(...) A Peace Offering.

An earnest and passionate Entreaty, for PEACE, UNITY, and OBEDIENCE.

WHEREIN An Impartial View is taken of the Chief Controversies among us, as to
Doctrine, Government, Liturgy, and Ceremonies: And it is cleared, That the
Differences are not so wide, as by the Heats of men they seem to be; Nor Any
thing required, but what may lawfully be submitted to, by men of Humble and
Peaceable, that is, Christian Spirits.

Designed Especially To persuade to a lawful Conformity, a just and necessary
Obedience to the Laws established, for PEACE, yea, for CONSCIENCE sake.

By JOHN STILEMAN, M. A. Minister of the Gospel, and VICAR of TUNBRIDGE in KENT.

Chrysostom. Hom. 31. in Hebr. (...). Contra Rationem, Nemo Sobrius; Contra
Scripturas, Nemo Christianus; Contra Ecclesiam, Nemo Pacificus, Senserit.

And as many as walk according to this Rule, Peace be on them, and Mercy, and
upon the Israel of God,

Gal. 6.16. LONDON, Printed for Thomas Pierrepont, at the Sun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1662.

ILLVSTRISSIMO DOMINO Stemmatis Nobilitate; nec non Primariae Eruditionis,
Eximiae Virtutis, Egregiae Pietatis nominibus vere Honoratissimo ROBERTO Comiti
Leicestriae, Vice Comiti Lisle, Baroni Sidney de Penshurst; Serenissimae Regiae
Majestati a Secretioribus Consiliis. S. P.
VEreor (Illustrissime Comes) ne insolentis audaciae crimine, quod apud
Dignitatem vestram deprecari expediret maxim, merito intentarer, qui chartulas
has tanto tamque splendido Nomini inscribere non subtimebam. Non enim tantum
mihi ausim tribuere, ut, quod in publicum emittere tenuitas mea praesumserit,
vestris manibus dignum censerem. Sed spes est, neminem mihi vitio versurum
fore, si, Quem omnes summo prosequuntur honor, and ipse Colerem, suspicerem,
and admirarer. Quin and singularis illa Benevolentia, qua obscurum me,
nulliusque nominis, dignata est prosequi Celebritas vestra, (Quem Docti,
Mecaenatem; Ecclesiae, Patronum; Ecclesiarum Ministri, Fautorem dicunt and vere
dicunt) Gratitudinis hoc, Observantiaeque specimen efflagitat. Liceat itaque,
rogo, Primitium hoc, quale quale sit, Strophiolum vestro Nomini porrigere:
quale se angusta nostra and inculta exhibere possunt viridaria; parum (fateor)
amaenum; piis tamen candidisque lectoribus (spero) haud insalubre.

Vidimus (heu!) vidimus Angliam bellorum incendiis, conflagrantem; ardentes
Provincias; prostrata and exanguia virorum, civitatum cadavera; in Optimates,
in Regem insurgentes de plebe infimos; Ecclesiam omnibus calamitatum procell is
objectam, and male-feriatorum pedibus misere conculcatam. Illius vero Dei Opt.
Max. qui per tot annos exulantem Regem in solium reduxit; qui Optimates
Honoribus, Episcopos Cathedris, Pastores Ecclesiis restituit; ejus (inquam)
auspiciis jam tandem respiravit Respublica, revixit Ecclesia, Antiquae jam
rursus vigent leges. Quae certe (bona si nostra norimus) omnium animos
laetitia, omnium ora summis Divinae Benignitatis laudibus explerent; omnesque
ad Promovendam hanc, conservandamque Ecclesiae Pacem tam divinitus datam
excitarent. At vero (quis crederet?) plurimorum mentibus etiam adhuc inhaerent
penitus, imo vigent discordiarum semina. Hic in Leges, Regem, Regimen, Ritus
Ecclesiasticos, Publicasque Formulas petulantius invehitur^ Ille teneris animis
scrupulos injiciens inanibus terriculamentis infirmos perturbat: Hinc, Leges
iniquitatis insimulantur; illinc, (...) quasi (...), tyrannidis, and (...)
sugillantur; istinc, reductis antiquis and innocuis Ritibus, and Liturgia,
Religio, quasi tota jam corrueret, and inundantis iterum Romanae Superstitionis
metus esset, defletur: Hi nolunt, Illimetuunt eadem cum caeteris fidelibus via
incedere, legibusque circa res Ecclesiae se submittere.

-- Quis talia fando
Temperet a lachrymis? --
Summus ille, Pater luminum, Deus pacis, qui dedit Ecclesiae unicum (...), qui
proposuit nobis unicam (...), Tit. 14.
qui praeparavit nobis unam (...), Jud. 3.
sicut promisit, sic and impertiat omnibus Corunum, Jer. 32.39.
and viam unam; illuminet omnium mentes Divina veritate; edoceat omnes
Fraternam charitatem; ut (...), Ephesians. 4 15.
(...) studiis sincerae pietatis sedulo omnes incumbamus, and (...) adolescamus
in eum, ^ui est, Caput, Christus. Quod ut fiat, has laborum nostrorum Primitias
Ecclesiae offerre and dicare visum est; quo scrupulis, qui tot adhuc male
habent, ex animis fidelium evulsis; Dubitationibus Praescissis; iniquis
suspicionibus amotis, Christiani, inter nos, omnes (...), Legibus, Ritibus,
Formulis and Constitutionibus Ecclesiae conformes, ejusdem Paci, Gloriae
splendori consulere inducantur. Si (quod absit) tanta de spe decidamus, hoc
tamen nobis erit solatio, fecimus quod potuimus, and in magnis vel voluisse sat
est. Etiam paucillum similae acceptum est Deo, Levit. 5.7, 11.
ubi Pecudes and Turtures non sunt in manibus. Qua spe fretus, sub Divinae
Benedictionis auspiciis, vestraeque Celebritatis umbra and Clientela scripta
haec, qualiacunque sint, confidentius ausim evulgare: Vestro Nomini, in
aeternum observantiae Monimentum, inscribere ista, and dedicare siliceat

Dignitatis vestrae Humillimo Cultori, Clientum infimo, JOANNI STILEMAN.
Dat. Pridie Idus Maii. Anno Aerae Redemptionis. M.DC.LXII.
TO THE Pious, Judicious, and Candid READER.
IT was an ancient observation, (...) -- Gregor. Presbyt. in vita Nazian.
that the wickedness of Christians brought in Persecutors upon the Church, and
raised up Julian against Christianity. What was of old, we have seen in our
days, and lamentable experience has made it manifest to any observer. The
Church of England did deservedly challenge as her due the title of the Best
Reformed Church in the world: Reformed by the Best Authority, in the most
Regular way, according to the Best pattern, and nearest to the Apostolical
Canon: standing as a City upon an hill, and showing to the world, more, holy
Bishops, eminently learned Divines, Faithful Dispensers of the Sacred
Mysteries; and some even of the enemies of her Discipline being judges) more of
the Truth of Religion and real Power of Godliness, than any Church of Europe
besides; not excepting even those, who pretended to the most righteous
Government, and Purest Discipline. God had here planted his Vineyard, built a
Tower, fenced it with the Mound of Peace, given to her a Defender of the Faith,
such a King as the world could not afford such another. Under which blessings
she prospered and flourished to the wonder and envy of all round about us. But
Prosperity is often (we know) abused to Sensuality; In Peace and Plenty men
grow wanton; and when the Church has shined most in external Beauty and
Splendour, and been blessed with the greatest Tranquillity, Christians have been
apt to give themselves over to the greatest security; and in the greatest
freedom of the Gospel, to abuse their liberty to looseness and licentiousness
of life. So did Israel, so did we, (as Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Jesurun) Wax fat, and kick, and forsake God, and lightly esteem the Rock of
our Salvation. Thus the Devil, when by open hostility and fury he cannot
overthrow the Faith, has ways, in the times of her Peace, to destroy the
Purity, and undermine the Piety of the Church: and by this means again make way
for her enemies to assault and oppress her: For sad indeed were the sufferings
of this poor Church; and we lay the blame on such and such, when the ground of
all was indeed in our own selves, our licentious lives. That Israel was sold
into the hands of Syria, Moab, Canaan, Midian, and the Philistines
successively, it was only because Judge. 3.7, 8, 12. and 4.1, 2. and 6.1, 2. and
13.1.
they did evil in the sight of the Lord. That God delivered us into the hands
of those Prodigious Usurpers, that threw out in their fury Lam. 2.6.
the King and the Priest; and into the Judge. 2.14.
hands of the Spoylers, that enriched themselves with the spoils of the
Church: was it not because we provoked the Lord to anger by our iniquities; and
were not careful to walk worthy of that Gospel which we professed; and those
abundant mercies, that we enjoyed? It may be hoped that God has ere this
taught us Obedience by the things which we have suffered. We are once more
through the unfathomable Providence of God, brought into the harbor. Methinks
we should now be so wise, as never more to come near to those Rocks at which we
had so late and fatal a wrack. Methinks we should now be afraid of sin and
impiety, lest God again plunge us into the Deep, and overwhelm us with the
billows of his indignation: and tremble at the thoughts of Contending and
Dividing, lest we again be broken, and become a prey (not only (as of late) to
a bold intruder, who chastised us with Scorpions, but) to such an enemy, as may
destroy us for ever. We have once more the Face of a Church, the beauty of
Order, a Righteous Government, an holy Liturgy established among us; The
Freedom of the Gospel restored in Peace. What remains, but that we make it our
great design to promote the real interest of this Gospel; to preserve the
Purity of Faith; to advance the Power of Godliness; to maintain the Peace of
the Church? Religion and Piety is the best prop and support of Peace: and it is
as true, that Peace is the best Nurse and Fence of Religion. He that has but
half an eye may see it, and we can never sufficiently bewail it, that when the
spirits of men have been hot and eager in contending about shadows and
circumstances, against external forms and orders; there has been most coldness
in the matter of real Devotion, in the Vitals and essentials of Religion Piety
and Peace, Humility and Love, Meekness and Obedience.

The sad reflections on these things have been my chief motive to this work, and
to present these papers to the public view. Wherein it is not my design to
engage in a quarrelsome Controversy, nor to undertake the full defense of the
Cause of the Government and Liturgy in every particular; not that I think it
cannot be maintained (for it has been sufficiently done by other hands). but
because that does not answer my main intendment: Which is not to dispute, what
Law is fit to be made, or Order to be established; but, the Law being made, and
Order established, to consider how far we are engaged to Peace and Obedience. I
cannot but take notice of the great mistake of men in this case, in reference
to their own practice and peaceable submission. We are en oyned Conformity, to
obey such a Government and Governors, to worship God in such a way, to use
such Rites and Forms: Men scruple and oppose, and dispute against the Law, as
not fit to be made; Censure the Governors as too corrupt, or rigorous, and
abusing their authority, as if this were plea enough for our disobedience. When
our business is but to examine the matters imposed, and the works required of
us, and whether w^ may lawfully do them. In this case, as we have no call to
challenge our Superiors, as not taking the proper way to Peace, and the
Advancement of Religion: so neither are we obliged to undertake a full
Vindication of them in every particular of their practice, or justice of their
impositions. There is a middle between these two. We may suppose them to err,
some particular persons to have corruptions, and in some things to deal
irregularly: which is but to suppose them Men. The B^st men have their Naevos
and imperfections; and the most righteous Governors are not infallible: yet
does not that excuse us from obeying It is not our duly, to believe them the
Best; they require it not: yet it is our duty, not to think them evil. Charity
is a duty, and that 1 Cor. 13 5, 7.
thinks no evil: Obedience and Reverence Rom 13.7. Hebr. 13.17. 1 Timothy 5.17.
to Governors both in Church and State is a duty, and that must think well.
Possibly, what is now enjoined us, is not particularly enjoined of God, nor was
a duty before this Law: yet, Obedience is a duty, yea Active obedience, in
everything, where we should not sin in obeying: Peace is a duty, and that is
best preserved by an humble obedience: and so, what is enjoined, now becomes a
duty; and we become obliged both for Conscience and Peace sake. And this is the
main design and subject of these papers.

Reader, expect not here florid elegancies, or flowers of Rhethorick, for thou will be mistaken: I have no ambition to please or humor the curious fancy; but
to serve thy soul; and by evidence of truth, and plain convictions of Scripture
and Reason to satisfy thy doubts, and perswad to Obedience and Peace. There
are these three things that may render the task that I have undertaken
difficult to be well performed. The things debated, mine own weakness, and the
different tempers of men to be satisfied.

1. For the matters before us, they are made the subjects of as great debate,
and managed with as much heat, and bitter exasperations, as any, that I know.
But, let us be entreated impartially to examine our own hearts, and consider,
whether these heats arise not rather from the intemperance of our own spirits,
than any thing in the nature of the things in dispute. For Confident I am,
that, if we will sincerely lay by Passion and Prejudice, and consider things as
they are; we shall find nothing in any of these matters, but what an humble
pious man may lawfully close with, and conform unto; and that may well stand
with Piety and Peace: which if it be interrupted, the fault (I fear) will
appear to be not so much in the Imposition, as our froward Opposition. I am
moreover well assured, that would we all conscientiously study and practice
those indispensible commands of the Gospel, viz. Holiness to God, and Peace
among our selves; we should neither have a mind, or leisure, to strive so much
about circumstances of Forms or Order; and trouble our selves and the Church
with our fruitless contentions.

2. For my self, I confess, I have almost undertaken a work without tools:
being in a place of very much employment, and very little profits, my leisure
is little, to search the Monuments of Antiquity, and Practice of former ages;
and mine abilities and opportunities less. Food and Raiment, and the necessary
charges of a family, devour the whole income of a poor Vicaridge; that many
books cannot get into my study, nor have I had opportunities of any other
Library. Yet so far as my slender stock will reach, I have been willing to lay
forth my self, and cast in my Mite to the Church, and I have the boldness to
promise my self, that even in these sheets, the Reader may meet with some
satisfaction about these things, from the fountain of Purest Antiquity, the
Holy Scriptures, and something also from the following streams in the practice
of succeeding ages.

3. For the other difficulty. I cannot but expect to meet with Readers of
different tempers. Some perhaps will think, I have not said enough: others,
that I have said too much. But Read impartially, observe the design, and then
judge. All that I aim at is to promote Peace and Obedience; and the humble
Christian (I shall presume to hope) may here find that which may satisfy those
scruples, and remove those doubts, which interrupt or hinder them. All that I
wish, or desire the Reader to bring, is, Piety, Judgment, and Candor: that he
be willing to learn, and know the truth: judicious, and able to discern it,
when made known: and ingenuous, ready to acknowledge and embrace it, when he is
convinced of it. If we have been mistaken, let us not think much to acknowledge
it; nor oppose our vain reputation to our duty, or the Public tranquillity.

I have adventured these Papers into the world; I present them to thee from a
sincere and honest heart; aiming at nothing but to do my part to further and
promote the Practice of true Piety, Conscientious Obedience, and the Churches
Peace. I hope, thou will find nothing in them mis beseeming the Spirit of the
Gospel, or the meekness of a Christian. I would not willingly offend any; but
serve and profit all. For common infirmities, thy Humanity will pass them over:
and thy Christianity will engage thee to love and pray for all that love Christ
and his Church, and among them.

Thine in our Common Savior, JO. STILEMAN.

(...) A PEACE OFFERING. The First Part.
CHAP. I. The Introduction bewailing our Dissentions, and pleading for Peace.
SYN THEO.
Noah raised. The one, in obedience to the Command of God, and conformable to
his Instruction. Genesis 6.
An Ark, Hebr. 11.7
for the saving of him and his house, 2 Pet. 2.5.
when God brought in the Flood upon the world of the ungodly. The other, in
Gratitude to God, when the Waters were aswaged, and the Earth dried, and the
Ark rested, and He and His saved and brought forth again, An Altar Genesis ^.20,
21.
unto the Lord, whereon he offered, of every clean beast, a burnt-offering.
That he might both give a Specimen of the Piety of his Soul, and his hearty
thankfulness to God for his mercy in that Salvation: and also, appease the
wrath of God, which had poured forth such a deluge upon the sins of men. And
the success answered his hopes, for it is said, The Lord smelled a sweet
savor, and said, I will not curse the ground any more for man's sake. Which
words, as they intimate that it was the indignation of God, provoked by the
wickedness of the world, which brought on the Curse with a Flood to destroy
the World: So they clearly signify this anger of God by this Sacrifice of Noah
to be aswaged and appeased. (...).
This Sacrifice appearing by this to be not only an Eucharistical or
Gratulatory; but also a Propitiatory Oblation. (...).
And because anger is not appeased till the sinner be purged, and the sin
expiated; The same Sacrifices, which did conduce to the one, did conduce also
to the other, and did therefore, among the Ancients, receive different names
according to their different effects and use. (...). Placamina. Feboua. Piamina.
They were Propitiations for the Attoning and appeasing a provoked Deity;
Purifications to purge and cleanse the vile offenders; and Expiations, or
Lustrations, to expiate, and take off the provoking and polluting sin.

He whom the least of the thousands of Israel, and the meanest labourer in Gods
Vineyard, (...)
to translate the Scene awhile into England, this little Island of the world;
an Island sometimes like the Garden of God, which was once (while she was as
Psalm. 122.3.
a City at Peace, and compact together) Cant. 6.4, 10
Beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem: Fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun;
and to her enemies, terrible as an Army with banners. But we cannot yet forget
the years that are so lately past, wherein Psalm. 93.3.
The Floods lifted up their voice, The floods lifted up their waves: The
indignation of God, as a Deluge, did overflow the Land, and Judgments came so
thick one upon the neck of another (as in a raging storm Psalm. 42 6. 88.7.
Deep calling unto Deep; all the Waves and Billows of God going over us) that
we were not only drencht as in a brook of waters; but almost drowned in a
flood, and all our peace carried away in a Torrent, a violent impetuous torrent
of Blood and Confusion. Then Lam. 1.1.
she who was great among the Nations and Princes among the Islands, even she
became tributary: Then stood the poor afflicted Church weeping. Verse. 2.
Her tears continually on her cheeks, for her friends dealt treacherously with
her and became her enemies: Verse. 5.
Her adversaries were chief, her enemies prospered. Verse. 6.
Her beauty was departed from her; Her Princes became like Hearts that could
find no pasture, and were forced to fly without strength before the pursuer.
Verse. 8.
She had grievously sinned, therefore, they that honored her, despised her:
Her Princes could not protect her, not her Fathers feed her, for, Chap. 4.
Verse. 19, 20.
Her Persecutors were swifter than the Eagles of heaven: And the breath of our
nostrills, the Anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, Chap. 2.6.
for the Lord in the indignation of his anger for awhile despised the King and
the Priest.

Arc for his Church, who, though she was floating and tossed upon the waters,
and Psalm. 18.4.
The floods of ungodly men made her afraid; yet was she safe. Psalm. 93.4.
He, that is on high, and mightier than the noise of many waters, than the
mighty waves of the sea, preserved her secure, even during those confusions.
He, that but speaks the word, and makes the storm a calm, Mat. 8.26, 27.
Who does but rebuke the wind and the sea, and they obey him, even the Lord,
Psalm. 65.7.
who stilleth the raging of of the Sea and the noise of his waves, has showed
us that he can, and does, still the madness, or the tumults of the people too.
He has made a Genes. 8.4.
mountain for the Ark to rest on; He has now stopped the fury of the torrent,
dried up the waters, restored our peace, has made our Isa. 66.12.
peace run like a river, and our glory like a flowing stream. He has by many
wonders of providence and miracles of mercy made Psalm. 77.19, 20.
his way through the sea, and his paths through the great waters that he may
again lead his people like a flock, by the hands of Moses and Aaron. He has
raised up our Monarchy from the grave, and given us a King from the dead, a
Prince of the Royal stem, and placed him again on the throne of his fathers,
and Zech. 4.7, 9
made the great Mountain a plain before our Zerubbabel, whose hands have
happily laid the foundations in the re-building of the Temple of God, and we
hope to see the same hands to lay the head-stone thereof to the joy of the
people of God with holy acclamations, shouting, and crying, Grace, Grace, unto
it. He has in a great measure restored again the beauty and the glory of
Israel; Our Fathers to their Sees, The Priests to the Church; The Prophets to
their Pulpits, which were usurped by the meanest of the people; and the
Church Assemblies to their pristine freedom. Psalm. 118.23.
This is the Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

Sicut Audivimus, Sic and Vidimus Psalm. 48.8.
As we have heard, so have we seen in the City of our God. As we have heard
done of old, so have we seen in our days. We have parallelled the old World
both in sins and sufferings. 1. For our sins, our times were, as theirs are
described by Genesis 6.2, 5, 6.
Moses, and as the like in the Poet,

Hor. Carm. l. 3. od. 6
Faecunda culpae saecula, nuptias
Primum inquinavere, and genus, and domos,
Hoc font derivata clades
In patriam populumque fluxit,
Such were they, and such were we, Number. 32.14.
An increase of sinful men, risen up in our fathers stead. I need not render
the Poet in English; for, consider but the general practice of men, that will
give the clear construction, their actions declare to the world how fruitful
our age has been in the Ephesians. 5.11.
unfruitful works of darkness; no place, no condition free. Hence, 2. God has
made us alike in Sufferings; This is the fource and origin of all the evi^s
upon this people and Nation; even our rebellions daring Heaven it self, and
forcing the Almighty to draw forth the Arrows of his indignation against us.

Noah, and his household, in our Deliverance and Salvation also. Psalm. 126.3^4.
The Lord has done great things for us, and has turned our captivity as the
streams of the South, with as great a miracle, and yet as much ease, as he can
give rivers in a dry and parched Wilderness; Jude 1.15.
springs of water in a South land. Let us tell it to our children, and their
children another generation, that, Hom. Il. z. Et nati natorum, and qui
nascentur ab ill is. Virg. Aen. 3. Sect. 6.
(...), even the Generations to come may sing the praises of the Lord, and know
the wonders that he has wrought for us.

3. What now remains, but that we also make the other parallel? that as Noah
did, so we also should build an Altar. What Altar? even an Altar in our hearts
to Jude 6.24.
Jehovah-shalom, to God, who is our peace, and who has made peace for us; to
Exodus 17.15.
Jehova-Nissi, the Lord our Banners; for it was he alone Psalm. 124.2.
who was on our side, when men rose up against us: And through his strength
alone it was, That Ver. 6.
we were not given as a prey to their teeth, but Ver. 7.
the snare is broken, and we are escaped.

an Altar, we must offer Sacrifice? but what shall we, or can we offer? even
such Sacrifices as may be demonstrations of our thankfulness, and send up our
praises; Psalm. 50.14
Offer to God Thanksgiving, and pay thy vows. Such Sacrifices as may again
atone us unto God; such as may purge our souls, and expiate our sins. Psalm.
116.12, 13.
What shall we render to the Lord? -- We will take the Cup of salvation, and
call upon the Name of the Lord. These are our Sacrifices.

Altar material we have not, nor may we raise one: A Sacrifice properly so
termed, we must not offer, neither can Hebr. 9.13
the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the ashes of a dead Heifer at all sanctify,
or purify the sinner. No, we have another, a better Sacrifice, which is
already offered once for all, even Jesus upon the Cross, who alone 1 John 2.2.
is the propitiation for our sins: His blood alone Heb. 9.14.
who through the eternal Spirit offered up himself without spot to God, can
purge our consciences from dead works, to serve the living God. Yet
Metaphorical Sacrifices we have, and may, and must offer, and such are still
required of us. When the Lord forerells the Rejection of the Jews, and the
despising of their Mal. 1.10, 11.
carnal offerings, even then he promises the calling of the Gentiles, and to
make his Name great there, and that even among them incense shall be offered,
and a pure offering. What are these? even the Psalm. 5.4.
Sacrifices of righteousness, 1 Pet. 2.5.
spiritual Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Thus, a penitent and a
broken heart is a Sacrifice, an heart humbled under the sense of sin, mourning
for transgressions, and lamenting after the Lord; this contributes much to
atonement and peace with God: Psalm. 51 17.
The Sacrifices of God, (i.e.) the most excellent Sacrifices, are a broken
spirit, a broken and contrite heart thou will not despise. Thus are Prayers and
Supplications a Sacrifice, such did Christ Heb. 5.7. (...).
offer up with strong cries and tears in the days of his flesh. Praise and
Thanksgiving is another Sacrifice, yea, a Sacrifice Psalm 69 30, 31.
that does please the Lord better than an Ox or Bullock that has horns and
hoofs. And so the Apostle accounts it, when he exhorts to it in this phrase,
Heb. 13.15. alluding to that of Ho^. 14.2.
Let us offer the Sacrifice of praises to God -- that is, the fruit of our
lips, giving thanks to his Name. Again, Love is a Sacrifice, which is intimated
by the Apostles Argument, pressing us Ephesians. 5.2.
to love one another by the Sacrifice of Christ, whereby he evidenced his love
to us. Acts of charity and mercy, a free communication; and bounty to matters
of charity and piety, are Sacrifices also, and placamina too, they are an Phil.
4.18.
odor of a sweet smell, a Sacrifice well-pleasing to God. And upon this
account urged so earnestly, Heb. 13.16
to do good, and to communicate, forget not, for with such Sacrifices God is
well-pleased. In a word, our bodies, our own selves must be a Sacrifice; Romans
15.12 (...).
a living Sacrifice are we, in rendering to God our reasonable service. And as
through the Apostles Ministration there was (h) an acceptable offering up, or
Sacrifice of the Gentiles: So still through the blessing of God on our
Ministries, there is a Sacrifice of the same nature now (though possibly short
of those perfections) offered up to God. The Gentiles did the Apostles then,
and the Ministers of the Gospel do still bring us an offering, when through
their Ministry they are consecrated an holy people to God, according to that
Prophecy. Isa. 66.91, 20.
They, (i. e.) those that shall be sent abroad to the Nations, Tarshish, Pull,
and Lud -- The Gentiles, and the Isles afar off (fulfilled in the Apostles and
Evangelists sent abroad from the Jews to the Gentiles) shall bring all your
Brethren (even those Gentiles by faith made the children of Abraham, and so
Brethren to the Jews) out of all Nations, a gift, or (...)
an oblation to the Lord. Thus are we in a sound sense Priests, even in the
Evangelical Ministry, to offer men, viz. by the power of the Word subduing them
to the Gospel, and bringing them Romans 1.5. and 16.26.
to the obedience of faith. The Sacrifices of the Levitical Priesthood were
slain Beasts; but the Sacrifices of the Evangelical Ministry is a Heb. 4.12.
ripping up of the hearts, a mortifying and destroying the brutish lusts, and
beastly affections of men, Ephesians. 6.17.
by the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God. Such Sacrifices as these God will
accept, and these he does expect from men in return of his mercies, viz. That
we praise him, that we be humble, penitent, and obedient before him; that we
mortify our unruly lusts, our pride, passions, envy, ambition, etc. That we
worship God with sincerity and humble devotion; that we love one another with a
pure heart, and unstained charity; that we follow peace with all earnest
affections. These are the Sacrifices with which God is well-pleased: These are
they which now are most proper to be offered; for,

Jam. 4.1.
Those wars and fightings, which swept away our peace and happiness, as with a
flood! Came they not hence, even from our lusts that war in our members? Pride,
Envy, Covetousness, and Ambition, these were the Engines which the Devil used
to fill us with hatred and malice, emulations and wrath, discontent and
murmuring, strife and sedition; and by these he overthrew the best foundations
of our peace, and unhinged the whole frame of our Government both in Church and
State. We cannot forget, how ambitious and self-seeking men made no difficulty
to sacrifice even Religion it self to their Rebellion, and the peace of the
most flourishing Church and State to their own lusts. And now can we do less
than sacrifice those lusts again to peace? We will do nothing, and are unworthy
of those glorious mercies which the Lord has through so many wonders brought
home to us; if we yet are unwilling to mortify our own inordinate affections,
and unruly passions; yea, if we cannot be content in a great measure to
sacrifice our own private judgments, and persuasions to the peace of the
Church. We have been divided long enough, sides and parties have appeared high
to the devouring one of another. Mat 10.20, 21.
Brother has betrayed the brother to death, and the father the child; children
have risen up against their Parents. -- It is now high time that we study how
to be at unity.

Thucyd. l. 1^
tells us of Lacedemonia, That before Lycu^gus his time, it was (...) --
for a long while abounding in factions, and shaken with seditions. Another
gives this reason of it, viz. because Plut. in vit. Ly^^g.
Eurytion, one of their Kings being vainly ambitious of popular applauses,
(...).
did too much loosen and relax the Rains of Government, and the power of a
Monarch. Hence the people grew fierce and insolent to despise their Kings, and
the City was still full of commotions and seditions: And the Sacred History
informs us of the abounding of sin, and commotions in Israel, from another
ground. We find Judge. 17.8. -- 13.
Idolatry in the house of Micah, and a young man of Judah consecrated a Priest
to his Idol. Jude 18.2. --
The children of Dan by force seeking themselves an inheritance, because none
gave them a legal possession. Jude 19.2. --
A Concubine continuing in whoredoms, and not punished. A sad War between Jude
20.
Israel and Benjamin, almost fatal to the house of Benjamin. And all these
troubles recorded in such a time, Jude 17.6.18.1.19 1.21.25.
when there was no King in Israel, but every one did that which seemed right in
his own eyes.

we had a King in Israel, and one also, who was to His Power zealous to
maintain the Church in her Splendour, the People in Peace; and who, rather than
let loose those golden Rains of Government, whereby He might rule and preserve
them, He was content to be sacrificed, a Martyr for both. But we were factious
and seditious, covetous and ambitious, and unwilling to be kept in order; we
were resolved that we would do every one, what pleased our own fancies; and
then raised up fears and jealousies, and concluded, We would have no King among
us; that there might be none to control or hinder our ambitious projects. And
that Pious King being thrown out of His Life, and Monarchy with Him out of the
Kingdom: How Schisms and Heresies abounded in the Church, Faction and Sedition
in the State; heats and animosities among all: How men studied malice and
revenge, and filled all places with blood, spoil and confusion, is too
notorious then to be forgotten by this Age. The wounds which the poor afflicted
Church received in the house of her seeming friends, are not yet perfectly
closed; and the scars of them will be too apparent (I fear) to succeeding
Generations.

Counsel, which the T. Live. l. 40
Roman Historian tells us, that Q. Caecilius Metellus gave to those M. Aemyl.
Lep^dus, and M. Fulvius Nobilior.
two great men (between whom there had been often and bitter quarrels both in
the Senate, and before the people, but now chosen Censors together,) That they
should join hands and hearts, and lay aside all thoughts of strife and hatred;
amongst the rest, Amicitius immortales; inimicitias vero mortales ^sse debere.
Live. ib.
That enmity and contentions (though they have arisen, and possibly might again
arise, yet) should be mortal, but for a time, and soon dye; But Amity, concord
and peace immortal, and be for ever. Oh, how happy should we be, did we but
follow the counsel of that Grave Senator! We have disputed and contended long
enough: it is time now to show that we intend not to continue these divisions
for ever; but to put a perpetual end to enmity and hostility: and that we now
will faithfully and cordially unite our hands and our hearts, that it may be
beyond the power of Malice, yea of Hell it self, to divide them; that we unite
our selves in such bonds of faithful amity, that the powers of darkness may
never break in or dissolve them: In a word, That we raise an Altar in our
hearts to the God of Peace, whence may still ascend holy flames from an
immortal fire, and we for ever be sacrificing to Peace and Love.

C. Tacit. Annal. l. 4. circa fin.
Tacitus be justly ours? who speaking of that year ( Ap. Junio silan^, and P.
silio Nerva Cose.) says, The year began foully. Faedum anni principium incessit
--
It was an ancient Custom among the Romans (as Lypsius observes) that upon the
Kalends of January they opened the Temples, sent up their prayers every one for
his own, and the public safety, and tranquillity; and did account it even
Piacular on that day, ( the First day of the New Year) to do any thing either
publicly or privately, that had any thing of sadness, or matter of sorrow;
yea, or to punish a Malefactor: yet even on that day did Sejanus lay snares
for, and basely circumvent poor Titius Sabinus, and upon slanderous accusations
brought him to Prison, yea to death: the poor man crying out: Sic inch^a^
annum, has Sejano victimas cudere.
Thus begins the year, these are the sacrifices offered to the malice of
Sejanus. Upon which the Historian concludes thus; Quem diem vacuum paena, ubi
inter sacra and vota, quo tempore verbis etiam p of anis abstineri Mos est,
vincula and laquei inducantar. Tacit. ibid.
What day, what time can we expect to be free from Punishment, from misery and
trouble, when even between the sacrifices and prayers for peace and safety,
even at that time, on that day, wherein men should, and are wont to abstain
even from Profane, harsh and bitter words; bonds are brought forth, and
Halters, those instruments of misery and death?

Era Redemptionis Angliae, the time of our deliverance and common joy
commenceth sadly. When the remembrance of our past bitter calamities through
our contentions, together with our happiness by our present salvation, should
fill our hearts with a common joy; and we should all Psalm. 42.4.
go together to the house of God, to keep Holy Day with the voice of joy and
praise; with one lip, and one heart, offering up joint Sacrifices of Praise and
Thanksgiving; and cordially begging, not only for our selves, but the
continuance of, and increase of blessings, peace, safety and prosperity to the
whole Church and State; and unanimously vowing faithful obedience to our God,
unstained and constant Loyalty to our King, and perfect peace and love one to
another: What do we do? what is brought forth? even now, at this season, when
we are charged by God and the King to forbear and avoid all words of reproach,
even all words that may revive the memory of the old contentions, which we
should strive to bury in perpetual oblivion (I cannot say, The Temple is shut
up, and the Prisons opened; we cannot complain of such base Artifices laid to
slander and circumvent; or Bonds and Halte's prepared to punish sober innocent
men: A just Prince needs not these Tricks of usurping Tyrants; nor indeed have
we cause to fear any such things from our Superiors in Church or State; but)
this we must confess to our shame, Men have not yet learnt to lay by their
animosities, or abate their heats; even in this day, and time of peace, we sow
seeds of Division, and men publish to the World that beginning of mischief,
Fears and Jealousies. When can we expect peace? when in such a season as this,
which (if any thing) would make us in love with peace, we yet neither seek it,
nor endeavor to preserve it; but still retain the seeds of malice and revenge,
or contempt one of another in heart, and give way to the reproaches and
slanders, uncharitable and unchristian censures of the tongue.

It was the great expectation and hope of all that wished well to the Church,
that now the Isa. 40.2.
Messengers of peace should speak comfortably to her, and tell her, that her
warfare is accomplshed, the (...) rendered, Militia, and, tempus statutum. See
Job 7.1. and 14.14.
time appointed of her affliction is expired; the time appointed of her peace
come; and that Lament 4.22.
her iniquity is pardoned, and she absolved, and her punishment ended: But alas
we, Horat. Carm. l. 1. od. 3


Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia, neque
Per nostrum patimnr scelus
Iracunda Jovem ponere fulmina.
We live, as if we were resolved to assault Heaven it self (not with that holy
Mat. 11.12.
violence, which the Scripture speaks of, when the hearts of men are inflamed
with an holy fire, and ravished with the contemplations of the grace and love
of Christ; and they run with as much earnestness and zeal Isa. 60.4, 8, 11.
in Troops together (as Soldiers to get the spoil of a besieged and taken
City) to embrace the Gospel ( the Gospel of peace and love) and by all sedulity
in the practice of righteousness and diligence in the ways of the Gospel, viz.
Humility, Meekness, Holiness and Devotion, Piety and Peace, Patience and
Obedience with all earnest endeavors; Luke 13.24.
strive to enter in at the strait Gate, and contend who shall get first into
the possession of those joys, which 1 Cor. 2.9.
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor can the heart of man conceive, which
God has prepared for them that love him; but) with that wicked violence
wherewith Ovid. Metam. l. 1.
Affectasse ferunt regnum Coeleste Gigantes
Altaque congestos struxisse ad sidera montes.


As if we were of the posterity of those Giants (mentioned in Genes. 6.4.
Scripture) who had not only corrupted themselves (for so had the Verse. 5.
sons of God, the children of the Church done also) but quite revolted from all
Religion and Piety, from all Peace and Humanity; such who were mighty in Power,
and fierce in Nature, a, (...) q. Defectores sc. a Deo. Desectores sc. hominum.
Irruptores ^c. in hominem.
fallen from God, and falling with violence upon those who were weaker than
themselves.

-- Ovid. ibid.
S^d and illa propago
Contemptrix supe um, saevaeque avidissima caedis,
Etviolenta fuit: scires e sanguine natam.
who have despised the Laws of our God, who breath nothing but violence one
against another? Victa jecet pietas -- Piety and holiness, peace and love lie
trodden down; but sin and profaness is rampant, Mat 24.12.
iniquity abounds, and love is cold; as if, what with our rebellions against
Heaven, and what with our contentions among our selves, we were resolved not to
suffer the Almighty to put up his anger, and lay down the arrows of his
indignation; yea, that God himself should not give us peace; for,

When even the season calls us jointly to Hag. 1.8.
go up to the Mountain, and bring wood to build the house of God, to repair the
breaches of the Temple, and again to set up the walls of Jerusalem (the Holy
Government and Discipline) that is broken down: We, on the contrary, take
several ways to fetch Coals, and throw in fire to destroy the remnant, to burn
up the Gates, and devour even the foundations of our Church and peace. We
provide materials, but such as they in Gen 11.3, 4, 9.
the Holy Story, Brick and Slime to raise a Tower in defiance to Heaven, as if
our whole design were to get our selves a name (though but to be famous for our
Rebellion against the Laws of God and the Land, to all succeeding Generations)
when the issue of all can be nothing but Babel, Division and Confusion. Should
we (like Genesis 11.16.
Heb^r) now give names to our children according to the times, how would all
our Regist's be filled with (...) Division.
Pelegs. For how are we divided (in tongue, shall I say? yes, we study a new
canting language, as if we feared we could not separate far enough one from
another, if we clothed the old Truths of Religion in the known expressions, as
if we must still have a Judge. 12.6.
Schibboleth to distinguish parties; but especially) in heads, and hearts, and
hands? Our judgments differ, and our hearts are divided in our affections, and
our actions are all levelled to nothing else but the interest of that side, and
the support of the quarrel of that party which we have espoused.

Jer. 4.19, 20.
My bowels, my bowels, I am pained at the very heart, my heart makes a noise,
dolefully lamenting within me; for division upon division, and consequently
destruction upon destruction is cried. Lam 2.11.
Mine eyes could even fail with tears, my bowels are troubled, my liver is
poured out, or gall cast up through extremity of grief and indignation, for the
destruction, yea, for the (...) a (...) fregit.
breach of the daughter of my people: A breach now not made upon us by a
Foreign Invader, but a fraction made among us, and within us by our own froward
and petulant contentions: Since Luke 6.45.
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, marvel not, where such
sorrows for, and tender compassions to this poor afflicted Church have taken
such possessions of, and make such deep impressions upon my soul; when mine
heart is so deeply affected to see the Lam. 2.10.
Virgins of Jerusalem hang down their heads for shame and confusion; and the
Elders of Sion, which should sit on their seats of Judgment in splendour and
beauty, even to sit on the ground in sorrow and sadness, because her children
unnaturally tear out the bowels of their mother, and will not yet learn that
great lesson of the Gospel, Peace and Love: marvel not, (I say) that now these
floods seek a vent, and open the sluices of the eyes, and force away the bars
that were upon the lips.

son of Craesus, dumb from his birth; yet when Sardis the royal seat was taken
by the Persians, and the sword of the insolent Soldier was lift up against the
life of the King, his Father; then the strength of natural affection, and piety
to his Father, loos ned the tongue of the dumb child, and he who never spoke
before, could then find a tongue to plead for his Fathers life, an^ery out,
(...) He odot. and ex eo Valor. Marc l. 5 c. 4.
O Sir, kill not Craesus. There is as great dan^er now to our dear Mother, the
Church of England from these bitter Divisions of her children, as from the
violence of unruly Soldiers; if these continue, she must expire: Piety and
pity would make even the dumb to speak and plead her cause. And indeed who can
keep silence at such a time as this? Who can write and not mingle his tears
with his ink? or speak, and not mix bitter sighs and sobs with his words? Jer
9 1.
were our eyes waters, and our heads fountains of tears; here is occasion
enough to spend all, for the Divisions of the daughter of England. Divisions
(not now of Judge 5.15.
Ruber, one single Tribe, but) of all the Tribes of our Israel, even among
Priests, and people too. Nor are these only single Divisions and Breaches, but
Division upon Division; and we are subdivided into as many Factions and
Schisms as there are opinions or interests among men. And, which is more sad,
these heats and hateful contentions reciprocated among men, who are tied by all
the engagements of Nature, Grace, and Relation, to Peace; who are by Nature,
Nation, and Religion, Brethren.

civil only, (for here men dare not be altogether so contentious) but sacred
and ecclesiastical, shall be cemented and closed up? that we no longer may
administer matter of sighing, sadness and sorrow to our friends; or of
insulting, to the enemies of our Church and State? It is this, which pleases
our common adversary, and makes the Jesuit laugh in his sleeve (as the Proverb
is): Hoc Ithacus velit and magno mercentur Atridae. Virg.
What the Pope would be at the greatest cost and charge to effect, we our
selves do for him. When the Jesuits were troubled to invent slanders to make
us hated or scorned abroad, and to find plots to ruin us at home, and yet
could not do it; we have taken the work out of their hands, and do it our
selves.

Venient Romani, Popery is creeping in, Superstition and Idolatry growing upon
us, the old way for discontented spirits to give vent to their dissatisfactions
at the established government; and to affright ignorant but well-meaning people
with a vain scarecrow, and name of Popery. But really by our Schisms, and
Breaches, and bitter animosities we do open the door for even Popery; yea, any
thing to enter, and we take the ready course to make good that Prophetic
speech of the dying Archbishop, See Arch B. L. Speech on Scaff. alluding to
Joh. 11.48.
by our Divisions to pave the way, where Venient Romani, The Romans shall come,
and take away our place and Nation. Absit omnem. From which fears by the
vigilance of our Governors; by our conscientious obedience, and peaceable
deportment and conformity to the established Laws; and by inviolated unity
among our selves, we are sufficiently secured.

1 Cor. 1.10.
Now I beseech you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ (and what
Name is dearer? what motive greater? that ye all speak the same things, and
there be no divisions among you: but that ye be perfectly joined together in
the same mind, and the same judgment.

CHAP. II. Two Arguments to persuade to peace and unity, from 1. The strict
charge of the Gospel, and 2. The possibility, and no difficulty to perform it.


Argum. 1. The strict charge of the Ephesians 6.15. Rom 10.15.
Gospel of peace which we profess, beyond all dispute obliges all Christians
to it. Romans 12.18
If it be possible, as much as in you lies, live peaceably with all men. And
Heb 12.14.
Follow peace with all men. With all men, in the greatest extent imaginable,
(how much more with Brethren;) of the same faith, of the same Nation, of the
same Church; and that with the greatest earnestness, if it be possible, and as
far as it is possible, as much as in you lies, let no fault ^ie in you, if ye
have it not; not only embrace it when it is offered, but follow it, that ye may
gain it.

Jesus, The Isa. 9 6.
Prince of peace, would be incarnate and come to dwell among men in no time,
but when peace was amongst them: when there was a general peace over the whole
world (as the stories of those times abundantly show) Caesar Aug. ab orient ad
occid^n^om, a s ^prentrione in Meridiem, ac per totum oceani circulum cunctis
gentibus una pace compositis, Jani portas tortio ipse tunc clausit -- eo
tempore, eo anno quo firmissimam verissimamque pacem ordinatione Dei Caesar
composuit, natus est Christus; cujus adventui Pax ista famulata est -- Paul.
Oros. Histor. l. 6. p. 22.
in those days, wherein Augustus Caesar had made a perfect peace from East to
West, from North to South, over the whole circuit of the Ocean, was our Lord
born. The Providence of God so ordering it, that a general peace over the
world, should usher the Prince of peace unto the world. At his birth the Angels
proclaim it, Luke 2.14.
Peace on earth, good will toward men: and indeed the great mercy and love of
God to men, is the highest engagement upon them to peace and good will one to
another. And this Jesus, who was born in such a time of peace, when he
preaches to men, does also straightly command it. Mark 9.50.
Have salt in your selves: be sure to retain the sincerity of grace, the purity
of faith, to keep your selves and others sound in that faith: but salt has
some biting acrimony: see therefore that this be tempered with prudence and
charity, that ye lose not peace; Have peace among your selves.

2 Cor. 13.11.
Be of one mind, live in peace. Again, 2 Timothy 2.22.
Flee youthful lusts, follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. To this he wooeth the Ephesians by
his bonds, and presses them as to a duty, which if they practice not, they
neither answer their profession, nor walk worthy of that Gospel, to which, and
wherewith they are called. Ephesians. 4. Verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
I therefore the Prisoner of the Lord, beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the
calling wherewith ye are called. How? even thus, With all lowliness and
meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one another in love (then not
reproaching or reviling) endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace. And he goes on, pressing it by the most cogent Arguments, There
is one body, and one spirit; (i. e.) ye are knit together by one spirit into
one body, and shall the members of the same body contend one with another? (see
also how he urges the same duty from the same ground in another place in his
Epistle to the 2 Cor. 12.12. -- 28.
Corinthians) but he goes on, Ye are called in one hope, ye have all the same
expectations; ye hope for the same end, the same mercies, the same life
eternal, why should ye not agree to walk in the same way? One Lord, one Faith,
one Baptism, one God and Father of all. Ye are all baptized into the service of
one Lord, into the same faith; engaged in one and the same vow: and should not
all this engage to the greatest charity, to the strictest unity?

Romans, Romans 16.17
To mark them which cause divisions -- and to avoid them. Even, (...), sc.
attente and diligentur quasi hosts e specula observare:
to watch them, as a watchman stands upon the watchtower to descry an enemy,
or a Sentinel upon the guard to prevent him. This is one great end why God has
set his (...) Act. 20.28.
Bishops in the Church, who are, as, (...), to oversee and look to the flock,
to teach, to feed, and govern them: so, (...), to watch for them, to discover
approaching dangers, as Ezekiel. 3.17.
watchmen to the house of Israel. And really, the watch cannot be set too
strictly, nor kept too carefully against such as make divisions, that such
enemies to peace and love may not creep into the City of God, whose grand work
is, to undermine the faith of the Gospel.

Romans 3.17.
The way of peace have they not known. They will neither live quietly
themselves, nor let others live quietly by them: and, if ye look to their
affections, Verse. 18.
they have no fear of God before their eyes: and the issue is, Verse. 16.
Destruction and misery are in their ways. Let men pretend never so much to
the Spirit, to a wisdom above the rest of their brethren, and to a more
spiritual way, yet Gal. 5.20, 21.
Variance, emulations, strife, seditions, heresies, hatred, envyings, are as
evident and manifest works of the flesh, as, Adultery, Fornication,
Drunkenness, Murder, etc. and as much opposite to the ways of the Gospel. Jam.
3.14, 15.
When ye have bitter envyings and sirife, that wisdom is not from above, but,
earthly, sensual, devilish. Yea, whatever men's boastings may be, where there is
envying, strife, and divisions; they are really carnal, and walk as men,
sensual men.

The Fruits of the Spirit have another name, are another thing. They are, Gal.
5.22, 23.
Love, Peace, Joy, Long-suffering, Goodness, Meekness, etc. The wisdom from
above is of another stamp: Jam. 3.17.
Pure, peaceable, gentle, etc. The Disciples of Christ are of another spirit,
they bear this character; Joh. 13.35.
By this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another,
said that Shepherd, who Joh. 10.3.14.
best knew the mark of his own sheep, even the Lord, who best 2 Timothy 2.19.
knows who are his. This was accounted the Character of the Ancient Christians
in Tertullians time, Christiani amant paene antequam norunt. Tertul. alicubi.
that they loved one another, before they knew the faces one of another, and
after him we are told by St. Chrysostom, that (...). Chrysostom. Hom. 31. in Hebr.
Love and peace are the standing marks and badges, the distinguishing
characters of true Christianity. Read over that whole Epistle of that Beloved
Disciple S. John, ye will find that the whole design of that is, from the
exceeding rich love of Christ to us, to engage us See particularly 1 John 2.3,
6, 7, 8. and chapter 3.11.24. and 4.7. to the end.
to love among our selves. This being both the old and the new command, which
unless we obey, we have forfeited our Christianity, That we love one another:
declaring this to be the special commandment which we have from Christ, 1 John
5.21.
That he who loves God, love his brother also. It is so indeed; for our Lord
Christ himself says so, Joh. 15.12.
This is my commandment, that which I especially give in charge, wherein ye
shall bear the signal character of my Disciples, That ye love one another.



Argum. 2. And that, which may yet engage us farther, is to consider this also,
That what is so straightly charged on us, we may with much ease, and no
difficulty obey, if we indeed will live like Christians. For, the controversies
and things in dispute among us are not so great, but, as they might be easily
composed, were we not given to contention: so, notwithstanding some differences
concerning them, we might live in peace. They are not really so great, nor are
are the distances so wide, as through the heats and animosities of men they
seem to be. Let us but purge our souls of passion and prejudice, and not
consider persons, but things, we might soon be reconciled, and easily agree (as
to the main) in our practice. And, this Consideration will aggravate the sin of
our Divisions, and may justly increase our shame for contending. Let us take a
view of the particulars of our differences.

CHAP. III. Our Differences examined, as to Doctrine, Government, Liturgy, etc.
and none found so great, as for which to divide the Church. This showed, 1. in
matters of Doctrine.
Doctrine. 2. Of Government and Discipline. 3. Of Liturgy, Rites and
Ceremonies. But in none of these is there any such great difference between the
learned sober men of either the Episcopal or Presbyterian persuasion, (For, men
of Fanatic spirits, whose principles are purely Schism and Separation, we here
consider not) as the world is made to believe: But lay by animosities against
persons, interests and parties, there may be very much compliance for Peace
sake.

Doctrine. Blessed be God, we are secure for the main. The 39. Articles have
not yet been challenged as guilty of any error of Faith: only some things have
been desired to be explained, some Articles to be made more full and clear; but
all this amounts not to a dissent or difference in the thing.

viz. The Doctrine of Election and Reprobation; The Counsels and Eternal
Decrees of God about the final estate of Angels and Men: with the Appendices of
this, The Sufficiency and Efficacy of Grace, the Universality of Redemption,
the Liberty of the Will, the Perseverance, or Falling away of the Faithful.
Doctrines of an high nature, and (rightly understood and explained) of great
use, both as to manifesting the Glory of the Goodness and Justice of God; and
to the strengthening of faith, exciting the hope, quickening the obedience, and
encouraging the perseverance of the Saints. Yet through the blindness of man's
finite understanding, who indeed is not able to fathom the abyss of Gods
counsels; and the bold presumptions of some men, who will dare to determine of
that, which no mortal man dares say he understands; it has been the unhappy
fate of this Doctrine to be the matter of the highest contention in the Church,
a Controversy of the longest continuance, and managed with the sharpest
bitterness.

Arminians, Damned Arminians; at least half Jesuits, Pelagians, Semipelagians;
Proud men, that dare presume to overthrow the Sovereignty, and dethrone the
glorious Grace of God, to exalt the Handmaid above the Mistress, setting the
insolent Will of Man in the throne, and making the Grace of God truckle under
it. And abundance more ejusdem furfuris.

Calvinists, Supralapsarians, Sublapsarians: Men that set up a Saturn for a
God, who devours his own children; who to glorify his own power, without any
respect at all to goodness or justice, but only to declare his own
uncontrollable sovereignty, has made the greatest part of the world to destroy
it; and decreed the tortures, the eternal torments of so many thousand innocent
souls merely for his own pleasure; and (that he might destroy them with
justice) first to make them sinners, that then they might be fit fuel for his
indignation. And that men have nothing to do, but to wait for the execution of
Gods will upon them; yea, if they do any thing, to sin as fast, and as high as
they can, that God may have the more glory of his grace, if he save them, or of
his justice, if he condemn them; for all must be merely according to his
pleasure. And a great deal more of this horrid representation charged upon this
side.





Arminian and Calvinist are made, and used as the great Name to distinguish
Professions; as if Arminius and Calvin were the (...); or, the men of the
several persuasions were bound jurare in verba, and owned either of them as
their Master; when both parties own no Master but Christ; and glory in no name
but that of Christians, their first appellation, or (because there may be some
necessity to distinguish the Reformed from the Pseudo-Catholicks,) Protestants.

Romanists do as much dispute it there. Those who have read the books of
Alvarez, or (for why should I name any one, when there are so many?) the
Dominicans, the Thomists, and of the Jesuits, will be able to witness this.
Are not the Sea a large discovery of this in the Author of the Provincial
letters, or Mystery of Jesuitism. Let. 1.2, 3.
disputes about the Next power to act; the general sufficiency of Grace given
to all, that (as one side pleads) men need no other addition of any efficacious
Grace to determine the Will; and the necessity of efficacious Grace, without
which (say the other) no man has power to act: as much ventilated between the
Molinists and the Jansenists? The Dominicans, or New Thomists (as they are
called) upon a base design closing with the Jesuit in words, but agreeing
with the Jansenists in the thing.

Irrevocabile, inevitabile, and immobile fatum? (though, I confess, the
rigidest Maintainers of the Absolute Decrees, do as much decry the Stoical
fatality, as the contrary-minded:) but especially, about the Determination of
the Will: whether the Will does determine it self; or whether any thing else,
and what that is that does determine it?

Calvin or Arminius were born; and will be, when possibly their names may be
forgotten. Both sides, we know, plead the sense of Antiquity, and the
concurrence of the Ancients in the same judgment: The one pleading, that they
have the Vote of the whole Church in all the first ages before S. Austin; and a
many of the great Lights of the Church also after him: Yet withal yielding to
the other part, that, at least, S. Austin was of their mind for the main. And
this other side pleading S. Austin ex professo disputing these points, and
citing the judgments of many, before him, as Cyprian, Ambrose, Greg. Nazianz.
etc. and after him, they call in the testimonies of Prosper, Fulgentius, and
abundance of later times both Papists and Protestants.

Isa. 8.20.
to the Law and to the Testimony, to the Sacred Scriptures; and strongly
conceive those Sacred Oracles to determine for their persuasions? The one,
building on those many Parables of the Gospel (especially that of the Sower,
Luke 18.11.16.
wherein the reason of the success or non success of the Word as to the fruits
of righteousness, is founded not in any such Decree of God, but in the goodness
or badness of the ground, in the probity or improbity of the heart, that
receives it:) And those many texts, in which God evidently deals with man as
a Rational creature, drawing him by Hos. 11.4
the cords of a man, and bonds of love; convincing the judgment by the clearest
demonstrations; wooing the affections by the sweetest and most endearing
expressions of kindness, and arguments of love; drawing the Will by sweet
promises of the choicest mercies; terrifying the impenitent, and awakening the
secure by severest threatenings, and the thunders of most dreadful terrors;
Deuteronomy. 30.15.19.
setting before man Life and Death, everlasting blessedness upon his Mat. 24
13. Rev 2.10.
perseverance in faith and obedience, eternal misery upon his final impenitency
and disobedience; seriously exhorting man Deuteronomy. 30.19. Josh. 24.15. Job 34.4.
Pro. 1.29. Isa. 1.16.21. and 65.12.
to make his own choice, that he may live and not die; Luke 19.42. Mat. 23.37.
Passionately bemoaning the blindness and stubbornness of man that will not
see, nor close with the things that do belong to his peace; and Deuteronomy. 32.6.28,
29.
expostulating with man for his unkindness to God, his unmindfulness of
himself: Calling Deuteronomy. 30.19. Isa. 1.2.
heaven and earth to witness, yea making Isa. 1.18, 19, 20. Ezekiel 18.25, 29
Man himself judge between God and his own soul, whether by any act, or any
such irrevocable decree, he be bound up that he cannot do otherwise; and by
solemn oath removing from God all kind of Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. and 33.10, 11, 12,
13-21.
pleasure in, or desire of man's destruction; and charging the cause of all upon
man himself, who will sin, and will not repent, and by consequence will die:
Expressly, Mar 16.16. Luk: 13.3.5. Heb. 10.38, 39.
most expressly determining Salvation onley upon condition of Repentance,
Faith, Obedience, and final Perseverance; Damnation only in case of
Infidelity, Disobedience, Apostacy, and final Impenitency. Thus from the
express Condition in the effect and execution, (by which only we can know the
cause in this thing) they infer such an indeterminate and conditional Decree:
there being no promise of life, but to persons so and so qualified, and acting;
nor salvation given, but upon perseverance in faith and obedience; no death
denounced, but upon intuition of sin; nor inflicted, but where such sin is
persevered in.

Romans 9 11. -- 28.
stability of the purpose of God according to Election: That He has mercy on
whom he will, and whom he will he hardens: That it is not of him that will
th, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy; the Discrimination
being made with God, before they have done cither good or evil: and that
howsoever God deals, he has as unquestionable a sovereignty over his
creatures as the potter over his clay; that every mouth may be stopped, and no
man dare to reply against God; referring the whole Series of man's salvation to
God first Romans 8.30.
Predestinating, then calling, then justifying, then glorifying: which only
charge sin and impenitency, and consequently impute all the miseries, death and
destruction on man's perverse and depraved will; but declare his help,
deliverance, mercy and life to be only from God, and his pure, free, rich Grace
and Love: and teach, that, though Repentance, Faith, Obedience, and
Perseverance in these, be the express conditions of life; yet they are all,
the Gifts of God, Act 5.31. Ephesians. 2.8. Phil. 1.29.
who gives repentance, and faith, and 1 Cor. 1.8, 9. Phil. 1.6. 1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
strengthens us to persevere, and upholds us from falling; and that therefore
such shall not utterly, and for ever fall away: And that, these being the gifts
of God, they must be from the pure love and only good pleasure of God; that
man may have 1 Cor. 1.29.
nothing to boast of in himself, as having nothing but 1 Cor. 4 7.
what he has received; and 1 Cor. 15.10.
the Grace of God being that which makes the difference: And though no man can
be saved, but such as are fully willing to be saved, and whose wills freely
choose the way of righteousness and life; yet the will of man is so naturally
corrupted, and enslaved to lust, that man cannot choose, nor the will determine
it self to that which is really good, until it be emancipated and set free by
that Divine grace, which is not given to all, but only to some certain
persons, according to the Beneplacitum Dei, the good pleasure of God, who makes
men Phil. 2.13.
willing, as well as enables them to work. Thus from these Scriptures,
experiences, and effects, they conclude the Absolute Decree of God, to prepare
for, and give to such a number of persons, whom he has chosen, this effectual
grace, and so to bring them infallibly to salvation, leaving the rest to the
liberty and corruption of their own will, to perish in their own wilful
Rebellion.

grace of God in the Throne, where it must unquestionably sit, and have all the
glory of the good that is in us, or conferred upon us; and yet assert the power
and liberty of the rational creature, which God has given to it, and according
to the use whereof it shall, and must be judged.

Calvin, nor Arminius were the first fathers or factors of either opinion, that
we should be now engaged to prosecute either, as a new Doctrine sprung up in
the Church, when it has been of old, and (I believe) will be among men while
men are in the World. And shall we now for this difference break peace? shall
we not unite in one communion, because we cannot agree in this one Doctrine?
should the Church for this maintain a perpetual Faction, and continue a
perpetual Rent to the end of the World, for a different judgment in so abstruse
a Doctrine; wherein (not Heretics and Schismatics, but) learned men, of
sober, pious, and peaceable principles have dissented, and do, and will
dissent, while they are on this side Heaven, where only they will be fully
acquainted with the truth, having their understandings enlightened beyond all
obscurity, and their hearts perfectly purged from all corruptions? God forbid.

Scripture, Reason, and Experience; and Arguments drawn from all these by each
dissenting Party, which will puzzle the acutest Respondent of the other side to
give such an answer and solution to them, as may clearly take off the doubt,
and give satisfaction to them that raise it. They must be wiser (I say not than
I, but) than most, than any that I know, who shall be able to unty all the
knots, and solve all the objections in this controversy? I shall need no other
Argument to prove this difficulty, than the constant dissent (not of men who
are troubled with the pruritus disputandi, that itch of disputing which is
never satisfied; or of such, of whom the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3.7.
who are ever learning, but never come (...).
to acknowledge the truth. But) of learned, and considering men, who are as
able as any to discover the truth; and take as much pains because they would
gladly find it; and as readily acquiesce and rest in it when it is found. Of
this I am fully confirmed by the judgment and ingenuous confession of one, Dr.
Saunderson. now Lord Bishop of Lincoln.
whom I judge as pious, learned and judicious; and as much considering things
before him; and as truly Reverend a Father as this age has known. Who having
showed his reasons for quitting the ways both of the Supra-lapsarian, and
Sub-lapsarian, and laid down his own sentiments, with the grounds of them,
says, that See Dr. Hammond. (...). Page 34. Sect. 52.
Against this, he knows, much may be objected, and much more than he
esteems himself able to answer; though yet, to his apprehension, somewhat
less than against either of the other extremes. And indeed I shall as soon
expect to see a man dive into, and fathom the deep, and tell me what is in the
bottom of the sea: or mount up to heaven and tell the number of the stars:
yea, ascend above the firmament, and get into the throne of God: as to find one
who shall be able to give a clear account of those secret counsels, and unravel
all the difficulties, and fathom the depths of this great abyss. So that I
cannot but wonder at men, who pretend to adore and admire this abyss of Gods
unfathomable counsels, yet themselves dare attempt to fathom and define them.
Sure I am, if there be any depths in the Sacred Scriptures, wherein (as they
say) the Elephant may swim; or (as the Apostle says) 2 Pet. 3.16
things hard to be understood; this is one of them. And now to perpetuate a
Schism, or deny to be at peace one with another for different opinions in a
thing so hard to be decided; how unworthy this is for Christians, yea, for men,
let common reason judge.

of the Church, of ours in particular, which never did define, nor in this
Controversy give a decision either way, which may well be another argument for
peace, notwithstanding a dissent in this thing. Survey her Articles, Canons,
Liturgy, Rubricks, Catechisms, to which only we are called to subscribe, ye
will find not any thing that tends to a determination of the point to either
side. So great her prudence, that in a thing of so much obscurity, and
difficulty she would determine nothing, that any pious and knowing man might
doubt: and so great her love to peace, that she would not define, where by
defining there would have been an occasion of perpetual Schisin. Whereby it is
evident, that our Church does not at all make this a condition of her
communion, that men should profess themselves of either side in this
controversy. And we therefore may well keep peace among our selves, though in
judgment we differ in this: nor are we excusable, if we separate from the
communion of the Church, or deny a peaceable communion in the Church for that,
which the Church has not at all made the condition of her communion.

Gal. 2.9.
the right hand of fellowship. It is true, look upon the odious consequences
which one Party draws from the Doctrine of the other, and the expressions that
fall in the heat of dispute; I confess the distance is wide, yet the persons
are more asunder than the tenets; for take the highest of either side, and let
a sober man take out their concessions in their calmer debates, he will find a
perfect accord in the main of all things that need be preached to the people,
or believed by them in order to their practice.

Dr. Hammond in (...). Page 3. Sect. 4.
Dr. Saunderson, these five things, or Positions, wherein all, he says, do
agree (though of contrary judgments) and indeed I know no Dissenter. 1. That
the will of man is free in all his actions. 2. That very many things in the
World happen contingently. 3. That God from all eternity foreseeth all, even
the most contingext events. 4. That whatsoever God foreseeth, shall inevitably
come to pass. 5. That sinners are converted by the effectual working of Gods
grace. Let me add some other particulars of agreement, that we may see how
small the matter of difference really is, which make such a noise in the World,
they are these.

That there is a Beneplacitum 'Dei, and an eternal purpose of God according to
Election: Some from all eternity decreed to everlasting life, and some to
everlasting condemnation. 2. That the number of each of these is certain, and
shall neither be augmented nor diminished, as to the event. For whether they
are determined (as say the one) or foreseen (as the other rather choose to
speak.) Yet all events as they are foreseen of God, shall come to pass
accordingly as they are foreseen; and as infallibly, as if determined; for God
can be no more deceived in his knowledge, than frustrated in his counsels. So
that whether God has decreed such particular men shall walk in such a way, and
so infallibly come to this end: or, whether he only foresees they will walk in
such a way, and upon this determines the end: the matter is all one as to this
event, The number and particulars of them that shall be saved, or everlastingly
perish, is certain with God. 3. That God by no act of his lays any necessity
upon the event, whether to force man to obey, or necessitate him to sin: that
B. Saunderson in (...). Page 4. Sect. 6.
Praescience does not, it is evident to common sense; and that any
Predetermination of God does, those who maintain it do deny; and they See B.
Davenants answ. to Hoard's Gods love to Mankind.
say, that as well the Predetermination as the Prescience of God may stand cum
possibilitate ad eventus contrarios, though neither of them cum eventis
contrariis. So that whatever some passages in their doctrine may seem to tend
to, they both disclaim a necessitation, though both acknowledge an
infallibility of the event, which is only necessitas consequentis and ex
hypothesi; all things being necessary when they exist, and what is future being
present and existing to the all-seeing eye of God, there being no priority or
posteriority in eternity. 4. Though there be not this necessitation, yet it is
agreed, That God works by his Grace (I confess about the Resistibility, or
irresistibility they differ: irresistibly (says one) not irresistibly (say the
other) yet even these agree thus far, that God works) so effectually on those
whom he has ex beneplacito appointed to salvation, in ordering the means,
occasions, and opportunities, with such congruity to that end, as that (...).
Page 5. Sect. 9.
de facto it is not finally resisted. o that though it be possible for the free
will of man to resist the calls of God, yet in those that believe and are
saved, the Grace of God works so sweetly and effectually, that the will does
not resist, but freely and willingly closes with it. 5. That the whole of what
we do amiss must be left unto ourselves, our sin and condemnation is from our
selves: and the glory of all the good we do, and of all the blessings we
receive both in this life and that to come, must be given only to Gods grace
and love.



1. That God did create man after his own image in perfect righteousness and
holiness, and full liberty of will (as a Rational creature) either to obey God
and continue as he was created; or to sin and fall away, having a power to
either, and by this we conclude that God decreed to make him so.

Satan, and by perfectly voluntary disobedience fall away from God, and cast
himself, and so was all mankind brought into a state of sin and misery, under
the bondage of Satan, without all power or possibility; yea, or so much as
desire to recover himself out of that wretched condition. This, it is evident,
God did permit (for he could have hindered it if he pleased) and therefore from
all eternity decreed to permit, a purposing to make use thereof for the further
manifestation of his power, wisdom, justice and goodness.

not to fallen Angels) that Satan might not finally triumph in such a Conquest,
if all Mankind should perish; did immediately after the Fall promise a Savior,
and in due time did send (and therefore from all eternity decreed to send) his
dearly beloved, and only begotten Son, Jesus Christ into the World, to
undertake our Redemption, to satisfy Divine Justice for our sin, and to make
peace by the blood of his Cross, and to deliver us from that state of sin and
misery.

all Mankind which was lost by the fall of the first Adam is restored to a
capacity, and possibility of salvation through the mercy of God, and merits of
Jesus Christ the second Adam: The merits of the second Adam being as fully
sufficient to save the World, as the sin of the first, to destroy the World. So
that it is not any want of mercy in God, or of merit in Christ, if any
particular person perish, or that the whole Mass of Mankind is not saved; and
this being so, evidenceth the eternal Decree, that it should be so.

New and Evangelical Covenant, which expressly are, sincere repentance from dead
works, a lively faith in Christ, new and holy obedience, and perseverance in
the same. This being the only way wherein God has expressly said in the Gospel,
that he will infallibly save men. This is that Doctrine which he sends forth
his Ministers to preach, Mark 16.15, 16. Luke 13.3, 5. Acts 3.19. Romans 2.7, 8,
9, 10. and many more.
his Heralds to proclaim remission of sins, and everlasting life upon the
performance, and only upon the performance of these conditions. So that whether
we say, or say not, there was an intuition, or foresight of these things in
this, or that man antecedent to the Decree to save him; yet here is an evident
agreement as to the event, That God did decree to give salvation to none but
such as should persevere in faith and obedience, and to deny it to none but the
finally impenitent and disobedient. There was no Decree ever to save any that
should not, or to condemn any that should so repent, believe, and continue
obedient. That howsoever with God the number of all the saved and damned be
infallibly and unchangeably certain, yet it is unquestionably true, and may,
and ought to be assured to this, to that, to any, to every particular man, that
though now he be sinful, rebellious, a child of wrath, and in a state of
damnation, yet if he repent, return, and sincerely believe, and receive Christ
as he is offered to us in the Gospel, viz. as his Lord and Savior, he shall be
saved: Or, though now he do believe, and be righteous, and so in state of
salvation, yet if he Apostatize to Infidelity, or Disobedience, and continue in
that Apostasy and Rebellion, in his sin he shall dye, and perish for ever.



From hence it follows also, and herein all sides agree, That,

Auxilium gratiae generale, as is sufficient ex part sui, to convert the soul
of the hearer, if it be accepted; and therefore being not accepted, but
rejected, is abundantly sufficient to leave the sinner inexcusable. God, when
he speaks the Word to the ear, Rev. 3.20.
knocking also at the heart; the preaching of the Word, is (...), the Ministry
of the Spirit; and the Word is vehiculum Spiritus, the Chariot, in which the
Spirit descends to us; and the resisting and persecuting his Prophets, is Acts
7.51.
a resisting of the Spirit.

Calvinists (let me use the word, though I like it not) that I know, yield
their consent, even they maintaining,

1. Seethese partic. in Fen ner. wilful impen. on Ezekiel. 18.31.
That the worst of men cannot plead, yea that no man can plead that he would be
better, but he could not; or that he would seriously believe, but God would not
that he should; for God declares and protests the Prove. 1.29, 30. Mat. 23.37.
Sect. 29.
contrary.

2. That God is aforehand with all, and deals with them according to this rule,
Habenti dabitur, to him that has, shall be given, and he shall have abundance
( viz. of things in eodem genere) not in the sense of the Pelagians, that
according to the use of the gifts of Nature, God gives the grace of the Gospel:
but in the same kind: as he that Prove. 10 4, 22.
uses a penny well, may get two pence; he that studies, shall increase in
learning; and he that receives and improves the grace given in the Gospel,
shall have more, which leaves them wholly without excuse, for they might have
had more, had they not rejected Gods gracious offers.

Mat. 25.14. -- 31.
one Talent, and so, some power to do good, and to act toward his own
salvation, whereby be might gain, proportionably to those that have more; there
being the same proportion of one to one more, as (...) two to two, or of sive
to five more: and the severity of the doom is not imputable to the austerity of
the Master, but to the slothsulness of the servant.

own, and only his own fault, that he is worse than his neighbor; for he had
the same means, yea possibly better, but did not improve them, as he might have
done, or, Mat. 11.20. -- 25. and 12.41, 42 and 21.32.
others would have done; for indeed God offers them power, Jer. 6.16, 17.
and they will not take it; yea, gives them power, Prove. 17.16.
and they will not use it: All men are Luke 16.2.
Stewards of some thing, and they account only for what they had. Insomuch that
every man can do more good, and avoid more evil than he does. Art. Dordrac. 3,
and 4. in refut. error. 3, 4. posit.


Joshua with any justice have Josh. 7.
punished Achan, if he had not had power to have passed by that accursed gold
and garment? Ephraim is guilty, because he Hos. 5.11.
willingly walked after the Commandment; if they know not, it is because Psalm.
82.5.
they will not understand: if they are proud and rebellious, it is because they
Exodus 10.3.
refuse to humble themselves: if they act not vigorously, it is because they
are slothful and lazy: every difficulty is counted an impossibility: and if
such a man starve, it is not because there is no meat before him, or, because
he has no power to take it; but because he is idle, Prove. 19.24.
He hides his hands in his bosom, and will not put them to his mouth. If man
work not in the Vineyard, it is not Mat. 20.3. -- 8.
because no body hired him, for, we are all called in by the Preaching of the
Gospel, and that early in the morning too) Nor can any say, though we have the
Word and Ordinances, yet we cannot profit by hearing, or reading, or praying:
for the fault is still, that men are idle, and will not labor; and would they
labor, they should see, that Prove. 10.23.
in all labor there is profit.

not stocks and stones, but rational creatures; he deals with them as such,
persuading, and exhorting by rational arguments, which were altogether useless,
had they no power to hear, or refuse: they have reason, understanding,
judgment, memory, will, affections, and all these excited, assisted by some
measure of evangelical grace, that they have much more power than they will put
forth. 2 King. 12.2.
Jehoash did do, what was right in the eyes of the Lord, all the days of his
Uncle Jehojada: therefore, he could have done so still, had he pleased, when
Jehojada was dead. Luke 8.13.
The stony hearers did receive the word, and believe and rejoice in it a while;
(i.e.) so long as the Gospel did please them: they then might have done so
still if they would; for though there were troubles in the world, yet they had
the same powers in themselves; which proves all the offers of God to the wicked
and vilest reprobates, to be very serious; his anger for their refusal to be
very reasonable; and his reproofs of their rebellion very equal: because in
them there is not a want of power, but only a want of will. And, really

their own consciences shall speak in sober sadness, they must thank themselves
alone for their own perishing; who are condemned, not because they could not,
but because Mat. 25.43.
they did not, they would not keep, or do the Commandments of Christ. We find
the man Mat. 22.12.
mute at the Wedding-feast, who was there without a Wedding Garment; being
reproved, he had not a word to reply; which he must needs have had, if, as he
had no such garment, so he had had no kind of means at all to get one, or power
to put it on. Thus far then there is a full agreement in both dissenting
parties.

In a word we shall at once take a general view of their consent, in the main,
in these four following heads.

Arminian yields, and fully grants to the Calvinist, (pardon me, that I use the
words which I abhor, because the use of the world has now brought in some
kind of necessity of it) That, The beginning, progress, and perfection; the
whole series of man's salvation; and all the glory of it, is to be referred only
to Gods grace. Viz. His preventing, exciting, assisting, sanctifying grace. So
that, even those who do Dr. Ham. (...). p. 58. Sect 82.
most earnestly contend, that, of two persons, who are under the same means,
and have the same offers and tenders of grace, yet that one is converted and
saved, the other not; the Discrimination arises from the one man's resisting
that sufficient grace, which the other does not resist, but make use of: and
imputing this, to that probity of heart (the Luke 8.15.
good and honest heart mentioned in the Parable) that docible, humble,
malleable, and melting temper, which is in the one, but the other wanted. Even
these (I say) impute this humble, malleable temper, (...). ibid. Sect. 83. and
ibid. p. 45. Sect, 63.
not to the natural probity or free will of man, but to the preventing grace of
God; and grant farther, that this probity, or humility of heart, this subactum
solum, or soil mellowed, is not any natural quality in man; nor is the
efficacy of grace to be imputed to those natural, or, moral preparations, but
to the grace of God, and his supernatural operations: that it is an Evangelical
temper, so far from being natural to any corrupt child of Adam, that
wheresoever it is, it is a special plant of Gods own planting, and a work of
his preparing, softening, and preventing grace, as much imputable to the
operation of his holy Spirit, as any effect of his subsequent, or cooperating
grace is, according to those words of Christ, Joh. 6.37.
All that my Father gives me, shall come unto me. They are first fitted by
God, then given, and Verse. 44.
drawn to Christ by the Father: then all these (and none but these) shall come
unto him: and that (...). p. 48. Sect. 67.3.
whatsoever good, man shall ever advance unto, it is by the strength of Gods
sanctifying and assisting grace; and he is to remember with the utmost
gratitude, how nothing has been imputable to himself in the whole work, but
from the beginning to the end, all is due to supernatural grace: and that, what
freedom soever the will has in this corrupt estate to other things, and how
fully soever furnished with ability to sin, etc. yet, (...). p. 54. Sect. 76.
as for an uniform constant choice of those things that do belong to our peace
and spiritual end; for the beginning of that, and every step and motion
through, and perseverance in it; its freedom and strength, and every degree of
life or action, is wholly and entirely from Grace: and then he, that Joh. 15.5.
without Christ can do nothing, now Phil. 4.13.
do all things through Christ strengthening him. This that learned man makes
his (...): p. 56. Sect. 79.
challenge, and interest, and not his concession only, but requires it to be
granted him.

2. On the other side the Calvinists do as readily grant to the Arminian, That,
The whole beginning, progress, and perfection of man's fall and perishing, is
imputable to none, but to his own self through his own voluntary defection and
rebeltion: and, that no decree of God necessitates any man to sin, or to be
damned. Even the greatest assertors of Gods irrespective decrees, do also as
fully assert, that God never forced, allured, or drawed any man to sin, nor is
there any force upon man, from any decree, to make him sin and perish: That
Hos. 13.9.
man's destruction is wholly from himself, because they cannot plead want of
power and means to escape, which God offered, and they would not take. Fenner
Wilful impenit. the design of the whole Sermon. See p. 82.
Man's destruction is most just, nor can he allege severity, or cruelty in
God, for He wilfully sins himself into Hell. Christ presses the Gospel of
peace, but they Act. 13.46.
put it off: their destruction therefore inexcusable. Nothing has man to plead
with God, for he has taken away all excuses from man: he has offered Christ,
Grace, Life; followed them with good motions, counsels, exhortations, promises,
threatenings, etc. but they would not: and must therefore be (as Mat. 22.12.
the man in the Gospel) mute, and speechless. The Prophets, Fenuer. ib. p. 110.
and Ministers of God have discharged their work, done their duties, they have
called, but men refused to hear; they have called, but men refused to return.
The p. 111.
Gospel has delivered its message, and errand, has freely offered life to all
that will, Rev. 22.17.
Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely; that it is evident,
those only perish, who will not submit, and take this life that is tendered.
Fenn. ib.p. 112.
The blood of Jesus Christ has done that which it was shed for, it has put
man, every man, into a capacity of life; it came to tender mercy upon easy
terms; to offer grace, pardon, peace, salvation, and Heaven freely; if man will
submit, he may have it: if men's Mat. 23.37.
houses be left desolate, and they perish, it is not because Christ would not
gather them, for he would, but they would not be gathered. And indeed, though
the Law did condemn, even there where men could not obey, (for 1 King. 8.46
Eccles. 7.20.
who of the fallen sons of Adam was ever able to continue in every particular
of the Law? which yet Gal. 3.10.
if he did not, he was under the curse) yet we never sin against the Gospel,
but only in that, wherein Fenner ubi sup. p. 115.
we will not obey: The Gospel requiring nothing of a believer, but what it
gives him. This is the voice of the Gospel, (...) Joh. 7.17.
If any man will, let him come, etc. Now we never displease God, but only upon
our Will nots: though through our weakness in this corrupt estate we cannot but
sin in every thing we do; yet this stains not our acceptance with God, when, 2
Cor. 8.12.
if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not. And indeed it is the whole design of that
tract of Mr. Fenners, to lay all the fault of man's sin and destruction upon
himself. And the same does another Bishop Davenant. anim. on Gods love to
mankind, especially from p. 83. to 189. and in those Chapters, where be shows
that Sublaps. oppose not the holiness justice, or goodness of God.
Reverend Author as fully avow (though expressly he be for Gods Absolute
Decrees) that yet God is not at all to be charged with the sin or destruction
of man, nor is man necessitated to either, by any decree of God whatsoever.
Thus even Calvin himself, who is so zealous in asserting the Absolute Decree,
will yet not allow the Pelagian, Manichee, Anabaptist, Epicure, any plea from
any necessity to sin, that men are bound in by any decree of God. For, Calv.
Instit. l. 3. c. 23. Sect. 8. Sic eorum pendet perditio ex Dei
praedestinatione, ut cansa and materia in ipsis reperiatur. -- Cadit Pgmo, Deo
sicordinante, sed sag vitio cadit. --
says he, Man's perdition so depends on Gods pred stination, that yet the
matter and cause of it is only in themselves. And a few lines after, Man
falls indeed, God so ordering it (or, possibly in his sense, ordaining it)
but he falls through his own fault. Genesis 1.31.
God pronounced all that he made, very good. Whence then (says he) became man
wicked? etc. that it may not be thought to be from God or his Creation, God
gives this elogie and approbation to all that came from him, It was very good.
Propria ergo malitia (says he) Man by his own wickedness corrupted that nature
which he received pure from God, and by his fall brought all mankind into
destruction with himself. And in another place, proving against the Novatians,
and Anabaptists, that there is yet mercy with God for all sorts of sinners
(though their sins be never so great, and after Baptism also) if they sincerely
return to God; has these words, Caiv. Instit. l. 4. c. 1. Sect. 25. Et sane,
non allus potest esse affectus ejus, qui affirmat se nolle mortem peccatoris,
sed magis ut convertatur, and vlvat.
There san indeed be no other affection in Him (i.e.) in God, who has said,
Ezekiel. 18.13, 32. Sect. 37.
He has no pleasure in the death of a sinner, but rather, that he return and
live.

3. Again, The highest Arminian, (I suppose) will grant to the Calvinist, That,
All the Decrees of God are (in a proper sense) Absolute. That is, taking 1.
Decrees, as Decrees in God, and not as the event decreed. Viz. that what God
has determined to do, he has absolutely determined to do, as, he has
absolately (i.e.) peremptorily, and immutably decreed to save all believers,
and this particular believer: and so absolutely decreed to condemn all finally
impenitent, and this, such an one, in particular. Yea, and 2. Taking Absolute,
as opposed to any thing without God himself, any cause that should be (...),
from without moving him so to decree: for, nothing could move him to send Jesus
Christ to redeem the world; and to bestow upon sinful miserable man, salvation
upon his faith and constant obedience; nothing could move him to decree
salvation upon so easy terms, but his own free love, the Beneplacitum, or,
good pleasure of his Will. So that, whatsoever we have, it is of Grace, and si
gratia quomodo non gratuita? it must be every way free. If of Grace, Romans 11.6.
then non ex operibus, not of works, sc. nec praestitis, nec praevisis; neither
done, nor foreseen. This (I think) even these will grant, that, though, as to
the decree of this particular man's salvation, there was an intuition of his
faith and obedience, yet the foresight of God that men would return from their
sinful estate, was not the cause, that God decreed to send Christ to save them:
but out of his own love, he freely (being moved by this alone to compassionate
the misery of man, in whom there was no good at all, until he was pleased anew
to impart to him) decreed this, viz. to send Christ, to enter into a new
Covenant with man, and so to save, whosoever of mankind should believe in him;
and to emancipate their wills, and endue them with such supernatural abilities,
that if they would not be wanting to themselves, they might return and be saved.

Calvinists will yield to the Arminian, that in this particular, No decree of
God is absolute: taking 1. Absolute, for irrespective to all conditions, and,
2. Decree, for the event decreed, the thing to be given according to this
decree. So that, though (in their sense) God did absolutely decree, to save
such and such persons; and to prepare effectual grace for them, and so to bring
them infallibly to salvation: and as absolutely decree, to leave the rest of
the world (though not without sufficient means to save them, if they would not
be wanting to themselves) to the liberty of their own corrupt wills; resolving
not to give them that certain portion of Grace, which would infallibly save
them; but to leave them to perish in their own voluntary rebellions: Yet, that
God never decreed, that any of these persons elected should be saved, without
intuition of that faith and obedience, which he also decreed should be the only
way to salvation: He never decreed to save them, but upon this condition, that
they believe in Christ, obey the Gospel, and persevere in so doing to the end.
Nor did he ever decree to condemn any person, but with an intuition of sin and
impenitence previous, and antecedaneous to his condemnation.

set forth the glory of Gods Grace, Justice, Goodness and Holiness; and to
quicken us to Repentance, Faith, Obedience: to show us that none can be saved
but by Grace and Mercy; to Romans 3.27
exclude our boasting; and, that none can be saved without Repentance, Faith, a
sincere, constant, and persevering Obedience; to rowse our security, and
quicken us to action; and to leave us inexcusably guilty of our own perdition
if we continue in sin, and miscarry.

our Church excellently comprised, concisely yet fully, in that Fourth Collect
after the Communion.
short Collect. Prevent us, O Lord, by thy goodness, there is acknowledged a
necessity of preventing grace, for a foundation: And further us by thy
continual help, there, a necessity of exciting, and assisting grace, to stir us
up, and help us in action, without which we could do nothing: That all our
works being begun, continued, snd ended in thee, there, the necessity of holy,
constant, uniform, sincere, and persevering obedience, and the practice of good
works through that grace: We may, through thy mercy, obtain everlasting life,
there is the reward expected not of Merit, but of Grace and Mercy, and all this
only Through Jesus Christ our Lord. Here is the foundation of all the love of
God to us, and of our expectations from God: all, through Christ, and for his
sake.

thoughts they judge. And, I am consident, take any of either side, the
eagerest in either extreme, yet they will subscribe to these things here laid
down. And if so, here being the substance of what we need know, as to the
ordering of our lives; how inconsiderable are the rest of the things, which men
contend about? and how to little purpose are they disputed? when we agree in so
many, in so great things, of the chiefest weight, and highest concernment; what
should hinder us from amity and peace? what should hinder our brotherly love,
and peaceable communion?

5. To all this let me add one argument more for peace, that we may not divide
about our different sentiments in this Article. It is taken from (as, the
Agreement in the main, so) the Needlesness and Vnprofitableness of this
Controversy. What need have we to contend? or, what profit is there in a
dispute about some nice points of difference, when we agree as to the main
substance, and the points of the highest concernment? For, 1. priority, or
posterioty of the Decrees of God? when we are fully agreed of the coexistency,
coessentiality, and coeternity of them all in mente divina, in the mind of God:
God at the same instant determining, and uno intui^u, See Boeth. de consol.
Philos. l. 5.
by one and the same act of vision seeing all things, there being no succession
or change, no first or latter in Eternity. All the difference being in nostro
intelligendi modo, the manner of our conceptions of them. And our finite
understandings not being able to fathom the depths of the infinite Counsels;
what profit there can be in disputes or contendings about our several
particular Schemes, I see not; when, howsoever they stand or fall, we agree in
the main, whereby the wisdom, power, justice, goodness and grace of God is
asserted, and the Glory of them secured. 2. Whether Jesus Christ be the
foundation of our election, or only the medium, the means given for the
accomplishing the Decree? when we are all convinced, that only Ephesians. 1.6.
in and through Christ we are chosen, and for his sake, and by his merits alone
we can be justified and saved. 3. Absolute, and Irrespective? when we are on
all sides convinced that, whatever the Decrees be, yet no man shall ever be
blessed with the decreed Salvation, but in the way of the Evangelical Covenant,
in the performance of the conditions of sincere repentance, unfeigned faith,
holy, sincere and constant obedience: nor shall any man be damned but for sin,
and final impenitency. And every particular man may, and ought to assure
himself, upon the unquestionable evidence of the Gospel, that if he
conscionably walk in the way of the Gospel, he shall be infallibly saved; but
if not, he must as infallibly perish everlastingly. 4. Resistibility, or
Irresistibility of Grace; and the nice contests about the Power, and Liberty of
the Will of man? when we all agree, that, in this corrupted state of nature,
the Will has too much power and liberty to that which is evil, whereby too
often, and too sadly men do resist the gracious motions of the Holy Spirit, and
sin away their peace; but has not a power to any supernatural good, until it
be emancipated and set free by Divine grace: And that the operations of Grace
are so strong, sweet, and congruously applied, that they are not finally
resisted by any of those who are ordained to everlasting life. 5. the manner of
the working and cooperation of Gods Grace, and man's Will? when we are fully
convinced of the thing, That the glory of all the good which we have, both for
the foundation, progress, and perfection of it, must be referred only and
wholly to the grace of God: and all the evil, which we do, or suffer, wholly to
our selves and our own voluntary rebellions, and to the liberty of our Wills
choosing to continue in sin and impenitency. 6. after Gods Image, perfectly
holy, yet with a freedom of Will ad opposita, having equal power and liberty to
choose good or evil, to obey or rebel, did yet refuse obedience and life, and
choose sin and death, and thus involved all mankind in a state of sin and most
deplorable misery; And that God did permit and suffer, and consequently decreed
to permit and suffer him so to do; and does now order and dispose the sin of
man (and so without doubt decreed and purposed to order it) to the further
manifestation of his wisdom, power, justice, and most rich and incomprehensible
grace and love: I say, when we are assured of all this, what profit can there
be in a dispute, Whether God did positively ordain that man should sin then;
and that many should sin and be damned still? unless it be to encourage the
security and idleness of man, or to put a word into the mouths of proud flesh
to reply against his Sovereign and most just Creator: to lay the charge of his
sin upon God; and then take no care to reform himself. Again, 7. Cui bono? to
what purpose? to what benefit? what profit comes to us by those multiplied
disputes about the Object of Gods Decrees: whether it be Homo nondum conditus,
sed creabilis, Man not yet created, but to be created, (as Dr. Twisse, and
those that follow him would have it;) or, Homo conditue, nondum lapsus, Man
created, but before the fall, or considered not as fallen (as Mr. Perkins, and
the Supralapsarians teach;) or, Homo lapsus, Man considered as fallen (as the
Sublapsarians hold;) or, Homo evangelizatus, Man preached unto, (as some other
sober, pious, and judicious men, which yet were never (that I know) for this
judged Arminians?) when to us, as far as it concerns our case, it is all one;
for we are, certainly, preached unto, we have the Gospel preached to us, and
are wholly to be ruled by the laws of the Gospel, and shall be judged by it;
and according to our conformity, or disconformity to this Gospel, we shall,
without all peradventure, be infallibly sived, or infallibly damned.


Grave Divine, who is yet living, and a Member of the present Convocation, and
who is very far from being ever accounted an Arminian, but judges the other to
be the doctrine of the Scriptures, and of our Church; a man of known learning,
and so able to judge, and of a pious, sober, humble, and peaceable spirit: I
say, it was this learned and grave persons profession in a private discourse
with me, That he had seriously set himself for several years to the study of
this Controversy, and had read the most and chief of the writings and
arguments of either side: But in all that time, in all those studies, he could
not, out of any thing wherein they differed, pick one Note, which he was able
to make use of in the Pulpit; though in the doctrines wherein they agreed he
could find enough. And now, can that become Christians, or men that profess the
Gospel of peace, to contend about, and break peace for, those things which are
confessedly of so little use, of so inconsiderable a profit, as to the
direction of the lives, and to the concerns, the great concerns of the souls of
men? I think not.

Absolute, Irrespective, or Conditionate Decrees; Resistibility, or
Irresistibility of Grace; Supra-lapsarian, Sublapsarian, Arminian, Socinian,
Calvinist, Remonstrant, Contra-remonstrant; and a many invented School-terms,
even before popular Auditories; by which, when all is done, the people are as
wise as if they had heard a Sermon in Greek or Latin, except that they have
been stirred up to make a party, and to account all the matter of their duty to
lie in being of such a side; and to affix terms of reproach unto, or at least
to be full of evil surmisings against the contrary-minded. And how baneful this
has been to that brotherly love which the Gospel requires, and the peaceable
communion of Christians, our eyes have seen, and our woeful experience does
sufficiently testify, and the world can judge.

young and least experienced Preachers are most (...).
confident; (as if it were not their design to edify the plain ignorant
people, by instructing them in the necessary points of the Gospel, and building
them up in Jude 20.
their most holy faith and obedience; but to get themselves a name of acuteness
in the parts of abstruser learning, and highest controversies.) And those are
commonly full of the most confidence, who are guilty of the least learning,
boldly determining, where they least understand: even then, when they pretend
to admire the inscrutable abyss of Gods unsearchable counsels; boldly presuming
to determine and define them.

our Church has showed in her Articles: Would all men conscionably comply with
that Declaration of His late Majesty, of blessed memory, to silence these
debates, and lay aside all further curious search and inquiry; and content
themselves, and shut up these Disputes in the general Promises of God, as they
are declared in the Scriptures; making the Revealed will of God in his Word the
only rule to go by both in Doctrine and Practice; all of either side being
equally silenced from all meddling with, especially from all positive defining
in any particular of those abstruser points in controversy: I say, were all
this done and yielded to, (as, with how much ease, content, and satisfaction
may it be done by all sober and peaceable men?) I am confident, a very great
progress would be made to the securing of the peace of the Church; and to the
suspending of that turmoil and heat of contention, and the preventing of those
envyings, reproaches, and evil surmisings, which do so much interrupt that
peace.

matters of Doctrine there are no differences so wide, as by the heats of
Contenders they seem to be; and such as they are, may well be composed among
sober and humble men. 2. Pap. of Propos. to His Maj. p. 24.
We dissent not (say the Presbyterian Divines) from the Doctrine of the Church
of England expressed in the Articles and Homilies, -- only (say they) some
by-passages or phrases are scrupled. Notwithstanding these then, we may live in
peace.

CHAP. IV. The Differences about Ecclesiastical Government examined; And that
there is nothing in the Episcopacy established with us, but may be submitted
to, proved.
Ecclesiastical Government and Discipline. This also is made a matter of great
dispute, and has been an occasion of as great a Rent in this Age, as I think,
the Christian Church can ever show; and we cannot be strangers to the eager
contendings, and multitude of writings which have been published on either
side, with passion and bitterness more than enough. Some being confident of an
Apostolical Institution of a Prelacy; others, as confident of the same
Institution of a Parity. The one, for the Jus Divinum and Necessarium of a
Paternal and Despotical Episcopacy: The other as eager, and with heat enough,
for the same jus of a sole Presbytery; yea, (in some) of a Lay-Presbytery too.
Both sides contending for their own way, and that no other Government can be
lawful in the Church. Both laying a stiff claim to Antiquity, yea, the highest
Antiquity, the primitive pattern, The Apostolical Canon and Practice. Here we
see,

Bishop in a strict peculiar sense, as the only standing Officer in the Church,
at first, superior to the Deacon, and affixed to a City-Church, or Metropolis,
and having all the adjacent places and dependants upon that City for his (...)
or (...) (for these, among the Ancients signified the same thing) his Diocese
or Parish. And the Church increasing in number and extent, so as it became a
burden too great for one man's shoulders, this Bishop taking in, and ordaining
others (out of the Deacons) to be Presbyters, that might bear part of the
charge and burden: And thus the Presbyter will appear to be a later Officer
introduced for the necessity of the Church.

2. On the contrary, The others plead as high for the Presbyter only to be that
standing Officer, and the College of Presbyters the only Judicatory of the
Church for the first Age; and the Bishop brought in afterward as a constant
Moderator, or Praeses in the Assembly, and then by degrees, with some
superintendency over the rest, to keep them in peace among themselves, for the
convenience of the Church, and a remedy against Schism.

a diametrical opposition; and maintained with so much eagerness, That though I
know none so high of the one side, as to deny the Presbyter his Institution,
and Sacred Order, and some interest in the Acts of Government in the Church;
yet I could name some (and to this the World is no stranger) of the other side,
who have been so violent as to deny the lawfulness of the being of any such
Officer as a Bishop above a Presbyter; and to plead a necessity of throwing him
out of the Church, as a Plant not of Gods planting; but wholly Antichristian,
and abominable. And if any abuses have crept in, or corruptions prevailed in
the Church; the very existence of the Bishop, as such, must bear the blame, and
be esteemed the cause of all. The popular fury thinking, corruptions cannot be
restrained, nor the Church reformed, until her Bishops and Govenrours, yea, the
Government it self be ejected and abolished.

desiring and rejoicing in the establishment of Episcopacy and Prelacy, as that
Order, which is not only best for the Church, but has also the clearest claims
to, and evidences of Antiquity; yea, the first and purest, the Apostles
themselves; who yet for peace-sake (though it would be their affliction) would
submit to a Presbytery without a Prelacy, where that Government should be
legally established, and might be submitted to without Schism; because they
judge this way of Government, though not the best, nor so good as they could
wish, nor to have those evidences which Episcopacy has; yet, not to be so
manifestly repugnant to the Word of God, but that it may be submitted to
without sin. On the other side, there are also many peaceable spirits, who
indeed judge the Presbyterial way, the most agreeable to the primitive pattern;
and therefore would choose such a Presbytery: Yet for the peace of the Church,
will also quietly submit to the Episcopacy established; because, though in
their judgments it be not so evidently founded in, yet neither is it so
contrary to the Scriptures, but that without sin they may obey it.



absolute necessity of the one, the other for the indispensible necessity of
the other way, and condemning the contrary as an unlawful Usurpation and
Antichristian; it is no more possible to make them agree, than to reconcile
both parts of a contradiction. And I confess further, while men bear those
heats in their spirits, and look upon Episcopacy as such an Usurpation, that it
is not lawful to own it, or submit to it; and think the Church can never be
happy till it be cast out: There is very little likelihood to prevail upon such
men for a patient submission, or a peaceable compliance. But is there any thing
in the nature of the Government in dispute, which must needs be the cause of a
perpetual Schism? Or, is there any thing of such a nature in Episcopacy, which
a pious Christian may not submit to, or (at east for peace-sake) comply with,
without sin? I think not; and no such thing has ever been proved that I have
seen.

of judgment in the thing in controversy, but) an union of hearts in love and
affection, and much of peace and compliance even here: I need not do more than
consider how much learned and sober men, even of the Presbyterian persuasion,
have declared themselves willing to submit to in the point of Episcopacy; and
how far their Judgments do concur and agree with their Episcopal Brethren: And
by this give a Judgment, whether they may not without sin do somewhat more; and
whether they are not (at least for peace-sake) obliged to comply with, and
submit to the established Government, as far as it is established.

viz. Those learned Divines of the Presbyterial judgment, joined Commissioners
with the Reverend Bishops, and others, for an amicable Conference about the
things in dispute, in their Petition for peace, prefixed to their Form of
prayer; and in the Papers of Proposal to His Majesty, have declared publicly,
1. That they are for Episcopacy. 2. That they desired the establishment of
Episcopacy according to the Primate of Ireland, B. Ushers Reduction. Yea, 3. A
thankful acceptance of His Majesty's Declaration about Ecclesiastical Affairs.
And, though they are not fully satisfied with that establishment of Episcopacy:
Yet they seem to rest in that expression of His Majesty, That the essence and
foundation of Episcopacy may be preserved, though the extent of the
Jurisdiction may be altered: Desiring an alteration only in such alterable
points, as the extending or straitning the limits of their Jurisdiction,
preserving still the essence and foundation of the Government; from all which
concessions and professions it appears, that their judgments concur with their
Episcopal Brethren in these things.

1. That there is, or at least may be an imparity among the Ministers of the
Gospel, and that lawfully; and, 2. In the lawfulness of a Superiority and
Jurisdiction in the Bishop over other Presbyters, both as to Ordination and
Censures; for both these, as well in the Primates Reduction, as in His
Majesty's Declaration, are evidently reserved to the Bishop.
Bishop to be (though not in their judgment, superior ordo, a superior order
from, or over other Presbyters, yet) superior gradus in eodem ordine, an higher
degree, and so a superior in the same order; they conceiving this to be also
the public sense of our Church, which advancing a person to a Bishopric,
calls him not by a new Ordination, as into another Order of Ministry; but
only gives him a solemn Consecration as to an higher Office, Employment, or
Degree. And these acknowledge such an imparity and superiority in the Bishop
distinct from the Presbyter, in Ignatius his time, and the Age next succeeding
the Apostles (which may be a very probable Argument at least, if not
demonstrative of such a thing in the Apostles days too, unless we find
something in their practice and writings, which may evidently prove the
contrary, which yet is not done) and withal, confessing the wisdom of the
Church, that brought in Bishops (though they judge they were not there before)
if upon no other account, yet for the maintenance of peace, and remedy of
Schism, according to that known testimony of St. Hierom so much stood upon in
this controversy.

Covenant, which they have sworn for the extirpation of that Episcopacy, with
the appendices established among us, yet judge themselves not obliged against
Episcopacy, nor against their Superiority and Jurisdiction, as such; but think
they have fully satisfied their Obligation in the acceptance of, and compliance
with Episcopacy, as reduced by Bishop Usher, where yet that Superiority and
Jurisdiction is still retained. Methinks here is a fair step toward
compliance, an happy door of hope opened that we may agree. The distance is not
so wide as at first it did seem to be; here are no terms now of Usurpation,
Tyranny, and Antichristianism, assix't to Episcopal Authority.

steps farther? And we all, whether of the one or the other persuasion, may
account our selves so much concerned to promote the peace of the Church, as to
submit so far to the established government, as the Laws under which we live
require that we should.

1. Is it, that the Bishops are conceived to take too much upon them; and do
more than they should, or are called to do? Or, 2. Is it, that they will not
suffer us to take our due, and to do that which we should; or that we are
called, and have authority to do? (for under these two heads must be comprised
all, that can with any shadow be pretended, why we should not comply, and
submit so far as the Laws require.


1. That it is not the design of these papers (and therefore none are here to
expect it) to enter upon the whole controversy of government, or the jus
divinum, of this in particular: nor here to undertake a full justification of
all the particulars in the constitution or exercise of it: for enough has been
already written pro and con, on that subject. My whole design here is not to
revive, but to do my part (if God see us yet fit for such a blessing) to put an
end to disputes of this nature. 2. Bishops, or Episcopacy, (which here I meddle
not with, and in the following sheets, may possibly in a great measure take
off) to consider, How far we of the inferior Orb, who, if we exercise our
ministry in England, are bound by the standing Laws of England to be under
them, may submit to their power; obey and conform to these established Laws.
Now that I may give full satisfaction in this case, I shall first lay down
these two general conclusions, which I must take as granted.
1. Postulatum, and require it to be granted me, which (I think) no intelligent
considering man will deny. Viz. That in order to the conduct of our
consciences, and the regulating of our actions, we are not to enquire, what is
the calling, office, charge, or duty of another; but what is the charge, office
and duty incumbent upon our selves. Particularly, it concerns not us, who are
not called to this authority in the Church, to be curious in examining, whether
the Bishops do, or do not, undertake a charge too great for them to manage:
what their power; or what their duty, and sins are: or whether it be fit they
should be established in such authority by a Law: this is to go out of our
sphere, and to meddle where we are not concerned. But, They being in possession
of this power, and established in that authority by those Laws under which we
live, made by the unquestionable Supremacy, and Legis-lative power in the
Kingdom, and to whom Romans 13.5.
we must be subject: Our business now, only is to satisfy our selves and
others, whether, and how far we are bound to conform to these Laws, in our
owning, and submitting to that Episcopal authority, which they have
established: Or how far we lawfully may do so, (and indeed, what we lawfully
may do, we are in duty bound to do, when by a just authority we are commanded
to do it:) This, I am sure, is most necessary, to gain, and preserve our peace.
And therefore, I cannot but condemn that preposterous course of some Ministers,
who had no way to commend their zeal to the world, but by preaching to one
Auditory the duties of another; or inveighing against their sins. Some
preaching in the Court, against the sins of the Country; and before the
Magistrate ripping up the irregularities of the Subject: Others with equal, yea
possibly, more bitterness inveighing before the people against the
licentiousness of the Court, the Pride of the Bishops, and the sins of their
Governors: And what Beautifiers such men have proved, we need not turn over
the Annals of many ages to witness. Sure I am, this was not (...), Rightly to
divide the word of truth, 2 Timothy 2.15.
like that (...), a workman that needs not be ashamed (of whom St. Paul
speaks:) nor, like the faithful and wise Steward, (of whom our Savior) Luke
12.42.
to give to every one his own proper portion of meat in due season. And when
men have thus made it their business to consider Mat. 7.3.
the Motes in the eyes of others; and neglect the Beam in their own: To judge,
censure and condemn the carriages of their brethren; and look over their own:
When Subjects and inferiors set themselves to examine the calling, office,
duty, and carriage; and to dispute the Place, authority, and commands of their
Superiors in Church or State: The fruit of this can be nothing but Sedition or
Rebellion; schism or faction; and mutual animosities, hatred, and contempt. But
could we learn every man to do what becomes himself; if others be irregular,
let the sin lie upon them; while we are careful to look to our own steps, and
faithfully to discharge the duties of our own place: with how much
cheerfulness, content and peace might we live together? 2. Postulatum I require
likewise to be granted, which, I judge, no conscientious Protestant ever
doubted; Viz. That the sins of Governors, and some irregularities in
Government, are not sufficient to discharge the subject of his duty; nor are
they a plea that can justify his disobedience. It is possible, some Princes
may be vicious, or their Government faulty: yet their maladministration is no
ground for the peoples rebellion. They shall answer their sin to God, but in
the mean time we must be subject. It is possible there may be vices in the
persons of some Bishops, for they are men, there may be errors in the
constitution and administration of the Government, for it is in the hands of
men, who are not yet perfect: if therefore, we shall neither own them, nor
their authority; upon the same reason we must cast off all government, and
authority whatsoever. For what government is there so righteous; what persons
so holy, but men, who are unwilling to obey, will be ready to plead the
government tyrannical, and the persons wicked? as Korah and his Accomplices to
Moses and Aaron, Number. 16.3.
Ye take too much upon you, all the congregation is holy; wherefore lift ye up
your selves? Yea, what government so Sacred, what governors so righteous; but
will discover too much of error and irregularity, while men are men, and on
this side heaven? if then we may have a just plea to refuse obedience, until
our Governors be free from the common corruptions of men, and the Government
every way faultless; or until we judge them so, and can find nothing that can
be said against either; Rebellion could be no sin till we get beyond the grave:
nor should we ever obey any humane power in Church or State, till there is no
Church or State on earth to be obeyed.
viz. suppose, those two charges to be true against the Bishops, That they take
too much upon themselves, or, That, they will not suffer us to take our due,
and do all that we should; (which yet, by the way, I have not seen proved) yet
these are not ground enough to hinder our compliance: and notwithstanding all
these, may a sober, conscientious Christian, who seriously minds the
discharge of his own duty, peaceably conform to the Laws established. But let
us a little examine the Particulars objected.

CHAP. V. The Particular exceptions against Bishops, as they are said to take
too much upon themselves, answered.
Bishops, is, That they take too much upon themselves: 1. General except. That
the Bishops take too ^^ch upon themselves.
and to this head I refer those four exceptions, which the Divines of the
contrary persuasion have made, in their Former paper of Proposals to His
Majesty, concerning the Discipline and Ceremonies of the Church of England: And
they are these.

1. The great extent of the Bishops Diocese, too large for his personal
inspection. 2. His deputing the Administration of much of the trust to
Commissaries, Chancellors, Officials, etc. secular persons. 3. Some affirming
Episcopacy a distinct order, and assuming the sole Power of Ordination. 4.
Exercising an arbitrary power, as in Articles of Visitation, etc.

These are the great things charged on them, Sect. 2. Answered in general.
and, we may judge, the greatest: for had there been any thing of an higher
nature to have been pleaded against them, no doubt it would have been given in.

Now then, suppose these things cleared, and that, being proved, they were a
real and just ground to petition, and by all legal ways to endeavor a
Reformation: Yet still, if this desired Reformation cannot be obtained, but
these things must continue, all this hinders not, but we may lawfully obey and
submit in peace.



There are these seven things, said, to prove that they take too much upon
them, which are the great exceptions against Episcopacy as it is with us
established.

That they assume a power, which was never instituted by God; that has no
footsteps in the New Testament; and they are therefore Intruders, and
Usurpers, and not to be obey^d.

Answ. 1. But suppose they are not intruders; what then becomes of this plea?
Sub judice lis es^; it is not yet determined against them: some learned and
pious men, who are both able to judge, and willing to be convinced of the
truth, yet cannot be convinced of any such usurpation: yea, they think, that
they have clear footsteps of such a government in the Apostolical practice.
Suppose, there were something in the Apostolical Commission (besides that which
was extraordinary in them) which made them standing constant Officers of the
Church, even where they were superior to other Presbyters: (for that they were
superior, is out of question; and that this superiority was a part of their
extraordinary Commission, is not yet proved:) and then because they continued
not in their own persons, but in their successors; these must be Bishops, or
none, which is the judgment of many; and of one, who is instar omnium, See,
confer. at Newcastle with Mr. Henderson, and, with the Divines at the Isle of
Wight.
His late Majesty: and some footsteps of such a thing seem to appear in the
holy Canon; where the Churches still send to Paul about their affairs; and St.
Paul writing to Timothy and Titus, directs them in the exercise of the 1 Timothy
5.19, 20, 21, 22. Tit. 1.5, 11.3.10.
Acts of Jurisdiction, distinct from, and over Presbyters; which intimates that
they had such a power, as to Ordination and Censures. That these had such a
Jurisdiction, and in particular Cities, as affixt to them (at least, at that
time) is evident. The one being to Abide at Ephesus, and for this work, 1 Timothy
1.3.
To charge some, that they do not (...), teach any other, or strange Doctrine:
and this is an act of authority over them. The other Tit. 1.5.
left at Creet, to Govern, and (...).
Order the affairs of that Church: this is also an act of Authority. And
suppose, these were not (as some say they were) only Evangelists, a general,
occasional, and extraordinary Officer for that time; but constant standing
Officers in the Church for ever, as some (not without ground) do judge; for
there being a constant necessity of the same works; why should there not be the
same Officer to do those works? The change of the name ( Apostle, Evangelist,
then, and Bishop now) proves not a change of the Office. So that, though that
be true, which the Annotator on the Epistle of Clemens Romans (made English in
these late times) cites out of St. Augustine, as to the name, That Episcopi
nomen, est vocabulum quod ecclesiae usus obtinuit; for they might give a new
name, but not erect a new Office: Yet, when the same work is still required to
be done in the Church, by such persons, call them by what names ye please, the
thing is the same. Again, suppose, though the name of Bishop and Presbyter, be
used promiscuously for one and the same Officer (as they Tit. 1.5, 7. Act.
20.17, 18. Phil 1.1. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2.
seem to be) yet, that this person is the Bishop, in the sense as now the word
is used (as Dr. Hammond does judge.) And that, at the first, the Pastors were
all Bishops; and that They, as their territories increased, and the Church
multiplied, and their charge and work grew too great upon them, ordained other
Presbyters to undertake part of the charge under them. I say, suppose all this
should be true, (as, yet we are not confident, nor can we be infallibly assured
of the contrary; And there are not a few, that think it unquestionable, and
believe they can prove it too:) Where are we then? Here is then, no intrusion,
not usurping an authority; but an Apostolical institution: And then what plea
can we have for disobedience? whereas, should it not be so, but that there were
only Presbyters at the first, and afterward one chosen out of them for the
avoiding of schism and faction, and he called a Bishop, (as S. Hierom thinks;
and yet this in his judgment early too, even when 1 Cor. 1.12
one said, I am Paul, and another, I of Apollos, and I of Cophas, etc. and how
soon that was, we need not be told:) Yet, in obeying the Bishop there could be
no sin; yea, there would be much reason to do it, if but for the avoiding of
faction and schism. So that here we may easily judge, which is safest to
practice: For, though the Bishops standing could not be proved, there yet is no
danger in obeying; But if it indeed be founded in the Primitive pattern, there
must be danger in disobeying; and our misguided judgments will be no sufficient
excuse for our sin, in rejecting an ordinance of God.

Discipline, Order, and Government are necessary to the Church for ever; and to
this are we bound to submit, though it be sometimes put into such hands, which
we judge not so proper, nor of primitive institution. For, the Thing is
essential, at least, to the well-being, and external communion of the Church,
viz. Government: But, the other, The particular hands by which this is managed,
is of another consideration. The Church may be happy, if governed by One, or
Many, or a College of Equals, or by some one or more, among whom there is a
subordination: But without order and government it cannot be so. Again,

Bishops (nor indeed any such) as to their entrance into, or exercise of their
Callings, or Administrations of Government, than was apparent in the Scribes
and Pharisees. For their entrance, they were evidently usurpers: Mat. 23.1.
They sat in Moses chair. They were there, it is true; but they inthronized
themselves in that chair, and being in, they held it: They took to themselves
the office of expounding the Law, and teaching the people; who (being of any
Tribe) did without any regard of right or wrong invade that chair, which was by
Gods institution appropriate to the Priests and Levites. Their Administration
was as bad also; joining their Humane Traditions to the Law, and their
Will Worship to the Worship of God, (whereby they are said, Matthew. 15.6. Mark
7.13.
In vain to worship God, and to make the commandment of God of none effect.)
Yea, making more account of, and urging these Traditions with more severity,
than the Laws of God himself. Yet, the charge of Christ is, what? Forsake their
Ministry? Attend not on the Chair while they sit in it? or, obey not the
Doctrine because they deliver it? No: but, Hear them. They are in Moses chair;
howsoever they got thither, there they are; and you must attend, and Hear,
Observe, and Do. Whatsoever they add besides, howsoever corrupt in their
practice, Follow not their Practice, but, Obey their Doctrine, as far as it is
of Moses.

Bishops have, never had the boldness to charge them higher. The Chair if they
have invaded, it is but as the Pharisees did: All the Humane Traditions, which
they are charged (I think, unjustly) to bring in, and require conformity to,
are of no worse nature, than those which the Pharisees used in and about Gods
service, and pressed upon the people: Nor can their Ministry be so repugnant
to Christ, as the Ministry of the Scribes and Pharisees: But in the Chair they
are, and there they are fixed and established too; And, though their entrance be
supposed irregular, (which it is not) yet must we obey: for they are in the
place of Governors. If they add Inventions of their own, it is their only sin,
and they must answer it: We are to comply in all things, where we shall not sin
against God. So that notwithstanding this exception, we may lawfully submit:
For it is not proved that they usurp what is not given them; and, if they
should, yet while the Government of the Church is in their hands, we are not to
oppose.

Though the office of the Bishop should be granted to be, abinitio; yet our
Bishops unaertake too great a charge. The large extent of their Diocesses is
too much for their personal inspection: wherein yet they take a personal charge
over the souls of all those within their several Bishoprics. Which burden must
needs be too heavy for one man's shoulders; The Pastoral office being a work of
personal ministration and trust, and that of the highest concernmen to the
souls of the people, for which they are to give an account to Christ. So that,
though Episcopacy be granted; yet not such as is established with us: The
charge of the Primitive Bishop being but over one Congregation; but of the
Diocesan Bishop extending to many.

Answ. 1. This exception is raised upon a doubtful foundation: For, it is not
yet cleared, or confessed, That the Bishops of every Diocese are bound to a
personal inspection, or charged with the oversight of every particular soul
within their jurisdiction: Or that they are to be accountable for the
miscarriage, or perishing of any particular soul, if it have not been through
their fault and neglect, or mal-administration of the power in their hands, so
far as their charge extends. They judge their charge to be no more, than, to
oversee the Churches; to take care that able Pastors be provided for the
particular cure, and inspection of the several Flocks; and that these do their
duties in their places; and that the people yield their due obedience to them,
and to their Superiors.

little Bishoprics, either there was an imparity, or superiority; or there was
no^: The Bishop had Presbyters under him, or he had not. If now ye say, that he
had not; ye say something indeed to the purpose, but it remains to be proved;
and the stream of Antiquity speaks the contrary. For (to omit the mention of
the third and fourth Ages, whereof none, that I know, ever doubted) when
Ignatius of Antioch, in those Epistles, which were never yet denied to be his,
and are by Videlius, Vossius, and our learned Usher acknowledged to be genuine,
does expressly make this distinction, and requires the Obedience of the
Presbyt^r to the Bishop (as those who have read Ignatius know so well, that it
would be lost labor to produce particular passages; when it is the main design
and argument of some of those Epistles, as particularly that ad Trallenses
which is wholly Hortatory, ad (...), to Unity in Doctrine, and Sanctity of
Life. For the preserving of this unity and purity of Doctrine, he exhorts, as
to avoid all Heretics, against whom he solidly proves the Deity, and
Incarnation of Christ: so, to yield a due obedience to their Pastors, both the
Bishops, because they watch for their souls; and to the Presbyters and Deacons,
because they are Ministers of the Church of God, and there have the place of
Jesus Christ. Particularly, (...) -- Reverence the Bishop, and that (...), as
ye reverence Christ; and adds, As the Apostles have commanded. So again, in
that ad Magnesianos, which is Paraenetical, and Hortatory also; and the design
of it is, to exhort obedience to the Bishop, yea though he be young: which he
presses by several arguments, as, That we are in this case not so much to look
to Age, as ad (...) and that (...), The oldest are not always the wisest. And
farther urges the examples of a young Daniel; and a young Samuel reproving an
old Eli; and Jeremy, Solomon, Josiah, Timothy: And again, that it is a terrible
thing to contemn the Bishop, for in him is God also contemned. And says,
(...), -- It is fit to obey the Bishop, and in nothing to oppose him. And
again, (...) -- As the Lord Christ did nothing without the Father, so must you
do nothing without your Bishop. I need cite no more, though I might add much to
this purpose out of those Epistles ad Philadelphenses, and ad Smyrnenses, where
he disputes of the power and authority of the Bishop. I know, that even these
are said also to be so interpolated, that it is hard to know Ignatius in
Ignatius. But that is a strange interpolation which shall leave nothing
genuine; and it would be scarce parallelled, that the main design of a genuine
Epistle should be spurious. Grant them interpolated, must it needs be the hard
hap of poor Episcopacy to be principally guilty? and wheresoever that is
mentioned or urged, (though it be so often, so professedly) must that Epistle
for the Bishops sake be either rejected as spurious? or this particular be
concluded the interpolation? Nothing of ancient records then shall have any
credit with us, when we have a mind to charge them with corruptions. Therefore
until these be proved spurious passages, we shall account them genuine
Ignatius.) Ignatius, I say, doing this; as it proves this Imparity and
Superiority as ancient as his time, which was the very next age to the
Apostles; so it has some force to persuade us, that it was so, even in the
Apostles days; both because he was so near them, and so more likely to know the
practice of the time but just before him; and also because he was for a good
season contemporary and coetaneous with some of the Apostles, particularly S.
John, who would certainly have contradicted him, had he pleaded for a power
which Christ never approved, nor the Apostles owned.

Imparity or Superiority be granted to have been in those narrower limits; it
must not, it cannot with any shadow of reason be denied, where the bounds are
farther extended. If one, two, or three Presbyters may be under a Bishop, then
may also ten, twenty, an hundred. More or fewer alter not the nature of the
office. Kings and Princes are as perfectly, and justly such now, when of larger
Empires and Dominious; as those of old, who were Kings but of some single
Cities or petty Territories: They are not to be cast out, because their
Dominions are conceived too large; but to be obeyed, because they are Kings. So
neither are our Diocesans therefore less Bishops, because their Bishoprics are
greater than those in the Ancient Ages: For, if any (were they fewer or more)
were to obey the Bishop then, so are we (though more) if by the Establishment
here we are put under his jurisdiction, to obey him still.

Even then, their bounds were so straight, as to be limited to one Parish, or
single Congregation: For, if there were many of these Churches in association
joined in one, and so, One Church, for acts of Government, to which particular
Churches were subordinate, (as the Sea, Assemblies answ. to Reas. of Dissent.
Brethr. and, Vindicat. of Presbyt. Govern. by the Province of Land.
Presbyterian Brethren, not only grant, but challenge, and lay it a foundation
of their Classical, and Provincial, and National Assemblies, as, The Church of
Jerusalem, Ephesus, etc. with other City Churches; which (say they) consisted
of more single Congregations than one:) Then, if there were a Bishop (as it
appears there was) either, He must be yielded to be over all this association;
or, if a distinct Bishop to every particular Congregation, then those several
Bishops must be under, and subordinate to the College of Presbyters, which I
have not yet seen affirmed. So that here was a larger charge, than of one
single Parish. And in after ages, it is most evident, that their (...) had not
that strict sense which now it has; but the Parish, was a (...), consisting of
more Parishes than one, (as we now speak of a Parish) though the Diocese were
not so large, as in succeeding times.

exception: That the Di^cess is by much too large, etc. What then? may we not
submit? if any undertake a charge, which he is not able to manage; let him look
to it; he must give up his own account, not we for him. If any of us be called,
or invited to, or offered such a place or power, if we judge it too much for
one man, and the account too heavy; on Gods name, let us refuse it; no man will
enforce any to be a Bishop against his will. But what is this to our obedience?
The extent of their charge may be occasion of sin to them who undertake what
they cannot perform; but can be no plea for us, why we should not obey, when we
are required. Had the Bishop none to govern, but some ten, or twenty of us,
which he might do, we were then bound to obey him: and though more be under his
charge, this exempts not us from our particular duty.

That, though the Bishop has authority over the flock; yet being in eodem
ordine, he has no power over others of the same order; i. e. over other
Presbyters, which yet he challenges; and where he has no authority to
command, there we have no obligation to obey. And therefore 1. They cannot
justly require, nor are we bound to yield that Canonical obedience, which we
are required to promise at our Ordination; and to swear at our institution into
a Benefice. 2. Nor have they any power to silence or suspend us from our
ministry; nor may we lay down the exercise thereof, upon their pleasure.

Answ. 1. To all this I answer in general, 1. If the Bishop be a distinct
order, then there is no place for this exception. But this I shall not now
dispute. 2. But, though a Bishop and a Presbyter be yielded to be not different
Orders of Ministry, as Presbyter and Deacon are: yet, one may be in a degree
of eminency in the same order above the other. And if it be but 1. For the
convenience of Administration, and to keep peace and unity in the Church: Or,
2. That the King, or Supreme Governor so is pleased to order the external
Economy: either of these is enough to oblige an humble Christian to a
peaceable submission; though he were not convinced of the Divine right of the
Superiority. For, where he has no authority, but only a possession, we may
ober, for Peace: and where he has (if not a Divine, yet) a Civil authority, we
must obey Romans 13.5.
for conscience ak^.


Answ. 2. But as to the two particulars, I give this Answer,

1. 1. To the matter of Canonical obedience.
To that, That they require of us Canonical obedience, which we are to Promise
at our Ordination, and to swear at our Institution to a Parochial charge:
which, it is said, they cannot justly require, nor are we bound to yield. I
answer,

Answ. 1. Why may they not justly require it? Is it for want of authority in
their place? No certainly. Authority they have: if (as some judge) they are the
Primigenial, Apostolical constitution, yea founded in the very Apostolical
Office; without question they have it then a Deo. And if it should be made
appear to us, when our great account comes to be given, to have been so: what
shall we answer for our denial of it? But if they came in afterward by the
Prudence of the Church, to govern, for the prevention of faction and schism:
still they are continued in the Authority: And such a prudential constitution
gives them power enough, as to this; nor can we be acquitted of Schism, if we
obey it not. Or, Is it, because this obedience which they require, is not to be
required? not this neither. For obedience is a duty of inferiors to superiors,
and they being made superiors, (whether by God, or the King, it makes no
difference in this case) it is due to them: they may require it, and we are
then bound to yield it. Besides, what is it, that they require of us? is it
not, that we do the duties of our places in the Church? This we are bound to
do, whether they require it or no; and sure, it becomes not sin to us then,
only because it is required.

Exigua est bonitas ad legem esse bonus. Were men proved to be never so much
Usurpers; yet I never knew any Casuist determine it unlawful to obey him, in
those things which we might lawfully do, and wherein we prejudiced not the
right of, nor did break our Allegiance to our lawful Prince. It is one thing,
what we are bound to do: another, what we lawfully may do. Were the Bishops
proved the greatest Usurpers, (as some men clamor,) yet I could never see any,
that durst say, our obedience to them in lawful things was unlawful: or that in
obeying them, we should disobey Christ, where we are to do but the duties,
which Christ has laid upon us; or, at least, such as He has not forbidden us.
And beyond this, All the Canonical obedience, required of us, or promised by
us, extends not. For what is it that we promise? even this. See, Form of
Order, Priests.
Reverently to obey our Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, unto whom the
Government and charge is committed over us, following with a glad mind and will
their godly admonitions, and submitting our selves to their godly judgments.
What is here promised that a good Christian may not yield? What do we promise
more, in the intent of the Law, than to obey those who are set over us in
licitis and honestis, in things lawful and honest, and not repugnant to Gods
Word? They require no more; we promise no more: And this, I am sure, we may
lawfully do, so long as the Government is committed to them; whether it be
directly by Divine institution, or only by the Authority of the King (which
even their greatest enemies must grant, that it is) it matters not, as to this
particular, the lawfulness of our obeying thus far.

2. Sect. 20.2. To the matter of silencing, or suspending.
As to the other part of the exception. There is indeed a great cry in the
world against the Bishops, for silencing, and suspending Ministers, which they
are said to have no authority to do; and it is pleaded, that we may not submit
here; nor lay down the exercise of our Ministry upon their pleasure: but that
the Act. 4 19. and 5.29.
Answer of the Apostles to those High Priests, Rulers and Elders, who commanded
them to preach no more in the Name of Jesus, must be ours, That God has
imposed this calling upon us, and therefore, unless we would rather obey Man
than God, we may not forbear the exercise of that office which God has laid
upon us, with a 1 Cor. 9.16.
woe if we preach not.

silenced, or suspended, or deposed, is but, to be denied the liberty of, and
so consequently, to be enjoined to forbear the public exercise of our
Ministry upon the Bishops pleasure: and to be deprived of that maintenance
which we had, while we were allowed to exercise our Ministry in such a place.
And in this the Bishops pleasure is the Magistrates pleasure, The Bishop
proceeding according to the Laws. And that the Magistrate has power, and under
him consequently the Bishop, to deny any particular man this liberty within his
Dominions, I know none that doubts: if he shall do this caussesly, the sin is
his, but submission and obedience is our duty.

Bishops, as such, if they have any place in the Church, Are Ecclesiastical
Governors; and their work is to Over-see, to watch over, and for the flock To
take care of the Church of God, 1 Timothy 3.5.
ne quid ecclesia detrimenti capiat. Their care it must be that Tares be not
sown among the Wheat; nor corrupt and heretical doctrine preached for the pure
Word of God; that the souls of men be not poisoned with rotten principles, or
leavened with Heresy, or stirred up to Schism or Sedition: but that they be
built up in the most holy faith; instructed in sound doctrine; encouraged to
Piety; and lead in the ways of Purity and Peace. And therefore it cannot but
lie upon them to be cautious what persons they admit into the Ministry, and to
watch how they continue in it. And their power equally extends to the
silencing, suspending, or ejecting those who are Seditious or Scandalous; as to
the denial of their admission; or to the admitting of such as are able and
faithful. It is no more then, what the Apostle Act. 20.28. -- 32.
gave in charge to those Elders, or Bishops (for so they are called (...)) at
Miletum, to watch, because of the Wolves that would enter. And for which the
Lord reproves Rev. 2.14, 15, 20.
those Asian Angels; that they permitted the doctrines of Balaam, and the
Nicolaitans to be taught, and Jezebel to prophecy. And this power is clearly
manifest in those Apostolical charges to 1 Timothy 1.3, 4, 6, 7. and 5.19, 20, 21,
22. 2 Timothy 2.14. and 4 2, 3. Tit. 1 5, 10, 11. and 3.10, 11.
Timothy and Titus, which are frequent in those Epistles. For the truth is, if
the Bishops have not this power, it is not possible they should perform their
duty, or discharge their trust to God, or his Church. If any of them abuse this
power, it is only their personal sin; and they abuse but their own power, for
such an authority they cannot be denied to have, if they have any power or
authority in the Church at all.

Ministry be from God, and the Calling of Divine Institution, yet it is
conferred on particulars, this, or that person by men; and they exercise this
ministry by virtue of that Calling which they had from men. Now common sense
and reason tells us, that we may lawfully obey men forbidding us the exercise
of a Ministry, which (though the ministry be from God, yet) we have power to
exercise in such a place by virtue of that Calling only which we had from men.

Apostles to the High Priest and Council, and their resolution and practice to
preach the same Christ still notwithstanding that Prohibition, any way lay such
a necessity upon any in our case to disobey; and to refuse to lay down the
exercise of our ministry when we are required. And as to this, let me crave
leave here to mind the Reader,

1. That this was one of the great arguments which Johnson the Brownist made
against our Church assemblies; Sect. 25. The Separatists objection.
that it was not lawful to communicate with them, because our ministry was the
ministry of Antichrists Apostasy: this he would prove, because none could
stand public Ministers, except they receive of the Prelates Priesthood and
Deaconry: and without and against the peoples consent, they are by the Prelates
alone silenced, deprived, and degraded from exercising any ministry in those
assemblies, who yet ought not to suffer themselves to be silenced, and deposed
from their public ministry, no not by the lawful Magistrate.

Here we see in this man's mouth impudence and Sedition, more than enough; yet
this bold assertion he labors to prove by this very Reply of the Apostles, who
would not at the command even of the lawful Magistrate cease to preach. But,

2. Sect 26. Answered by a Nonconformist.
What answer was given to him, will exactly fit our case also. I shall give it
in the words of Master William Bradshaw. Both, because they speak fully to the
Objection, and in this so far justify the Bishops power, as to lay a necessity
both upon the Minister and people to submit with peace: and also to show, how
even then (when, they say, the Church groaned under the highest exorbitancy of
Episcopacy.) The soberer non-conformists, who did not acknowledge the Prelacy,
did yet judge it lawful to submit to their power, and to forbear the exercise
of their ministry upon their pleasure. For one of these, was that Master
Bradshaw, and, set aside his dissent from the established Order of the Church,
(I doubt not) a pious, sober, sound Divine; and even then, when himself was
silenced upon the account of Nonconformity, writing in the defense of our
Church Assemblies, justifying our Communion, proving the unreasonableness of
separation from them; in which Book Unreason. of Separat p. 90 -- Sect. 27.
he gives this answer to the Separatist.

1. When he (i. e. Johnson the Separatist) distinguishes between silencing and
deposing by lawful Magistrates; and by Prelates (as indeed he seemed to do,
when he said, We are silenced by Prelates, when the Apostles would not, no not
by the lawful Magistrates) is in our case, where the Prelates do it by
Authority, and Commission from the lawful Magistrate, a distinction without a
difference.

the Separatist had said, The Apostles did not make their immediate calling
from God the ground of their refusal; but this, That they ought to obey God
rather than men; which is a Duty required of all Ministers and Christians: He
answers, That

Though the Apostles did not assign their immediate calling from God, as the
ground of this refusal, in so many letters and syllables; yet that which they
do assign, is by implication, and in effect the same; for it is as much, as if
they had said, God himself has imposed this calling upon us, and not man; and
therefore, except we should rather obey man than God, we may not forbear -- for
opposing the obedience of God to the obedience of man, they therein plead a
calling from God, and not from man; otherwise, if they had received a calling
from men, there had been incongruity in the answer: Considering, that in common
sense they ought so far to obey man, forbidding them to exercise a calling,
which they do exercise only by virtue of that calling from men; else by this
reason -- there should be no power so to depose a man from his Ministry; but
that notwithstanding any Commandment of the Church or State, he is still to
continue in the exercise of his Ministry, and should be bound to give that
example which the Apostles did; which is not only absurd, but a conceit plainly
tending to manifest Sedition.

3. We are to know, That though the Apostles, Prophets and Evangelists,
preached publicly, when they were not hindered by open violence; and did not,
nor might they leave their Ministry upon any humane authority and commandment
whatsoever, because they did not enter into, or exercise the same upon the will
and pleasure of any man whatsoever; yet they never erected and planted public
Churches, and Ministry in the face of the Magistrate, whether he would or no,
or in despite of him; but such in respect of the Magistrate were as private and
invisible as might be.

4. some of the Apostles only forbidden, so as others should be suffered to
preach the same Gospel in their places; but the utter abolishing of Christian
Religion was manifestly intended in silencing them. But out Churches whereof we
are Ministers are no private and secret Assemblies, such as hide themselves
from the face of a persecuting Magistrate; but are public, professing their
Worship, doing their Religion in the face of the Magistrate and State; yea, and
by his countenance, authority, and protection: And we are set over these
Churches, not only by a calling of our people, but also by the Authority of the
Magistrate, who has an armed power to hinder such public Actions; and who is
also willing to permit and maintain other true Ministers of the Gospel, in
those places where he forbids some.

Apostles, and Ours, is not the same, nor can their answer to the High Priest
and Elders (from whom they received no call to preach, and by whom they were
forbidden to preach Jesus; the design of that Council being not to forbid them
alone, and permit others to do it, but utterly to abolish Christianity) with
any pretense fit us, that we therefore should not lawfully obey, and sit down
in silence, and recede from the exercise of our Ministry in a particular place
upon the command of those, from whom we received Authority there to minister;
and who, (though they silence and exclude us, yet) send others to minister to
the needs of the Church in the same Gospel; and therefore as the said Mr.
Bradshaw, so we conclude,

1. If after our public calling to minister in such a known and public
Church; nor by the Church only, but by the Magistrate also: The Magistrate
shall have matter against us (just, or unjust, as to our obedience, it matters
not) and shall in that regard forbid us to minister to our Church, (and the
Bishop in these censures acting according to the Laws under which he and we
are, it bears the same reason:) I see not by what warrant in Gods Word we
should think our selves bound notwithstanding, to exercise our Ministry still;
except we should think such a Law of Ministry to lie upon us, that we should
be bound to run upon the Swords point of the Magistrate, or oppose Sword to
Sword; which I am sure Christianity abominates.

2. Yea, and suppose the Magistrate should do it unjustly, and against the will
of the Church, and should therein sin; yet does not the Church in that regard
cease to be a Church, nor ought she therein to resist the will of the
Magistrate; neither does she stand bound in regard of her affection to her
Minister (how great and deserved soever) to deprive herself of the protection
of the Magistrate; by leaving her public standing to follow her Minister in
private, and in the dark; refusing the benefit of other public Ministers,
which with the good leave, and liking of the Magistrate, she may enjoy.

3. Neither do I know what warrant any ordinary Minister has by Gods Word, in
such a case, so to draw any such Church or people to his private Ministry,
that thereby they should hazard their outward state and quiet in the
Commonwealth where they live; when in some competent measure they may
publicly, with the grace and favor of the Magistrate enjoy the ordinary means
of salvation by another. And except he have a calling to minister in some other
Church, he is to be content to live as a private member, until it shall please
God to reconcile the Magistrate unto him, and to call him again to his own
Church. So far this learned man, though a Nonconformist.

Magistrate into Bishop, the reason is all one; we may submit to one, as well
as to the other: Though we should deny any such Authority to the Bishop, as
such; yet because he in this acts under the Laws; and whatsoever Autho ity he
has by virtue of his Function in the Church, yet it is certain that the
exercise of this Authority here, is by the leave and authority of the
Magistrate. So that here is nothing material in this exception, but it still
remains out of dispute, that though it should be granted, that the Bishops have
no such power by any authority derived from Christ (which yet, we say, they
have) yet we may lawfully submit to them in the exercise of it. And let us do
this, we do our part; and we shall live in peace.

Bishops, is this, That, though it be granted, that they have some authority,
or if they have not, that yet we may lawfully obey; yet, They exercise an
Arbitrary power, and this is not to be submitted to. And of this nature is that
fourth exception made by the Presbyterian Divines in their first paper of
Proposals to His Majesty. Viz. That some of the Bishops exercised an Arbitrary
power; as, by sending forth their Articles of Visitation, inquiring
unwarrantably into several things, and swearing the Churchwardens to present
accordingly: so, by many innovations, and ceremonies imposed upon Ministers and
People, not required by Law.

really innovations, and imposed, and not required by Law, surely we are not
bound to obey; nor do I know any that affirms, we should sin, if we submit not
to them: nor will it be charged upon those that deny them, but upon such as
impose them, if the peace of the Church be violated. Yet let it be considered
also,

Bishops to order, appoint, and require, what shall be for the peace of the
Church, and order in it; what shall be for the conveniences, solemnity, and
decency of Administration; and of all this leave them to be the judges: what
they now do so require, they cannot be said to require without or against Law.
And if these particulars which they require, be not manifestly against the Word
of God, I cannot see how we can be excused from sin, if we disobey; considering
that establishment, which by Law they have among us.

submit not, (supposing the things to be lawful in themselves) I see not, but
that the violation of the Churches peace will be laid upon us, as well as upon
them; nor will their imprudence excuse our sin. There may, perhaps, be some
kind of sin in them requiring; but I am sure, when the things required are not
materially evil, there can be no sin in us, in obeying. Let us not therefore so
much consider, what they must, or may require, but what we may, and should do,
when it is required; and we shall have peace.

The Bishops claim to be Spiritual Lords, contrary to the Royal Prerogative of
Jesus Christ, the only Lord and King of the Church; The same which Johnson the
Separatist made against our Churches. See, Unreason, of Separat. p. 47, 48.
and expressly contrary to that rule of the 1 Pet. 5.2, 3.
Apostle, where they (if those Elders be supposed to be Bishops) are only to
oversee the Flock, and not as Lords over Gods heritage, but as ensamples to the
Flock. Yea, contrary to the Royal dignity of the King, and temporal Magistrate,
both in civil and ecclesiastical causes: For, they have their voices, and
authority in Parliament for enacting Laws for the Commonwealth: They are Rulers
of Provinces and Diocesses in ecclesiastical causes: in civil State and dignity
some of them above all; all of them above some of the Nobles, Justices, and
other Magistrates of the Land: They and their Courts handle and determine civil
causes and affairs, that appertain to the Magistracy: they inflict civil mulcts
and penalties: give Licenses in several cases: all the Priests and Deacons are
exempt from the Magistrates Jurisdiction in diverse things, and answerable only,
or chiefly to the Prelates, and their Officers.

viz. our submission for Peace sake. For

to be, and, to claim to be) may we yet not lawfully obey them in things
honest, though we own not their claim? I judge we may. The claim may be unjust
in them, and yet the things, which they require of us, may be fit to be done by
us.

2. Though they should claim more than belongs to them, yet this makes not a
nullity of that authority which is their due. What they may justly require as
Bishops, and Governors of the Church, they may require, had they not those
Titles of Spiritual Lords: and then the addition of that Title destroys not
their power of Bishops.

Bradsh. unreas. of Separ. p. 65.
learned Non-conformists have acknowledged, and which their Canons and practice
show. For, those things which are antecedently necessary by the Law of God,
they do command and press, not as their own, but as, the Laws of Christ. And
for things which are of another nature, the practice whereof is made necessary,
pro Hic and Nunc, by their constitutions; they prescribe them not so, as to
bind the conscience of any to the acknowledgement, and approbation thereof, as
necessary things; but only to obey them in practice, and for external order;
and as things indifferent in themselves, which we are no longer obliged to,
than they are commanded: And therefore they cannot be said to arrogate such an
Office of Spiritual Lords, as the Apostle condemns, nor in that sense, wherein
Christ alone is Lord of his Church. They never attempting to introduce a new
worship of God; or enjoining subscription to new Articles of Faith: But
requiring only the same Articles to be believed, which Christ has revealed;
and ordering only the external mode and circumstances of worship (the substance
of which is only from Christ) as to decency, order, and edification: of which,
they, as the Governors of the Church here, must be in a very great measure
acknowledged the Judges; and which are by Christ left free to the Church, to
order according to the condition of Time, and Place, and other Circumstances.

Jesus Christ: so neither do they infringe the Authority of the King, and Civil
Magistrate. And to evidence this, I need say no more than that which the
forecited Unreas. of Separ. p. 47.
Mr. Bradshaw (though no friend to the Bishop) has said in answer to this very
objection.

1. That the Prelates claim their voices in Parliament, not as Divine
Ordinances appertaining to their Prelateships, but as an honor annexed to the
same by the Civil Magistrate.

2. Their Authority in causes ecclesiastical over Provinvinces, etc. is either,
such as the Magistrate himself may execute, and administer in his own person,
if he please: or, such as is not for Him, as a Magistrate, to execute. The
first sort, The Bishops administer only by virtue of the Magistrates own
Commission; and therein they impair not either his dignity or supremacy: much
less in the other part of their authority, which belongs not to the
Magistrate himself to execute; especially when they use not this neither,
without his consent, license, and approbation.

3. That all are above some, some above all the Nobles, Justices, etc. is a
free and voluntary honor granted to them by the Civil Magistrate, and held in
tenure from him, and not claimed as pertaining to the Episcopal function by
Divine right.

4. Their Courts determine no other civil causes, than the Civil Magistrate and
his Laws do permit; or if any do, the fault is not in the Prelateship, but in
the persons. Further, they inflict civil punishments; give licenses; exact
oaths, etc. by authority from the Magistrate, whose substitutes therein they
are. And therefore the Prelates neither in this, nor in any of the former
instances can be said to impair the dignity, authority, or supremacy of the
Civil Magistrate; but herein do all things in, and by the protection of his
authority.

5. If all our Ministers be exempt from the Magistrates Jurisdiction in some
things appertaining to them (but in what things, I know not) this very
exemption it self is an act of the Magistrates Jurisdiction; and depends upon
his pleasure: and how can it then any ways impair the same?

exception, The Honors and Lordships given to the Bishops, is a civil
additament, which we have no reason to envy them: neither does that Title, or
their rule and dominion infringe the Prerogative of Christ, or the Power and
Authority of the King. And how their Honors and power in the Church should
discharge us of our obedience, or be a ground of our contentions, I must
profess I see not how any rational account can be given to any considering man.

But, if they have a power themselves, yet how can they set up, and substitute,
and require our obedience to other officers which in the Church are confessedly
not of divine institution? for this also is an exception against our
Episcopacy: and thus did the Presbyterian Divines give it in in their 1. Pap.
of Propos. except. 2. against Bishops.
Proposals to His Majesty. That by reason of the disability to discharge their
duties and trusts personally, The Bishops did depute the Administration of much
of their trust, even in matters of Spiritual Cognizance to Commissaries,
Chancellors, and Officials, whereof some are mere secular persons, and could
not administer that power, which originally pertains to the Officers of the
Church. And again in their Second paper to His Majesty, presented, in reference
to His Majesty's Declaration communicated to them before its publication, they
say, The Prelacy which we disclaim, is That of Diocesans, upon the claim of a
superior order to a Presbyter, assuming the sole power of Ordination, and of
Public admonition of particular offenders, enjoining Penitence,
excommunicating, and absolving, (besides Confirmation) over so many Churches,
as necessitated the corruption of Discipline, and using of Humane officers (as
Chancellors, Surrogates, Officials, Commissaries, Archdeacons) while the
undoubted officers of Christ, the Pastors of particular Churches, were hindered
from the exercise of their office.

Answ. 1. How much these things may signify toward the design for which they
were urged by these Brethren, petitioning for an alteration of the
establishment (which here I meddle not with) sure I am, should all these things
be granted, they signify nothing as to the exemption of us from a peaceable
submission to these officers being established. (And this is all that I here
aim at) As to the Diocesses, and Superior Order, I have already spoken to them;
the matter of Ordination I shall examine under the next exception.

Public admonition, Penances, Excommunication, and Absolving, etc. I say, that
such censures, as these, are to be executed in the Church, none that knows the
nature of a Church, and is acquainted with the Scriptures, did ever, or do now
question. The censures are necessary, the ends great; To preserve the Church in
Purity and Peace; To keep men from Scandal and Schism; To recover the lapsed
sinner; To restore the Penitent; To strengthen the weak; To confirm and
establish the doubtful; to make the Church Cant. 6.4, 10
comely and beautiful in her self, and terrible to her enemies as a well
marshalled Army. Now when we acknowledge the Censures of Divine institution,
and of so great necessity; why should we quarrel at the Administrators; which
yet are not so incapable of this trust, as some may conceive? The Bishops on
all hands are granted an interest in the power of the Keys, even by those, who
will not acknowledge them above the Presbyters. Now, if they exercise this
power alone, or with others, yet excluding some, whom we judge to have an
interest with them; yet what they do, they do by virtue of that authority which
they have. The taking too much upon them, or any maladministration may be
personal faults, but no ground for us to refuse obedience.



Archdeacon in Scripture, in Silas and Mark to Paul and Barnabas, although not
under the same name:) Yet, 1. The Lay Elders beyond all doubt are as much
secular persons as any of these, and have as little a foundation in Scripture
as these, as to the being Ecclesiastical officers, and the passing of
Church Censures; and then methinks these men that could admit them, may admit
these. If their being secular persons be an argument against these, sure I am,
it is as strong against them; and with us more, for they never had any legal
establishment in this Church, as these have. But, 2. The legal establishment of
these Officers by the Laws of the Kingdom, is enough to engage our submission
to those Laws; and upon this account may even those men with a good conscience
obey them, who yet acknowledge not a Divine institution of them, nor a Divine
right in Episcopacy it self. For, 1. Whitgift, (which I find cited, but
miserably misapplied by Johnson the Separatist;) viz. The substance and nature
of Government must be taken out of the Word of God, and consists in these
parts: That the Word be truly taught; the Sacraments rightly administered;
Virtue furthered; Vice repressed; and the Church kept in quietness, and order.
(All this is certainly of Divine institution; and this we may, and must submit
to: And this is all which the Bishops and Officers under them are empowered to
do.) But (says he) the Officers of the Church whereby this Government is
wrought, be not namely and particularly expressed in Scripture, but in some
points left to the discretion and liberty of the Church, to be disposed
according to the state of times, persons and places. Now if there be a truth in
this, (which, I think, few will deny) if the Church have such a liberty; And
she has made use of this liberty to appoint such persons for such
ministrations, agreeable to the general rules of the Word, and answering the
general end of Discipline and Government: We may then submit to that Discipline
and Government, notwithstanding the supposed or real personal faults of the
Administrators; yea, though we judge no Divine institution of the particular
Officers. But, 2. Calling of Bishops, farther than the necessity of this
argument requires. Many (whom it would be highly uncharitable and unchristian
to deny to be holy and faithful men) do cordially believe the Calling of
Bishops to be Apostolical, and by Divine appointment: And there needs no
argument to persuade such to obedience. And for those, whether Ministers or
others, who approve not of, nor are satisfied in the Calling of the Bishops,
and their subordinate Officers, as such; yet that they not only may, but,
considering the establishment, ought in conscience to submit in peace, and with
cheerfulness too, may be fully cleared by these following Considerations.


1. National, or Provincial Church, or any Church larger than the limits of one
Congregation (which yet the Jus Divin. Minister. Evang. part. 2. cap. 1. p. 12,
13, 14.
London Divines of the Presbyterian persuasion, have owned, and proved, and
therefore I judge, they do so still) yet they must acknowledge that This
Kingdom is a Kingdom of Christians, or a Christian Nation, (and this is indeed
tantamount to a National Church) then consider 2. That the state of a Christian
Commonwealth cannot be perfect, without some general Visitors, and Overseers
of the several particular Churches. 3. That though a particular Church, or
Congregation may be complete without them; yet for the necessary union, and
agreement of the several particular Churches in Christian Provinces and
Kingdoms, it is fit, and agreeable to reason, and no ways repugnant to the
Word of God, that under the Supreme Magistrate, there should be other
Governors to protect and encourage those Ministers and Churches, which do
their duty; and to punish those, which shall offend. Wherein, if either through
want of humane Laws, or some personal corruption, they shall in some things
pass their bounds, they do no more, than any other officers, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, through frailty and infirmity may do. 4. Bradshaw Unreas. of
Separ. p. 65.
used against the Separatists, and may upon those grounds, if they will admit
no more, with equal force of reason engage all peaceably to submit to, and live
contentedly under the Government and Discipline established by Law.
1. Whether the Supreme Magistrate have not power to oversee and govern all the
several Churches within his Dominions; yea, whether he be not bound so to do?
Without doubt he is. 2. Whether for his further help and assistance herein, he
may not make choice of some grave, learned, and Reverend man to assist him in
the same Government? This I think is so rational, that no considering man will
deny it. 3. Whether by virtue of this power, these persons thus called, may not
lawfully try the abilities of all the several Ministers within that Dominion;
and give public approbation of the worthy, and inhibit those who are unworthy
from the execution of their Ministry? and whether may they not visit these
several Ministers and Churches, convent them before them, and examine how they
have behaved themselves in their places; and punish the blameworthy? 4.
Whether, for the more easy and orderly government of the said Churches, so far
forth as it appeartains to him, he may not divide his Kingdom (as ours is) into
Provinces, assigning over each of them under himself, some special Magistrate
(though we call not the Archbishop, or Bishop by that title, but in a large
sense it may pass, and I know no Solaecism in an Ecclesiastical Magistrate: And
if we own him but so far, this is enough to engage a peaceable obedience) fit
for learning and experience to oversee and govern all the general and
particular Churches there? and whether may he not also subdivide those
Provinces into Diocesses, assigning also unto them other more inferior officers
under him, and his Provincial officers, to oversee the several Churches within
such and such a precinct? none doubts but he may. 5. Whether it destroy the
nature of a Ministerial, or true particular visible Church, that many of them
should appertain to one Provincial or Diocesan government, though in that
respect they should be held or reputed for one Provincial or Diocesan Church?
That it does, has been said by those of the separation, but never proved: but
I am sure according to the Presbyterian principles it does not, whose
Classical, Provincial, and National Church must be built upon the same
foundation with the Diocesan.
learned Nonconformist, and thought sufficient, even according to the
principles of those Ministers who were not satisfied with the Bishops power,
without farther proaese (as being clear by their own light) to stop the mouth
of that bold Separatist. And those very things which were then accounted
Arguments of force enough to prove a lawfulness of Communion in those Churches,
which are under this government, have the same force to prove the lawfulness of
the peaceable exercise of our Ministry under the same. For, whether we grant
their Jurisdiction in the Church to have been ab initio, and an Apostolical
constitution or no: (as indeed now, that I know, plead it is, as exercised in
all the subordinate officers hands, nor is it needful we should) yet this we
must grant, that they are Commissionated under His Majesty for the exercise of
this power, whom we acknowledge over all persons, and in all causes, (even
Ecclesiastical) Supreme Governor. And upon this ground, are we bound to obey
them in all lawful things, though we should deny their Apostolical standing.
And this is enough to preserve our peace; for, it is not essential to Peace
that we are in all circumstances of the same judgment: but it is essential,
that we for the main walk in the same way, practice the same things, and
perform the same duties. And it is not strange, that diverse men should agree in
one necessary practice, though they agree not in the reason of that necessity.
Neither do the established Laws require us, nor were ever the Bishops so
rigorous as to require, that we should profess the Divine right of that
constitution, in manner and form as it is established; but that we obey in our
places in all things not contrary to the Word of God. And, whether we judge the
Government Apostolical and necessary; or, only Prudential, brought in by the
Church, and not repugnant to the Holy rule; or, only as the Bishops are
empowered and Commissioned under the King: being here established, I see not,
how we can without sin refuse a peaceable compliance with it.

learned Brethren (who, though in their Proposals to His Majesty, they desire
that Chancellors, Archdeacons, Commissaries, etc. as such, may not pass any
censures purely Spiritual: yet when they say only (as such) it may intimate,
they would not deny them under another notion; as Commissioned under His
Majesty to do so.) These Brethren, I say, add this. But for the exercise of
Civil Government (and this, by their words there, may seem to include, the acts
of Government in the Church, and ecclesiastical Causes, so far as the Censures
are not purely Spiritual) coercively by Mulcts, or corporal penalties, by power
derived from Your Majesty, as Supreme over persons and things ecclesiastical;
we presume not at all to interpose, but shall submit to any that act by Your
Majesty's Commission. Were indeed these Considerations well weighed, they would
do much to a peaceable obedience.

The Bishops take too much upon them. And that is, The matter of Ordination,
and now, the Reordination, for thus it is excepted. The Bishops, some of them
-- do assume sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction to themselves. And now
it is farther urged as unsufferable, that upon their re-establishment, they
require a Reordination of all those, who during the late Confusions, were
ordained only by a Presbytery.

Superior ordo, etc. enough is already said. But to the matter of Ordination
and Reordination, I say,

Their hands are Necessary, and that none can be regularly ordained without
them, is the Judgment of none of the least or lowest in the Church, who think
the Scripture speaks clearest on their side also. For, Though Timothy had the 1 Timothy 4 14.
Imposition of Hands of the Presbytery; yet it is expressly said, that he had 2 Timothy 1.6.
Paul's too, and he not acting as one of them, but under a distinct notion, (as
the words if well weighed, do more than intimate) for, whatsoever that (...)
was, which was given by that Laying on of Hands, whether the extraordinary
gifts of the Spirit, usually, in those days, by the Act. 8.17, 18.
Apostles hands: or the Gift, i. e. Authority of Ministry (whether of a Bishop
or Evangelist, it matters not) whatsoever, I say, the gift was, it seems to be
conferred (...).
chiefly by the hands of Paul, and referred to the hands of the Presbytery,
(...)
but as assistants, or associates with him. But those texts seem to be more
express, where not only the Deacons were made by Act 6.6.
the sole hands of the Apostles; but also in the ordaining of Presbyters we
read, that Barnabas and Paul, those Apostles, Act. 14.23.
did ordain Elders in every Church as they went; we read not of any other hands
with them. St. Paul also lays this charge on Timothy, 1 Timothy 5.22
Lay thou hands suddenly on none, intimating an act, wherein he only was
concerned, for, if there were other Presbyters, or a Presbytery at Ephesus; and
they necessarily to join with him in every Ordination; why is the charge only
given to him? why not the same caution urged on them? And in that clause, Tit
1.^.
For this cause left I thee in Creet, that, Thou -- should ordain Elders in
every City, we see Titus infallibly left with authority to do this; but we read
not of any others appointed with him. If any object, He was an extraordinary
Officer, and Evangelist; This signifies little, for whatever he was, he was an
Apostolical person; and for that time, at least, seated at that place for the
particular Government of that church; to perform not an extraordinary; but, a
work of standing use in the Church, the administration of an ordinary, and
perpetual Ordinance: And why then, in such a work, he may not be conceived to
act as a settled ordinary Officer, I see not. This we are sure of, That
Ordination was not given in those days without the hands of an Apostle, or an
Apostolical person; We are not sure, that it was not sometimes without the
hands of the Presbytery. Upon these grounds these learned and conscientious men
judge a Necessity of the Episcopal, or Apostolical hands; though not excluding,
yet withal not necessarily requiring the hands of other Presbyters.

Hands of Bishops are lawful in this work, is granted so far, by those; who
urge the greatest necessity of the Presbyterial Ordination, yet excude not the
Bishop, See, Jus Divin. Minist. Evang. 2. part.
who (on their judgments) cease not to be at least a Presbyter; and the Name
of a Bishop does not (with them) take away his interest of a Presbyter in
Ordination: nor nullify the Orders, because his Hands were in them.

Now, then if we may but lawfully take it at the Bishops hands; if it be
required to be had from them alone, (though it should be supposed somewhat
irregular) and we can have it no other way without the violation of the Laws in
being: suppose they should sin in assuming that only to themselves, which
should be done jointly with others; yet we should not sin in taking it of them,
because they unquestionably have a power, though, possibly, not the sole power.

Some Bishops challenge to themselves, etc. Now the matter is not what some
particular men challenge; but what the established constitution is. It concerns
not us to be of the same judgment with every particular Bishop; but to obey
them in that place, where the Laws have set them, and in that authority,
wherein the Constitutions of this Church have invested them. Now the Laws of
our Church give no such power of sole ordination; nor does any Bishop, (that I
know, or have heard) practice it. The Dean and Prebends were of old, I doubt
not, accounted a standing Presbytery to the Bishop, and the Can. 31.
Presence of four of these are expressly required to every Ordination, (viz.)
The Dean, Archdeacon, and two Prebendaries at least: or in the necessary
absence of them four other Presbyters. Nor may we understand this of a naked
presence only; but by the order for the Practick, they are to assist in the act
too, they are See Rubr. in Form of Order. Priests.
with the Bishop to lay their hands severally upon the head of every one that
receives Orders. And this Ordination I never knew questioned by any, that
allowed any Ordination by Ecclesiastical persons at all. And the Jus Divin.
Minist. Evang. Part 2.
London Divines have justified, even in their judgments, the validity of it.

Canon required; and the Promise which they are to make of obedience to the
Bishop. To this I shall only say, 1. Sect. 18, 19.
said before, as to the Promise of obedience; We are required no more, than
those Reverend Brethren of the Presbyterian persuasion have declared to be
their avowed principles. Account, to the King, of the confer. p. 4.
We are remembered (say they) that in things no way against the Law of God, The
Commands of our Governors (not only may, but) Must be obeyed: but if they
command, which God forbids, we must patiently submit to suffering; and every
soul must be subject to the higher powers for Conscience sake, and not resist:
The public judgment Civil or Ecclesiastical, belongs only to public
persons, and not to any private man: That no man must be causlesly and
pragmatically inquisitive into the reasons of his Superiors commands; nor by
pride, and self-conceitedness exalt his own understanding above its worth and
office; but all to be modestly and humbly self-suspicious: That none must
erroneously pretend to Gods Law against the just commands of his Superiors, nor
pretend the doing of his duty to be sin: That he, who suspects his Superiors
commands to be against Gods Laws, must use all means for full information,
before he sets in a course of disobeying them: And that he, who discovers
indeed any thing commanded to be a sin, (though he must not do it) must manage
his opinion with very great tenderness, and care of the public peace, and the
Honor of his Governors. These are our principles. Now then when their avowed
principles yield so much, (as indeed all sober Christians do and must,) and,
The Bishops require no more, nor are those, who are to be ordained, to promise
any more, why may there not be a full compliance here? why may we not promise
that, which we acknowledge we are obliged to perform? But, 2. Can. 36.
required, is only to these three Articles.


1. That the Kings Majesty under God is the only Supreme Governor of this
Realm, and of all other His Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all
Spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and causes, as Temporal: and that no
Foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have
any jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence, or Authority Ecclesiastical
or Spiritual within His Majesty's said Realms, Dominions, or Countries. 2. That
the Book of Common Prayer, and of ordering Bishops, Priests, and Deacons,
contains in it nothing contrary to the Word of God, and that it may lawfully
be used, and that he himself will use the form in the said book prescribed in
all Public Prayer, and Administration of the Sacraments, and none other. 3.
That He allows the Articles of Religion agreed upon by the Archbishops, and
Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden at
London in the year of our Lord God, One thousand, five hundred, sixty and two:
and that he acknowledges all and every the Articles therein contained, being
in number 39. besides the Ratification, to be agreeable to the Word of Grd.
Now in reference to this Subscription required, let me but propound these
things to be seriously considered, and duly weighed. Viz.

1. Bishops, But they are obliged by the same Law to require it, as others are
to do it. They may not ordain, or give License to any which refuse to
subscribe, upon pain of their own suspension. So that we can neither impute
this to the Bishops; nor deny it our selves without opposing the standing Laws,
which do equally oblige, both them, and us. 2. First, The Kings Supremacy, none
denies, but the Papists, and some few Sectaries; All conscientious Protestants
make no doubt or scruple of it, and can clearly prove it. For the last, The
Doctrine of the Church of England, in the 39. Articles, even those Brethren,
who dissent from the Government, never charged them with any material error.
The scruple only is about the second, The Common Prayer Book, etc.
Presbyterian persuasion, even there where they desire a liberty from this
Subscription, do yet acknowledge, how far they can and do consent to the things
to be subscribed. Their words are: 2d. Pap. of Propos. to His Majesty. p. 24.
We Humbly acquaint Your Majesty, that we do not dissent from the Doctrine of
the Church of England expressed in the Articles and Homilies: But it is the
controverted passages about Government, Liturgy, and Ceremonies; and some
by-passages and phrases in the Doctrinal part, which are scrupled by those
whose liberty is desired. Not that we are against subscribing the proper rule
of our Religion, or any meet Confession of Faith: Nor do we scruple the Oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy; Nor would we have the door left open for Papists
and Heretics to come in. Now I humbly propose this to be considered, Whether
upon this grant there may not be a cheerful subscription, as is required: for,
I cannot see more required to be subscribed, than upon the point is here
yielded, and consented to, for 1. No dissent from the Doctrine expressed in the
39. Articles and Homilies: and That, They are ready to subscribe any meet
Confession of Faith, or Rule of our Religion: which those Articles are, and
must be esteemed to be, in their judgments, who profess, they dissent not from
them. And this is the whole third Article to be subscribed. For that which is
objected concerning Some by-passages, and phrases in the Doctrinal part; This
is nothing, that should be of any force to hinder this Subscription: which is
not that we acknowledge the propriety of every phrase, which is a thing below
the consideration of serious men in matter of such weight. Were such a thing as
a Confession of Faith put under the curious censures of Critics and
Grammarians, there would still be matter of dispute; but the thing required is
of an higher nature. Be the By-Passages or Phrases what they will, the thing
which only we are to subscribe, is, That the Doctrine contained therein is
agreeable to the Word of God: and to this there is a consent, whether those By-
passages stand or fall. What some have added, That the Articles are not full
enough, nor do particularly enough express all the substance of Faith or Truth
to be believed; This signifies nothing in this case. For, to omit, that, 1. I
look upon it as the wisdom of This Church to couch her Articles in those
general expressions, agreeable to the Sacred Canon, to which all must
unanimously subscribe; rather than descend to more particular decisions, which
would have been still more matter of controversy: Men according to their
various sentiments differing in particulars, and the more they descend to
particularities, the wider they are in their judgments, when yet they agree in
the general Doctrines. I say (to omit this) 2. The Article requires not our
judgment as to any thing else, nor does it oblige us to believe, that nothing
else is agreeable to the Word of God, but that this Doctrine contained in these
Articles is so. This we see is granted, and why then may it not be subscribed?
2. Oaths of Allegiance or Supremacy, which is all required in the first
Article, That then may also be subscribed. 3. lawfulness of the use of the Book
of Common Prayer, and a promise to use it. Of this I shall give a more full
account in the next parts. But in the mean time, let us see what is yielded,
and how far we are required to subscribe it.


1. That, They would not have the door left open for Papists and Heretics to
come in. Now the use of this Liturgy was ever accounted one Characteristical of
our Church, differencing it from the Church of Rome (so far is it from being
nothing but their Mass Book) and in the judgment of our Governors, who
require it, an excellent bar to the door, and a means to keep out Papists and
Heretics. And with this do but compare their professed principles, That the
public judgment, Civil and Ecclesiastical, belongs only to public persons,
and not to private men -- And this will go very far toward a persuasion of the
lawfulness of this Subscription; which in the judgment of our Superiors is so
necessary, as to that very thing which we our selves would have to be done:
Again, 2. Liturgy and Ceremonies materially or manifestly evil; but only that
there are some controverted passages about them. Now in such things, how much
may we yield for peace sake? when if nothing be required, that is materially
evil, or manifestly against Gods Word; it is certain we cannot sin in
subscribing: But it is not certain we should not sin in refusing; yea, it is
certain we should sin in disobeying an established Law, where that Law is not
contrary to the Law of God. And that is all that we subscribe; not that it is
the best that may be framed, but that it is good, or not contrary to the holy
Word, and may lawfully be used. And what may lawfully be used, we may lawfully
promise to use. But of this more hereafter. 3. Dutch Churches, may any be
admitted among them to the exercise of a public ministry, who will not
subscribe, or (which is equivalent) expressly own the Decisions of the Synod
of Dort against the Remonstrants? And those points, I am sure, are an higher
controversy, a matter of much more doubt among learned and conscientious men,
than any of ours: wherein had our Church decided either way, and required our
subscription to it, it would have unavoidably proved a matter of perpetual
Schism (as we may justly deem) to the worlds end.
Presbyterial Government was erected by the Ordinance of the two Houses of
Parliament, the Covenant was really made a (...), or Shibboleth, to distinguish
parties (to omit, how it was a snare too, to many conscientious men, and so
only used; for it is too manifestly known, particularly at Cambridge, it was
tendered to none but those whom they suspected, and had a mind to eject out of
their places) none could be ordained, nor admitted into a living, unless he did
subscribe it, and solemnly swear the Extirpation of the established Episcopacy;
were he otherwise in Doctrine never so Orthodox, and in holy life never so
exemplary; nor indeed keep that living whereof he was legally possessed. How
many (I say not scandalous and vicious persons, but) truly learned, able,
faithful, orthodox, holy men were ejected and sequestered, only for refusing
that Covenant, and conscientiously keeping close to their Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy? (not to speak of the latter times, wherein the Usurpations,
Tyrannies, and Extravagances of men ran up to the height of Enmity against the
Church and Ministry.)

Brethren, let me beseech you, lay your hands upon your hearts. Might you
require Subscription then to your Establishments? And is it sin in our
Governors now to require the like to theirs; yea, not theirs only, but of this
Church and Kingdom ever since the Reformation? Is the established Episcopacy a
matter of controversy now, and was it not so then? Or, are those only who
oppose it, learned and conscientious, godly men; and those only who are for it,
men of no learning, conscience, or godliness? Was it lawful for you to require
a Subscription to one side of the controversy, which you judged right? and is
it not lawful for them to require the same to that part which they judge so?
yea, is it not much more legal in them, who require it by the Authority of an
established Law, than in those who had no such Authority? In a word, was it by
you accounted lawful, that men for the liberty of exercise of their public
Ministry, should not only subscribe, but swear to endeavor the extirpation of
the Prelacy of England, which was never proved unlawful to submit to; (though
some have judged it so, to exercise) a business which those who were put upon
Covenanting, had no call to act in; an established Government by a known Law,
of full Authority; and this Covenant imposed by those, whose Authority, as to
such a thing, is justly questioned, and expressly against the Royal Assent,
which is essential to a Law of England. And can it with any shadow of Reason be
denied to be lawful, to subscribe to that Government which was established of
Old, and is restored, and re-established now by unquestionable, and the
Sovereign Authority; and when we are only required obedience, not to condemn
all other Forms, but only to acknowledge this; and this also, as good and
lawful, and agreeable to the Word of God?

Let but men seriously make these reflections in their unprejudiced thoughts,
and give an impartial judgment; and they will see no worse conditions required
of them, than they themselves did sometimes put upon their Brethren; and
nothing required, which is in it self evil, but what may lawfully be submitted
to without sin; yea, and ought to be submitted to, rather than violate the
Peace, or make a Schism and Division in the Church.

Ordination, the remaining difficulty is about the matter of Reordination: The
matter of Reordination stated, and cleared.
This is accounted a thing unsufferable, that those who were ordained, and
received a Commission to the Evangelical Ministry, must now be forced, in
effect, to deny that Ministry so received, and take it up again from the hands
of the Bishop: But

In answer to this Scruple, I say,

Ancient Canons which deny and forbid it: And one of those called the Apostles
Canons (confessedly later than the Apostles, whose names they bear) decrees,
That Si quis Episcopus aut Presbyter, aut Diaconus secundam ab aliqu^
ordinationem susceperit, deponitor, tam ipse qui ipsum ordinarit. Can. Ap. 67.
Both the Re-ordainer, and the Re-ordained shall be deposed. I know also, there
is a common Saw in the Romish Church, in that old Friars verse, or thing like a
verse.

Bis B. Baptismus. O. Ordo. C. Confirmatio.
BOC non dantur; sed E. Eucharistia. M. Matrimonium. P. P^nitentia. U. Unctio
extrema.
EMPV reiterantur.

The Fathers in the Trent Conventicle anathematizing all that shall deny the
indelible character imprinted by those three of their Sacraments, Baptism,
Orders, and Confirmation; which they deny therefore to be reiterated. But what
this indelible character is, they have not told us; nor do we find where the
Scriptures mention it; nor is it (that I know) of such reckoning among
Protestants. But though these deny it, yet can any thing hence be an Argument
to prove it unlawful to submit to it? Those who herein dissent, will not think
themselves bound in other things to be tied up either by those Apostolical
Canons, or those other Councils in the business of Episcopacy; and why then
obliged in this, which they determine with no more Authority? And much less are
we to be swayed by the Popish decisions, who acknowledge neither their
Authority, nor understand their indelible character; especially considering,

Protestant Churches, a learned man Humph. of Reordin. Sect. 2. p. 22.
(who (it seems) has studied this point for the satisfaction of his own
conscience, as to his own practice) does furnish us with these two Testimonies
(for the Books, I confess, I have not by me, to examine) one of Chemnitius, who
says, Chemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid. de Charactere. Quod Baptismus non sit
iterandus, de magna re agitur: Pactum gratia in illo nobiscum Deus in it. --
Illud vero quod Baptism proprium est, ut se noniterctur, ad suos o^dines
transtulerunt.
That Baptism is not to be repeated, is a thing of weight, because in that God
enters into a Covenant of grace with us -- But what is proper to Baptism, viz.
That it may not be reiterated, They (i. e. the Trent Fathers, for which he
blames them) have transferred to their own orders too. Surely, if this denial
of iteration of orders be blameable in the Papists (as in that learned man's
judgment it is) it cannot be blamed in us to allow it, unless to deny, and
allow be the same thing. The other is, Dr. Baldwin, that learned Professor at
Wittenberg, giving his judgment in this case, which he puts thus; viz.

Whether a man ordained by the Papists may be ordained again by us. In his
answer, he maintains the no necessity, but clearly allows the lawfulness of
it Baldvin. de Casib. Consc. l. 4 c. 6. cas. 6. -- Quod siquis existimet se
tranquillius suo in nostris Ecclesiis offic o persungi posse, si etiam nostris
ritibis ad sacro-sanctum ministerium utatur; nibil obstat, quin ordinationem
(...) nostris accipere possit: nec enim cadem est ratio Ordinationis ac
Baptismi, qui iterari non potest; ^ecenim Sacramentum est Ecclesia, illa autem
externus tantum rit^^.
If any man, says he, think that he can with more tranquillity, or freedom,
perform his office and duty in our Churches, if also he use our Rites, (i. e.
enter our way) into the Sacred Ministry, nothing hinders but that he may also
receive Ordination from ours; for there is not the same reason of Ordination,
as of Baptism which may not be iterated; for this is a Sacrament, that only an
external Rite of the Church.

Bishops of England were against a Reordination, is confessed; but withal it
must be acknowledged, that the case with them, and among us now, is far
different. The question then, was concerning the admission and reception of
those who had received Orders in Foreign Churches of the Presbyterian way; as
the Scottish, Dutch, or French; for several instances may be given of some of
them received and admitted into English livings and preferments. The question
was, Whether these being ordained only by Presbyteries, the Churches from
whence they came having no Bishops, they should be re-ordained here, before
they should be admitted to English livings, who had an Episcopacy over them. In
this case they concluded in the Negative, and that charitably, and like
Christians; for in those Churches which had no Bishop, an indispensable
necessity lies upon all that will be ordained, to receive their orders in the
way that is current among them, or they must have none. And I never heard of
any of our Church, that did upon that account pronounce their Ordination null,
or their Ministry void; but did acknowledge it (though not so regular, as they
judged it should be, yet) valid being done. Si Orthodoxi Presbyteri, ne pereat
Ecclesia, alios Presbyteros cogant^^ ordinare; ego non ausim bujusmodi
ordinationes pronunciare irritas. Daven. Determ. Quaest. 42.
If the Orthodox Presbyters (said a Reverend Bishop of our Church) are by an
insuperable necessity forced to ordain other Presbyters, that the Church fail
not; (the Church and Ministry being but res unius aetatis, and in one Age gone,
if no Succession of Ministers be provided; and if Presbyters ordain not, there
are no other to do it) in this case I should not dare to pronounce such
Ordinations void. Upon this account, the Bishops had reason not to require of
them a Reordination, because they denied not the validity of their Ministry,
nor would be so unchristian as to unchurch those that gave it, an invincible
necessity putting them upon this or none.

Presbyterial Ordination in their own, from whence they came, and to whom we
are to give the right hand of fellowship, notwithstanding this difference in an
external Order; but concerning the members and subjects of our own, who by the
standing Laws of this Church and State were bound to receive, and legally could
receive only that Ordination, which could not be conferred without the hands of
a Bishop; and which they might have had, had they not first by a popular fury
thrown out the Bishops: So that though the Ordination received from Presbyters,
as to the Ministry it self, may be yielded valid; yet here, as to the manner
and entering into it, it will be in every Episcopal judgment, (and considering
the Laws establishing Episcopacy here, never yet repelaed, I see not how it can
be otherwise) accounted Schismatical. The former Bishops would not require
Reordination of those who came from other Churches, which were Presbyterial,
because they denied not their Evangelical Ministry, as to the substance of it;
that they might not seem to condemn those Churches, as no true Churches of
Christ; Yet, instances may be given of some that were of this Church, whose
Ordination would not be allowed which they had taken abroad from a Foreign
Presbytery, which they might have had, but refused from the Bishops at home:
And upon the same reason now, of their own members, they also require a
Reordination; that they may not condemn themselves as Antichristian, nor
justify the popular fury that cast them out, nor countenance a Schism in our
own Church.

should those, whom it concerns, lie under a guilt of sin should they submit to
a Reordination by Episcopal hands? I am fully convinced, they should not. For,
whatsoever may be the judgments of men, and the practice of some Churches at
some time, yet sure I am 1. One Baptism: but no such thing upon One Ordination:
It is then such as cannot be condemned as Contra Fidem. 2. Contra Bonos Mores.
I know not which way it can be charged to do any thing to the hinderance of a
sober, just, or godly life. Men may be as ardent in their affections, as devout
in their worship, as conscientious in their obedience to God: as loyal to their
King: as humble, sober, meek, just, charitable to their Neighbors, as they
are, or may be without it. Yea, in some cases it furthers and helps forward
these duties: for before, some conscientions men did doubt of the Mission of
their Ministers, (how justly, I dispute not, but they did so) and were under a
temptation to reject their message: Now they acknowledge them indeed sent, and
legally established and Commissioned; and their words now have authority, and
their Message received, as of Ambassadors of Christ. How much this conduces to
persuade men to obey the Gospel, which they preach, I need not use many words
to prove; The experience of Thousands will attest and evidence it. And that it
hinders not, yea promotes obedience to Rulers, is clear; for the very
submission to it, is an act of obedience to their Laws. So that this
Reordination being neither against Faith, nor good Manners, I see no reason,
but that (according to that known Quod neque contra fidem, neque contra bonos
mores injungitur, indifferenter est habendum, and pro little, inter quos
vivitur, societate tenendis est. Aug ad Jan. Ep. 118.
rule of St. Austin) it is to be held and reputed indifferent, and to be kept
and observed for their sake, and communion among whom we live. 3. We may well
distinguish between what is necessary ad essentiam ministerij; and what is
necessary ad exercitium pro Hic and Nunc. A man may have all things conferred,
which pertain to the essence or substance of Ministry; and yet, there may be
an use, yea an accidental, and occasional necessity of something else to enable
him to exercise his Ministry at such a time, and in such a place. Or, (which
comes all to one) as Humph. of Re-ord. Sect. 2. p. 16.
one distinguishes, between, what is required to the setting apart a man to
the office of a Minister in the sight of God: and what is requisite to make him
received as such among men, and give him full authority, and repute to execute
his Ministry in the Place or Church where he is, or shall be called. So that
even those, who judge their former Ministry valid in fore Dei, and may not
therefore renounce it as null: (nor indeed is that required) yet may see, as a
necessity from the Pleasure of their Governors; so a lawfulness in the thing,
viz. To be ordained again: Not to make them simply Ministers or Presbyters
anew; but to make them Presbyters, for (as our Church uses the word, which is
equivalent) Priests of the Church of England; i. e. that, they may have
authority to use and exercise their Ministry, and be received as such in This
Church of England, and particularly in those places, where they shall be called
to minister. For, thus says the Bishop in the Ordaining him. Form of Order.
Priests.
Take thou authority to preach the Word, and Minister the Sacraments in the
Congregation where thou shall be appointed. Whereby there is not only a
Ministry conferred; but an authority to exercise that Ministry in the English
Church, and a freedom, a legal and regular liberty to use it in the place to
which he is called. And what sin or in convenience there may be in this, I
cannot imagine. 4. Humph. of Re-ord. Sect. 1. p. 6. and Sect. 4. p. 30.
Master Humphreyes.) It is evident, That St. Paul was made a Minister and an
Apostle by Christ himself, who says, Act. 26.16, 17, 18.
I have appeared to thee for this purpose, to make thee a Minister -- And now I
send thee to the Gentiles, to open their eyes -- Here he was made a Minister,
and had the office of Apostleship conferred upon him. This he stands upon, Gal.
1.1.
Neither of man, nor by man, but by Jesus Christ -- This he pleads as his
undoubted call, when ever he is called in question. He is now then estated and
invested in this office and function. Yet we may well conjecture, (and some
think it cannot well be denied) that Paul was confirmed in this Ministry by
the imposition of the hands of Ananias, Acts 9.17, 18, 20. with Acts 22.14, 15,
16.
who put his hands on him -- and he then was filled with the Holy Ghost, was
baptized, and then went and preached. But, clearly, after this, we find him
again Acts 13.3.
Separated to the work of the Gospel by Prayer, and laying on of hands. With
him, take his Companion Barnabas; it is clear, He was Act. 11.22
sent forth before by the Church at Jerusalem; and it is not probable that He
so famous a Minister should be in such a work without Ordination: yet He also
with Paul in the forenamed place, has a New Ordination. Separate me Barnabas
and Saul (said the Holy Ghost) to the work whereunto I have called them. And
they did so. Acts 13.1, 2, 3.
When they (i.e. Niger and Lucius) had fasted and prayed, they laid their hands
on them, and sent them away. They were called now to go upon a special Mission,
to preach the Gospel at Seleucia, Cyprus, Salamis, Paphos, etc. and are sent
out by a New Ordination. And the same reason, shall justify persons that
submit to a Reordination now, which may be given of the Imposition of hands
upon those two, who without controversy, were in the Evangelical Ministry,
and their office before. There was indeed the special command of the Holy
Ghost; true, but the Holy Ghost commands nothing to be done, but the thing it
self has its proper reason and end. To give them the Ministerial or
Apostolical office it could not be; for that needed not, they had it already.
But it was to send them out to a particular work, to give them a just repute in
the places to which they were sent, to put a due valuation upon them, that they
might be received as the Ministers of God, and Apostles of Christ. And upon the
same reason, or the like, thus far infallibly may any conscientious Christian
submit to the required Reordination, though he still stand upon his former
Ministry as valid in foro Dei, and all his former Ministerial acts by virtue
thereof good and valid too: yet, as the case stands with us in England, wherein
the Laws suffer none to exercise their Ministry unless ordained, or at least
allowed and licensed by the Bishop: and wherein many will not; some perhaps out
of conscience cannot (suppose it their weakness) hold him for a true lawful
Minister otherwise, at least not a Minister of the Church of England. He may, I
say, considering these cases, submit without sin, and for these reasons take
this new Ordination, That he may have both a full and free authority from the
Laws to exercise his Ministry: and that he may be received, as an allowed
Preacher, a Minister legally sent, as to the exercise of his function, with
freedom, acception, and success with those among whom he is placed. Before I
leave this instance, 5. Humph. of Reord. Sect. 1. p. 7.
the forenamed Author, gathered from this new Imposition of hands on Paul and
Barnabas. That if a Minister have a call to a new place, or a new special work,
though there be no necessity of it, yet he lawfully may have a peculiar
Ordination to that place and work; so far, that, if the hands of a Bishop and
other grave persons were laid on him afresh, with fasting and prayers for Gods
blessing on him in the same, no man can rationally judge, that in so doing,
either the Bishop or himself should be involved in any guilt of sin. 6.
Presbytery) are obliged, for a 1 Cor. 9 16.
Necessity is laid upon them to preach the Gospel, and to administer the
Ordinances of Christ to that Congregation, where they are placed; leave and
liberty they may have to do this, if they will thus far submit to the Episcopal
authority. Now, sure I am, that Woe is unto them, and they sin, if they do it
not, where they may have leave and liberty: but I am not sure, they should sin
if they should submit to this Episcopal Ordination superadded to their former,
that they may have liberty and authority to exercise that Ministry in this
Church, which they have received: Nay, very probably, yea, I think, infallibly,
they should not sin in this; but should sin certainly if they would rather lay
down their Ministry, and forsake their work and standing, than submit to this
Ordination required. Now then, whether it be fit to commit a certain sin, such
as laying down our work, and the exercise of our Ministry, upon the doubt or
fear of but a supposed sin, in taking a new Ordination, which is in this case
but a Confirming of us in our Ministry: let any serious considering man judge.
7. a duty, that must be done; upon the account of that Obedience which the
Gospel requires Romans 13.1. -- 5.
in every soul to the Higher Powers, and this For conscience sake; and to 1
Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
every Ordinance or Polity among men (for that, I conceive, is the genuine
meaning of that (...) in the Apostle.) Whether to the King as Supreme, or to
other Governors commissioned by him, for the Lords sake, and because so is the
Will of God, that we should do. For, if we yield to Episcopacy, (though not as
a Divine, yet) as an Humane Constitution, not repugnant to the Word of God; and
so much without doubt (whatsoever it be more) it is with us, being established
here by the known Laws: When then they require this of men, I see not how it
can be avoided, but, by virtue of those forementioned texts, it ought to be
done. Reordination being in this case (as is well noted) but a submission to
that Order of Church Polity, which is by the established Laws (made by the
Powers not only in being, but who have the undoubted Sovereignty and legal
authority) again set over us. In a word, 8. to make a man a Minister of Christ;
but also what is requisite to qualify a man for the legal maintenance which
does belong to such a Ministry in England. And those who deny the necessity of
a superadded Episcopal Ordination as to the former end; yet must see a
necessity, at least the use and lawfulness of it to the latter. Upon such an
account as this no man ever questioned the lawfulness of a double Marriage.
When the late Usurping Powers required this to be Solemnized by the Civil
Magistrate, no man doubted, but those, who were either not satisfied in
Conscience of that way; or doubted the ill consequences, when the tide should
turn, the Laws, as then standing, not allowing the Legitimation of the issue of
such a Marriage, might lawfully, (as many, and all wise men did) be Married
again by the Minister according to the Laws in force, without incurring the
guilt of any sin thereby. And why may not a second Ordination be admitted upon
the consideration of the like consequences? One is no more a Sacrament than the
other: One is as much an Ordinance of God as the other: The Name of God would
be no more taken in vain in the one, than in the other: Nor can I, by any thing
in Scripture, find there should be any sin in the one (as before it is stated)
than in the other. Sure I am, the Holy Scripture no where condemns it; has
no where given us a Law against a second Ordination; and Romans 4.15
where there is no Law, how there should be a Transgression, I say not, I, but
a wiser than any of us, even St. Paul himself could never see.


He that is desired to see more of this Subject, let him consult that little
book of Mr. Humphreys, professedly handling this question of Reordination:
where he will see the lawfulness of it (at least as to the receiver) clearly,
and fully proved; the main doubts and scruples about it, and difficulties in it
untied, and solved: To that I refer the Reader. In the mean time, This may be
enough to persuade, and show that men lawfully may in this thing submit to, and
comply with the Orders of our Superiors without sin.

Having now solved these doubts as to matter of Ordination, and Reordination,
and answered all the most material Objections, I hope, I have laid such grounds
as may satisfy all serious and considering men of the (if not necessity, yet)
lawfulness of our submission to the Government, the Episcopacy established with
us, notwithstanding these great exceptions taken against them, in matters
referring to the first general head: wherein the Bishops are said to take too
much upon themselves; and to challenge a power which is not theirs.

CHAP. VI. The other general Exception against the Bishops, as hindering the
particular Pastors from the exercise of their Office answered.


That the Bishops (as they are said to take too much upon themselves, so) will
not suffer others to take their due, but hinder the undoubted Officers of
Christ, the Pastors of particular Churches from the exercise of their office,
particularly (as some have objected) that part of Government and Discipline,
which they think they should, and do judge they are called, and have authority
to administer: every particular Pastor being bound to a personal ministration
of all the Ordinances of Christ, to that particular Church committed to his
charge. So it is objected.



1. That the particular Pastors of the several Congregations are the undoubted
Officers of Christ, there is none, that I know, among all those concerning whom
the dispute now is, who does in the least deny. 2. preaching of the Word, and
Administration of the Sacraments, the two principal works of the Evangelical
ministry, they are expressly sent to do them; and have these given in charge
to them in the very form of their Ordination Form of Order. Priest,
Take thou authority to preach the Word of God, and to minister the holy
Sacraments in the Congregation, where thou shall be so appointed. Here are the
Keys expressly given into their hands, and no small part of the power of the
Keys, viz. The Key of Doctrine, to preach the Word, which was never denied
them; and the Key of Discipline too, thus far, as to open to Door, and let
persons into the Church by Baptism, when the same authority is given them to
administer the Sacraments, as to preach the Word. Yea, farther 3. binding and
loosing put into their hands? Have they not this Commission given them (yea
before they receive their particular Mission by the Bible put into their hands)
at the very imposition of the Bishops, and other Presbyters hands? in these
words Form. of Order. Priests.
, Receive the holy Ghost, whose sins thou do forgive, they are forgiven: and
whose sins tho do retain, they are retained: And be thou a faithful
dispenser of the Word of God, and of his holy Sacraments In the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Where, observe, Their Commission
is given them, in the very same form which John 20.22, 23.
Christ himself used in commissionating his Apostles; which some have
quarrelled at in the practice of our Church; as if it were an abuse of the
Scripture, and assuming a power which Christ never gave to the Bishops, The
Form used, Receive the Holy Ghost. -- vindicated.
To give the Holy Ghost; nor is the Holy Ghost given to all on whom the Bishops
so lay their hands. But indeed the Exception is groundless, nor may this Form
with any reason be quarrelled at; for (that by the way I may here vindicate the
innocence of the Church in this) know, 1. giving the Holy Ghost; as the Holy
Ghost is taken to signify the saving graces of the Spirit, whereby a man is
regenerated, sanctified, or made holy, who was not so before: Or, as it
signifies those (...), or special gifts of the Spirit, which were in the
Apostles days frequently given, and poured out; accomplishing therein Joel
2.28. with Acts 2.1. -- 20.
those Prophesies of old, concerning this large effusion of the Spirit that
should be in the days of the Gospel: Or, indeed, as it signifies, Those inward
endowments, gifts and abilities, which are requisite to qualify a person, and
make him fit to be ordained to such an Office; for these are indeed the gifts
of God, and in a good measure supposed to be already in the person, who is
therefore first examined, that the Bishop may in some measure be satisfied,
that he fath these abilities who comes to be ordained: It cannot therefore be
rationally supposed, that the Church should pretend to give these at the
Ordination. 2. Holy Ghost in that sense; for, though beyond all controversy
Christ had power to give the Holy Ghost, (the Holy Ghost proceeding from him,
as well as from the Father) who did promise Joh. 14 26. and 15.26.
to send his Spirit, who, when sent, was to teach them all things; (i.e.) every
way to qualify them for, and enable them proportionably to the work in which
they were to be employed; yet he does expressly tell them, that this effusion of
the Holy Ghost upon them they were not to expect whilst he was with them; nor
to receive till after his Ascension. Joh. 16.7.
If I go not away (says he) (...) (this Spirit, who was to enlighten, teach,
comfort, etc.) will not come unto you; but if I depart, I will send him unto
you. And accordingly we find he did, when after his Ascension he sent this
Spirit in Acts 2.3, 4. --
fiery cloven tongues upon them. Yea, it seems to be evident, that Christ did
not at this time (when he breathed on them, and said, Receive the Holy Ghost,
etc.) indue them with those gifts, because after this, we find his command to
them Luke 24.49
to stay at Jerusalem, until they should be endued with this power from on
high. Nor need we say (as one Mart. ex Brent.
does) That the Spiuit was here given only thus far, as that they were lightly
and in a small measure sprinkled with his grace, being afterward more fully to
be endued with his power: For, though it be indeed the work of Christ to give
to those whom he calls to the Pastoral Office, such gifts and sufficient
endowments, as shall make them fit for, and in a good measure able to perform
that charge to which they are called; yet in this Commission Christ does not
(as even the same Author confesses) so make them presently Preachers of the
Gospel, as immediately to send them forth to the work; but they are yet to stay
till this power, and these abilities be given them from above; and therefore,
3. Holy Ghost there given, is meant, the Gift, or Authority of the Evangelical
Ministry, whereby they were made Apostles, and Preachers to the world, for the
collecting and gathering a Church to Christ, and for the feeding and governing
that Church being gathered: Preaching and proclaiming Remission of sins to the
world, upon their sincere Repentance from dead works, and unfeigned Faith in
Jesus Christ; and Retaining the sins, and preaching the certain condemnation of
those who will not repent, nor 2 Thessalonians. 1, 8, 9.
obey the Gospel. For these Ministrations are all The gifts of the Spirit, as
the Apostle 1 Cor. 12.4, 5. and per totum.
evidently teaches. There are (says he) diversities of gifts, but the same
Spirit: What gifts? It follows, There are Differences of ministrations, etc.
And if we consider the whole series of his discourse in that Chapter,
concerning the several Members of the body having their distinct offices, we
must acknowledge, that he speaks there not of Gifts as endowments, and inward
qualifications of men, but chiefly as of their capacities and relations in the
Church, the places and offices to which they are called, and the works to which
they are sent: as, Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, etc. which Ministrations are
all from the same Spirit, and called Gifts also. Romans 12.6, 7.
Having gifts differing -- whether Prophecy, -- or Ministry. -- And Christ is
said to have Ephesians. 4.8, 11.
given gifts, when he sent Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers.
So that we may well conceive, that the thing which Christ does, when he says,
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, is, but to give them their Commission, constituting
them his Apostles and Messengers to the world; impowering them to remit or
retain sins: To preach pardon and peace, and to absolve the penitent, or to
cast out and cut off by excommunication the impenitent: In a word, he
commits to them the charge of the Gospel, or that ministration which is the
2 Cor. 3.6.8. (...), and (...).
ministration of the Spirit; constituting them Ministers of the New Testament,
not of the letter, (as in the Law) but of the Spirit. 4. And in no other sense
does our Church use this Form in her Ordinations: not pretending to give the
inward either sanctifying Graces of qualifying gifts of the holy Ghost; but
indeed giving a Commission to, and conferring upon the Person ordained the
charge and Authority of the Evangelical Ministry, which is the ministration of
the holy Ghost. And why she may not most conveniently make use of the same
Scriptural expressions, when she conferreth the same Authority, as to the
Preaching of the Doctrine of Faith and Repentance, which is as the Key of
heaven committed to their ministry, which binds, or loses: Remitteth, or
Retains sins: I have not yet seen any sufficient reason given. But

viz. To preach the Word, and by Doctrine to bind or loose: for, there is yet
somewhat more committed into their hands. Some part at least, yea a very great
part of Discipline too, even in those very parts of Discipline which are said
to be denied them. As 1. Public Admonition: I have sometimes wondered, That
the particular Pastors are hindered from the exercise of their Office, and in
this particular, The public Admonition of particular offenders: When we may
admonish, and ought to do so, not privately only, but publicly also. Yea,
before the Bishop lays his hands on any, he requires their promise to do it,
and they engage it. For so is the question; Form of Ord. Priests, Quest. 3.
Will you be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away all
erroneous and strange Doctrines, contrary to the Word of God; And to use both
public and private Monitions and Exhortations, as well to the sick as to the
whole, within your Cures, as need shall require. The Answer is, I will, the
Lord being my helper. 2. Absolution of the Penitent is another part of
Discipline. And are we hindered from this? neither. For, we are not only in our
own Public Offices, after the Confession of sin, Absolution.
to pronounce in general The Absolution to those who truly repent; but
particularly also, in the Visitation of the Sick, upon their serious and
credible profession of Repentance, in the name of Christ to Absolve that
particular person. And though indeed we have no power (nor is it fit we should)
to give Absolution to any who lies under a Public censure; (all reason
requiring, that the same hand which bound, should also loose; Nor can it be
jugged that a particular inferior Pastor has authority to take off the censure
past by the Authority of a public Court) yet those who have known the exercise
of Discipline among us, know also, that as the Sentence of Excommunication
being passed in the Bishops Court, it is to be pronounced by the particular
Pastor in the Congregation: so by him also (the Bishop being first satisfied)
the Penitent is to be again received in. So in the case of other Censures,
though the Sentence pass in an higher Court, yet the particular Minister is to
manage it, in the Public Admonition of the Offender, and Absolving and
restoring the Penitent. 3. Suspension. Again, In case of Scandal, and notorious
sin, we are not only permitted, but every particular Pastor is expressly
enjoined to exercise that part of Discipline in Suspension from the Holy Table,
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Consult the Rubric of our Communion, ye
will find this power put into the Ministers hands. Rub. 2. and 3. before the
Communion.
If any of these ( sc. who would communicate,) be an open, notorious, evil
liver, that the Congregation by him is offended, or have done any wrong to his
neighbors, by word or deed: The Curate having knowledge thereof, shall call
him, and advertise him in any wise not to presume to come to the Lords Table,
until he have openly declared himself to have truly repented, and amended his
former naughty life; that the Congregation may be thereby satisfied, which
before was offended: And that he have recompensed the parties whom he has done
wrong unto; or at least declare himself in full purpose so to do, so soon as
conveniently he may. But what, if notwithstanding this, the person will not be
warned to keep away; may the Minister do no more? yes, he must not suffer him
to come; for so is the very next Rubric. The same order shall the Curate use
with those, betwixt whom he perceives malice and hatred to reign, not
suffering them to be partakers of the Lords Table, until he know them to be
reconciled. And if one of the parties -- be content to forgive, and to make
amends -- and the other will not be persuaded to a godly unity, The Minister
OUGHT to admit the Penitent person to the holy Communion, but not him that is
obstinate. Yet again consult the Canons and Constitutions, which were, and are
to be observed in the Church of England; there ye find this expressly enjoined.
NO Minister shall in ANY WISE admit to the receiving of the holy Communion ANY
of his Cure or Flock, which be openly known to live in sin notorious without
Repentance: NOR ANY, who have maliciously and openly contended with their
Neighbors, until they be reconciled: NOR ANY Churchwardens -- who having
taken their Oaths to present to their Ordinaries all such offenses as they are
particularly charged to enquire after -- shall (notwithstanding their Oaths,
the faithful discharge whereof, would be a chief means that public sins --
might be reformed and punished) wittingly, and willingly, and irreligiously,
incur the crime of perjury, in neglecting or refusing to present such public
Enormities. --


These are the express constitutions of our Church, that would every Pastor be
careful to do in this case, as he is not only permitted, but enjoined to do (so
far are we from being hindered the exercise of our Office) there would be no
ground for that grand charge of promiscuous admissions, and impure mixtures at
our Communions. And if this part of Discipline be not put in due execution, it
is not because the Pastors are not suffered to do it, but because they are not
careful and diligent to do what they are not only suffered, but required to do.
Let us then not lay the fault upon the Prelacy, or the Government, which must
lie at our own doors. Once more,



Will you give your faithful diligence always to minister the Doctrine and
Sacraments, and Discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded, and as this
Realm has received the same, according to the Commandments of God, so that you
teach the people committed to your charge, with all diligence to keep and
observe the same? The Answer is, I will do so by the help of the Lord.

Episcopacy; and judge whether it can with any shadow of reason be said that
the particular Pastors are hindered from the exercise of their undoubted
Office. Let but every Minister in his place seriously and faithfully set
himself to perform those several duties and offices, which he is not only
permitted, but required to do, and he shall have no reason to complain for want
of work. If any particular person have been hindered from the actual exercising
of any of these, by any particular person or Court, (suppose it not for any
default in himself, yet) it is irrational to make a personal fault to be an
irregularity in the Government and Constitution: Such miscarriages are not to
be imputed to the Church, or the Prelacy, when the contrary is manifestly
required in the Public Forms, Rubricks and Canons. This Exception then is not
wholly just, That the particular Pastors are hindered from the exercise of
their Office; for in a very great measure, and the most and chief parts we see
the contrary.

Excommunication, in whose hands. For the power of Excommunication, this is
indeed denied them; nor can I find that in any Age, either in the Jewish or
Christian Church, any single Minister of a particular Congregation challenged
it, or that ever any Church allowed it. To omit the practice of the Jewish
Church, where the learned know, that a particular Priest or Levite never had
that power; (...)
but even their Niddui, the least and lowest of their Excommunications, (...)
was passed in a Court (though a lower and more private one) but their greater
Excommunications, both their Cherem, or Anathema, and especially their
Shammatha (which was called Excommunicatio in secreto nominis Tetragrammati,
the Form whereof we find recorded by Drus. de Trib ^ect. lib. 3. cap. 11
Drusius) were passed no where, but in the public Courts, and Ecclesiastical
Consistories, in the face of the whole Church. The first that we read of in
practice in the Christian Church, is this Excommunication of the 1 Cor 53, 4.5.
incestuous Corinthian: This now was not the Act of one single Minister in
Corinth, but of the Apostle himself first (...)
judging and sentencing, (though absent) and then charging the Church (when
(...).
gathered together too) to see it executed. Another we read of, is that of 1 Timothy 1.20
Hymeneus and Alexander; this an Apostolical Act also, Whom I (St. Paul
himself) have delivered unto Satan. And I dare challenge all the contrary
minded to show me any Church well regulated and constituted, where ever this
was entrusted in the hands only of the Minister of a particular Congregation.
Sure I am, had there been any such, we should have heard something of it in
these days of Contention: But in all those varieties of Forms and ways of
Government pleaded for, none yet pleaded for this, but would have it in other
hands. The Separatists, and with them, those of the Independent, and
Congregational way, who are for a Democratical Government in the Church, place
the Power of the Keys, and this in particular, in the Collective Body of the
Congregation together; the Pastor having but his single Vote, and perhaps
pronouncing the sentence as they decree. And in the Presbyterial way, it is as
little allowed to the Parochial Pastor; for though he with his particular
Eldership be allowed the exercise of some lower censures, yet this of
Excommunication is solely referred to the Classical Assembly: And if our
Brethren account it there fit to deny this power to the particular Pastor, and
fix it in the Classis: Why it may not now under Episcopacy be also denied to
the Paroshial Pastor, and reserved to the Bishops Consistory, I see not: That
the same thing should be no fault in the Presbyterian way, and a great fault in
the Episcopal, seems somewhat strange; we have therefore reason to judge, that
this particular is no part of that undoubted Office, which our Brethren say,
The particular Pastors are denied the exercise of; when in their own way they
do not allow it him.

4. Sect. ^^.
But suppose there were many parts of the particular Pastors Office, which we
were hindered to exercise, what must we conclude? Is it therefore not lawful
for us to submit? Or, are we bound to exercise all that we judge to belong to
our Office, whether we may be suffered or no? The truth is, where we have
liberty, we are obliged; but where we are powerfully restrained, we are not.
Our Ministry it self we cannot publicly exercise without leave and license
from the Magistrate in his own Dominions, and from those Governors who are set
over us in his Church. And that we may sit down in peace, when hindered from the
whole: We may also; when hindered but in part, and may yet have liberty to
perform the principal parts of our work; To preach the Word, and Administer the
Holy Sacraments. If the Laws and Powers, under which we live, deny us liberty
to exercise what we are called to; if causlesly, it is their sin, and they
alone must answer it: but there can be no sin in our submission, and
forbearance, when we cannot help it. Infallibly, if we are diligent, sedulous,
and faithful in doing all that we can, and that we have liberty to do: that we
do no more, will not be imputed, as a fault, to us, by any rational man, nor
will it be by the Righteous God. Yea, we shall be very much eased of a very
Great Charge, and much of that account will be taken off from us, which would,
and must have been required of us, if all these things also should be laid upon
our shoulders. But certainly the most gracious God will never make us
accountable for that which we had not in charge. And seriously, I know not any
Minister, who faithfully desires the discharge of his duty; but he would be
willing, very willing to be confined to his Study, and the Pulpit (and could
find work enough there) if he might with safety and a good conscience be
excused from the performance of all other charges and duties.

CHAP. VII. The Conclusion of this Part.
From the foregoing Considerations inferring the lawfulness, yea and duty of an
humble obedience to the established episcopacy: and pleading for it both for
Peace and Conscience sake.
Ecclesiastical Government established in this Church, and, I think, plainly (I
hope to the satisfaction of all sober minded) have solved all those
difficulties, and doubts, that might seem to lie in the way, to hinder a
Conscientious Obedience to that Church-Politie, which by the express Laws of
the Land we are obliged to conform unto. The exceptions, I confess, are many of
them cited in the words of those Reverend Brethren of the Presbyterian
persuasion: yet give me leave here solemnly and seriously to profess, that in
so doing, I had no design in the least to enter a quarrel with them, nor to
mis-represent their ends; nor, do I here examine how far they may be a Motive
to Petition for an alteration or Regulation of the establishment, to those in
whose hands only such a power lies. But the exceptions being the same which
were taken of old; and all unsatisfied men do make use of these, and the others
here spoken to, (and none else that I know) as Arguments to keep off themselves
and others from obeying, and conforming to the Laws in being, persuading
themselves upon these very grounds, they should sin in so doing; (and while men
are settled in those persuasions, there can be no hopes of peace, but bitter
animosities, and contendings, if not seditions and rebellions, while the Laws
positively require obedience, and punish disobedience, and yet men think they
should sin if they should obey) I could do no less, (if I did any thing to
satisfy conscience in these scruples) than to show, that, if His Majesty, and
our undoubted Governors under Him, should not yet see reason to alter the
establishment, we are all bound to obey and conform; and that notwithstanding
any thing in these exceptions, we lawfully may do so, as far as in our places
the Laws and Constitutions require that we should.

Peace of the Gospel be precious in our eyes, and let us by this evidence that
we indeed obey the Gospel of Peace: The way to Peace is not to consider what
our Rulers should do, or how far they should yield to us, but what we should do
our selves; if they mistake, their errors in Government will not excuse the sin
of our disobedience. Let us do our parts, and if we have not the wished for
Peace, the fault will not lie at our Doors: yea, let us do our parts, and we
shall have Peace. Would we be conscientious in our obedience, the Powers of
Hell cannot be able to divide and ruin us. The wounds of the Church have been
too long open, This is all that we can do to close them. O let the tears of the
Mother, have some effect upon, and draw some pity from the hearts of her
children; if we unite not, she must expire. Unity and Peace is the best fence
to the Vineyard of God, let us obtain, and maintain this, then shall neither
the Wild Boar of the Forest be able to lay her waste; nor the subtle Foxes
within pluck off her grapes, or destroy the Vine. It is within reach, we may
have it if we will our selves: and that only by our obedience and ready
submission to the Public establishment. Never look for Peace in this, nay, not
in any Church, if the members may refuse to obey, while ever they see any thing
which they judge fit to be altered in the Government. But though something
there may deserve an alteration, yet if it be not altered (because those, to
whom that power belongs (and they only are judges) see it not convenient,
because the benefit of alteration possibly may not countervail the mischief of
a change) and lawful to be obeyed, The Peace of the Church must oblige us to
obedience. Such is our case at present in reference to the established
Episcopacy; it is that only Government which our Laws acknowledge, that which
they oblige us to conform to, and wherein it has been cleared there is nothing
but what a conscientious Christian may lawfully submit to: O then for the
Lord-sake, for the Churches, for Peace, for Conscience sake let us obey.

Let me, for a close of this Chapter, and Argument, but propound these four
things to be seriously weighed and considered.

1. Episcopacy established be indeed so contrary to the Word of God, and the
Primitive pattern (as is suggested, and some pretend) that it is altogether
unlawful to submit to it, or exercise our Ministry under it, according to the
Laws thereof: it cannot be avoided, but that we must charge the whole Ministry
of England, that continued in their public stations, and exercised their
Ministry according to the public Rules of this Church, ever since the
Reformation, till these late confusions, to have lived in manifest sin; and to
have been guilty of a sinful compliance with corrupt men against the interest
of Jesus Christ. And what an uncharitable and unchristian judgment would this
be? What! all those famous Champions; some learned Writers by their Pen
maintaining the Truth of the Protestant and Evangelical cause against the
Romish adversary: Many Holy Confessors, Glorious Martyrs, who were not afraid
to lay down their lives at the Stake, and by their Constancy showed their
Courage, who for the Testimony of Jesus Rev. 12 11.
loved not their lives to the Death: Some of these, were Bishops themselves:
Others not only submitting to, but acting in this Government; All exercising
their Ministry by virtue of their Call, by these hands: And yet (it will be a
strange Censure) all guilty of manifest sin in their very Calling; in those
Actings, Ministry, and Preaching, which yet God was pleased to honor with the
glorious success of the happy conversion of so many souls to God? Has this
been the sad fate of Poor England, that among all the Reformed Churches, she
only has never had (till of late) any Public Ministry, but such as have been
guilty of manifest sin, in their very Calling, and whole exercise of their
Ministry? God forbid. 2. this Ministry, which was only exercised according to
the Laws of this Government; and that none were pure, or worshipped God aright,
but such as drew off from our Church, and separated themselves from our
Communion. And now, whether in this we shall judge righteous judgment; I shall
appeal to all the sober spirits, and godly-wise in the Land. 3. unlawful, and
therefore refuse to conform to the Government, and to obey the Laws
established; What a wide door must there needs be open to an unavoidable and
perpetual Schism in this poor Church? Our Governors judging that they are
bound (as indeed they are) to preserve the honor of the establishment, and the
Laws in their vigor; and too many thinking that they are bound (when yet
indeed they are not) to oppose, or withdraw, or suffer, rather than obey? And
what a bane this will infallibly be to Piety as well as Peace, we need not
search very deep, to Devine; too sad experience, will too soon be a manifest
conviction. 4. Bruta Fulmina, but have an armed power to force obedience, and
to punish the disobedient. And howsoever therefore some may resolve willingly
so to suffer, and may triumph and rejoice in their sufferings; yet He that
would have real ground of joy, had need first look well to the cause of those
sufferings. 1 Pet. 4.14, 16.
If indeed ye suffer for Righteousness sake, happy are ye, The Spirit of Glory
and of God rests upon you; and even these will be a Crown of Glory, and a
Diadem of Beauty upon your heads. But really, if your sufferings be, only for
not obeying that just Authority, that is set over you; and in such things too,
wherein (for any thing in the nature of themselves) we might lawfully conform,
without sin; whatsoever your pretense, or fancy may be, you will never be able
to give any good account of, or to answer your very sufferings to God, or Men.
Not to God, who called you not to them, but commands you to obey: Not to the
King, nor your Governors, who delight not in punishing; but would rejoice in
the Peace, and Prosperity of the Church, and of every Subject; Not to your
Relations, nor your Posterity, who depend upon you, suffer in you, and may be
exposed to misery, reproach, and want, through your temerity and folly. Really,
in this cause, I fear, ye will not bear the character of those Christians, (of
whom Tertul. ad Scapul. O miseri siquidem mortem vultis, praecipitiorum and
laqueorum abundi habetis.
Tertullian speaks) who in the cause of Christ and Christianity boldly
appeared, yea ran in troops to the Heathen Judicatories; so many, that it made
one of their Persecutors cry out to them, O wretches, if ye desire death so
much, have ye not halters, and precipices enough at hand? as if their
Persecutors were even weary in tormenting. I fear, I say, your sufferings will
not bear this character, for the cause is not the same. But rather of those, of
whom Clemens Alexandrinus makes mention, Antonin. Arrian. apud Tertul. ibid.
Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 4. (...).
and blames, who, he says, had nothing of Christians but the name: who were
(...), certain Heretics, who were (...), did voluntarily offer themselves, or
leap into death: They were indeed publicly punished; but they brought death
upon themselves; They neither did bear the character of Martyrs; nor did their
death deserve the name of Martyrdom. Now what comfort, what peace, what
rejoicing can men expect in sufferings upon such accounts as these? Oh let us
consider, whether any of these Pleas will bear us out, or be a sufficient
excuse for our Disobedience, at that Great day of Reckoning, when the secrets
of our hearts shall be laid open at that dreadful Tribunal of Jesus Christ. We
may here please our selves in our oppositions, and appearances of zeal, but
indeed Pseudonymous; and have a kind of glorying in our sufferings: But when
Christ shall come to charge upon us the Contempt of an Romans 13.2.
Ordinance of God, in disobeying those Laws, to which we were obliged, and
might have submitted without sin; judge ye, how far it will stand you in stead,
to pretend sin in the Governors, or some irregularity in the Government, as to
the justification of Schism, or excuse of Disobedience, or the alleviating of
those everlasting punishments which are due from the most Righteous God to
those who despise his Laws, and resist his Ordinances.
Government of the Church, the established Episcopacy, examined and discussed.
If thou expectedst elegance of style, flowers of Eloquence, or ornaments of
Learning, I confess, thy expectation is frustrated, they are things to which I
dare not pretend: But I hope it will not be accounted arrogance if I say, thou
may here have met with soundness of Doctrine, and evidence of Truth, and the
cordial desires of an honest Heart for the peace of the Church, which we may
have, if we will but do our parts in all that lawfully we may, notwithstanding
any thing that yet has been objected, in reference to this head, The matter of
Ecclesiastical Government. Let it be our care to approve our selves unto God,
as such who bear not Nomen Christianum in contumeliam Christi; but as such, who
Phil. 2.15.
as the Sons of God, by an holy, harmless, undefiled, humble and peaceable
conversation in all things, sincerely endeavor to Tit. 2.10.
adorn the Gospel of Christ, which we profess: That 1 Pet. 2.12, 13, 15.
those who seek occasion to reproach us as evildoers, may yet by the good
works which they shall behold in us, be forced to glorify God in the day of
visitation: while we conscientiously submit our selves to every Polity among
men, legally established both in Church and State: This being the will of God,
that with well-doing we put to silence the ignorance of foolish men. In a word,
would we live, and indeed see 1 Pet. 3.10, 11.
good days, let us be sure to refrain our tongues from evil, and our lips that
they speak no guile: Let us eschew evil, and do good; let us seek peace and
pursue it.

FINIS.
(...) A Peace Offering. The Second Part.
WHEREIN OUR DIFFERENCES Are examined as to the LITURGY. AND It is showed that
herein they are not so Great, as for which to Divide the Church; Nor Any thing
in this, but what may be lawfully used and Complied with.
CHAP. I. The Differences about the Liturgy noted, and some Scandals observed
to be given by the non use thereof.
Liturgy; and the Rites and Ceremonies there enjoined to be used. I need not
report what a matter of Contention there has been successively in the Reigns
of the three last Princes, who have sat upon the English Throne, and is still
continued, and agitated, I think, with more exasperation and bitterness now:
When yet the happy return of His present Majesty, and the Blessings upon us by
his restoration should have prevailed more with us to study Peace and Love.

His Sacred Majesty was (after the barbarous Murder of His Royal Father; and
His own violent extrusion from the Throne of his Ancestors; and a bitter
exilement in a strange land) at length restored in Peace, and by His return the
Ancient Laws also restored to their vigor, which had been so long, and so
violently interrupted: Thousands of conscientious loyal hearts passionately
called to their Ministers for the use again of the established Liturgy in the
public worship of God. Many able, faithful, and conscientious Ministers, who
thought it their duty, and did therefore still use it, during all these late
times of Confusion; wherein they despised the hazard of their Liberty, Estates,
and Means of subsistence, in comparison of their obedience to the standing
Laws; were now revived, and filled with joy, that with boldness and confidence
they might now use that, which before they only could do in private. Many
others, who, during those violent Usurpations in the Land, and the Sword being
over us, thought it a Lawful and Christian prudence so far to give way to the
furies of men, as to forbear the use of that particular form; rather then
forsake their station in the Church, and lay by the use and exercise of their
Ministry in their several Congregations: Now, those fears being over, and there
being no plea of any restraint from the Powers above us; but a full liberty
open to obey the Ancient Laws, which were, and are still, in force; and these
Laws laying a strict charge and injunction upon all Ministers; They were
convinced of an Obligation, and a duty incumbent on them to conform to those
Laws in returning to the use of the Liturgy, and Form of Worship prescribed:
being Conscious that they could not be acquitted of sin before God, if they
despised those Laws, where they saw no material evil in the works required.
This they judged to be both lawful and expedient for them: not only fit, but
their duty to do.

Hine illae Lachrymae. While some conscientiously conform to the Laws in being,
in the use of the Liturgy, and enjoined Rites of the Church of England; seeing
nothing in either, but what, in their judgment, they may lawfully do; and
therefore, being commanded, thinks they are bound in Conscience to do: Others
(I verily believe) both Learned, and Conscientious, peaceable men, out of a
tenderness of Conscience, afraid to sin against God in any thing, especially
in matters of public worship, wherein we are to draw so near to God; seeing
not that evidence, and judging some things evil, at least to be imposed, in
these things: dare not yet comply in that use, being not convinced of the
lawfulness, are afraid least they should sin in the doing of it, in the mean
time not condemning others for their practice, but only taking, and desiring a
liberty for themselves for forbearance, and between such as these, no man
doubts, but there may be an happy composure, and accommodation at least, and
we may live in peace.

Religion only a matter of Design and Policy, being zealous only so far, and in
such things as are pleasing to a party, and may make them eminent in a side
which they have espoused. It is a bitter affliction to my Soul to see some, who
have no way to commend their zeal for the Church, than by reproaching and
vilifying of others, who are not in all things of their mind, charging Schism,
Heresy, Faction, and Rebellion, not only upon those who are really guilty, but
upon all, who in the least circumstance come not up fully to the established
Rule, though in other things they are as Peaceable, Humble, Faithful, Loyal, as
any in the Church. On the other side, my Soul cannot but mourn in secret, and
mine eyes run over with tears, to see, how many, for the particular
miscarriages of some persons, have thought it no sin to lay loads of reproaches
upon the Church it self, and its whole constitution: So that now, if any do (as
they are bound) walk according to the Laws of the Church; submit to the Rites;
use the Public Forms: Howsoever they are (even their Adversaries being Judges)
otherwise, Able and Learned, Judicious and Pious, Faithful and Painful in their
Ministry, Constant and Eminent in the Pulpit, unblameable and exemplary in
their lives; yet what are the titles of honor, that the foul mouths of
discontented men cast upon them? even, for this single use of a Common Prayer,
and conforming in (in their judgment) an innocent Ceremony, They are, Baals
Priests, Idol-shepheards, Dumb dogs, Time-servers; at the best, Having but a
Form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; themselves Limbs of
Antichrise, and their very habits, Garments of the Whore. Now for such Spirits,
as these do discover themselves to be, I know not how the Church should obtain,
nor why she should trouble her self to seek their peace. These being near
allied to those Horsemen (mentioned in the Rev. 9.17.
Apocalypse) out of whose mouth proceeded nothing, but Fire, and Smoke, and
Brimstone, The Church cannot well deal otherwise with them, then the Apostle
would have such Tit. 1.10.11.
unruly and vain Talkers, and Deceivers in his time dealt with; Whose mouths
must be stopped, who subvert whole houses, teaching things, which they ought
not, for filthy lucres sake.



viz. to require of all, a due Conformity to her Constitutions in the use of
this prescribed Liturgy, and the practice of such and such Rites; All that we
now have to do, is to examine, (not Her reasons of imposing, but) whether, and
how far we may, or ought to obey the imposition, whether we may lawfully, or
ought to use the public Forms, and suffer our selves to be tied up to them.



Liturgy, I dare be their Compurgatour, that they abhor the principles of
Faction, and Disobedience. Yet, Scandal given by then (...) the (...).
let me desire them seriously to enquire whether by their non-use, and
forbearance of this, they have not given too much occasion of offense, and a
various Scandal.

1. To the Church; In bringing an evil report upon her Discipline, and
Constitutions; upon her Worship, Scandal ^. To the Church.
and Public Offices. When men who are either strangers to her Laws and
Practice, or are not well able to judge of the Reasons of them, come to
understand what she requires of all Ministers, and in all public Assemblies;
that These are her Rites; These the Public Prayers; and yet that such and such
Faithful and Godly men use them not, dare not use them for fear of sin: What
will they judge? but surely such men will obey, were the things lawful to be
obeyed: or surely this Church binds her Members to very hard conditions, and
lays upon them very grievous burdens, when such Learned and Conscientious
men are not able to bear them. To them without.
2. To them without, to keep them from entering. Really it cannot well be
imagined, what a stumbling block before these is the Nonconformity, to the
legally established practices, as some one or more known or reputed godly
Ministers. We cannot imagine that strangers, who otherwise might be willing to
embrace the faith which we profess, and to enter Communion with us, should now
so readily do it; when they must needs be affrighted by our Divisions: either
concluding from our different practices, that we are of different Religions,
and so know not which to choose, judging of us, that we serve not one Christ,
when we cannot agree in one worship; or concluding the Laws and conditions of
our Communion to be much too hard and rigid for them to submit to, when such
eminent persons among our selves will not, and plead they cannot conform to
them. 3. To many tender and religions hearts within, to affright them from
obeying. To the weak and tender hearts within the Church.
Many that truly fear God, and the desire of whose souls is to serve him in
sincerity, and to attend upon his Ordinances and Worship daily: Yet when they
see Ministers (whom they highly reverence for their parts, and piety, and judge
some of the most able and conscientious in the land) to deny this form of
Worship, and rather lay down their Ministry, then submit to these Rites and
Liturgy, they are under a sad temptation to think, that surely some grievous
corruption sticks to our worship; some strange profanation is in our use of
these Ordinances; and then to judge it unlawful to come to our Assemblies, or
hear that Minister who reads the Common Prayer, or does any thing else, which
they see by others accounted unlawful. And thus they are in danger to lose
their share in those precious blessings which they might receive from God, by
his Word and Sacraments; where they might Isa. 66.11.
suck and be satisfied, and indeed find the breasts of true consolation, and
milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of the Churches glory. 4. To the
profane.
To the profane, and ungodly. When such men as are noted eminent, deny
obedience to authority; They will be apt to Despise Dominion, and speak evil
of Dignities: if sober men refuse the practice of the sacred Rites; Those will
blaspheme them. The Kneeling, Holy and Humble Adorations, and solemn singing,
shall be in the Profane mouths, Ducking, and Cringing, and Fidling, and
Fooling. Yea, if they, who bear the name of holy learned men do disobey the
Church in one thing; Those will think they may do it in another: if These may
disobey her constitutions; Those will think they may despise her Discipline,
Admonition, and Censures, and be as careless in the ordering of their lives,
as they see others in the matters of Order and worship. And when the Church
shall take account of these profane persons, for their neglect, and careless
contempt of the Ordinances of God, and their constant absence from those sacred
services, and public Religious duties, (though they care for neither, and
prefer their worldly profits, or loose carnal pleasures before them, yet) from
hence they have a word and plea put into their mouths; The Worship is corrupt,
your service abominable, good Christians cannot come to it; Take away your
Forms, or mend your Liturgy, and we will attend. 5. To Religion it self: And
the serious practice of Piety. To Religion and Piety.
When those who have a name of eminency for the strictest Christians, and the
holiest men, shall yet walk in ways that have an appearance of Schism and
Disobedience; How ready are profane men to impute those crimes to Piety it
self? And then no man shall sincerely set himself to promote the power of
Godliness, to rebuke open sins or enormities; exhorting to, and being himself
a pattern of a strict and holy life; but he shall be in their mouths a
Precisian, Factious, Schismatic, and what not? when, really, Religion and
Piety is the mother of no such brood; but the personal miscarriages and
indiscretions of some (otherwise pious,) men have administered too much occasion
of the Scandal. To the Schismatic, and Separatist.
6. To the proper Schismatic and Separatist; Justifying and confirming them in
their separations. When many of their principal arguments, against our Church
and Worship, have been taken from the practice and writings of some
nonconforming Brethren at home. I confess they have not been sufficient to
prove their Conclusion, That therefore they must separate from our Communion,
or, therefore they may not communicate in our Church Assemblies, which even the
sober nonconformists have often clearly refuted: yet it is too evident, that
the premises, some of them at least, have been taken from themselves, such as
concerning the nature of a particular visible Church, its Constitution,
Officers, extent of Power, etc. and Corruptions in Discipline, Worship, etc.
while the one pleads against Episcopacy, and the power of Bishops over a
Province, or Diocese; That there was no other particular Church in the
Scripture-times of larger extent, then one single Congregation, no such thing
as a Diocesan, yea, or a National Church; no higher Officer than the particular
Pastor of that Congregation; no degree in the Evangelical Ministry; no
subordination of one Pastor to another, etc. Have not the other justified, or
labored to justify their separation, by these very arguments end eavouring to
prove that we have no true Churches? yea, and have not the Independents made
the same plea against the Presbyterial way too, in their Classical, and
Provincial Government? When the one pleaded the Corruptions in the worship
prescribed, Innovations in the Rites established; Have not the other made use
of the same Plea, making the same corruptions a ground for their forsaking of
our Communion? These things are too too evident. 7. To the King and Nation.
Lastly, To the King and Nation, In bringing, or at least being an occasion of
an evil report upon both; for, when such Laws are established, such things
required, and yet so many, so noted, so eminent persons refuse to yield
obedience; and, it may be, others of more unquiet and turbulent Spirits, will
be too ready to raise Commotions about them: The King cannot in Justice and
Honor, but maintain his Laws; it cannot be expected, but the Penalty of the
Laws will be in some measure executed upon the Disobedient; now, especially if
many should disobey, and consequently suffer; what a noise will this make in
the world? and according to the different judgments, and humors of men that
hear it, how will it bring a reproach upon both? In some men's accounts, The
King shall be a Tyrant, not a Father to the Church; who makes such Laws, which
his conscientious Subjects cannot obey, for fear of sin against God, and are
yet punished for disobedience, even persecuted for Conscience sake. Among
others, when they see so many disobey, and be so unquiet under the Laws: The
whole Nation shall lie under the reproach of a troublesome, disquiet,
discontented, factious people, delighting still in Sedition and Rebellion; as
if they would indeed make good that Byword, that the King of England has such
a people to rule, as he may fitly be termed Rex Diabelorum. Pudet haec
opprobria nobis.
an offense, nor give any occasion of offense to any; to friend or foe; to the
righteous or ungodly; to Papist or Protestant; to weak or strong; to those
within or without the Church, 1 Cor. 10.32, 33.
Neither to Jew nor Greek, nor to the Church of God: Cordially seeking, not our
own profit, but the profit of many, that they may be saved.

CHAP. II. Some General, undoubted Maxims, concerning the Obligations of
Humane Laws, applied to the particular Case of the Liturgy, etc.
Peace sake.

Obligation of Laws upon conscience, and applying these to the particular case
of the Liturgy, we shall see how really little the matter of difference is, and
labor to remove that, that there may be a perfect conformity so far as the
Laws oblige.

by all sides. That our First, Great and Principal Obligation is to Law, and
Will of God: So that whatsoever we are to do in this or any others case, must
not be repugnant to this, viz. it must be in it self lawful, Not evil, or
sinful in the matter of it, for we are engaged to God in an higher Obligation
than we can be to any Laws of men whatsoever. And in case of a thing materially
evil, this must be our rule: Acts 5.29.
That we obey God rather then men. We must not be scrupulous to refuse an
active obedience to the Laws of men (who have no power but by Commission from,
and subordination to God) when in obeying them, we should manifestly sin
against the eternal God; who is the only Jam. 4.12.
Supreme Lawgiver, and who is able to save and to destroy Mat. 10.28.
both soul and body. In this case those two Apostles, Peter and John, Act. 4.19.
appealing to the Consciences of their very Persecutors.

that the things which we do, must not only be lawful in themselves, but
expedient also in reference to the several circumstances, and accidents that
may occur; for many things may be in themselves lawful to be done, there
being no evil in the matter of them, which yet upon the several emergencies,
and from the circumstances of Time, Place, Persons, Scandal, he may neither be
convenient, nor expedient, but the contrary; and so during these emergencies,
they become, at least accidentally, for those persons at such times unlawfully
to be done; as it is evident in the case of meats offered to Idols. 1 Cor.
10.25.31.
Whatsoever was sold in the Shambles, a man might buy, and eat, though it was
probable some of it had been offered to Idols, it yet was nothing to him, who
knew the 1 Cor. 8.4.
Idol was nothing, nor the meat offered to Idols in that regard of any esteem
with him, but he eats and gives God thanks. But in case of Scandal, v. 7, 8,
9, 10.
all having not the same knowledge, where another might be offended, or
encouraged by such an example to eat in Conscience to the Idol; He should sin,
who would not abridge himself of his own lawful liberty for the profit of the
weak: Here the Apostles Rule is, 1 Cor. 10.23, 24.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient; Let no man
seek his own, but every man another welfare.

3. It is as fully agreed, That, When a thing appears to be a duty, it is then,
not only lawful, but, necessary; and it must supersede all dispute about the
near lawfulness or expediency: such a thing now, not only may, but must be
door. Here we are not to make scruples, or examine whether it be fit to be
done, because, if a Duty, it cannot be omitted without sin. And without
question, a (...) once supposed^ D^^y, is by the same supposed lawful,
expedient, yea necessary: and no imagined expedience may super^^de a necessary
duty.

a Law made by a Lawful (thougl. H^m^^) A^^^ority ^^yeth an Obligation upon the
Conscience. The Obe^ (...) a thing indifferent; but in Conscience we are bold
to yield it, and if we refuse it, we are under the guilt, not only of the
breach of an Humane Law, but of sin against God, wh^ gave the Prove. 8.15.16.
power to the Law makers, and whose Romans 13.1.2.5.
ordinance is despised in the contempt of those laws. The powers have their
authority from God, They are ordained of God; therefore to resist, or disobey
them, is to resist and disobey God; and the end is Damnation; the proper Romans
6.21, 23.
fruit, and end of sin; and Therefore ye must needs be subject, not only for
wrath; the fear of anger, or punishment by those in Authority: but for
Conscience sake; as obliged in Conscience to a duty which God requires.

5. It is also (I thin^) unquestionable among all knowing and considering men,
That (though no powers can oblige a Subject by any Law, to what is materially
evil, Conscience being primarily bound Nulla^st necessitas ^^^inquendi q^ibas
una est necessitas n^n delinquendi.
not to sin by the Law of him, who is God and Lord of all, yet) A just
authority commanding that, which was before a duty, a new Obligation is laid
upon the Conscience by this command of men, added to the command of God, so
that Conscience is now tied in a double bond; even from God and Man; and to
disobey now, would be a double sin; yea farther.

A just Authority commanding, or forbidding that, which was before, lawful,
either to be done or forborne, brings now an Obligation upon the Conscience of
the Subject, which was not obliged before; so far, that what I might lawfully
do, without sin; now when commanded, I am bound to do it, and sin, by the
breach of an obliging law, if I do it not: and what I might lawfully forbear
before, now, when forbidden, I not only may, but must forbear, and conscience
is obliged in sin, if I forbear it not. e. g. Christians are undoubtedly bound
to acts of Public and solemn worship of God; suppose particularly, on the
Lords day: and it being perfectly indifferent, at what hour of the day their
public meetings shall be, it being beyond dispute, that they may lawfully
assemble at any hour: but they being once by authority of Church or State
determined to such an hour, by that command they are bound to assemble at the
time appointed: it being a circumstance on all hands confessed, where they may
command, and we may obey, Again, to Fast, and humble our selves before the
Lord, upon occasion of our provoking sins, or the presence, or sear of some
heavy judgments, to implore pardon for the one, and the removing or preventing
of the other, is, without question, a duty upon us by the law of God: and so it
is also to meet for public Praise and Thanksgiving: but the partic lar days
and times are confessedly indifferent; and none that I know, ever doubted the
power of humane authority to determine them: and having so determined, we are
obliged to observe them. Even those, who yet scruple the religious observation
of the constant Fasts, and Feasts prescribed in this Church, such as the Lent
Fast, Ember weeks, Vigils, and the observation of Saints days; and the
particular solemnities of Christ's Birth, Resurrection, and Ascension, etc. yet
grant in Thesi this to be true, That it is in the power of the Magistrate to
appoint days either of Fasting or Thanksgiving, and that his law obliges the
Subject to observe them accordingly: which is an infallible evidence, that in
things thus purely indifferent, the law of a just Authority obliges, where
before we were not obliged. And those Reverend Divines commissioned by his
Majesty to treat about the Alteration of the Liturgy, making not this an
exception against the Ceremonies imposed, That because they are in themselves
indifferent, a law is not to be made concerning them; or if made, that we are
not obliged: but only this, they desire such a law not to be made, because,
though they be indifferent in the judgment of the imposers, yet they are not
so in the judgment of the opposers, but held by some of them to be sinful and
unlawful in themselves, and by others very inconvenient, and unsuitable to the
simplicity of the Gospel. Which assures me, that were they in their judgments
lawful to be observed, the command, would not be a plea why they should not be
observed. I might give several other instances of such indifferencies. It is
without doubt lawful in it self to eat Fish or Flesh at any time, but when upon
just reasons, or prudential motives, a just authority shall command an
abstinence from Flesh for such a season, we are for that season obliged to
forbear it, so far as we are really able, unless we have a dispensation by the
same authority that made the law. And indeed it concerns not Subjects to
enquire the reasons why the law is made; but whether the thing be lawful, the
matter of that law be not evil; and when it was lawful before, it becomes a
duty now. For the laws of a just authority come in Prove. 8.15. Romans 13.1, 6.
the Power of God, and it is a duty to be subject for conscience sake, (as
before was showed:) and therefore to deny to do that which is commanded, when
it is commanded, or because it is commanded, is an high contempt of the
ordinance of God, a sin of an high nature before God.

That where a law made by such authority requires our active obedience, ( i.
e. to do, or not do, such a thing) and lays a penalty on those who observe it
not; the conscience is obliged to the duty, and it is not sufficient to submit
to the penalty; because the law engages to the Fenalty only secondarily, and
accidentally, upon men's failures; but obliges conscience primarily and
intentionally to the duty required. The sanction or penalty being added to
preserve the honor and authority of the law, that it may not be contemned;
that when men do not, or will not for conscience obey, they may by the terror
of the punishment be kept from disobeying. And though by submitting to this
punishment ordained by the law to those who break it, they may have satisfied
the Courts of men, yet in this case they are not cleared from sin, or guilt
before God; because they were obliged actually to do the duty of the law, not
only for wrath, but for conscience sake. The Murderer, Thief, Felon, is hanged,
the Traitor executed; thus the law of man is satisfied, as to the penalty, but
the guilt of sin upon the conscience is not cleared, nor the man, with God,
innocent.

That, though a law may not be so good as we could wish, or as indeed it should
be; yet if the matter of it be not evil, a sin forbidden by God, we are bound
in conscience to obey it. It is not strange in the world, wherein the best men
are not perfect, to see imperfections in the best laws; and some laws made,
which are not so good, or convenient, as they might be; because they are like
the men that made them, imperfect at the best: yet when they are not evil, no
sin in the matter enjoined, they oblige the conscience to conform to them. It
may be possible that we may be able to devise a better law, yet God never made
particular Subjects judges of what is fit or not fit to be enacted for a law to
the Community; nor ever gave us power to prescribe a law to our selves, nor
will he acquit us from sin, in disobeying a law which is not evil, upon our
imaginations that it might be better. For we are bound to be Romans 13.5.
subject, and to 1 Pet. 2.14.
submit, as patiently submitting to the Powers punishing us, without rebellion
or murmuring: so especially readily doing, what they command us, in what we
can, and may lawfully do; Tit. 2.9.
(...), without disputing or gainsaying. When I say (lawfully do) I mean still,
the matter not being evil: for there may be somewhat in the Form, or other
circumstances of the law, which may denominate that an evil law, and yet the
subjects bound to obey that law, though not unto evil.

That, though the making of such a law may be a sin in the lawmakers, yet when
that law is made, if it command not sin, it is to be obeyed by the subject. e.
g. if a law be made rashly, without that serious consideration of the
necessities, expediencies, and benefit of the people for whom it is made, this
is sinful in the lawmakers, who is bound to use all care, circumspection, and
prudence, and advice, that is possible conveniently to be had; again if a law
do too much disproportion the offenses and penalties, laying on a grievous and
heavy censure, or capital punishment upon a light or trivial offense
(supposing no ill consequences likely to ensue of an higher nature, for this
alters the case much, and makes the offense great in the circumstances, which
is inconsiderable in the particular matter) or inflicting only a slight
inconsiderable censure on an hain^us transgression, or capital crime; This
would be an evil, because unequal and unjust law: but it is evil only in the
form of it; and notwithstanding this does still oblige the subject to
obedience; because the matter enjoined is not evil, but may be done; and the
offenses punished, are really offenses, and may not be done. The formal
injustice in the law, in the disproportioning of the penalties, is only the sin
of the lawmakers, and he alone shall answer it, and that only to the Lord above
him: It is the matter only which concerns the Subject; And the sin of the
lawgiver can be no plea to justify the subject in the breach of the Law, when
it is once made, and given for a Law.

Scripture and Reason, that all sober Christians (I think) and all Protestant
Divines, that I know, do agree in them; even those, who yet scruple in the
particular case of the Common Prayer, and Rites of the Church of England, will,
I presume, subscribe to these general things of the Obligation of Laws, made by
a just Authority, upon the Conscience: And I am confident, were these things
duly considered, and seriously weighed, there would be much more peace and
charity in the Church, even among, and with those, whose judgments do dissent
about some particular practices of, and laws in the Church.

prescribed Liturgy, and the Rites therein ordained.

1. There is (we all know) a Law establishing this made by unquestionable
authority: An Act of Parliament, legally summoned, legally chosen, justly
constituted, confirmed by the Royal assent, whose only stamp and fiat, gives
Laws their being. and makes them perfect Acts, valid and obliging.

actual use of this Book, of all Ministers, upon very severe penalties. Now
though the penalties have their proper use, for that purpose to which they are
ordained, viz. to preserve the Law from contempt of men, to preserve the peace
of the Church, which might otherwise be violated by some, who make no
Conscience of the duty enjoined; and to prevail with some spirits, to do that,
which otherwise they would not do; The fear of wrath being one motive, though
not the only one; and though not the principal, but of an inferior and lower,
yet not of no consideration. Yet the Conscience of duty is the principal thing
that should in this case oblige our conformity. For being convinced, and
agreeing upon the fore named principles, that the Laws of a just Authority do
oblige us in Conscience to yield actual Obedience, so that it is not
indifferent whether we obey or no: we must also be convinced, that we are bound
to obey this Law, nor can be excused of sin if we do not: supposing in this we
should not break our higher Obligation to the Law of God.



It enjoyneth all Ministers in the Church of England to us^ this form of
Confession, Prayer, Praises, and Administration of Sacraments, and the Rites
therein prescribed, in all the administrations of the public worship of God.
Now there is no imaginable reason, why any should refuse conformity to this
Law, but what may be referred to one of these two heads; The unlawfulness, or
the inexpediency (not of the constitution, but) of the practice, And if I
satisfy these two, that it is neither unlawful nor inexpedient, I am sure I
shall do enough to justify, yea (considering the Law upon us) to prove the
necessity of this practice to any rational man.

CHAP. III. The Liturgy examined, and 1. That a prescribed form is not
unlawful, proved.
lawfulness of the use of this Liturgy, for this is the main, and this being
cleared, the matter of expediency, (considering the Law requiring it) will soon
be resolved. Here then our enquiry is, whether there be any thing in this form,
which is in it self evil, or that may not be used without sin.

must do so, in regard of the Law, that enjoins it. In this case, therefore,
for the satisfying of my self and others, (for we are not to obey as brutes,
but as rational Creatures, who are to know what, and to give a reason why they
obey) it is not proper for us to enquire whether it be well imposed; but being
imposed, whether may we lawfully use it? Not, whether it were just or fit to
make such a Law; for of this we are not the Judges: but the Law being made, how
far are we bound to obey it? and this is our proper work.

whether our Superiors may justly enjoin this service, and require this use of
the Liturgy upon such severe penalties; The Question truly stated as to our
practice.
though I judge they may, yet for me, let every one abound in his own sense so
as he publish nothing of it to disturb the peace of the Church, or raise in men
an evil opinion of their governors: Negatively.
nor suffering their own hearts to despise, or have a grudge against, or ill
thoughts of their Rulers, or their Authority, God having unquestionably bound
all, by his most righteous Law, Exed. 22 28. Acts 23.5.
not to revile the Gods, or speak evil of the Judges and Rulers, who are as
Gods: and this Law forbidding not only reproach and calumny by the tongue; but
the iniquity of the Eccl. 10.20.
thoughts also. The same (...)
word is used both in Moses and Solomon, and signifies not only open railing or
blaspheming, but in the primary and first Notion, any, vilifying, contemning,
or slighting; we may not openly rail on them, like those impure Sectaries, who
Jude 8.
despise Dominion, and blaspheme Dignities; nor privily detract from them: nor
in our thoughts contemn, or slightly regard them; for they are Psalm. 82.6.
Gods, and to be reverenced, as well as obeyed: Their names, and honors are
sacred, as well as their persons.

whether, and how far are we bound to obey it? or thus, whether might these
prayers, and rites, Positively. And the Affirmation pro^ed.
have been lawfully used by us, had they not been commanded; and so now, this
use become a duty, being commanded? for I take this to be undoubtedly true,
that what is lawful in it self, becomes a duty, when enjoined, even according
to the principles of those Brethren who have declared, Due account, etc. to His
Majesty, p. 4.
That it is the desire of their souls to contribute their parts and interests
to the utmost, for the promoting of Holiness, Unity, and OBEDIENCE to Rulers
in all LAWFVL things. And I am fully satisfied in the former, that it had been
no sin to use them, considered simply in themselves, had they not been
enjoined; and therefore must conclude it now a duty to use them, and a sin not
to use them being enjoined, during the standing of that Law which enjoins them.

if it lawfully may be done, then in obedience to a law it must be done; for I
have purposely waved here the term of indifferent, which has occasioned so
much dispute, and men have not agreed upon the meaning of the word; some would
have that to be indifferent which is a middle, between lawful and unlawful,
absurdly enough, when these, lawful and unlawful, are such as (...), they have
no middle between them, all things that can be done must be one or the other.
Others, not so irrationally, yet not very clearly, account that indifferent,
which stands equally related to good and evil, and neither one or the other: when
it will be hard to find any one thing in matter of action, which is not clothed
with such circumstances as will denominate it either good or evil: and the
truth is, I judge nothing to be indifferent to be done or forborne (for of such
things we speak) which has not some measure of goodness in it, for I am sure
no evil can be so, it must be forborne, it may not be done, but there are many
good things, which either may be done, or may be forborne at some times and
places; and this is properly indifferent; and what may be done, must be good,
so far as it may be done. I take therefore an indifferent thing to be that
which stands equally opposed, or related to a necessary duty, and to a sin;
such as we are not necessarily obliged to do; nor sin if we do it not: but, for
any thing in it self, we may lawfully either do it, or forbear it. Now a Law
coming, and determining us either way, though there be an indifferency in the
nature of the thing; yet there is no indifferency in our obedience to a Law.
And really if we acknowledge the thing required to be lawful, we cannot deny,
but, we may lawfully obey; and if we obey not, where we lawfully may, neither
God nor man will acquit us from the guilt of resisting an Ordinance of God, as
well as the Commands of Men.

whether this Liturgy, or these Rites prescribed may without sin, or lawfully
be used? I am clearly satisfied in the affirmative that they may; and that,
which satisfies me, I hope may have the same force to satisfy others, when
the argument is produced, and the evidence of truth appears. I shall here only
speak to the Liturgy, and public forms of prayer, etc. and if these papers
find acceptance, I shall communicate the like, about the Rites and Ceremonies.

Liturgy, then, binding to the form of words in prayers, praises and
administration of Sacraments, and the other holy offices, I shall only desire
the conscientious Reader to weigh this one argument.

If it be unlawful to conform to the law in the use of this Liturgy, then, it
is either because it is a form prescribed; or because there is something in the
matter, which makes this particular form to be unlawful, though other forms
should not be so.

But, neither is it unlawful, because a form, nor is there any thing in the
matter of it, to make this particular so.

Therefore, upon no account is it unlawful to use it.

proposition, is most evident, for if it be neither unlawful to use a
prescribed form: nor there be any matter in this form, to make this unlawful; I
see not what shadow of any thing else can be objected against the lawful use of
this. And under one of these heads has all been comprehended, that has ever
been objected. The Separatist boldly denies the lawfulness of any form: the
soberer Nonconformist will allow a form, but only some things in the matter of
this are scrupled.

The Assumption, I shall labor to clear, in both the branches.

illiterate Souls; but, upon those many able Divines, famous Preachers, holy
Confessors, glorious Martyrs, who for many years and ages constantly used the
prescribed forms of the Church in their public Ministrations? Must all these
be condemned as such who worship God in an unlawful way? yea, must all the
Christian Churches of the world, for many Centuries, be condemned, as so
careless of Christianity, and Religion, that the very substantial acts of
their public worship were offered in an unlawful way? O my Soul, come not thou
into the secrets of the men, who thus judge.

Scriptures we find Forms given, used, prescribed; and were all these unlawful?
That was a form which Moses used, not once, but constantly, Number. 10.35.36
at the removing and resting of the Ark: which Solomon also made use of, almost
in the 2 Ch^. 6.41.
same words, at the Dedication of the temple: And David, Psalm. 68.1.
at the bringing of the Ark into the City of David. In the same Scripture we
find forms, for constant set times, and occasions; there we have one Psalm. 30.
Psalm, a solemn Form of praise at the dedication of the house of David, Deuteronomy.
20.5.
according to the law. Another, Psalm. 92.
a Psalm for the Sabbeth day: another, a solemn form of praise, made by David
to be used by the Psalm. 136. with 2 Chronicles. 7.6. and 20, 21.
Levites, and the singers with instruments of music: another, a Psalm. 105.
with 1 Chronicles. 16.7, 8.
form of praise, as composed for the Quire: several forms of prayer to be used
in Psalm. 86.22.102.
affliction: one, penned Psalm. 90. vide Mo^ler. in lac.
by Moses for a prayer, upon occasion of Isreal's suffering in the Wilderness,
to lie by them, to admonish them of their weakness, mortality, and sin, and to
direct them in their addresses to God: one, Psalm. 95.
more then probably seeming to be written, not for private use, but appointed
for Apparet ex verbo (...) venite, Psalmum hunc non in privatum usum scriptum,
sed publicis convintibus destinatum fuisse, quando populus frequens ad templum
conveniebat, ut in Sabbato: ita enim populum alloquitur, ut jubeat omnes
concurrere ad hoc sanctum opus per agendum. Moller. in Psalm. 95. etc. Apparet
hunc Psalmum Ecclesiasticae congregationi, praesertim frequentiori destinatum,
quasi erat apud Judaeos die Subbati: Muscul. in eundem.
the public assembly, when people come to worship at the Temple: which our
Church does therefore use in the beginning of her sacred Offices, viz. the
venite, etc. Come let us sing, etc. Were not the Levites in Hezekiahs time 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
commanded to sing praises with the words of David and Asaph the seer? And the
Priests and Levites in Ezra's time Ezr. 3.10.11.
set by the builders, to praise the Lord, according to the Ordinance of David;
and they sand together by course, (or quire-wise) what? even in that form of
Psalm. 136. For his mercy endures for ever. Do we not find the people stirred
up to pray in time of affliction, and H^s 14.2, 3.
words put into their mouths? yea, the Priests, and Ministers of the Altar to
pray in a form too, and say, Joel 2.17.
spare thy people, etc. what is that in Isaiah, Isa. 12.1.4.
but a form to the Church; In that day shall thou say, O Lord I will praise
thee, etc. and, In that day shall ye say, Praise ye the Lord, etc. what else
can we judge of that Rev 15.3.
song of Moses mentioned in the Apocalypse, which the victorious Christians are
said to sing. To omit, in the New Testament, those many forms of Romans 1.7. 1
Cor. 1.3. 2 Cor. 1.2. Gal 1.3. Ephesians. 1.2. 1 These. 1.1. 2 These. 1.2.
salutations, Eom. 16.24. 1 Cor. 16.23. Phil. 4.23. 1 These. 5.28. 2 These. 3.18.
valedictions, and blessings, so frequently used by the Apostles, which none
ever doubted, but we may lawfully use still: as the Church does use that very
form of words in Baptism which Christ used in the Commission; I Baptize in the
name, etc. yea, Christ himself we find using that very form of words which
David the Type had used before, Eli, Eli, lamasabachthani: Mat. 27.46. Psalm. 22
1. See on this Argument Synops^urior. Theol. Disp. 36. These. 33.
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me.

form for all, That, which our Lord has given us in his prayer, which he
taught his Disciples; which the Church has not only accounted, but constantly
used as a form; and thought fit to give the first, and the greatest place in
her Liturgies. The first, as a guide to the rest. This the ancient Church
called legitimam, and ordinariam orationem. Premissa ^egitima et ordinaria
orati^e, quasi fundamento; accidentium jus est desideriorum, jus est
saperstruen di extrinsecus petitiones. Tertul lib. de Orat. cap 1.
The lawful, (as being the prayer, which Christ's own law, has tied the Church
to use in his own words: and as being given for the law, and rule of our
prayers) and the ordinary prayer, constantly used in all parts of the Christian
world: And this being first premised, they then did add other desires, and
build upon it their other requests: other, not for substance, but only more
largely and explicitly expressed. The greatest place; as a necessary supplement,
to supply, whatsoever is wanting in ours: we come to God with boldness for
Pardon and Mercy, when we come both in Met. 18.20. Joh 14.13, 14.
the name, and the Agneseit pater si il sui ver ba cum preces fundimas.
Cygrian. seim. de orat. dom.
words of Christ: and therefore the Church has used this also, in the last
place, at the end of her sacred actions, Durand. Rational^d vin. effic. l. 5.
c. 5. Sect. 17.
tanquam sal omnium Divinorum officiorum, (as one fitly calls it) as the salt
that Seasons all her religious and sacred offices, And as the ancient, so the
Coronidis vice omnibus orationibus oration dominica adjicienda, quae omnium
rerum petendarum epitome a Cypriano recte appellatur Herisbach. Orandi Formula.
Christian Churches of later days have all, and do still use it; neither shall
we find one Liturgy where it is not. In the French Churches four times during
the meeting at one Assembly.

viz. he gave it at two several times, upon distinct occasions, in a different
manner. In one place, we find him in a Sermon preaching, and reproving the
Hypocrisy of the Pharisees, in their long Prayers, for ostentation, in open
places, to be seen, their vain Tautologies, etc. There he gives the Doctrine of
prayer, and teaches them by a pattern, that their prayers be like this, brief,
full, significant, and to this purpose, and in such order. (...).
Pray ye (says he, not as the Pharisees, but) after this manner. But in St.
Luke, we find another story: The Disciples came with a Petition, Luk 11.1.
Lord teach us to pray, as John taught his -- it is Calvin's judgment, upon
that place, and not his alone; that St. John, as the exigency of those times
required (which were so corrupt among the Jews, that all Religion seemed to be
collapsed, scarce any one true and sound form of worship and prayer among them)
did give unto his Disciples a form of prayer, probably collected out of several
Scriptures, that might agree to those times and expectations, and the spiritual
Reign of the Messiah, whose coming, according to the Prophesies that were of
old, they then expected. Christ's Disciples now come and make such a request to
him, that he would give them such a form, as John gave to his; in answer
whereunto he gives them this, and delivers it to them in this expression, Luke
11.2. (...).
when ye pray, say, Our Father, etc. it is given as a pattern, in the Sermon
upon the Mount: it is delivered as a Form, upon the Disciples request. So that
as some weights and measures are to be rules to others, yet are they themselves
to be used as such also: so is this Prayer both a pattern to direct, and a form
to be used: the foundation of our Prayers, the Prayer of prayers, the Rule (as
Calvin calls it) the law of Prayer, and the Breviary of the Gospel (as
Tertullian.)

Scriptures giving us a Record of so many Forms; Moses, David, Asaph composing
such; Hezekiah commanding the use of them; The Priests, Levites, People of the
Old, the Apostles of the New Testament, yea Christ himself using such, and
giving one to us: Can we think of any, or without blasphemy say so of all, that
they sinned, or did unlawfully either in the one, or other; either in framing,
using or commanding them? (...).

That these are all (...), by divine inspiration; Moses having a Commission
from God, for what he appointed in the house of God; and other holy penmen had
an infallible conduct; which since, now, no men can plead unto, we may no more
observe the Forms of men, then we may suppose, they may make another
Scripture, or receive them if they should.

It is altogether frivolous; for,

Form in general. Should we argue the necessity of one of ours, from the use
of another in Scripture, this were a clear non sequitur, for the infallible
inspiration of the one, would show a difference enough to convince the
illogical inference of the other; but from the composing and using Forms then,
we prove the lawfulness of such still; and that our practice cannot be sinful
in such things wherein the Holy ones in Scripture have commendably gone before
us: where by the way, it is not the absolute necessity, but the lawfulness,
that we plead. And when God is pleased to give a Form for direction, and we see
those Scripture Forms have been lawfully used: yet not so determined by God,
but we are left at liberty to use them or not; we conclude, that no one Form
(as such) except the Lords Prayer, is absolutely more lawful then another; and
that any one, which is sound and grave, and agreeable to the Holy Canon, is
free to the Church to be used, as well as those very forms in Scripture; which
indeed do warrant any other, that shall in substance agree with, though in
words they differ from them.

Forms in Scripture were by infallible inspiration, yet the application of
those particulars to this or that purpose, was not by extraordinary motion of
the Spirit; but upon grounds common to us with them, in analogical cases, and
on like occasions. 2 Chronicles. 29.30.
Hezekiab did not compose the Form, but commanded them to use that which was
already composed. Nor can I see, why upon a like occasion we may not use the
same words, or others devised to the same purpose, to express the thoughts and
affections of our souls, as no doubt he might have done. And the same warrant,
that we have for singing David's Psalms in Meeter, or in any Translation; yea
for the using of a set Translation of the Scripture, or composing Catechismes,
or collecting matters for Instruction, Exhortation, Rebuke, or Comfort, etc.
from the practice of the people of God; we have also, from the like practice in
these cases.

[That these were not prescribed: so as though it might be lawful to use them
at our own choice and liberty, yet not to be enjoined them, nor may we submit
to an enjoined Form.]

Hezekiah not only commanding their duty to sing praises, -- but enjoynes them
a Form also: In the words of David, and Asaph the Seer, -- But,

Forms being lawful, the former maxims prove, that the prescribing them by a
just authority, is so far from making them unlawful to be used, that it makes
the use of them a Duty. And indeed let reason judge; Is the Form good, sound,
grave? does the injunction make it bad or unsound? may we pray, bless, give
thanks, etc. in such words at our own choice? and may we not use the same words
when we are commanded? were they good before, and are they evil now? The
commands of men do indeed take off the indifferency of an action, so far as pro
Hic and Nunc, to determine us, where we were before at liberty: but I could
never hear, that the command of that which is lawful, should change the nature
of it, and make it sin: so as what is lawful now for us to do, shall be
unlawful when enjoined. So that notwithstanding all this, it stands undoubtedly
true, That to use a prescribed Form is not unlawful: and consequently this
cannot make the use of our Liturgy unlawful, that it is such a Form.

I need not enlarge in this particular, which is not much gainsaid: and even
those, who scruple this particular, do yet acknowledge the usefulness and
expediency of a Form in the Public Ministrations. But by the way,

Forms in the Jewish Church. This I am sure of, The Jews are acknowledged to
have had some Forms in their sacred offices: for though we find not any whole
Liturgy of theirs, which was used in their Synagogues, and public assemblies;
yet that such they had is more then probable; for I never yet met with any, who
had reason to question the truth of that, which is by learned men observed of
the Form, which they used at the Celebration of the Passover; our Savior
himself in his practice conforming thereunto. This (say the Bez. in Matt.
26.20. ex Iosepho de bello Judaic. l. 6. c. 3. Paul Burgens. in Psalm 112. Ios.
Scalig. de emend. Temp. l. 6.
learned) was the Form they used from the time they entered into Canaan. They
were to eat the Lamb in private families, where were to be no less then ten,
no more than twenty persons: They washed their feet, then lay down to eat the
whole Lamb with unleavened bread: then rose, and washed again, and lay down to
the Table to the Post-coenium, the After Supper, where they had their
unleavened bread, and sallets of sour herbs in a dish. Then the Master of the
feast first dividing the bread, blessed it in this form, Benedictus es Domine
Deus noster, Rex universi, in esu panis arymi.
Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of all the world, in the eating of this
unleavened bread. The bread thus broken, they kept one part, and divided the
other among all the persons there, who did eat the Passcover, in this form of
words; Iste est panis aerumnae, quem comederunt majores nostri in terra
Aegypti; quisquis esurit, accedat et paschatiret; et cui opus est, nccedat et
paschariret.
This is the bread of affliction, which our Fathers did eat in the land of
Egypt, whosoever hungreth, let him come and eat the Passover, and whosoever
has need, let him come and eat the Passover. This done, He took the cup and
blessed it, in this form, Benedictus es Dmine, qui fructum vitis creasti
Blessed art thou, O Lord, who have created the fruit of the vine: and of this
he drank, and then it went round about the Table. [This cup was called the (...)
cup of blessing, to which the Psalm. 116.13.
Psalmist alludes, I will take the cup of (...)
salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord: and in reference whereunto the
Apostle calls the Poculum Eucharisticum in the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 10.16.
(...).
the Cup of Blessing.] At which time was sung that Solemn Hymn, which they
called the Great Hallelujah, which was the 113 Psalm, with the 5 following:
thus did the Jews. This form, manner, and rites, that Christ himself did use,
those passages of the Sacred History do discover: viz. Matthew. 26 23
Judas dipping his hand in the dish, and Christ Joh. 13.26.
giving him the sop: the beloved Disciple Joh. 13.23.
lying in Jesus bosom: Christ Job. 13.4.
rising from the table to wash his Disciples feet: then again Joh. 13.12.
lying down: and Mark 14.26.
singing the Hymn: these things were not usual at every ordinary eating. It is
therefore observed, that Christ did not wholly institute any New Rite in the
Church, but what was before in the Jewish Church, he took and applied to a new
use, end, and signification. They had Baptism, as in their several washings,
so in the solemn admission of a Proselite into the Church: the Jews did not
therefore quarrel with John for bringing in a new practice, but only asked his
Mark 1.4. with Joh. 1.25.
Authority to baptize. What was with them thus an initiation, Christ in his
Church made Sacramental. The Eucharist was not simply new neither: for, they
had at their solemn Feasts, their Post-coenia, and in those a Commemoration of
the Blessings at those Feasts celebrated; as at the Passover, the Deliverance
from Egypt: at their Pentecost, the Delivery of the Law: at the Feast of
Tabernacles, their Travels in the wilderness, etc. the proper blessings
remembered in those Feasts. Christ takes up this practice, continues this
post-coenium: and only adds a new signification, and the Commemoration of his
Death and Passion, who indeed is the proper (...). 1 Cor. 5.7.
Paschal Lamb; and the Joh. 1.29.
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world.

2. Forms in the Ancient Christian Church. As the Jews, so the Christian
Church had their Liturgies and public Forms too. Thus much we find
acknowledged even by the learned Non-conformists, that Ball, Trial of grounds
of Separat. answ. to obj. 8. c. 5.
whatsoever may be thought of the two first ages: yet for the space of 1400
years the Churches have had their stinted Liturgies: There we ibid. c. 4.
answ. to object. 8.
find Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, Augustine, all acknowledged to allow, some
to have devised, and composed such Forms: There we read of ibid. c. 7. Arg. 6.
Petrus Diaconus, and others, sent from the East to Rome, in their book to
Fulgentius and other Bishops of Africa, rehearsing a Prayer of Basils Liturgy,
which they say, almost the whole East frequented: There we are told ibid ex
Clem. l. 8. Constit. Apost. cap. 16.
the Sursum Corda, lift up your he arts, and the peoples answer, We lift them
up to the Lord, were anciently in use, if not even from the Apostles times. And
though diverse passages speak those Liturgies under the name of Basil,
Chrysostom, etc. to be of a later date, yet that diverse things in them were of
ancient use in the Church: and that such particular Actions, Passages, and
Rites, as the Deacons ibid. c. 7. answ. to obj. 3.
Oremus, Attendamus, Let us pray, Let us attend, etc. and then the Reader
beginning, etc. do argue that there was some public Liturgy, Forms, and Rites
in those early days. And now, having for the necessity of our obedience, the
command of the Church and State we live in, for the warrant of our practice,
the Word of God, and example of the Saints, the Church in the Primitive times,
among whom we find the footsteps of several Liturgies, with many of the same
particulars as in ours, (of which more hereafter) for which we might preduce a
cloud of witnesses; I can see no reason why it should be a sin in us, more than
in them to observe such a practice.

Forms in the Reformed Churches. Nor is a Form strange to, but approved, and
used in the Reformed Churches in these later days. The Bohemian, which I
reckon the first; the French, Dutch, Geneva, these three Presbyterial, have
one. It would be long to site particular testimonies; this one. Mr. Ball will
be instar omnium, who not only Ball, ibid. c. 5. answ. to obj. 7.
does acknowledge it, but makes it his plea, as a thing notoriously known, even
to the Separatists. They (those Separatists) know (says he) ibid. c. 6. answ.
to obj. 5.
that all the Reformed Churches, since the light of the Gospel began to shine
forth unto the world, until this day do allow, and maintain the use of a
stinted form, etc. Further, if any man Ibid. cap 7. answ. 10 cbj 8.
(says he) desire an instance of their doings, let him compare the Prayer
which Zepper. de polit. eccles l. 2. c. 4.
Beza constantly used before, Calvin, opuse. P. ec. Eccles. formulae. Bez in
Cant. Hom. 1.
and after Sermon, with the Geneva book of Common Prayer; so that here we find
the practice even of Geneva it self.

Obj. If any object, these were not exacted of all Ministers at all times, nor
imposed, but every one left free to use them, or any other the like.

Answ. 1. I might return, what Ball. Ibid.
Mr. Ball does; suppose this true, (which yet will not be fully proved) yet
this proves, they did both use and allow such a practice, though they enacted
it not: but,

Scotland first, then this of England, writing after their Copy (if that may be
called the act of the Church, which indeed was not, but the actings of some men
in it, and who had no legal call to do it: and I am not alone, but many other
truly Religious Spirits are of the same mind. I shall give instance of one, in
this case beyond exception; it was that well known, well approved, much
respected Mr. Jam's Cranford the elder, He in discourse sometime with me in
Tunbridge, while he lay here, upon the account of health to drink our waters,
did tell me his manner of laying down the use of our Common Prayer. That he
used it as long as any, who were suffered to enjoy their livings; and when he
laid it by, having first vindicated it from the exceptions laid against it, he
declared, That he would not have laid it down, had not he been forced by the
fury of a faction, and if ever it should please God to give the liberty to use
it again, he would take it up with much more readiness and joy then he laid it
down. These were his expressions, as near as I can remember, in his own words,
I am sure, not at all varying from the sense of what he then spoke; but this by
the way, to show, that this was not the act of the Church, but however) England
and Scotland were the only ones that ever I read of any settled Church, who
threw out an established settled Liturgy, and owned none. For the other reformed
Churches, whether they imposed their forms or no, it is certain, they did both
use, and allow the use of them.

Romish Superstitions. In the Church of Geneva we have these two, Calvin, and
Beza, the passages cited before, prove their judgments to have allowed them:
and Calvin we find not only for the use, but for the binding of the several
Ministers to the use of them. His words are Quod ad formulam precum -- valde
probo, utilla c^ta exstet, a qua pastoribus dis edere in functione non liceat.
Calv. Ep. 87.
As for a form of Prayers -- I do very much approve of it, that it be one,
certain, fixed, stated form, from which it may not be lawful for the pastors in
in their function to depart; for our own, even non-conformists; One shall give
testimony for all Ball Trial of grounds of separat. c 7. ansar. to obj. 8.
The Ministers to whom the use of the Common Prayer has been thought most
burdensome, have from time to time expressed their liking and approbation of a
stinted Liturgy; that they like well enough of that council, which forbad
vulgar Psalms in the service of God, and those forms of service which are not
Conc. Lac^ic. Can. 59. Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 23. Conc. Milen. Can. 12. Conc.
Affric. Can. 70.
antea probata in concilio, vel cum prudentioribus collata; least happily some
things against faith, either through ignorance or want of consideration should
be composed, That they Never sought a razing of the Communion book, but a
filing it after the pattern of that care which former examples bad set them,
wherein they thought many things retained, that might have been spared: They
have Evermore condemned voluntary separation from the Congregations, and
Assemblies, or Negligent Frequenting of the public prayers.

filing of this book of Common Prayer, yet, as it was (though not filed
according to their minds) used it, preached not against it, labored not by
their Sermons to raise in men's hearts a dislike of it, discouraged none from
it; but condemned the negligent, and consequently encouraged the diligent
frequenting of these public prayers. Oh, were men cordially so affected, of
such holy, humble, peaceable Spirits; with how much quietness, and peace,
might we live together, and worship, and Psalm 42.4.
Go with a multitude to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praises, to
keep holy day? Then might we Psalm. 55.14.
take sweet counsel together, and walk to the house of God in company, and if
so then Amos 3.3.
agreeing, and (as our old version has it) as friends. To these let me add but
the present judgment of our Presbyterian Brethren, who say, 1 Paper of propos.
to His Majesty.
we are satisfied in our judgments concerning the lawfulness of a Liturgy, or
a Form of worship, provided, etc. So that even in the judgment of these, a
prescribed Form is not unlawful, and consequently not our Liturgy, upon that
account.

The usefulness of prescribed forms. Yea more, we could with much ease prove
the, not only lawfulness, but usefulness, yea in some degree, necessity of a
well composed form of public worship in the Church, and that upon very good
reasons.

1. To help the weak. To provide for the weakness of some men, Quae^i solet,
utrum concepiis precationum formulis public out privatim uti liceat; nos si
modo cum debita animi attentioni pronuncientur, non modo licitas, sedet valde
utiles esse contendimus, quia novas (...) concipere cuivis detum non est
Synops. P^rior. Theolog. Disp. 36. These. 33. Sic et Calvinas Epist. 87. Quod ad
Formulam precum valde probo -- tam confiditur quorun dan simplicitati, et
imperitiae.
and help their infirmities, of whose ministry the Church may have need; and
this truly is not of no consideration; for let us hear but the testimony of
one, who (Mr. Ball See Ball, Trial of Separ. c. 7. answ. to obj. 8.
will tell us) what a godly, learned, and well experienced Minister. As to the
lawfulness, or expediency (says he) of praying by book, or using a prescript
form; it is to be considered that there be diverse degrees, both natural (as
will and utterance) as also the grace (as knowledge, faith, zeal) given to
diverse men; besides, some have been trained up in this holy duty more than
others -- which difference, I have observed not only in private Christians, but
in some most Reverend, faithful, and worthy Ministers, some using both in their
public Ministry, and private Families, a set form of words -- and a little
after, for the Congregation for the most part it is expedient to keep a
constant form both of matter and words. 2. To testify Communion. To testify
our consent -- Vt ce^tius conslet omnium inte^ se ecclefiarum consemsus Cav.
Ep. 87.
and Communion with other Churches of Christ; for where shall another find,
what is the Doctrine, Faith, Worship, of a Church, but in her Confessions and
Liturgies. 3. To prevent irregularity. To prevent errors, and irregularities in
worship, probata in concilio, lest otherwise something against faith through
ignorance or rashness should be composed; and upon the same account, there is
a necessity of such a well composed form, that nothing, which is contrary to
the faith of the Gospel, or good manners; or unbeseeming the Majesty of that
sacred service; or dissonant to Christian Charity, should through the ignorance
or weakness of some, the corruption, frowardness, malice or wickedness of
others be uttered. And the truth is, our Liturgy of old was wont to be
accounted an excellent preventive both of Popish Superstitions, and unbeseeming
irregularities. To extend to all concerns of the Church. And (what is not of
the least, but of very great consideration) to reach, and extend to all the
public concerns of the Church; and, For edification of the people. Being
incomparably most for the edification of the people; though a conceived prayer
may commend the speaker, yet is a form much more profitable for the hearer, who
in a known form may readily concur with the speaker (for this they already
understand, are acquainted with, and are ready to join hearts, with those
Petitions, which they know are to be put up) which in a conceived prayer of a
man's own (which yet is a form to the hearer) unheard by them before they can
not so well do; for such is the obscurity of some men's expressions, especially
to vulgar ears, that they cannot easily comprehend the meaning of the words,
and so can not join hearts; and while they study to understand them, the
Minister is gone to other petitions. In these public forms, known and
understood, they have nothing to do, but to attend with the heart: and really
this is Nos -- conceptas formulas -- valde utiles contendimus, quia -- et
attentio auditorum in magnis conventibus per usitatas non parum juvasur Synops.
purior. Theol. Disp. 36. These. 33.
no small help to attention, when the mind need not study to understand, but
has nothing else to do, but attend, and join in prayer.
Christ, Mat. 26.39.42.44.
on the same occasion to pray in the same words. And really,

same persons, who come to worship the same God; to pray for the same mercies;
on the same occasions to beg the same blessings, Pardon, Peace, Grace, Life,
Health, Comforts, etc to vow the same duties of Faith, Love, Loyalty,
Obedience; to praise him for the same favors: why should it be a sin on the
same occasions to use the same expressions?

etc. if the matter be good, the words proper, the affections suitable, the
prayer, etc. is acceptable, and this may be as well in forms, as in any private
conceptions,

stinting of the Spirit, contrary to 1 These. 5.18. Forms, no stinting of the
Spirit.
it signifies nothing; for to omit that Scripture speaks nothing at all to this
purpose: I say, there is no more a stinting of the Spirit in this, then in the
conceived prayer of the Minister: for there are the people tied up to his words
and expressions, as much as in any prescribed form: yet was never this
accounted a stinting of the Spirit, or unlawful for the people to join in; and
indeed take away all forms (for such is one man's prayer, to all that hear it)
and ye must take away all public prayers, or prayers of a Congregation, our of
the Church.

May pray in forms, yet pray with the Spirit.
that to use a form is contrary to that of the Apostle, ^ Cor. 14.15. Pray with
the Spirit; for, 1. If this Objection be of any weight, it takes away all
meditation and preparation, and argues against any such prayers conceived by
our selves, as well as those composed by others for us: and this if urged so
far, must put man upon a finful tempting of God, and looking for Enthusiasms,
and extraordinary impirations, when ever he prays; which God has made no
promise to grant, nor has man warrant to expect: far wiser is that counsel of
the Son of Syrach Ecclus. 18.23.
Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, (not thy tongue only, but thy heart
chiefly) and be not as one that tempts the Lord. 2. forms of Prayer, then
forms of Praise, or, singing, wherein it has been practiced, and the practice
still allowed, if in Praise, why not in Petition How does it stint the Spirit
in one, and not in the other? Must the matters of request fit the occasion? so
must praise. Does the Spirit teach to pray? so he does to praise and return
thanks. Must we pray with the Spirit? so must we also sing with the Spirit. If
in prescribed forms, we may 1 Cor. 14.15.
sing and praise with the Spirit, and with understanding also, so without doubt
may we pray. And indeed, 3. Jude 20.
they should) in the Holy Ghost; for the Assistance of the Spirit (as that
Right Reverend Bishop Bishop Downam, of prayer. cb. 23.
has observed) is not so much in helping the invention (invention and gift of
conceiving a prayer is indeed a gift, but a common gift, not a proper grace of
the sanctifying Spirit; and a confident Spirit, a nimble wit, with a ready
utterance goes far in it) but chiefly in these three things.


1. In rectifying the judgment, teaching us what to ask, because we Romans 8.26.
know not, what to pray for as we ought; and helping our infirmities.

3. In inflaming our affections, drawing out the heart to cry with Romans 8. ibid.
sighs unutterable; the Spirit of Grace and Supplication makes us pour out our
Souls before God, while we look on him whom we have pierced, and mourn.

3. In exciting, and drawing out our faith to Act, stirring up our hearts to
cry Abba, Father; to call upon God, as our Father in Christ, believing. Now
that all this the Spirit of God can do for us, yea, and has done it, in
prescribed forms, drawing forth the Soul, warming the heart, inflaming the
affections, quickening the spirit and exciting Faith: the experience of
thousands of Christians will testify.

reading, Prayer in Reading.
not praying, I shall say no more then this; though it be true that reading (as
such) is not praying, this being an act of the heart; that only of the lips and
tongue: yet the lifting up of the heart in that reading is praying: if the
words be sound, the matter, according to Gods will; the manner, holy, reverent,
humble, faithful, fervent; the wants laid open; and requests sent up from the
Soul: here is an holy prayer. And may not all this be, though the words be read
out of a book, or uttered by heart; may there not be as much humility of heart,
faith in Gods promises, earnestness of desire, holiness of affection?
doubtless there may.

Balls Friendly Trial of the Grounds tending to separation. This is enough to
justify the Use of a Prescribed Form; and consequently to prove, That the
being such, makes not our Liturgy unlawful to be used.

CHAP. IV. Our particular Liturgy considered.
Form in general, proved in the precedent chapter. But, possibly there may be
some such corruptions, and material errors in our particular Liturgy, as may
make this Form unlawful to be used. This I shall now examine; and I doubt not
to make it appear, that there neither is any thing in this, but what may be
used without sin. For the portions of Scripture to be read, there is no dispute
about them. For the Prayers prescribed, that they also may be lawfully, yea and
acceptably used, is also apparent.

the matter be according to Gods will; for such things as he has commanded us
to ask, and promised to grant; for such things as tend to the advancement of
Gods Glory; the doing of his will; the spiritual and eternal good of our selves
and others, in the Remission of sin, our Regeneration, Sanctification, and
eternal Salvation, etc. yea, and Temporals also, Life, Livelihood, Liberty,
Comforts, Prosperity, Peace, etc. so far as Divine Providence shall see these
things really good, and necessary for us and them. 2. That the Form of them be
grave, the manner holy, reverent, fervent, our wants laid open, and petitions
enforced in such expressions, as may become the gravity of such devotions, the
Majesty of that God to whom we speak; and suited to the matter which we desire;
and with such reasons and arguments, as are agreeable to the nature of the
requests, and likely to prevail. Apply these to our Liturgy, and see if all
these things be not observed there.

form of external, vocal Prayer, is the outward frame and disposition of the
words, with the inward elevation of the heart: now if the words be sound, the
matter good and necessary, and the heart lifted up by the Holy Spirit in faith
and fervor, here is an holy Prayer. (and there is the same reasons of
Confessions and Praises.) And that the heart may be thus lifted up in the use
of these prayers, the experience of thousands of pious Christians will
abundantly evidence.

matter of them: Are they not some, for pardon or Grace; some for instruction
how to pray; some, to be heard when we pray; some, confessions of sin, and
begging repentance and remission; some, confessions of weakness, blindness,
infidelity, and praying for strength, illumination, and faith: Prayers for
temporal, spiritual, and eternal blessings? And are not all these the subjects
of the promises, and commands of God; and by consequence the matter of them
according to Gods will? it will be too long to insist upon particulars.

Form, have not in any one charged this book with matter of impiety, or
material evil in the substance of it, or in any thing which concerns the
Prayers, and Forms of public administrations (and to the Rites and
Ceremonies, I shall give my thoughts hereafter) so as the use of them should
involve any one in sin. Yea, to the contrary, they have these expressions,
Account of all Proceed. p. 1.
We have an high, and honorable esteem of those godly and learned Bishops, and
others, who were the first compilers of the public Liturgy, and do look upon
it as an excellent and worthy work for that time, -- if excellent and worthy
then, it cannot be sinful now. Again, ibid. p. 11. at the conclusion of the
s^veral exceptions.
The things themselves (viz. there excepted against, and) desired to be
removed, not being of the foundation of Religion, nor the essentials of public
worship. If so, then certainly much may be complied with, and conformed to in
matters of circumstance, (wherein there is no danger for the main, and these
not being essentials of worship, they are not contrary to that prohibition,
Deuteronomy. 12.32: so much urged) for Peace sake, and in obedience to those in
Authority. And again, ibid. p. 32. at the conclusion of the particul,
exceptions.
We have not the least thought of depraving or reproaching the Book of Common
Prayer. Then certainly, they charge it not with any matter of impiety, or such
thing as is unlawful to be used in the public worship; for that were a just
reproach enough.

to put that just interpretation upon them; and, since they are not evil in
themselves, but may be used without sin, to obey the commands of our proper
Governors in the use of them: our conceptions, that we could do better, do not
free us at all from obeying the the Law, which commands the use of these;
(whereby yet we are not so tied up, but that at some times, as in the Pulpit,
before Sermon, we are left to the liberty of our conceived Prayers also.) But
to clear this matter more distinctly.

many extend them further, than those Brethren did intend or offer them for.
They used them only as arguments for an emendation, to satisfy the scruples
of some, who could either not at all, or, bardly comply with the use of them;
and as a means (in their thoughts) to promote peace and unity: But others
presently conclude them of such a nature, as to make the use of the Book
utterly unlawful: and begin to think some strange horrid thing imposed upon
them. I shall take a view of the most material objections, and it will soon
appear that there is nothing charged upon this book, of so dire an aspect as to
make Ministers afraid of it, or judge it unlawful to use it or people to hear
it.

Vt quae nou prosunt singula juncta juvent.
multitude of enormities are charged upon it, they are too willing to believe
it guilty. Whereas, those Brethren confess them to be of a Account of Proc. p.
11.
various nature. For some, they grant, are of inferior consiaeration; verbal
rather than material: then, sure I am, these are not sit Subjects of
contention, we may use them notwithstanding, and should be guilty of a very
great transgression, if we should disobey an established law, and break the
Peace of the Church for matters of no higher consideration, then which are
only verbal.

others, they plead, but as dubious and disputable, as not having a clear
foundation in the Scripture for their warrant. For such things, if they have
not clear Scripture for their particular warrant (nor is this always
necessary, in many cases a general warrant is sufficient) yet if there be not
evidence of Scripture to prove them unlawful; in such a case to me Statuta
Majorum prolege tenenda: The practice of our Fathers; and the commands of our
Superiors; the establishments of our own Church, must be a law, and are
warrant enough. For, if they are dubious, it is not certain we should sin in
the use of them: but it is certain, we should sin against an Romans 13.2.
ordinance of God, in disobeying the laws of our Superiors, which are not
against the law of God. Our Brethren confess, Due account to his Majesty, p. 4.
that public judgments belong to public persons, (and if in any thing, then
without doubt in such dubious matters) and that no man is to exalt his own
understanding above its worth and office; nor erroneously pretend Gods law
against the just command of his superiors; nor the doing of his duty to be sin.

some things, they say, there be that seem to be corrupt, and to carry in them
a repugnancy to the Rule of the Gospel -- to which I say,

1. If there be indeed such real corruptions, I know none that pleads for
them, none do I know but would have such reformed, and not submitted to, all
conscientiously agreeing to that Apostolical Maxim Act. 5.29.
It is better to obey God than men. But then, let those who disobey, be sure of
their hand; that these things wherein they obey not, be really such as is
pretended; not seeming only, but really corrupt, and repuguant to the Holy
Rule.

to be corrupt, or indeed to carry such a repugnancy; but only that some
things SEEM to be, and to do so. Now though such an apparency may be an
argument (and so only they used it) to plead for an alteration; and does
justly require such amendment, where there would not follow in the Church a
greater mischief by a change, then there is inconvenience in the
non-alteration, or could be good by the Reformation: of which (by the way)
those must be accounted the Judges, to whose hands is committed the Government
of the Church, and upon whom chiefly it lies to take care Ne quid Ecclesiae
detrimenti capiat, that the Church suffer not in her purity, peace, or order:
yet this is not argument enough for private persons to cast off the use of a
thing enjoined. It must not only seem, but indeed be evil, ere it can justisie
any in their disobeying a law, that commands it. For, suppose it should not be,
as it seems to us to be; but what we judge repugnant, be not so, to the
Evangelical Rule: will it then be a sufficient plea for us at the great day of
account, that it seemed so? I fear, not. I am sure we have all reason in this
case, if in any, to be modestly and humbly self-suspicious, as our brethren
acknowledge. And I judge (for in dubiis tutissimum est eligendum, and what does
but seem, is still but dubious) it to be by far the safer course for every
inferior and private person to obey, which does not only seem, but infallibly
is a duty: than to suspend his obedience in a thing which does but seem to, but
happily is not, when disobedience certainly is Romans 13.1.5. Heb. 13.1^. Sect.
12.
against the rule of the Gospel.

3. These things yet are but general accusations. Had the particulars been
expressed, which are the inferior, and verbal; which dubious matters; and
which seem corrupt, and repugnant to the Gospel? we should have been better
able to have judged of them. But they being given in together, and no note of
distinction on them, it is not so ready to judge which they understand (at
least not all of them) to be such as seem to be corrupt. It would be too long a
work, and to little purpose, to give an account of every particular; I shall
therefore pick out what I conceive to be the most material exceptions; and
which may have the greatest influence upon some men's spirits, to induce them to
believe the book so corrupt, as that it should be unlawful to use it; and which
I conjecture, they may suppose to be repugnant to the rule of the Gospel. And
if I shall manifest that there is really in these no such repugnancy, as may
engage any to forbear the use, or ensnare him in sin, that shall use this
Liturgy: I shall do enough to justify our Conformity, and to manifest that it
is not unlawful to obey Authority in this practice. And I am sure then, if we
love the Peace of the Church, we shall conclude it our duty.

CHAP. V. 1. The charge of Battology, or vain Repetitions, answered.
Form, or 2. the Matter, of the service or worship prescribed: and in this
order, for methods sake, I shall treat of them.

Form, Order, or Manner of the service and offices, are these four. 1. Vain
Repetitions. 2. The Peoples interlocution. 3. The Prayers too short, and
divided. 4. Shreds of Scripture in Epistles and Gospels.

It is guilty of Vain Repetitions; the same things being ordered to be repeated
several times in one morning service: as the Lords Prayer, sometimes four,
sometimes six times, always twice. The Gloria Patri at the end of those short
Versicles after the Lords Prayer; then after the following Psalmodie: after
every Psalm, and the Hymns between, and after the lessons. Which seems contrary
to that rule of Christ, Math 6.7
When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the Heathen do.

Christ is giving rules about those eminent acts of Christianity, Alms,
Prayer, and Fasting. Concerning Prayer, the rules are principally two. 1. The
one concerns the manner; their carriage in, and ends of praying. Here the rule
is, that we avoid the Mat. 6.5.6.
Pharisaical Hypocrisy, who aim to be seen; and that we pray in secret, where
God only sees. 2. The other concerns the matter, and expression. Here the
rule is, That we Verse 7.8, 9.
avoid the Ethnical, or Heathenish Battology; and pray according to the pattern
there given. The words are these (...).
When ye pray, use not vain repetitions, (or if we could so make the word speak
English, do not Battologize) as the Heathen do, for they think to be heard for
their multiloquy, many words, or much babbling. The only difficulty here, is to
find what is the fault condemned, it is (...) which what it is, we shall partly
understand.

Scapula and Stephanus whom be epitomized.
Lexicographers (from one Battus a Prince, and Founder of Cyrene in Eybia, who
was said to be one of a small slender voice, (...). Vide Herodot. l. 4. and
Dausan. in Pho^icis.
and a stammering tongue) give this for the first notion, to hesitate, stick,
and stammer in speech. Of this fault (whether the text mean it or no, it
matters not) I am sure the Liturgy cannot be guilty: but some men out of too
rash a presumption of a gift, which they have not; boldly venturing upon
extemporary prayers in the public, too often betray the want of that ability,
which they presumed themselves to have; and by their too indecent hesitations,
and culpable stammering, in their often interrupted expressions, for want of
that due meditation and preparation, which becomes men who come to perform such
solemn service to so Holy a God; discover themselves too guilty of this kind of
Battology: but this is not the fault there pointed at.

There is another more usual acceptance of that word. There was (say some) one
Battus among the Greeks, who was wont to adorn Images with Inscriptions, long
and tedious, and full of idle repetitions of the same things over and over: or,
(as others) a Foolish Poet, whom that nimble Poet Ovid. Metam. wittily s offs
at, Montibus inquit erant, and erant in montibus illis. and brings in Mercury
answering him in his own way, -- Me mihi perside, prodis? me mihi prodis? ait.
who wrote many verses, but their number increased by this vain Tautology. From
this Battus, do they take (...), to signify, to repeat one and the same word;
to trifle in discourse; to prattle vainly. Hesychius renders it (...), idle and
unseasonable speaking. The fault then is chiefly, a tedious length, or
prolixity of speech, which cannot well be without a vain Tautology, and idle
repetition of the same things. Thus the Greeks generally understood it, as
contrary to that which they called (...), short and pithy speeches, as the
Spartans used, who (says the Plut. in vita Licurgi.
Historian) had a vast deal, a great mass of money, to be worth but little, but
a few words, of great weight; They spoke little, but much to purpose. The wise
Philosopher Plato in Alcibiad.
therefore far preferring their short and pithy prayers, that God would give
them (...), before the long prayers of the Athenians, wherein they affecting
prolixity, uttered many things, which nei her became the Majesty of God, nor
were expedient for themselves; and says well, (...).
that we had need of much care, circumspection, and deliberation, what is fit
to be spoken, and what not; agreeable to that of a wiser than he, even Solomon:
Eccl. 5.1.2.
Keep thy foot etc. Be not rash with thy mouth -- God is in heaven, and thou
upon earth, therefore, let thy words be few.

Sinonymous, declaring that by this Battology, Christ did understand, a (...)
multiloquy, or verbosity, an heaping up of words, and nothing or little else
but words, a babbling to no purpose: which was both in a tedious length, such as
was in the prayers of Pharisees, condemned by Christ as Hypocritical, who for a
pretense Mat. 23.14. (...).
did thus pray long; and in often repetition of the same words, that they might
hold out, and continue talking. And 2. We may understand the thing, by the
persons that were wont to use it, and the reason why they did so. They were the
Heathens, and the reason why they did so was, because they hoped by that mians
to be heard the sooner, or at the last at least. They persuaded themselves that
their much, loud, and long crying, often repeated, did at last prevail with
their Gods to answer them: for which the Prophet so manifesty scoffs at those
Idolatrous Priests of Baal, who cried, all day, and aloud, from morning to
evening, and all the same note, O Baal, hear us; O Baal, hear us.

Battologie, there by Christ condemned; was the Heathenish babbling; or what is
like that, which they used in their Idolatrous worship, viz. multitude of
words, without weight of matter. 2. Not every repetition, but such as theirs,
vain and idle. 3. And these uused, as if they looked to be heard for their many
words sake.

Lords Prayer, and the Gloria Patri: would we know who are guilty of this crime
indeed? One, and he no Popish, nay, nor Episcopal Author, (I think) will tell
us that, Marlor, exsecario.

Vtuntur in cratione inani hac loquacuaio, et multiplicandorum verborum
vanitate diffidentes, et qui frig^do sunt anime, nec admedum scrio curant quid
loquuntur. ^. Calv. in Mat. 6.7. Qui ut Deum persuadeant et exorent, multum
veriorum profundunt.


Those men are in their prayers guilty of this idle loquacity, or vanity of
multiplying words, who are, 1. Diffident, doubtful they shall not else be
heard. 2. Whose hearts are cold, their affections not inflamed in their
devotions. 3. Who are not serious, who neither mind nor care what they speak.
And (says another) Those, who pour out a multitude of words, and think by this
means to persuade and prevail with God. Shall I give instances.

Popish practice is extremely faulty: where persons are taught their Paters,
and Aves by number and tale: to number upon their Beads a certain set of
prayers, which they understand not, and therefore cannot mind: putting so much
the greater meritoriousnesse in them, and receiving larger Indulgences, as they
do oftener mumble over their Rosaries.

Nor are They free, who affect a tedious length in a continued Prayer; and yet
are not able to find either fit matter or words; nor to keep their hearts close
to God, and so lifted up with faith, and inflamed with fervor during that
time, as they ought to be in these holy Duties and Addresses to the most high
God: for though, where a man is endowed with such a gift of expression and
utterance, and where variety of holy matter is poured forth with a constant,
continued, attention of mind, and vigor of affections, such prayers cannot but
be acceptable Sacrifices; nor can they be condemned for the length, and even in
this sense may we Col. 4.1.
continue in prayer: Yet when such is our weakness, that our minds rarely do
attend; and our dullness such, that our affections scarce can be intent so long:
it is not only our wisdom, but a duty to moderate the length of our prayers
according to the measure of grace received, and the strength of our affections,
faith, and devotion, that the intention of them be not dulled, where it cannot
hold out; though where it can last, Intentio, sicut non est obtund^nda, si
perdurere non potest; ita si perdurare potest, non est reliquenda. August. ep.
121.
it be not to be laid down. Absit in oratione multa locutio; sed non desit
multa pre^^tio, si perseveres intentio. Aug. ep. 21.
Much Praying is one thing, and much speaking, or many words in prayer is
another: the one is a duty, the other a fault, and to be avoided. This must be
condemned as a vain Battology; which Solomon fitly calls the Eccl. 5.1, 2, 3
(...)
Sacrifice of Fools; and is a thing which argues no little irreverence in
worms of earth before the high God: wherein we often see that to speak much,
and to speak seasonably and fitly, are far a sunder; men soon becoming
negligent, and the Devil easily taking occasion to steal in upon them, and to
steal away their hearts from the matter they are about: and when the heart is
absent, they offer up nothing but words: which is not much short of the
Ethnical, or Popish Battology, and much more guilty, then the Liturgy can with
any shadow of reason be pretended to be.

Liturgy men may be, and some (I fear, too many) are guilty of this also, but
withal it is unquestionable, that this is not the fault of the book, but only
of those persons, who use it so.

Not of the Book; for, 1. The things repeated are not many: they are but two;
The Lords Prayer, and that never in the same, but in distinct offices, and
parts of worship (which is very far from that vain and heathenish repetition,
who had nothing to offer, but (as those Baalites) the same thing for an whole
day; and as far from being like the Romish Beadrol of 15 Pater Nosters, and 150
Ave Mary's) and one Gloria Patri, a Doxology at the end of each Hymn or
Psalm; which can no more be charged as a fault here, then that versus (...) at
the end of every verse in one Psalm Psalm. 136.
For his mercy endures for ever. Nor is there such a difference between a
Psalm of praise, and praise in our ordinary prayers, that what is lawful in
the one, should not be lawful in the other; that what is confessed an ornament
in the one, should be a sinful Battologie in the other. This Doxology, being
yet used but once in our prayers, but generally at the end of Psalms, where it
is an ornament, or of an Hymn of praise, where it must needs be proper.
However that versus intercalaris is a sufficient argument that every repetition
is not to be charged with vanity, and there must be something else to prove it
Battologizing. And thus far we have the concurring judgment of our Brethren
Account of Proceed. Reply page 62.
That the same words may be often repeated, (as David does, Gods enduring
merey) without Tautological vanity, when it is not from emptiness, or neglect
of order, or affectation. -- In Psalms and Hymns, where the affections are to
be elevated -- we are not against such repetitions. 2. Neither can it with any
charity be rationally suspected that the Church prescribes those few
repetitions any way to lengthen out her prayers (which yet never were accounted
too long, but often accused of too much brevity, as shreds, or Snips) much
less, 3. Can it be thought, that these are prescribed, as if the bare use or
repeating of the words were an acceptable service to God, or could pretend to
an hope of being heard (as the Heathens did) when the affections are not
cordially intent, nor the heart sincerely fixed upon the matter, neither with an
holy fervency begging the mercies, nor with an heavenly cheerfulness sounding
forth the praises: Yea, 4. We have much reason to judge, that the edification
of the people, and the quickening of their devotion is mainly intended; when
their minds and souls, which in a continued length are apt to grow cold and
flat, are awakened by these (yet not too frequent repetitions) to raise their
intentions to those prayers, which should be as darts sent up to Heaven with
vigor, quickness, and fervency.

In the persons a fault there may be, when they superstitiously think, there is
any strange efficacy in the words, or magic in the repetitions, though they
neither understand, consider, nor are intent upon them; when they are guilty of
the sin of that people, whom God Isai. 29.13. Mat. 15.8. Mar. 7.6.
complains of, that they draw nigh with their mouths, and seem to honor God
with their lips, but remove their heart far from him: Such is that, of many
ignorant people, who say over the Lords Prayer, the Creed, and Ten
Commandments, all, as their Prayers; and think they have sufficiently done
their devotions, when they have done no more but repeated the words: Such is
that, of those, who content themselves with a formal attendance with their
bodies, and joining with the tongue in these offices; and think they have
served God well enough, when they have thus externally answered the letter of
the Law, though their minds at the same time were roming about the things of
the world, or the lusts of the flesh. But this still is not the fault of the
form, but of the persons and it is no more to be imputed to this, than the very
same irregularities, and wandering thoughts are to be imputed to the conceived
prayers of the Minister, though in themselves never so holy or excellent; to
which this neglect and non attention is every way as incident, yea possibly
more, than to the use of this Liturgy. This is really Battologizing, what ever
the matter of the Prayer, or Petition be, whether repeated or not.

careless persons, is there such a necessity of altering the form? or is it
therefore unlawful for an Holy, Religious Minister, or Devout Christian to use
it? nothing less; for then we must cast all prayers out of the Church; wherein
some will still be guilty of offering nothing but a verbal service, and
yielding but a formal, careless attendance. But, let us learn to be serious in
our affections, and prayers (whether conceived by our selves, or composed by
others, and prescribed to us) and we are so, (as Calvin Vbi serio aff^cta
concipitur cratio, lingua non anteit pestus: dein^e non captatur deigratia
inani verborum fluxu; sed potius fuos affectus pium cor emittit, non secus ac
sagitta; qui in coelum usque penetrent. Calv in Mat. 6.7.
observed) when our tongues go not before, or without our hearts, nor do we
think to catch the Grace of God by the flowing forth of vain and empty words;
but the holy heart sends forth its affections as so many darts, and arrows from
a bow, that may pierce the clouds, and ascend Heaven it self: Let us come (as
the Psalm. 57.7. and 108.1. and 25.1.
Psalmist) with prepared and fixed hearts, the Soul cordially joining with the
tongue, and the Spirit directing the lips in our prayers and praises; holy,
heavenly, and inflamed affections, (supposing still the matter according to
Gods will) my Soul for yours, the Holy God will never charge you with a sinful
Battology, or vain repititions; neither Heathenish babbling, nor Popish Polylogy.

By this time I suppose ye see it proved, that that prohibition of Christ
(...), cannot be extended to this Liturgy, nor is this Liturgy upon the account
of any repetitions (whatsoever it seems) repugnant to the Rules of the Gospel.

CHAP. VI. 2. Another exception answered, and the Interlocutions, Responsals,
and Alternate Reading Justified.
Interlocutions, or, The Repetitions and Responsals of the Clark and People,
and the Alternate Reading of the Psalms and Hymns; and this exception is
built upon these two foundations. 1. Non-edification, Account of proceed, the
3d. gener. except.
That they cause a confused murmur in the Congregation, whereby, what is read,
is less intelligible, and therefore unedifiing. 2. The seeming repugnancy to
the Sacred Rule; because, The Minister is appointed for the people in all the
public services appertaining to God: The holy Scriptures of the Old and New
Testament intimating the peoples part in public prayer to be Only with
silence and reverence to attend thereunto, and to declare their consent in the
close by saying, Amen.



Where the Scriptures appoint the Minister for the people in all public
services appertaining to God; Responsals of people, whether Repugnant to
Scripture.
and those holy Scriptures both of the Old and New Testament intimate the
peoples part in public prayer, to be only with silence and reverence to
attend thereunto, and to declare their consent in the close by saying, Amen:
And the form prescribed does not so, but appointed to the people a great part
in the public services themselves. There is a repugnancy between that Form,
and the Scriptures.

But the Scriptures do so; and the Form so, (as is expressed) Ergo.

For the proof of the assumption, several particulars are produced, The
Alternate reading of the Psalms and Hymns: The Responsals of the Clark and
people: The Litany so framed, that the Petitions are in a great part uttered by
the people, etc.

The Scriptures intimate so and so: and the Form appoints so and so; now what
is only intimated, is not clearly determining: and here therefore is no Real,
but a seeming, or intimated Repugnancy.

2. But the Assumption (as there conceived (viz. That the Minister is appointed
( sc. by the Scriptures of both Testaments) for the people in all public
services etc. and that the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament
intimate the peoples part in public prayer to be only with silence to attend,
and declare their consent in the close by saying Amen.) This I positively and
resolutely deny: for,

particular affirmative overthrows an universal Negative; and a particular
Negative an universal Affirmative. Observe then, This is all laid down in an
express universal: The Minister in all public services etc. for the people.
The people only (to do nothing else, but) to attend with silence -- and to say
nothing but Amen. Now if any particular instance can be produced to the
contrary, that is enough to wipe of this charge; and, I think, the Scriptures
do afford us many.

this very exception; and though in the latter branch, there be a restriction
to public prayer, yet the former is against the peoples part in all public
services, and the Plea is laid not only against the peoples bearing a part in
public prayer, but against the Alternate reading of Psalms and Hymns. But
sure I am, The peoples joining with their voices, and bearing a part in these,
is neither against the Scriptures appointment, or intimation, which does not
only not appoint the Priest, Levite, or Minister, to be wholly, and alone for
the people in these; but does also not intimate only, but clearly express the
peoples bearing a considerable part in them, and not, only silently attending,
and adding only their Amen in the close.

Brethren, Accom. of proceed. Reply p. 92. Sect. 16.
that, in the case of Psalms and Hymns (and these are a part of the public
services) it is certain they had a Liturgy or Form, as we have; which Forms are
carefully collected preserved, and delivered to us, as a choice part of the
Holy Scriptures. And these Forms were then certainly to be used, and the
peoples bearing a part in them is evident enough: for,

singing, is questioned by none (that I know) even those Sectaries who deny it
in mixed Congregations (as they allow no such Communion in any Ordinances) do
yet allow it among those, whom they account all Saints: But for us, we all
practice it. And whether we sing together Jointly, in Meeter; or Alternately,
in Prose, (as in the Cathedral way) the matter comes all to one, the people
bear their part in both.

Tot pane psallentium chori, quot gentium diversitates. Hieron. ep. 17. ad
Marc. cap. 6.
as many Quires of singers, and ways of singing, as diversities of countries.
Sometimes one only singing, and then another Dicas Psalmum in ordine tuo.
Hieron. ep. id Rustic.
in his order; sometimes Tertul ad uxer. l. 2. dicit. Psalmum inter duos sonare.
two: sometimes we find a council forbdiding Council Laodic. can. 15.
any to sing, but such, to whom the office of singing belongs: sometimes the
whole multitude sang, Audict orantis populi confistens quis extra ecclesiam
vocem; spectet celebres hymnorum sonitus Hilar. in Psalm. 65.
that those who stood without the Church might hear the voice of the people
praying, and the loud sound of their singing; and this sometimes jointly
together; sometimes by course or (...). So the people in St. Basils time sung
the Psalmedy, one part answering another, at the sound whereof Nazianzen says
of Valens the Emperor, that (...), he was smitten as with Thunder. See Jewel
Art. 3. Div. 2. out of Basil. ep. ad Cler. Neocaesar, and Greg Naz. Orat.
Funebr. in Pasil.
Quire-wise, Responsoriis psalmorum, cantu virorum, mulierum, virginum,
parvulorum consonus undarum sr^gor resultat. Ambr. Hexamer. l. 3. c. 5. And a
many more citations to this purpose does Mr. Ball give us, which I have now not
leisure to examine, he that please may. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 17. Socrat. l. 6. c. 8.
Theodoret. l. 2. c. 24. and l. 4. c. 27. Plin. epist. l. 10. ep. 97. Basil. ep.
ad Cleric. Neocaesar. Nazianz. funcbr. orat. in Basil. Aug. confess. l. 9. c. 6,
7.
men, women, maids, and little children, answering one another.

Jewish Church, and Scripture times also. There we find, the people of God in
their solemn services, in such forms answering one another. There we find in
one place the Priests and Levites (...) responderunt invicem. i. e. vicissim
(...) cant abant, Piscat. Ezr. 3.10, 11. with 1 Chr. 6.31. and 16.7.
singing together by course, and praising God after the Ordinance of David the
King; yea not these only, but the people, even the women also: for so we read,
Not Moses only, but the Exodus 15.1.
Children of Israel with him sang a Psalm of praise upon occasion of that
miraculous passage made for them through the Sea, that drowned the the
Egyptians. v. 20, 21.
And Miriam went out (says the Text) and all the women after her, and she
answered them, Viris; ita ut alternis canerent, mulieribus eundem versum, qui
primus est cantici, (...). Jun. in Exodus 15.20, 21.
sing ye -- The women and the men (as Junius Viris; ita ut alternis canerent,
mulieribus eundem versum, qui primus est cantici, (...). Jun. in Exodus 15.20,
21.
notes on the place) thus answering one another in the song. And it may not
unfitly be understood of such a Carmen Amaebaeum or Alternate Song, what we
read of the Israelites singing before the Golden Calfe; by that action showing,
as what they had learnt among the Egyptians, to set up an Idol: so what was
wont to be their practice in their services to God (for they worshipped the
Calfe, as they did God; and it is not unusual for the Devil to be Gods ape)
They sang, and it was not either the united shout for a Victory; nor a crying
out together, for being Conquered: but it was (...) Exodus 32.18.
the voice of singers; by their alternate answering in song, discovering
themselves. Thus if we consult the Hebrew Text, where the same word is used by
the Psalmist, it seems to be not only the practice of that people, but to look
very like a command, (...) Psalm. 147.7
sing unto the Lord -- what plainly so? I conceive not, for then another word
would probably have been used, viz. (...), but sing alternis vicibus, answering
one another (as the word signifies) and one Psalm. 88. (...) vid. Gatak. cyn.
part. 1. c. 10. p. 126.
Psalm there is that seems purposely to be set ad hunc ordinem canendi, to be
sung in this order, or alternate manner, as the word Le-annoth in the title not
obscurely intimates.

singing; but it is the alternate reading of Psalms and Hymns that we disallow.

alternate singing, this is enough to our purpose, to prove, the people bearing
a part in these services: besides, singing and reading are not of so different
natures, that what may be allowed in one, may not be allowed in the other: when
their singing sometimes was but like fair, long reading, with some modulation
of the voice, and that not much neither, if we believe S. Austin August. Conf.
l. 10. c. 93. sect 2
who in this commends Athanasius, that he commanded the Reader of the Psalm
to sound, or sing it, modico flexu vocis, with a very little modulation, like,
but ut pronuncian^^ quam canenti vicinior esset.
a more plain and distinct reading. Such a practice there was then in the
Ancient Church, as the people joining in the Psalms and Hymns.

Proprios Hymnos, Hymns proper to the Christians, and composed by themselves,
and sung to the honor of Christ, (as Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 17. et l. 5. c. 28.
See the like in Th^od^ et. l. 4. c. 19.
Eusebius out of Philo testifies of the first Christians) and this perfectly
agreeable to the Scripture pattern and practice. The practice we see in the
(...) Cor. 14.26.
Corinthian Church, which the Apostle reproves not, but orders it, and
directs them in it. A rule we have in that Apostolical exhortation, to teach,
instruct, and quicken one another, Ephesians. 5.19. Coless. 3.16.
in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual songs. Nor must we conclude that the
people sung only such Hymns, as were either sound in the Scriptures, or framed
de proprio ingenio, their own private conceptions; for though such they had,
and used, yet also they had Hymns See Council. Laod. c. 59. Council. Tolet. 4.
cap. 12.
composed by others for them, which they sung to; as we read that Ephrem,
Syrus, made Hymns in that, sc. the Syrian tongue, which were sung at the
solemn feasts of the Martyrs, as Sozomen informs us.

Psalms and Hymns of Praise, for even in the Scripture we read the people
joining in these: yet in the other parts of worship, and prayer, not so; where
they are to be silent, only adding their Amen in the close: in this is the
Minister to do all. These are the words of our Brethren. -- Account of Proceed.
p. 29. Reply to answ. (...) 3, 1.
We said not, that the People may not in Psalms concur in voice to God -- (we
speak of Prayer --) we concluded it agreeable to the Scripture practice for the
people in prayer to say but their Amen. -- And finding ordinarily that the
people spoke no more in prayer, (distinct from Psalms and praises) we desired
to imitate the surest pattern. From hence some may be apt to gather, that, (as
to Prayer, and those parts of worship) there is a repugnancy in the Liturgy,
(where even in these the people bear a part) a repugnancy to the Scripture
rule. But,



1. The Argument indeed concludes only the peoples silence, as to Prayers,
(distinct from Psalms and Praises) yet the Premises were larger, and extended
to all public services in things pertaining to God, which are praises as well
as prayers. And it is there reckoned as Account of Proceed, ibid.
the peoples invading the sacred office of the Ministry, at least seeming to do
so, 1. To read half the Psalms and Hymns. 2. To say half the Prayers. 3. To
be the mouth in Confessions. 4. Being the only petitioners in the greatest
part of the Litany. So that, it is an incroaching in one as well as the other:
if they incroach in saying half the Prayers, so also do they in reading half
the Psalms. But their part is confessed in Psalms and Hymns. They may sing,
as together, so alternately; and if they may sing so, they may also read so:
and then notwithstanding any thing in this Argument, may do so in prayers also.
Again,

ordinarily spoke no more in prayer then Amen. And if no more then so, here is
nothing to prove it unlawful to bear a greater part at some time: for it may be
supposed, that yet upon some special and extraordinary occasions they might say
more, though ordinarily they did not. And what they might sometimes do, is not
unlawful in it self, nor repugnant to Scripture (for that may not be done at
all) and this is enough for our purpose. Yet farther,

Account of Proceed. 16 Repl. p. 92.
That in the case of Psalms, it is certain they had a Liturgy, or Form (as we
have) which is carefully collected, preserved, and continued to us. This
Liturgy, or Form (if any else) is without question those Psalms of Moses,
David, Asaph, Heman, etc. in the singing of these, it is confessed and proved,
the people concurred in voice, more than in a single Amen, and they sang
alternatim, or Quire-wise; and if they may sing half, they may distinctly read
half, (as before is noted.) Now then, in these Forms, in which it is
confessed, they did thus concur, we find some which are not Hymns, or Psalms
of Praise; but expressly (and penned for that purpose) Deprecations of misery,
Prayers in affliction, and for mercy. Consult the Titles and the matter of
them, they will evidently appear to be, some, purely, or chiefly (...) Co
nprecaturii, (...). Psalm. 17.86, 90, 102.
Prayers in afflictions, in case of misery, distress, or fears; for support,
strength, mercy, deliverance, life, etc. some, Deprecations, whose Titles are,
Al taschith, i.e. Destroy not, complaining of, and praying against evils, both
of sin and sufferings. (...) Deprecation, (...) Psalm. 57, 58, 59, 75.
Some, Commemoratory, or rather (...) Commonitory, (...) ad redi. cendum in
memo. a. n. Psalm. 38.70.
Commonitory; not (as Junius conceives) to stand as memorials, for the
remembrance of evils past, and deliverance received; But, (as that truly
Reverend, and by me never to be forgotten Gatak. Cyn. part 1. c. 10. p. 123.
Mr. Gataker, (whose excellent works praise him in the gates, and are, and will
be to after ages, eminent discoveries of his learning and piety) has well
observed) to be Monitories to God himself (to speak with reverence, and after
the manner of men) as our version does well render it to bring to remembrance,
viz. of God: to mind him of the streights and troubles. This people, and awaken
him to their help: as the whole service and frame of the Psalms clearly show:
some (...) Testimonium; peti^us obtestatio. Psalm. 80. vid. G tak. ibid.
obtestatorii, not so much because the Church does there testify her faith in
God, as that she does therein earnestly beseech, and even obtest and conjure
him to help and dliver them from those evils wherewith they are oppressed, by
that care which he was wont to take of them, which now seems to be remitted;
and that success thereof, which those evils, which she suffered by her
adversaries, did seem to make void. Shall I add others? which are evidently
instructing, (...) eruditor. Psalm. 32.42, 44, 45. cum multis a^iis.
teaching Psalms, and so are rendered in the Margin of our Bibles, Psalms
giving instruction, and one expressly penned, (...) ad docendum. Psalm. 60. Sect.
17.
to teach.

4. Let any man now show any one thing, which is in our Liturgy appointed, the
subject of alternate singing, or (which makes no difference) Reading, that is
not perfectly of the nature of some of these Psalms. Might they so sing those
Psalms, whose main scope is to confess sin; complain of enemies; bewail
miseries; beg pardon, pray for mercies; awaken (as it were) God to hear, help,
and save? and may not we also do the like in our Hymns and Litanies, which are
composed for the very same ends? or shall we yet say, they are repugnant to the
Scripture pattern, to which in these particulars they do so perfectly agree?
yea, may we not hence also draw a justification of the lawfulness of that
practice in Collegiate and Cathedral Churches, (which yet is more quarrelled
at, and condemned, than the alternate reading or pronouncing) viz. the singing
of this Litany? those Psalms of this nature being no doubt sung in the
Assemblies as well as the rest.

Litany, that therein the people are the only petitioners in the far greatest
part of it, (the Minister only reciting the matter, and making no request at
all, which is only done by the people in their Good Lord deliver us, and We
beseech thee to hear us, etc.) for in this choice part of the Liturgy, wherein
(if any where else) our Prayers are (like those, which S. Augustine mentions of
the Dicunter fratres in Aegypto crebras quidem h^bere orationis sed eas
brevissim^s, and raptim quodammodo jaculatus. Aug. ep. 121.
Egyptian Brethren) as several, and very short, so as darts and arrows
severally sent forth with a sudd n quickness, and lively ejaculation, it is
clear, 1. The Minister begins, expressly petitioning, the people repeating
but the same after him It is 2. evident, that in the main body of it, it is a
prayer put up by the Minister, beginning the prayer for all the particular
matters, with this, We sinners do beseech thee to hear us, O Lord God. That it
may please thee, -- and so goes on in the particulars, to which the people
severally add their request in the words before by the Minister dictated; We
beseech thee, -- which is, in effect, but their Amen. Neither 3. can we say
that the Minister repeating the matter of the petition, does not pray, or
petition; for to what purpose else are those particulars expressed? When the
Minister repeateth, From all evil and mischief, from sin, and the rest that
follow; is it intended that he should repeat these words only, which without
the petition would not make up any sense? yea, is it not intended that he with
the Congregation should pray for Deliverance from them? What Rubric appoints
the Good Lord deliver us, to be said only by the people? yea, the Minister, as
the mouth of the Assembly, having repeated the matter of the request; are not
minister and people then jointly together to send up the petition?

Alternate Reading or singing, and the peoples bearing a greater part than
silence, and a bare Amen, not in Psalms and Hymns of praise only, but in
prayers, and deprecations also, is not repugnant, but perfectly agreeable to
the Scripture pattern; and may therefore lawfully be complied with.

Old Testament practice, yet we find it not agreeable to the Evangelical rule.



1. When it is confessed, that the Church of Israel had such a Liturgy in
Psalms, and Hymns; and some of these being proved of this nature now in
dispute, and these all acknowledged to be preserved to us as a choice part of
Scripture; I cannot see any shadow of reason, why we may not use them as they
did. It is acknowledged, we may use the same things, words, and forms; and why
not then in the same manner? and if these, why not others also of the same or
like nature.

Mosaical Paedagogy, or Economy (as such) be obliging; it follows not that
every thing therein is now unlawful. It is true that those things which were
then Figures of Christ to come, and instituted as Types of our Redeemer to come
in the Flesh, were certainly of no use, when Christ was really come to fulfill
all the things by those types prefigured: and now they, yea, all that was
symbolical among them, as observed with any opinion of necessity, are not only
dead and rotten, but only Et mortua, and ma^tisera.
deadly also, and mortiferous; and the charge upon us is, Gallat. 5.1, 2.
stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made you free, upon as high
an account, as even, the renouncing of Christ, and of all benefit by him, who
in this case, shall profit you nothing. Yet, for those things which did pertain
only to Order and Decency in the external managing of divine worship, without
any typical, or such symbolical signification, I see not how they can be
condemned as unlawful, though it is possible sometimes, and in some cases they
may be inconvenient.

Mosaical Paedagogy should be unlawful; yet many things were then in use and
practice, which cannot properly be accounted a part of that Economy, or proper
to that Paedagogy; but upon principles of common right, and reason taken up by
them, and practiced in common with others. I never knew any deny, but
Magistrates might still (if they see it convenient) use the same Laws in
Judicials, as were given to the Jews; and punish the same sins with the same
penalties: nor does their being used under the Mosaical Economy make it a sin
for Christians now to use them. Nor can I see any reason, why we may not use
those external orders of worship, which were used in the time of, but really
were no part of, that Economy, which was properly Mosaical.

the Apostles days, this need not trouble us; unless we can prove that
nothing may be done, do not in circumstantials of worship, for which we have
not the example of the Apostolical practice; yea, though we have the practice
of the Church before, and that not condemned any where, either by Christ, or
his Apostles. The Christian Church was then under too much persecution, to have
her public Oratories, and solemn Assemblies, and solemn Order of the Sacred
Public Worship; and no wonder then, that we have no examples of her practice
in such a case. When then we have such evidences of the Churches practice in
the Old Testament, in things not at all symbolical or typical, and this no
where condemned or reproved in the Gospel, which yet does so sharply rebuke the
abolished ceremonies, though the times then did not admit such public
solemnities: I see not, but we may well conclude it agreeable to the Scripture
pattern, and not at all repugnant to the Evangelical Rule.

Church of England, for those years since the Reformation (which yet is no very
good argument either of our piety or charity) but even the whole Christian
Church, (both Greek and Latin) in those ancient ages, of forsaking the
Evangelical Canon, and admitting and practicing a public worship of God
contrary thereunto. Which, how agreeable it is to that Evangelical Rule, and
the sentiments of Piety, and Charity, let the sober and considering Christian
Judge. For evidence of their practice, (besides those testimonies See Sect. 9.
of this Chapter.
before cited,) I shall now add these. For the Lords Prayer, (which we find in
their several Offices, and St. Hierom tells us, that Apostoli Dominico
praecepto ad celebrationem eucharistiae adhibuere orationem Dominicam. Hieron
l. 3. contr. Pelag.
The Apostles by the precept of Christ, added this to the celebration of the
Eucharist: and S. Austin informs us, that Quam totam petitionem ferc omnis
ecclesia Dominica oratione concludit. Aug. in ep. 59. ad Paulin. q. 3.
The whole Church almost, concluded their Prayers with it) In the Liturgy of
St. Chrysostom, we find the whole Chorus, or Quire saying it; And the Priest
only with a loud voice adding the Doxology, For Thine is the Kingdom, etc.
Again, in the same Chrysostom we find Minister and People joining together in
the holy Ministration, He saying, The Lord be with you; they answering him, And
with thy Spirit. Thus are they, Chrysostom. in 2 Cor. Hom. 18
the Minister and People talking together, or speaking one to another, as he
expresses it. Again, for that in the Communion, Lift up your hearts it was not
only the admonition of the Deacon, as the Minister may now, at the beginning
say, let us pray, or as they then did in the very same words; See Jewel. Art.
3. Divis. 16
Oremus, attendamus, or oremus pariter omnes, etc. as calling upon the people
for prayer and attention: but in a particular office, immediately before the
Communion In the Greek Church, the Cyprian. in Orat. Dom. Sermon. 6.
Priest said (...), as we, lift up your hearts; the people answering, we lift
them up unto the Lord: and this Chrysostom. ex vari is locis in M^tch. Hom. 9. or
(^s Aug. in Psalm. a 39. and de dono persever. l. 2. c. 13.) in sacramentis
fidelium, And again (de bonoviduitat. c. 16.) inter sacra misteria cor hab^re
sursum jubemur. See Jewels Defense. Part. 2. c. 14. divis. 2.
in conspectu Sacrificii, as they then called that Sacrament, not dreaming of
such a Sacrifice, as is now pretended in the Popish Mass. Of the Council.
Valent. An 444 Can. 6
Holy, Holy, Holy, of the, Council Val. Can 5 Basil ep. 63 Aug. ep. 178 Sozom.
l. 7. c. 9
Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy, etc. Of the Hallelujah, or Praise
ye the Lord. Of the Gloria Patri, or Glory be to the Father, etc. a Doxology
wont to be added at the end of every Graecls usitatum terminare p^eces aliqua
Doxologia Hinc Psalmis addere solius Gloria Patri See Conc. Val. Can. 7. and
also Platina de vitis pontific, Damas. 1.
Psalm, yea sometimes of their Prayers also. Of that in the Communion, It is
very meet and right so to do -- Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, etc. I
might give (yea they are gathered to mine hand by Ball. trial of Separ. chapter 9.
p. 175, 176. and chapter 7. Answer to Objection 3.
Mr. Ball) a cloud of Witnesses, Councels, and Fathers, to evidence this
practice in the ancient Church; And though the whole Liturgies, that go under
their names be conceived to be of later date, yet these particulars are
acknowledged to have been in use in those elder times.

So that all these things considered, there yet appears nothing, which can
prove our Liturgy repugnant to the Rule of the Gospel, or upon this account
unlawful to be used,

Responsals and Alternate Readings, and evidenced their non Repugnancy to the
Scriptures; it will be matter of less difficulty to solve that Objection of
their Repugnancy to edification; for as to this it is said,

they cause a confused murmur in the Congregation; as to edification
whereby what is read is less intelligible, and therefore unedifying: and
again, we may warrantably profess, in the name of our selves, and many sober
pious persons, that we experience that these things are against our
edification. But for Answer,



2. If any cannot experience his own edification, I shall earnestly beseech
him, before he pass a censure upon, or condemn the practice; that he would
first do this one thing, viz. seriously, sincerely, and impartially, as in the
presence of the great God, ( that Jer. 17.10.
searches the hearts and tries the reins) examine his own Soul, and see from
whence it really comes to pass, that he is not edified: whether it be not
from something in himself; rather then any thing in the matter or form of the
Prayers and Hymns, so read or sung. For, if it be either from his own
carelessenesse, or non attention; or from a prejudice in his mind against the
way and practice; that he receives not that profit, which he otherwise might:
there is no reason, for this, to condemn the form; when all the fault must be
charged upon his own self: let but such a Soul endeavor to purge out those
corruptions, and prejudices; let him seriously attend the service, and mind
what he is about; and without disputing cordially join in those Petitions,
Orizons, and praises: I doubt not but every such humble, pious, devout
Christian will experimently find, his heart in a good measure excited,
quickened, inflamed in his devotions; and then see, that these are not
unedifying. It is true, indeed, when men look upon these things with an evil
eye; when they shall give themselves (as some have done) liberty to vilify,
reproach, and scorn the way of the Church; and contemptuously call it, The
Chattering of the Priest and Clark one to another: it is no wonder, if they be
not edified by that which they so much despise. But if this be an argument, it
holds as strongly against all the conceived prayers and preachings of men: For,
we cannot be ignorant (when these late days have given us too sad experience)
how many persons have taken up a prejudice against the Ministers: they conceive
such and such to be formal, and cold in their Prayers, dull and heavy in their
Preaching: they despise the persons, and then their labors; and say they
cannot edify by them. Scarce any have been found (though never so eminent) but
to some or other their Prayers and Preaching have been judged unedifying: yea,
to some, The whole order of the Ministry has been so judged: and yet this is
no argument, to prove them so, when the only fault is in the passions, or
prejudice of the hearers. This was that, which hindered the edification of the
Jew in Christ's time Jo. 7.41, 52.
He was of Galilee. Math. 13.55.
The Carpenters Son, etc. and from hence it was, that He Mark 6.3, 5.
could do no mighty works there; not because he had not power to do so; but
because of the hardness of their hearts: who through their prejudice against
him could not receive the things of their peace. And really, I fear, that in
our case it is the great prejudice, which is in some men, against the Persons
and Places of those Reverend Bishops and others, who impose this Liturgy, that
makes men dislike the Form for their sake: and it edifies not, only because it
comes from those persons, which they love not. I charge not this upon all,
only I do desire every one seriously to examine his own Soul; and see, if
something of this nature be not in himself, before he pass a judgment of
non-edification upon the thing, or use required; as if it arose from the nature
of that, which arises only from the nature of men's passion and prejudice. And
withal I might oppose (and justly) to this, the experiences of others, sober,
pious Christians; whose hearts (as thousands will testify) have been
wonderfully excited, quickened, inflamed, and so edified by their (not formal,
but) religious, devout attendance on these holy performances.

Alternate Reading and Responsals (supposing still the attention of the mind
and heart) edify? The Confused Murmur (as it is called) makes not the words
intelligible to them, who do themselves bear a part, and say those words. All
edification (as was noted, by those right reverend Bishops Account of proceed
Answ. to N. 3.4.
at the conference) is not to be confined to the informing of our Reasons and
Understandings; but there is also very much of edification, (building up the
Soul in Grace, Holiness, Faith, Fervor, toward eternal life) in the
quickening, continuing, and uniting our devotions, which are apt to sleep,
freeze, and grow flat in a long continued Prayer. And people, no doubt, may be,
and many souls are, thus very much edified, when they are often awakened by
frequent Amens, and Interlocutions; being thus excited and stirred up by mutual
exaltations, provocations, petitions, holy contentions and strivings, which
shall show his own, and stir up others zeal to the glory of God. It is not for
edification that by that short Petition, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline
our hearts to keep this Law, after every commandment, Account of proc. p. 103.
Answ. to Sect. 1. P. 17.
Christian People are taught, as by a quick and active Prayer, to ask and beg
upon their knees pardon for their lives, forfeited by the breach of each
Commandment; and to pray for Grace and strength to keep them for the time to
come? In that, so much decryed, but indeed excellent, Litany, how are the dull
hearts of men quickened and awakened; and the truly pious, devout Souls
inflamed by their own frequent closing in the several petitions for every
particular matter therein begged? Does not the whole Congregation by these
their Petitions and Responsals show, that they are sensible of Gods Honor;
troubled for their own wants; and do therefore desire that God should have all
possible glory; and beg, that their own wants may be relieved? These being
things, which in the Assemblies of Christians should not coldly or faintly be
done; these their own Responsals, and verbal concurrence, do much conduce to
the wakening of the Soul; and to put into, and preserve in the heart that heat
and vigor, which should make them, at the end, sound forth together their Amen
(as is recorded of the Primitive Christians) with that fervor, and zeal, ut
reboarit instar fulminis, aut irati maris; that he that heard the Echo of
their zealous tongues, might suppose, he heard the sound of the roaring of the
Sea, or the mighty voice of the Powerful thunder.

CHAP. VII. Two other exceptions answered, and 3. the frequent Intercessions,
and short Prayers, as also 4. the parcells of Scripture for Epistles and
Gospels, Vindicated.
Liturgy with Vain Repetitions: and the Responsals, with the Hinderance of
Edification; and Repugnancy to Scripture practice. The others, which follow
about the Brevity of the Prayers, and the Communion Service, will be easily
answered.

Form is, The Brevity or the Number of short Prayers, which would be much
better in one continued Prayer; not in several shreds or snips (as some call
them, rather the Prayer). And these are charged to be unnecessary Abruptions,
and Intercesions, neither agreeable to Scriptural examples, (when many
petitions are offered up at the same time) nor suited to the gravity and
seriousness of that holy duty.

Gravity, and Seriousness should be used in Prayer, which is our address to
the most High, and Holy God, is unquestionable. But it is also beyond dispute,
that this Seriousness is a quality of the mind; and may as well be in short, as
long Prayers: yea, too woeful experience shows, that men may trifle in longer,
as well as in shorter Orizons: and yet (the words of the mouth, and carriage of
the person being discoveries of the inward affections) it is confessed that we
are to show also as much reverence and gravity, as we can, in our words and
gestures. Yea, in public services, all things should be so ordered, as that
the people may be then taught an holy reverence; and kept in a serious frame of
Spirit during all those sacred offices. I cannot, therefore, but (with that
Extra modum and ordinem orationes multiplicant, undc auditores fibi ingratos
efficient and populum Dei potius fastidio avertunt, quam alliciunt. Durant.
Rational. integra brevitas. l. 4 cap. 15.
learned Papist) dislike, that men should multiply, or lengthen out, their
prayers beyond all measure and order; whereby the hearers are wearied, and the
people of God are not allured by the sweetness of the holy duty; but driven
from it, through the disdain of the tedious performance. And I cannot but
approve that rule of another, In Divino officio non tam overasa prolixitas
quam devota and servetur. Petr de Allia. Lib. de Reform. ^ccle. Cap de Reform.
Praelator.
That in divine offices there by observed, not so much a burdensome prolixity,
as a devout and entire brevity.

2. But it would be an unjust charge, to say this Liturgy is guilty of either
of these faults condemned. We have several short prayers, but not multiplied
beyond measure, or the bounds of a grave decorum: nor are they in the body of
them lengthned out to a burdensome prolixity. They cannot be accused to cause
a weariness by a confused tediousness; but they rather refresh by a grateful
variety.

Massebook; but has the practice and judgment of the ancient Church for her
direction. It was the Doctrine of St. Chrysostom, Deum trans, non longos
extendat Sermones nec in longum orationem producat; sed pauca et simplicia ve
rba dicat. Non enim in verborum multitudine, sed in mentis solertiae positum
est, ut exaudiatur. -- Breves enim and frequentes orationes fieri Christus and
Paulus praeceperunt, paucie ex intervallis. Nam si Sermonem in longum
extenderis, in negligentiam frequenter lapsus, multam dia bolo surrependi
facultatem dederis; and supplantandi, and abducendi cogitationem ab his quae
dicuntur. Si vero continuas and crebras orationes facias, totumque tempus
interpolans frequentia, facile poteris modestiam exhibere, and ipsas orationes
cum multa facies solertiae. Chr. Hom 74. Tom. 4. p. 641, 642.
That, he that prays should not make long speeches, nor draw out his prayer
into length; but speak few and plain words -- for the hope of being heard lies
not in the multitude of words, but inward disposition of the heart. -- Christ
(says he) and Paul have enjoined short and frequent prayers to be made, with
small pauses, or intercisms (and such and no other are ours in this Liturgy)
between them: for if thou draw thy speech into length, then falling frequently
into negligence, thou will give the Devil too great opportunity to steal in,
supplant, and withdraw thy thoughts from those things that are spoken. Whereas
if thou make frequent prayers, and throughout all the time does renew them
often; thou may with ease show a moderation, and yet make thy prayers with
much skill. Agreeable to this, is that which St. Austin records of the Brethren
in Egypt: of whom (says he) Dicuntur fra tres in AEgypto crebras quidem habere
orationes, easque brevissimas, and raptim quodam modo jaculatas; ne illa
vigilanter erecta (quae orantiplurimum necessaria est) per productiores moras
evanescat, and hebetetur intentio. Aug. ep. 131.
it is reported that they have many prayers, but every of them very short,
suddenly darted forth, least that intention of mind being vigilantly raised
(which is very necessary for him that prays) should by long continuance
vanish, or grow blunt. In their judgments then, by short and frequent Prayers
the Soul is kept awake, and in a more quick and lively frame. And this I am
sure is no enemy to seriousness or gravity.

A. Nor is this so disagreeable to Scripture patterns, but that we may find
some examples of this also. Neither can I see, why the frequent repetition of
Gods Name and Attributes at the beginning of our several requests; and closing
them with the merits and mediation of Christ, should be suggested as an
irreverent, affected, empty tossing of Gods name in prayer (an expression which
I am heartily sorry, that grave, serious, sober men should use, to vilify an
established order in the Church) any more then (supposing it used with holy,
faithful and humble hearts) that repetition of this name of God no less than
four times in two verses, Psalm. 42.1, 2.
As the Heart pants -- so pants my soul after thee, O God. My Soul is a
thirst for God -- The Living God; when shall I come -- before God? The Church,
by these quick and short prayers, seeming to teach her Children, how the
gracious heart sends forth its desires and longings after God. The constant
attendant of the Hearts braying after the waters, is quick and short breathings;
the breath in have drawn in, and as suddenly sent forth again: so the gracious
Soul longing after the presence of God, the enjoyment of Pardon, Peace, Grace,
Life, and Communion with Christ, is thus panting, and these quick, pithy
expressions, and short prayers, a^ lively resemblances of the quick and short
breathings of the Soul after God: as there, O God, the living God, when shall I
appear before God. And if the same words may be repeated, (as no doubt they
may) without Tautological vanity; and it is so Account of Proc. p. 62.
confessed if it be not from emptiness, or neglect of order and affectation:
Why should such emptiness, affectation, or neglect of order, be imputed to our
prayers merely upon the account of such a repetition? if any persons be guilty
of such defaults, or neglects in the use of them; let them bear their own
blame: let it not be imputed to the Prayers, which may be used by holy and
humble hearts, and no doubt are, without that affectation, etc.

Account of Proc. Rep'y, to Answ. to Except. 16. Sect. 3.
though in Psalms and Hymns, where the affections are to be elevated by such
figurative streins and elegancies, as best beseem Poetry and Rapture, such
repetitions are not condemned: yet to make a prayer of a few petitions, and
begin and end every such, with Gods name and Christ's merits, this is condemned
as an affected empty tossing, etc.

Psalms, or Hymns, or Raptures of Poetry. That Prayer of Daniel, which upon
the expiring of the 70. years Captivity he put up to God, for Confession of
sins, and Humiliation, and praying for the restoration of Jerusalem, seems
indeed to stand as one continued prayer (and yet, if so, it is no longer then
some one may be found in our Common Prayer Book) but observe it, and ye will
see it to consist of several intercisions, and, even such short prayers as
ours, beginning still anew with the name and attributes of God. He begins,
Dan. 9.4.
O Lord, the great and dreadful God; keeping Covenant and mercy to them that
fear him -- We have sinned, etc. again, within three verses, v. 7.
O Lord, Righteousness belongs unto thee -- then a fresh, in the very next
verse, v. 8.
O Lord, to us belongs Confusion -- and as closing this, v. 15.
And now O Lord our God -- then immediately begins another prayer, o. 16.
O Lord, according to all thy righteousness I beseech thee -- again, in the
very next, he begins with the name of God, and closes with the merits of
Christ, v. 17.
Now, therefore, O our God, hear the prayer of thy servant, and his
supplication, and cause thy face to shine upon the Sanctuary, that is desolate,
for the Lords sake: yet he immediately begins again, v. 18.
O my God incline thine ear and hear, open thine eyes and see -- and closing
that also with, Not for our righteousness, but thy great mercies. He presently
begins again, and subjoyns another short prayer, full of nothing but such
repetitions, quick and short breathings, four times in one verse v 19.
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive; O Lord hearken and do: defer not for thine own
sake, O my God. Here we see a Religious service performed with many such short
prayers (for they are evidently called so, (...) Preces, Supplications for
grace and mercy a (...)
not one, but as many, and several, v 3.
Supplications in the Plural) and as frequent repetitions as any can be found
in our Liturgy: and I think none dare accuse this holy Prophet as guilty of an
affected empty tossing of Gods Name, etc. Yea, Christ himself has given us a
president in some cases of not only repeating the same words, but the same
thing; repeating the same name and attributes of God, etc thrice, Math. 26, 39,
42, 44.
Father if it be possible, etc. I shall conclude this with the words of that
truly Reverend Person: Bp. Downam^ of Prayer. c. 22. p. 13^.
Wherefore, howsoever some do carp at the short prayers in our Liturgy, calling
them shreds; and wishing, that in one continued prayer, all our requests should
be joined: Notwithstanding, the wisdom of those learned and godly men, who out
of the most ancient Liturgies compiled ours, is to be commended; who,
considering that our long continued prayer would to the greatest sort seem
tedious, and breed distraction and wandering thoughts; have set forth many short
prayers, to avoid weariness, and to keep the mind of the people attentive.



shreddings (as some pleased to call it) as of prayers, so of the Scriptures;
taking here and there a piece for an Epistle, and Gospel.

in transitu give a short account of the use and standing of these in the
Liturgy. I mention these here, where we are considering the Form and Order;
for, as to the matter of them, they being part of the Holy Scriptures, that
admits no dispute: but the exception is taken to that manner of Section, and
Division which is used; and the order of reading them; and calling Historical
parts, the Epistle, which is only matter of Form and Order. But I Answer, 1.
ab initio, nor very ancient: and why we may not upon particular occasions make
such or such Sections, as our Fathers have done longer or shorter, I see not.
What See several vrieties o^ divisions of the Gospel, etc. in Balls ^^ial of
Separ. ch 3. p 3^. out of several Authors.
variety of such divisions has been in several Churches, is not unknown to the
learned. The first Author of that division of Chapters, which we follow, some
River Isagog. ad Script c 29. Sect. 21.
conceive to be Hugo, Cardinalis, about the year of Christ, 1254. and that is
not so long since as to be accounted ancient. He that put the Henr. St^ph. ad
Lector. in Conc N Test.
Latin Bible first into Verses, and so also divided the New Testament, was
Robert Stephen. These are things, therefore, too low for wise men to contend
about. 2. For the thing it self, we need say no more to justify it, then 1.
Jewish Church at the times of their solemn assemblies, had lectures out of the
Law and the Prophets, which the Act 13.27 et 15.21.
Scriptures clearly intimate. Junius Ju^. in Act. 13.15.
out of Maimonid. gives us this account of the manner. The custom of reading
the Law in the Synagogues every Sabbath Day, they say, was delivered by Moses,
and again brought in by Ezra after the return from captivity; and then there
was added the reading of the Prophets also. The Law they divided into so many
Sections ( which they called (...)) as there were sabbaths in the year; that
every year the whole Law, i. e. the Pentateuch, might be read through: which
was ended at the Feast of Tabernacles, and then to begin again in course. Out
of the Prophets also certain Portions or Chapters ( which they call (...))
answering to the Sections of the Law, in number, and (as near as they could) in
matter and consent in Doctrine also, were collected and appointed to be read.
This reading of the Law and the Prophets being finished, they, having first
obtained leave from the Master of the Synagogue, out of the Scriptures preached
to the people. 2. See many Collections to this purpose, in Ball Trial of Separ.
p. 31.
had lectures out of the Prophets, and Apostles; before Sermon they read some
portion of the Old and New Testament (as did the Jews, the Law and the
Prophets) and those lessons did usually afford texts for their preachers. In
some, Hook. Eccles. P^l. 15. 20.
we read of an Apostolical constitution for the P^st lectionem legis, et
prophetarum, et Actorum, et Evangeliorum, sa^utat ecclesiam, diecns, Gratia
Domini nostri, etc et post salutationem alloquantur populo Sermon Hostatorio.
Clem. Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 5.
reading of the Law, the Prophets, the Gospels, and the Acts, and after all
these, the blessing given, The Grace of our Lord Jesus, etc. then this service
being ended, a Sermon preached. Ordinarily they were read in course and order,
(as those who read the Sermons of St. Chrysostom and St. Augustine, shall soon
find) but sometimes some See several testimonies of this in Ba^l. Trial. etc. c.
8 p. 144
peculiar lecture was read, and the order interrupted by an intervening
festival; which had a peculiar portion of the Gospel suited to the day and
solemnity. And this was not wholly arbitrary; for the Scriptures being not all
of one sort, some parts being easy, some hard: Direction where to begin in
reading and how far to proceed, is not altogether superfluous. And the Church
appointing such Chapters, or Portions at such times, and upon such occasions,
as are judged to fit the seasons, and to afford profitable instructions to the
hearers; can neither be repugnant to Scripture or the Christian practice. There
is nothing in this then but may lawfully be complied with, God having commanded
us to read the Scriptures, but what book, what chapter, such a day, or on such
occasions, or how much at a time, are things (as Baxt. his Disput Disp. 5. chapter
2. Sect. 13, 14.
Mr. Baxter himself acknowledges) left to Humane Pendence to determine; and I
am sure, if it be determined by our Superiors, it is no part of prudence to
oppose their determinations in this thing. 3. Epistles, and Gospels, we read of
them in the Liturgies of the Greek Church. But the first mention that I find of
them under this name, is in a Manuscript, that I have seen, of one Nilus, whom
in Ecclesiastical story, we find to be both a Bishop, and a Martyr: so he is
called by the Cent. 4. c. 4. de ^oct Sect. de bon oper.
Centurists of Magdel. but whether the Bishop, and the Martyr be the same
person, is some doubt; a Nilus there was a Fuseb Hist. l. 8. c. 13.
Martyr in Egypt under Dicclesian: a Nilus (whether the same or no) a Cent.
Mag. Cent. 3. p 22
Bishop in Palestina, and a Martyr, a Nilus reckoned among the Cent. 4. c 10. p
6^5.
Doctors of the Affrican Church, who is said to write many things, some
precepts concerning good works according to the Order of the Law: certain
(...), or, short sentences of Piety, and Morality, Among these sentences there
is mention made of these Epistles read in the Church, which he calls, (as
among the Greeks they were called) (...), because usually they were portions
taken out of the Acts or writings of the Apostles: among other of his
Sentences, this is one, If thou come into the Church, and see none there,
then go thy self, and out of the book there read the Epistle ((...)) and go thy
ways, etc. it seems by this, that the Bible lay then in the Church, and such
portions of a Liturgy, and Sections of the Gospel, or Apostolic writings
appointed for such and such days. In the Liturgy of Chrysostom, this office
is called (...), and thus ordered. In the morning service they did read one
Gospel, a portion out of the Evangelists: after this, at their Missa, or Holy
Communion (for the notion of the Popish Sacrifice was nothing of their Mass in
those days) they had this order -- Allelujah, and a Psalm of David, being
ended, the Deacon says (...), Let us attend: then the Reader having repeated
the (...), which was, two verses of some Psalm of David, suited to the nature
of the Epistle then to be read, and the Festivity of the day then Celebrated;
The Deacon said again (...), Let us attend: then the Epistle was read: that
being ended; and some interlocutions between the Priest, Deacon, and Quire,
sung; and some other rites passed; the Priest standing at the Holy Table, with
his face toward the West, i. e. to the Congregation, he said with a loud voice
(...), Let us hear the holy Evangelist: then the Deacon read the Gospel
appointed for the day. This ended; the Catechumens are dismissed, and the
Communicants proceed on. Priest (...), Let us with our whole heart say, and
with our whole mind let us say -- Chorus, (...) -- Lord have mercy upon us;
Deac. (...), O Lord Almighty, the God of our Fathers, we beseech thee hear us,
and have mercy upon us. Chor. (...). Lord have mercy upon us. Deac. (...). Have
mercy upon us, O God, according to thy great mercy, we beseech thee hear us,
and have mercy upon us. Chor. (...). Lord have mercy upon us. Deac. (...) --
We pray thee moreover -- going on to pray for their Kings and Emperors, etc.



These things I have cited thus at large, that it may appear, that those
several Practices, and Interlocutions, and Responsals, as in the Liturgy in
general, so particularly at the Communion, and the reading of the Epistles, and
Gospels, as we use them, in such Sections, and Order, is no new thing in the
Church, nor did the ancient Christians think this any way repugnant to the holy
Canon.

Apostles, or Prophets, or Acts; whether called the Epistle, or, for the
Epistle. These are things (almost infinitely) below the Peace of the Church.

Thus, I think, I have gone over the most material exceptions against the
Liturgy, as relating to the Form, Frame, Manner of Composure, and Order therein
prescribed: and have so far cleared it, that it may appear, there is nothing
herein, whose use is unlawful; or contrary either to Scripture, or the Gravity
and Seriousness of a Religious service, and the holy managing of our public
Devotions.

CHAP. VIII. The Matter of the Liturgy examined, and the exceptions against it.
1. As Defective. 2. As using corrupt Translations. 3. As prescribing
Apochryphal Books. 4. As to the Form of Absolution, considered and answered.
Form, we now are to consider the Matter of the Service, and Prayers
prescribed. And if there be nothing in this, evil to be done; nothing required
of us, which is either against the Rule of Faith, or Good Manners; nothing
contrary to Faith or Holiness: (Then according to that known Quod neque co ^ra
fidem, neque contra bonos mores insungitur, indif^^ren ^e^ est habendum, et pro
eorum, inter quos vivitur, societate servendum est. Aug. ad Jan. Ep. 118!
Rule) there remains nothing in it, but what may with a good Conscience be
lawfully used, and submitted to: and this I hope to make appear in these
ensuing Chapters.

And the truth is, this is a matter of no great difficulty, and therefore does
require no great skill, or length of discourse to clear it; for among all the
exceptions, there is not one, that charge the matter as evil. Let us take a
view of the particulars, and a transcient view, in the most, will serve the
turn.

Defectiveness. 1. The first charge is Defectivenesse, or want of due matter
that should be, Account of pro. genesis ^xc. 17. Sect. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
no preparatory address: sins in Confession not express enough, nor
sufficiently enumerated: prayers for the most part consisting of mere generals,
without mention of the particulars, wherein the generals exist; The Catechism
defective in many essential necessary Doctrines of our Religion, etc. But,

1. Answered. Sect. 3.
It might be answered, that many of these things are not wholly wanting, but in
some good measure there: That (despise not, O Lord, humble and contrite hearts)
in the Preface cannot with reason be recited as an exhortation; but is really
an address to God for acceptance. Nor can these words, [That those things may
please him which we do at this present] be rationally said to be no words of
prayer, but a part of an exhortation to the people, when they are expressly put
up as a prayer in this petitionary form, (wherefore we beseech him to grant us
true repentance that --) and the confession of sin is comprehensive of all the
particulars required: Psalms and Hymns there are of praise suited to Gospel
worship; and petitions both for general and special mercies.

forms, the matter whereof being agreeable to the Word of God; we may lawfully,
beyond dispute use them, though there be not other particulars, which we judge
as good, or necessary: We are not required to give our judgments concerning
other things, but to conform to the use of these.

2. Sect. 5. Except. 2. Corrupt Translations.
Another exception is, against the corrupt Translations used, and appointed to
be used: These Translations are mentioned by the Divines in the Conference Acc.
of proceed. Genesis Exc. 8.13.
in the several Epistles and Gospels, but by others, in the old version of the
Psalms, wherein some passages are said to be contrary to the Hebrew Text; as
particularly that in the Old, Psalm. 105.28.
(They were not obedient) to the Hebrew and new Translation, [they rebelled not
against his word] and again, in the Old, Psalm. 106.30.
then stood up Phinehas and prayed] to that in the New, agreeable to the
Hebrew, and the truth of the Number. 25.7.
sacred Story, ( Then stood up Phinehas and executed judgment.

1. Epistles and Gospels, Old translation being rejected, and the new brought
into those parts of the Liturgy. 2. Psalms (whether because of the Music used
in Cathedrals, being set to that Version; or for what other reasons appearing
to those Reverend persons, to whom the business of the Liturgy was referred)
the Translation is not thought fit to be altered; they must stand as they do;
but yet here is nothing that can amount to such an evil, as for whose sake the
Liturgy, wherein this Version is retained, should be deemed unlawful to be
used: For, 1. Calendar prescribes what particular Psalms shall be read in their
daily order; and what special Psalms, on special days and solemnities: but I
know no Rubric, or Canon that appoints them to be read in that Translation,
though it be there retained, and printed with the Book as it was then in use,
when the Book was first compiled: And I doubt not therefore, but that we obey
the Law when we read these Psalms, though in the New translation: And I know
some, who in the former days did so read them; but I am yet to learn, that any
one was ever questioned for so doing; even then, when the days are said to be
days of the greatest persecutions against the Non-Conformists. 2. that we read
the Psalms according to that version; but this is not to judge this the best,
nor to justify any errors, if such be in the Translation; the New Version, may
have its errors, but the use of this is not to maintain those errors. 3. New
Translation is deservedly judged, by men well skilled in the Original
languages, the best extant: yet is not this perfect. For, who is there almost,
that has either commented, or paraphrased upon the whole, or explained, or
preached on some several positions; but he has attempted to amend it; and
given quite another sense, then the words of the present Translation seem to
mean: and yet accounted blameless for so doing? and in many of these there is
in their judgments, as great a contrariety to the Hebrew Text; as any in the
Old Translation to the New: So that here also there may be a difference from
the new translation, and yet not from the Original Hebrew. Yea, in the Hebrew
it self we find as vast a difference between the (...) and the (...) the
reading and writing observed by the Masorites; whose work it was, to
distinguish the Canonical Scripture from the Apocryphal; to purge the
Authentic Canon from all corruption crept in during the captivity; and that
they might prevent such for the future, to number the Verses, Words, yea, and
Letters of every Book; and also to note the different writing and reading. And
there we find as great differences, as any observed in these Versions. Yet
notwithstanding this, these Holy men who were so exact and careful, and zealous
for the purity of the sacred Oracles, did not judge it expedient to deny or
cast out the received writing, but kept that which they found in the Text, and
only noted the (...), or reading in the Margin, which is evident to any that
has (though but cursorily) read the Hebrew Bible. 4. Huttons Answer to Reasons
for refusal of subscription to the Common prayer, cap. 1. and 2.
learned man, because they do fully take off the Objection, and the Book is not
in every hand, nor easy to be had; who (when these very Pleas were made by
some Ministers of Devon, (about or soon after the Conference at Hampton Court)
for their refusal of Subscription as the Can. 36.
Canon required) thus answers these contrarieties mentioned in those two places
of the Psalms.

1. As to the one, the words are (...). The difference in reading, in the old
Version, [They were not obedient -- ] in the New, Psalm. 105.28. examined.
but then not extant, [they rebelled not against his word] these seem directly
contrary. To satisfy this he does first premise this general consideration,
that in a place challenged to be contrary to Gods Word, we must know: 1. What
contrariety is, and what diversity. 2. Whence the diversity, as, 1. By variety
of Copies. 2. Ambiguity of words. 3. Propriety of speech, sentence and phrase
must be observed. 4. Pointing, with distinctions. 5. A tuning and accent. 6.
Circumstances of the place. 7. The Analogy and proportion of Faith. Having thus
premised, he applies these to the particular thus;

1. As to this place, men might know, that the word [(...) not,] is in Hebrew
taken sometimes for ((...) to him) as many times the Masoreths note it (I
suppose he means writing of one in the Text, and noting the other in the the
Margin, as indeed it is frequent, and in many places the Marginal reading seems
to be the more genuine, as particularly that in Psalm. 100.3. (...) Marg. (...)
And to him we, i. e. His we are, even because he made us, which I conceive to
be the genuine meaning of this place, parallel to that, Ps. 95.
The sea is his, for he made it,) and if we allow it may be so taken, this (he
conceives) if well thought upon, would be enough to cool the heats and
invectives of men, against the Translation of this word.

2. In this seeming contrariety about this, [ not obedient, and not
disobedient] we may find at the first view the like in Job 13.15. See this Text
canvased by Mr. Gataker in his Cyn. et Miscel. Advers. l. 3. c. 18. p. 187, 188.
Job, (...) Behold, he will kill me, I will not trust, -- Or, will I not trust
in him? The Geneva omitteth this word (not) ^ Lo, though he slay me, yet will I
trust these I will, and I will not, may be thought to thwart one another,
comparing the Original and the Translations. But a seeming contrariety it is,
and no other; for set a fit accent upon the words, and give them the point of
an Interrogative, and there is no odds; Will he kill me? and will I not trust
in him? the same in effect, as, Though he kill me, yet I will trust in him. The
like course does Junius take, to succor the Chaldee Paraph. against
Bellarmine, as in Cains speech, Genesis 4.23. Bellarm. de verbo Dei. l. 2. c. 3.
I have killed a man, The Chaldee to be read by way of interrogation, (...).
Iun.
Have I not killed a man? So where Bellarmine carps at the Septuag. for that
they read Genesis 26. Bellarm. ib. c. 6.
we have found water, the Greek is, Have we not found? so far off must we be
from over busy, and hasty prejudicing a translation, though it give in
affirmative terms, when the Hebrew may seem to deny.

3. There is not more difference in these [ Not Obedient, and Not Disobedient]
then in that to the Jews, Joh. 5.35. (...) ab (...) Noluistis ab (...)
Voluistis. Aret. in l. oc.
[Yee would for a season rejoice in his light] and, [Yee would not -- ] so
Aretius interprets it; both true, and of the same persons: yet a contrary will.

4. Admit the same speech be delivered of one and the same thing; one
affirming, the other denying: yet no contrariety, i. e. no contradiction. For
examine the speech, Mic. 5 2. Mat. 2. 6. See these places more fully and
exactly ventilated in Gataker, Cvn. lib. 3 c. 18 p 200.201.202.
[Thou Bethlehem art the least] and, [Thou -- art not the least -- ] In the
one, the least, because of the smalness of the circuit, in the other, not the
least, being dignified by our Saviors birth.

5. Read we a contrariety? as sometimes we do: yet either our ignorance it is,
that we see not; or, if we see, want of discretion, that we give not our selves
and others satisfaction in this case, St. Matthew writes, There was (...), Mat.
8.30.
a far off from them, an herd of Swine: St. Mark, and St. Luke say, There
(...). Mar. 5.13. Luke 8 32.
by them. Let men learn what this means, and having considered these, let them
demand satisfaction for the other.

6. Say, one place sorbids, another commands the same thing: will men take part
with one against the other? or, not lay their hands upon their mouths; till
they know, what answer to make? Hos 4.15.
Come ye not to Gilgal; go not to Bethaven: here is a prohibition: yet in
another place, Amos 4.4.
Come to Bethel, and transgress; to Gilgal -- here an injunction. How? does
one bid, another forbid? What! is God divided? is their dissension in the
Spirit of Unity? or, is there more then one truth? Prophet against Prophet?
Osee against Amos; and Amos against Osee? nothing so. The plain-song is
negative, Go not up: The Descant is varying the tune by way of Irony, or mock;
as that of Elijah, when bidding Baals Priests 1 King 18.27.
Cry aloud, he gives a reason, because, Baal was pursuing his Enemies.

7. We take not this to be more prejudicial to the truth, than the word,
Cajnan, Luke 6.36.
in the Genealogy of Christ, put in by the seventy. Here, let us observe how
Junius follows the truth in love, speaking of this point. The Objection is,
if that word Cajnan be admitted, the authority of Lukes Gospel is impreached,
for, Falso adhibetur Cajnanis uomen
the name of Cajnan is falsely put in, to this, Junius answers, Etsi, re falsum
suisse dabimus, tamen suit opinab. le, quam opinionem in vulgo roceptissimam
respexit lucas. Jun. paral l. 1. Paral. 60.
Though indeed false, yet was it otherwise supposed. I, but, Luke knew, it was
false, S^ivit quidem illud, sed hoc ^^^^modi esse sciv ^ q^od re^ tantum unius
by ^ori^^ no^ autem fid^i catholicae ^eritatem effend ret. ibid
He knew it indeed, but he knew it to be such a point, which might offend the
truth of one only History, but not of the Catholic Faith: I, but Luke, by
this means did confirm an error; but, it was no such purpose of his; the
remedy he knew would have been worse, if in all have, out of season, he should
have attempted the removal of this name: Propter cansam quae non at^ingit funda
mentum ullum fidei propri, and per s^^ periclitata fuisset scripturae
authoritas etc.
for so the authority of the Scripture might have been endangered; whereas this
(...) point did not properly, of it self, touch the foundation of Faith. I, but
this is the wisdom of the flesh: Non est, sed spiritus haec fa^i n^ia ibid.
No, it is the wisdom of the Spirit, that those Quod 70 olim mutaverunt Mosen,
indigne factum; quod Evangelista. and Apostoli mutatu^^ receperint, sapientur
factum per spiritum Dei, convenientur ^^is temporibus. ibid.
70 changed Moses, it was not well done, that the Apostles and Evangelists
received it being changed, and so did use it, I hold it wisely done by the
Spirit of God, and sorting with the times. Then closing the point, desires of
God this modesty in this our age, bearing with others errors; which without
offense, for peace and edification, might be tolerated: and extinguish that
fervent spirit of contention, which now a days can pardon their brethren
nothing, nor yield ought to the public peace, edification, and charity, the
bond of perfection: which Nihil tegere, and dissimulare potest, in eo, qui
tegit pecca^^ nostra, and miscricordia maxima toleravit tempora ignorationis
nostrae. ibid.
can cover and wink at nothing, even for his sake, that covers our sins, and
in greatest mercy bears with the times of our ignorance, as if that blessed
Servant of God his exhortation had respect to the words of St. Paul, (...)
Follow the truth, and for fear of being over eager, it is added, in love. The
ground of which sweet entreaty, if we may conjecture, he might take of St.
Hierom, Qu^d semel aures h^mi^um occupaverat, et n^scent^s ecclesis robo averat
fi them. justum a^ etiam nostr^ filentio comproba ri. H^^ron. 1. Pro^m. in P^ral.
what thing ^ath once possessed the ears of men, and has strengthened the faith
of the Church springing up, it was meet also by our silence to be approved.

8. To close all, Arist. (...), c. 4.
there is no contradiction, unless it be of the same person, Ad idem, se
cundum, idem simal, et eodem tempore. Arist. de repreh. Sophistar.
action, and time, and in the same manner. Now in the History mentioned by the
Psalmist, there are diverse persons, to whom these words may be fitted; some of
the learned, understand Moses and Aaron, and They were not disobedient: others
fit them to the wonders and judgments which God sent forth, others take it, of
Pharaoh, and his Host, and They were not obedient; and to this the old version
refers -- so as there is a truth in them all, no falsehood; if Dunces, that
have a wrangling Spirit, can render a question for Averroes the Arabian
interpreter his credit; as where Aristotle writes, Natural Philosophy is
busied in that Physica speculatur de ente. quod possibile est moveri. Arist.
which is possible to be moved; the Arabic is -- De ente quod impossible est
moveri. Averr.
which is impossible to be moved; by distinguishing (as their manner is) a
Subjectum commune, vel adaequatum.
common subject from a proper: what a foul shame is it for us, that will not
understand, (which we may specially terms far more easily composed without
prejudice to the truth of Gods word, and our Holy Faith? Thus far, that learned
man in answer to this exception: adding in the close this; Let men, with whom
we have to do in this case, but promise us their love in the truth, and we dare
promise their (...). 1 Cor. 13.5.
love will have much patience.

Thus much for the version of this, They were not Obedient, in the Old, and,
not Disobedient in the New.

2. To the other, in the next Psalm, in the Old Translation, Psalm. 106.30.
considered.
Phinehas prayed; in the New executed judgment, wherein they are said to be
contrary, this learned man proceeds to answer thus.

1. Might not Phinehas do both, pray, and execute judgment? These be diverse
things, but not contraries; Paul Baptizeth, and Paul Preaches: the same
person, but a several action; several, not contrary. -- But does this
translation, He stood up and prayed, deny that he executed judgment? -- Admit
this kind of argument, viz. that diversity of reading implies a contrary
story, we may show our love in easy crediting them that say so; but then we
follow not the truth, as it does become us. For those places Psalm. 40.6.
Mine ears have thou pierced: and, Hebr. 10 5.
A body have thou prepared me: do seem as unlike, yet they speak both of the
same person and action. So, He Isay 28.16.
that believes shall not make have; in the Prophet: and Romans 10.11.
He that believes, shall not be ashamed; in the Apostles: have more odds in
show, than that which here offends our Brethren; but they are a looking-glass,
to see man's infirmity; how it pretends truth, but intends not love. The
Prophet, and the Apostles well agree notwithstanding the diversity of words:
for, he that beleiveth makes no more have, then good speed, and therefore is
not ashamed; a figurative speech, Metony^^. effecti.
because hasty men are disappointed, and men disappointed are ashamed. In Osee
it is said, that, Hos. 12.4.
Jacob had power of the Angel, and prevailed; He wept, and made supplication:
but the History Genes. 32.28.
has no such words, as, He wept, or prayed; what then? yet might he do all
these, and no contrariety in the action.

Obj. But the word signifies, He executed judgment.

2. Sol. The word is (...) (whence (...), Prayer, is derived) and it may seem,
the Translatour read (...) in which Conjugation it is rendered prayed, having
the same letters, the same points, the same accent in the History of Abraham
and Abimelech Genes. 20.17
[Then Abraham prayed unto God.] neither are we alone in this Translation: The
Targum, and Chaldee Paraphr. is, He prayed, the Greek (...), He offered up
Sacrifice. And since it was an action so pleasing to God, we do injury not to
think, he prayed, when he did apply himself to this work; since every thing,
(yea, executing judgment) is sanctified by prayer. Now, the word bearing so;
other Translations Chaldee and Greek, rendering so: as we condemn not others, so
neither have they cause to condemn us. Is it Heretical, or an occasion of
danger either way interpreted? Qui been operatur, been orat. Glos. Ordin.
He that is well employed, prays well, and Prayer it is that sanctifies
every duty of our calling: so as Prayer excludes not executing of judgment;
nor does this exclude that. How then are these Translations made enemies, that
in this holy business have so kind an eye each to other, as Exodus 25.20.
Cherub toward Cherub, and both looking toward the Propitiatory.

Inst. But the Holy Ghost meant only one of these.

Repl. 3. But, which is that one that you mean? what assurance of that? why not
that which I mean? the words bearing both; why shall we say but one? In this
case S. Austin his counsel may well be followed. Cum alias dixerit, hoc sensit,
quod ego; and alius, imo illud, quod ego: religiosius, arbitor, dicere, cur non
^trumque verum. Aug. Conf. l. 12. c. 31.
When one shall say the Holy Ghost meant as I do; and another, as I do: I think
it a more religious speech to say; why not rather both? if both be true; yea,
if a third, or a fourth. Cur non illa ^mnia vidisse tredatur, per quem unus
Deus sacr^s literds vera and diversa visuris, multorum sensibus temperavit.
ibid.
And if any man sees any other truth in these words; why should not he be
thought to see them all, by whom one God has tempered the holy Scriptures with
senses of many things, for them that see many true things, and yet diverse? What
himself would do in such a case, that Father sets down; rather keeping
himself to the liberty of the Word, then any way either to imprison it, or the
riches of Observation that arises from it. And in another place, he shows
what inconvenience comes by this straight course. Si qua scripta divina
legerimus, qua possint salva fide, imbuimur, aliis atque aliis p^rere
sententiis in nulla earum nos praecipiti affirmatione ita projiciamus, etc.
August. de Genes. ad lit. lib. 3. cap. 18.
If we shall (says he) read any divine Writings, which may obey diverse
interpretations without danger to the Faith; I advise that we be not headlong
in the affirming but one, excluding the rest, least afterward the truth being
more exactly discussed, may be found to overthrow it quite; and so we strive
Non pro sententia Divina nostrarum Scripturarum, sed pro dimicantes. ibid.
not for the sentence of Holy Scripture, but for our own interpretation,
contending that to be Scripture, which is but our private opinion, whereas we
should seek that to be ours, which is the Holy Scriptures. So far this Author,
and I hope the Reader will not be much troubled at the transcribing of this,
which may give much light to the matter in hand; for really were these things
seriously considered by men, who sincerely minded (as the truth, so peace and
love, this translation of the Psalms would be no such stumbling block in the
way of our peace, nor matter of any such contention among us.

Translation, which it deemed to be not so genuine, because not exactly
agreeable in many passages to the Original Hebrew. In many places this Version
seems to follow the Greek, Septuagint; which has been always received among
the learned in the Church with high veneration, and esteemed next to the sacred
Text: And sure I am, if the Apostles, yea, Christ himself, might (as they did)
use that, and cite those Texts, which they made use of, from the old Testament,
in their preachings and writings, not from the Hebrew, but the Greek Text, as
those 72. it can be no crime in our Church to follow their example: Yea, and if
that be true, which Isaac Vossius labors [and not without appearance of
reason] to prove that the authority of this Septuag. is more authentic then
the Hodierne Hebrew Copies; this will sufficiently justify the practice of our
Church there, where they follow that Translation, though not agreeable to the
Hebrew now extant. And, this, as it abetteth the Cainan (...), Luke 3.36.
in S. Luke, making the computation of the time, a mundo condito, more then the
present Hebrew reckons; so it excellently clears that particular Translation of
the 14th Psalm, Psalm. 14. v. 5, 6, 7. Whence inserted into the old Translation.
where three whole verses are inserted, which are not in the Hebrew there
(though in other places they are) viz. Their thro^t is an open sepulcher, with
their tongues have they used deceit; the poison of Asps is under their lips:
Their mouth is full of cursing and bitterness their feet are swift to shed
blood: Destruction and unhappiness are in their ways, and the way of peace
have they not known: there is no fear of God before their eyes, which are all
in the Greek, and thence taken out and so written by S. Paul Romans 3.13. -- 19.
himself, who must not be charged, either in this or any other, to follow a
corrupt Version against the Holy Text: Sed haec obiter. Only here let me mind
the Reader how many considerations might induce the minds of peaceable men to
study rather how to salve, then impair the credit of the Church, and not to
contend about such things as these.

Baxt. five Disputat. Disp. 5. cap. 2. Sect. 12. p. 402.
When there are (says he) diverse Translations of the Scripture in the same
language [ as in England here are the Old Version, the New England Version, Mr.
Rous his first and second, Mr. Whites, Bishop Kings, Sand 's, Mr. Bartons,
etc.] God has not told us which of all these we shall use, but given general
directions, according to which our own reason, or our Governors should make
choice. Now our Governors have made choice of this Version to be used in this
place, and have so prescribed it to us: Which by this confession, they may do,
and if they may do so, we may; yea we ought to obey, and use it according to
their prescriptions.

Thus have we considered this Old Translation of the Psalms, which now does (I
hope) clearly appear not to be so corrupt, as by some is pretended: and
whatsoever it be, there is nothing in it of such a nature, as for the sake
thereof, to make the Liturgy unlawful to be used, where this Translation is
retained. I proceed now to consider the other exceptions that follow.

3. Another Exception is, Except. 3. Apocrypha. Sect. 14.
That this Liturgy prescribes Apochryphal books and chapters to be read for
Lessons, which yet are (as to Doctrines to be believed, and duties to be
pra^ised) of dubious and uncertain credit. This has been of old one constant
exception, and many particulars cited out of the chapters thence to be read,
which carry a repugnancy to the Authentic Canon. At the least, These being
read as Lessons, the peace appointed for reading the Scriptures, this seems to
give them the authority of Scripture; which ought not to be done. For answer,
1. Matter of the Liturgy: and I shall freely acknowledge, 1. That in that
little reading which I have in Ecclesiastical History, and the practice of the
Ancient Church, I am not able to give an account, when these books first began
to be read. In the highest records, we find the Reading of the Prophets,
Gospels, and Apostles: yea I find the reading of the lives of Martyrs as high
as the 3 d. Council of Carthage, and there is some ground to think, that as
they, so these Apocrypha were then read for instruction, as other Homilies and
Exhortations; and might by degrees come into the place of Lessons; but in this
I am not peremptory. And I must also confess, 2. That I am not able (shall be
willing to acknowledge it my weakness) to reconcile many passages in these
books with the Doctrine of the Holy Scripture, and the sacred History: that as
yet I find not any thing to convince me of the reality of the story of Judith;
nor how to reconcile her Judeth 9.2.
commendation of the Genesis 34.
Fact of Simeon, with the Genesis 49.5.
Condemnation of it by the Holy Ghost; nor know how to justify her prayer to
God, Iudeth 9.10.
to prosper her in her lies: nor can ^ see how Baruch wrote his book in Bar.
1.1.
Babylon; and yet in the Ier. 43.6.
Holy Story, was with Jeremy at Jerusalem, and went not from him: nor do I well
understand his Bar. 1.8, 10.
offerings, and Vessels, when the Temple was before that time burnt: nor know I
how to bring the account of his Bar. 6.3.
seven generations to Jeremies Ie. 29.10.
70 years of captivity. Not to mention in Tobit, the Angels lie; the unchaste
Devil Asmodeus; the 7 Angels presenting the prayers of the Saints; the Magical
businesses of the Fishes heart, liver, and gall, to drive away Devils, and
restore sight: to all which, I know what answers have been offered, which yet
have not satisfied me. And 3. therefore I confess it my hearty wish, that they
may not; and my hope that (these things being under the eye of the Right
Reverend Bishops, and Clergy in the present Convocation) at least these
Chapters will not be prescribed for Lessons. 2. Israel) possibly they may see
reasons to retain them still; I am sure I am not to prescribe to them; and they
may see reason not to admit this alteration: I am now only to enquire, whether
we may submit in this. Is the reading of these of such a nature, as to involve
us in sin if we do it? or, is the requiring of these such a crime, as to make
the use of the Liturgy unlawful for the sake of these? I think not; and that
when commanded, we may lawfully obey in this, I judge for these reasons;


1. Though I find not, when they were first brought in, yet I find them read
very early in the Church. In Eusebius Eusebius. Hist. l. 4. c. 13.
we read, that not only the Apocrypha, but Clements Epistles were read: (as by
the Council of Carthage, Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 47.
the lives of Martyrs.) yea Eusebins Eusebius. l. 6. c. 18.
citing the Testimony of Origin to it, who was yet earlier. The Ancient
Councels indeed, ordered nothing to be read in the Church, Conc. Laod. Can.
15.16, 59.
but the Holy Scriptures: that is, as such, as Canonical, or under the name of
Holy Scripture; as is to be seen in that Council of Carthage, where they allow
the reading of others in their proper place, and for their proper end: and this
farther appears by that of the Council of Hippo, which abridging that 3 d of
Carthage, gives us this account of it Scripturae Canonicae l ^gendae quae sunt:
and praeter quas aliae non legantur. Conc. Hippon. Can. 36.
These are the Holy Scriptures, to be read in the Church; and besides these,
let no other be read. i. e. no other for such, or for Holy Scripture. It is the
unquestionable prerogative of the Sacred Scriptures, to be the prime and
supreme rule of Faith and Manners: and nothing is to be read as such, viz. as
the undoubted, or immediate rule of either, but the Scriptures alone: and
therefore by those ancient Fathers and Councils, they were accounted only
Canonical; and none else admitted for Trial of Truth, or proof of Doctrine. But
yet all Apochrypha were not accounted either profane or impious: but there
were some called Ecclesiastici, a majoribus appellati, quia in ecclesia
recepti, etc. Jo. Drus, de quaest. per epist. 107.
Ecclesiastical, because received and read in the Church, among other godly
books, though not as a rule of Faith, yet as instruction in manners: hence
those books were of old called in a sort Canonical, or Deutero-Canonici; not
equal to the Scriptures, but went after them, in a secondary place, and
preferred before others. In this sense I take that of St. Austin, speaking of
the times after Haggai, Zechary and Malachy. Aug. de civ. ^^ Dei. lib. 18. c.
36.
Quorum supputatio Temporum -- The supputation of which times (says he) is not
found in holy Scripture, called Canonical, but in others; which though the
Jews do not, yet our Church does reckon for Canonical. i. e. in a secondary
place such: for in another place he speaks otherwise of them; In Apocryphis
eist invenitur aliqua veritas, tamen propter multa falsa est Canonica
authoritas. August. de civit. Dei lib. 15. Cap. 23.
In the Apocrypha, though there be found some truth, yet because of the many
falsehoods, there is no Canonical authority. i.e. properly such. But by these
testimonies, it is clear that they were read in the Church; though not as the
undoubted rule of faith, yet as instructions builded thereupon.

Non-conformists See Balls Trial of Separ. Chapter 7. Answ. to Object. 6.
here also. He that pleases, may see See Hutton Answ. to Reasons chap. 10.
gathered to his hand the judgments of Zanth. de Relig. c. 1. art^^. 4, et 5.
Zanchy, Hiper. lib. 1. Me^h. Theol.
Hiperius, Pellic. praefat. in Apochryph. et praefat. in Judith.
Pelican, (one highly esteemed by Bucer, Zuinglius and Melancthon, and the
learned in those days) and Kimedonc. de Script. verb Dei, l. 6. c 90.
Kimedoncius a Professor of Divinity at Hidelburgh, who have judged these books
to have been received next to the Scriptures with great reverence; profitably
rehearsed; fruitful and profitable to the edifieation of the people; not Canons
of faith, but instructions for manners.

2. Neither has our Church received, or prescribed them in any other notion; a
mark of distinction is set upon them; they being called no other than
Apocrypha; and therefore cannot rationally be judged to be prescribed as
Canonical: especially when the express words of our Artic. 6. of the Church of
England.
Articles are, The other books (as St. Hierom says) the Church does read for
example of life, and instruction of manners, but does not apply them to
establish any doctrine; and these are the third of Esdras, and the rest that
follow.

3. Nor can our reading of them (though in that time and place) be with reason
judged to put an higher authority upon them, than the Church has done, which
prescribes them. Yea, though they are read for instruction, and example; it
follows not, that we are taught to practice every thing, or imitate every
particular in any example there; or to esteem every action good any more, than
we are to practice or imitate every thing that we read done, in the Scriptures.
The reading of Genesis 9.21.
Noah's being drunk: Genesis 19.33, 35, 36.
Lots incest Genesis 42.15.
Joseph swearing by the life of Pharaoh: 2 Samuel 11.4-18. and 12.9.
David's adultery, and murder: 1 King. 11.5.
Solomon's idolatry: Number. 12.1. --
Aaron and Miriams sedition: Act. 15.39.
Paul and Barnabas's angry parting: Matthew. 26.70. --
Peter's denial, and Gal. 2.11 -- Sect. 20.
dissimulation, etc. is neither an allowance of these infirmities, nor a ground
to practice the like. There are other uses of examples, than imitation: they
are in cautelam, as well as in sequelam; for caution, as well as instruction.
Nor can there be any more allowance of all the actions, lies, or fumigations in
Tobit, or Judith, by reading them, than there is of those other.

So that yet here is nothing to conclude it sinful to read these books
according to the order prescribed. The highest that can be imagined, is (which
yet I dare not determine) or may be, want of Prudence in requiring them; but no
shadow of unlawfulness in obeying the prescription; which is, Sect. 21.
Except. 4. The Absolution Answered.
but to read these Books, not to justify every thing in them.

Form of Absolution in the visitation of the sick: in these words, I absolve
thee -- This I conceive is of very little weight to be stood upon. For

1. That such authority is given to the Ministers, is, and must be granted by
all, that acknowledge them to have any interest in the power of the Keys, and
clearly given to them by Christ in that Joh. 20.23
Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted. From whence (if any where) we
must fetch the ground of our Commission and Ministry: and is so expressly
signified by the order of our Church in her Form of Order. Briests. Sect. 23.
Ordinations.

2. Nor do we without warrant (agreeably to our Commission, John 20.) say, By
this authority committed to me, I absolve thee. -- When, it is clear, we do not
that, which is proper to God alone Mar. 2.7, 10.
and to Jesus Christ as God, actually to grant a pardon; nor pretend to a power
to free from any penalty due from God to sin: nor as Judges, give the sentence:
but only as Ministers under Christ, and authorized by him, declare that
sentence: and this not absolutely, but expressly upon condition of sincere
repentance antecedaneous to that absolution. The Penitent having first made his
confession of sin, and supposing him truly such; Absolution is certainly his
due by the Promise of the Gospel: and what is so given, i.e. declared here by
the Minister, is Mat. 18.18 John 20.23.
ratified by Christ in heaven. But the truth is, errante clave, the person not
being penitent, the Absolution (though upon his profession, it remits the
censures, or estates him in the communion, and gives him the peace of the
Church; yet) as to mercy with God it signifies nothing: nor is it given any
otherwise than conditionally, that the subject be capable: it being purely
Ministerial, and Declarative of the mind of Christ in the Gospel. Nor is there
any difference between I absolve thee, in the sense of our Church; and I
declare thee absolved, which is really all one. Therefore to contend about
this, is but (...), to contend about words, when we differ not in the thing.

CHAP. IX. 5. Exception answered: and the Matter of several Collects examined
and cleared.
THere remains only one exception more. Sect. 1. Except. 5.
The matter of some Collects, Acc. of Procond. p. 15.
which were desired to be debated and considered. And these are these ten, (for
as to the Collects for Christmas day, Newyears day, Whitsunday, etc. Where the
exception is only to these words, [ This day, or upon this day.] The business
is only verbal, and not material; and if it be said, as upon this day, or, as
about this time, it is enough.)

1. The first is the Collect, for Saint John Evangelists day, Sect. 2. Coll.
for St. John Evan. day Answ.
and that is this

Merciful Lord, we beseech thee, to cast thy bright beams of light upon thy
Church, that it being enlightened by the Doctrine of thy blessed Apostle and
Evangelist John, may attain to thy everlasting gifts: through Jesus, etc.

Now I cannot easily conjecture what that is, that should in this Collect be
matter of offense: unless it be, that it supposes the Church enlightened by
the Doctrine of John. And really, in this where is the crime? Does it at all
oppose the Doctrine of John to Christ? Does it make the Gospel to be of John,
and not of Christ? Nothing less. The Gospel is the Gospel of God. 1 These. 2.2.
of the blessed God. 1 These. 1.5. and My Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.11. of Christ, Romans
1.16. and yet St. Paul cale it also Our Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.8. as that, the Gospel
of Paul, so is it the Doctrine of Jo^^, which he preached.
His Doctrine is the Doctrine of Christ; nor do we mean any thing else, but the
Doctrine or Gospel of Christ preached by Saint John. And would we seriously
study that Doctrine of Christ delivered by him, I am confident, we should soon
put an end to these unnecessary disputes: the main scope and design of His
Epistle being to press and persuade Peace and Love.

2. Another Collect is that on St. John Baptists day, Sect. 3. Coll. on St.
John Baptists day.
(for these, I suppose, must be the Two Collects on St. John's day, mentioned)
and it is this.

Almighty God, by whose Providence thy Servant John Baptist was wonderfully
born, and sent to prepare the way of thy Son our Saviour-by Preaching of
Penance; make us so to follow his doctrine and holy life, that we may truly
repent according to his preaching, and after his example, constantly speak the
truth, boldly rebuke vice, and patiently suffer for the truths sake, through
Jesus Christ, etc.

I cannot see in this Collect, Answ.
what is either for matter unsound, or for words ill expressed; unless that one
or both of these expressions be thought so: wherein St. John is said to be
wonderfully born -- and to preach Penance.

wonderfully born (though not as Christ alone, Luke 1.34.
without Man, of a Isa. 7.14. Mat. 1.18.23. Luke 1.27.
Pure Virgin, by the Mat. 1.18, 20. Luke 1.35.
Power of the Holy Ghost: but in the way of ordinary generation, yet) I think
the Scriptures do sufficiently evidence: if we consider those several wonders
or miracles precedaneous, or concomitant to his birth. Such as the Prophesies
of him long before, as of an extraordinary person; the forerunner, to prepare
the way for the Messiah; one of old Mal. 4.5, 6. with Mat. 11.14. and Mar 9.11.
by Malachy; this renewed to his father, Luke 1.17
Zechary, immediately before his conception: His father seized upon with a Luke
1.12, 13.
fear, and consternation of spirit, when he received this promise; and stricken
Luke 1.20.
dumb for a season; for several months not able to speak; partly, for a check
to his diffidence; partly, for a sign to confirm the promise: This Message
brought by Luke 1.11, 19.
an Angel from heaven: The Mother conceiving, when both her husband and her
self Luke 1.18.
were old, and, according to the ordinary course of nature, past the acts of
generation: The child thus born, Luke 1.15
filled with the Holy Ghost, from the birth; and born to Luke 1.15.
live an austere life, far different from the ordinary way of men in that age;
and Luke 1.17. Mal. 4.2, 5.
to go before, as the Morning Star to the Sun of Righteousness. All these speak
the wonders of his birth; though indeed short of the wonders of Christ's, which
followed.

he preached Penance, and so prepared the way for the Son of God in the world;
I cannot imagine, what, in this, can be matter of doubt. Which out Church never
conceived, in the least to favor the Popish satisfactory Penances; but is no
more, than, as we read in the Gospel, that he did Preach the Baptism of
Repentance, for the Remission of sins. Mat. 3.1, -- 13. Mat. 1.2, -- 9. Luke 3,
2, -- 19.
His constant work being to Preach Repentance, as Preparatory to Baptism, and
so, to fit men to receive Jesus Christ, the true Messiah; and to entertain the
Gospel, and Kingdom of God. Here is then nothing in this Collect, to be a
matter of scruple to a considering man.

3. The Collect on Innocents day, excepted also against, is, Sect. 6. Coll. for
Innocents day.


Almighty God, whose praise this day the young Innocents, thy Witnesses, have
confessed, and showed forth, not in speaking, but in dying: Mortify, and kill
all vices in us, that in our conversation our life may express thy faith, which
with our tongues we do confess, through Jesus, etc.

Against this there are these two things objected. 1. That these little
children, who were murdered by the Sword of Herod, cannot properly be called
Martyrs, or Witnesses of the praise of God; which they knew not, nor could they
understand: nor were they so much as children of the Christ an Church; that
Economy being not yet set up in the World. 2. That it is (...), and very
improperly said, that they should confess his praise, and not speak, sc. Not
inspeaking, but in dying. But I answer,

1. For this latter expression, though it be Catachrestical, Answ. Sect. 7.
and figurative, yet it is as frequent, usual, and plain, as it is Rhetorical;
and not at all strange even to vulgar capacities, and the meanest conceptions:
among whom no word is more common, than this, Fortus loquitur vita quam lingua.
Actions speak louder than words: Actions being indeed (...).
unanswerable arguments; as Asian in the Poet, pleading for Achilles Armor,
thought this enough to oppose to the flourishes of words, and subtilty of
Ulysses: -- Quid verbis opus est? tentemur Agendo. And agreeable to this is
that, which (as I remember) I have some where read in the Book of Martyrs, of a
good Woman, who thought this enough to reply to the Popish Persecutors; I
cannot dispute for my Religion, but I can Die. Without doubt, Dying, was a more
unquestionable confession, and Profession of faith, than all her words could
show forth. This, I know, comes not fully up to the case of the Bimuli, these
Murdered children, who were purely passive, and knew not why they suffered; and
therefore Death could not be their choice: but, I only mentioned these
passages, to justify the expression of, Not in speaking, but in Dying.

Martyrs, or, Witnesses, etc. (though they knew it not, nor could by their
death intend to give any such testimony) may well be affirmed; if we consider
the cause of that their death: which was (as to the Murderer) purely the sake
and interest of Jesus Christ. For, Herod bad heard by the Wise men of a Child,
born the Mat. 2.2, 3.
King of the Jews; as indeed this Child was of the Royal line, of the Seed of
David. He that knew himself a stranger, and placed on the Throne only by the
Roman power, began to suspect his own standing; (...) he could not be secure,
should the Jews have another King in b^ing. To prevent this danger, and secure
himself against these fears, He commands these Wise men to find out the Child,
pretending only, Mat. 2.7, 8.
that he might worship him. They find the Child, they worship, and Mat. 2.9.
present him with several gifts. But, God, Verse. 12.
to prevent the malice of Hered, sends those Wise men another way: Herod being
frustrate of his hopes, that he might be sure not to miss this Child, but
strike sure, sends out, and Verse. 16.
slays all the children of Bethlehem (where Christ was born, and he supposed
he yet was) of two years old, and under; that slaying all, he might be sure of
him also, whose death he principally designed. It is true, These Children knew
not, upon what account they suffered; but had it not been upon notice of
Christ's Birth, the King (not in a Temporal, but Spiritual Kingdom) of Israel,
they had not suffered. That wheresoever this Story shall be heard, of the Death
of these Innocents, there also shall the cause be known; there will be an
infallible Testimony of the Birth of Jesus Christ, who was sent from God the
Father, to be the Redeemer of the world, and to save his Chosen. Thus did the
Providence of God order it, that, though not by the mouths (as it is in the
Psalm. 8.2.
Psalms, and verified also upon another occasion in the Mat. 21.16.
Gespel) yet, by the Death of these Babes, and Sucklings he did perfect his
praise: those who knew it not, being made real Martyrs; their Death attesting
the Birth of the Savior of the world, and the King of the Church.

4. The next is, Sect. 9. Coll. for the first day of Lent.
the Collect for the first day of Lent, viz. this,

Almighty and everlasting God, which hate nothing that thou have made, and
do forgive the sins of all them that be penitent: create and make in us new
and contrite hearts, that we worthily lamenting our sins, and knowledging our
wretchedness, may obtain of thee, the God of all Mercy, perfect Remission and
Forgiveness, through Jesus Christ.

I have examined this Collect, word by word, Answ. Sect. 10.
both for matter and phrase with the best eyes and judgment that I have; and
yet, I must seriously profess, I cannot see what that one thing possibly should
be, that may be thought needful to be altered. The Doctrine concerning God, is
every way sound, clearly expressed, and perfectly agreeable to the Holy
Scriptures; magnifying the rich Goodness of God, who made all things Genesis 1.31.
very Good, and therefore can hate nothing which was the works of his hands:
and though now he do justly hate those persons, which by sin and rebellion have
made themselves, other than God made them; yet upon their true Repentance Isa.
55.7. Hos. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.
is ready to pardon them, and to love them again. And upon this, the Petitions
inferred, and enforced, are proper for our present condition, and perpetually
necessary for us while we are short of Perfection; for New and Contrite hearts,
sincere Repentance, that we may be in the way, the only infallible way to
Pardon and Peace through Jesus Christ. What is here, which does in any thing
cross the Evangelical Doctrine? What, is not suitable to the Scripture Pattern?
What is asked, which is not the matter of the Command, and the Promise of God?
What is there, which we are not bound to ask every day, who are taught to beg
Luke 11.3, 4.
Remission of sins as often as our Daily Bread? If it be to be asked, and this
Petition sent up every day, upon what account it should be unfit, or
unseasonable that day, I cannot imagine. And at a time of Fasting and
Abstinence (let the Lent be esteemed but a Civil Constitution, of which I shall
speak more (God willing) in my next Part) for the Church to teach us the
Practice of Mortification, and Repentance; and to suit our Prayers to such
duties, cannot but be seasonable and proper: following herein the example of
Christ and his Apostles, from Temporal occurrents (if the Lent be deemed no
more) to teach and press spiritual duties; as many instances might be given,
were it needful in a matter so common, and obvious in the Holy writings.

5. Sect. 11. Coll for the fourth Sunday after Easter.
The Collect, for the fourth Sunday after Easter, is this,

Almighty God, which do make the minds of all faithful men to be of one will
grant unto thy people that they may love the thing, that thou command, and
desire that which thou do promise, that among the sundry and manifold changes
of the world, our hearts may surely there be fixed, whereas true joys are to
be found, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

There is but one thing in this, Answ. Sect. 12.
which I can conceive to be liable to any exception; and that, no part of the
matter of the Prayer, but only a phrase, or expression in the Preface, viz.
this, -- Which do make the minds of all faithful men to be of one will. Now,
however, if we should submit the phrase to the censure of some curious
Critics, it might be thought better to express it otherwise; yet here to
contend, is but a fruitless dispute about words and syllables, when the thing
is sound: and the very thing, which the Scripture requires in abundance of
places, as the duty of Christians, and shows to be the affection of the
faithful: to be (...). Phil 2.2.
of one soul; of the (...). 1 Pet 3.8.
same mind; to come together, (...) Act. 1.14.2.1, 46. 8.6.15.25.
with one accord; to (...) -- and, (...). Phil. 2.2. and 3.16.4.2.
mind, savor, or affect the same things; to be perfectly joined together in
the (...). 1 Cor. 1.10.
same mind, and in the same judgment; that they may (...) -- Romans 15.6.
with one mind, and one mouth glorify God. And this do all the faithful, as to
the main concernments of Christianity: they forget that they are Christians,
when they forsake that one Rule; Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
one Faith; one Hope; one Gospel; which all are to be guided by: They are
brought by the Grace of God, as to agree in one truth; so to follow this (...)
Ephesians. 4.15.
in love, (...). Act. 4.32. in answer to that promise, Jer 32.39. and Ezekiel.
11.19.
with one Heart: And this is all that is said here. Which make the minds of
men to be of one will; i.e. to be (as the Scripture requires) (...), alike
affected; is indeed no more, nor other, than if it had been expressed in those
Scripture-words, -- Which make all the faithful to be (...), of one soul, or
heart; and, (...), to mind, savor, affect, and will the same thing; viz. To
love what God commands, and desire what he does promise, as in the Prayer we
Petition that they may. So that, though the words, as they are expressed, may
not in our present English, sound so well to a curious ear; nor the Phrase be
so exact to a Critical observer; yet the thing is agreeable to the Holy Canon;
and therefore, howsoever some may conceive a reason, why the expression may be
fit to be altered, yet it cannot be unlawful to use it as it stands.

6. The Collect for Trinity Sunday, follows, viz. Sect. 13. Coll. for Trinity
Sunday.


Almighty and Everlasting God, which have given to us thy servants grace, by
the confession of a true faith, to acknowledge the glory of the eternal
Trinity, and in the power of the Divine Majesty to worship the Unity: We
beseech thee, that through the stedfastness of this faith, we may evermore be
defended from all adversity, which live and reignest, etc.

There are two main things considerable in this short Collect; Answ.
but in neither of them can I see any thing, that should be matter of just
exception.

Tri-unus Deus, The Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead. (...). Greg
Naz.
Three, yet one. Three, really distinct in their modus subsistendi, their
manner of subsisting, and operations, ad intra; yet really one, in Essence not
divided, but all coessential, coeternal, and coequal in Power, Divinity, and
Majesty. As we are taught to confess clearly in the Athanasian Creed; And is a
truth evident in the Scriptures, 1 John 5.7.
There are Three that bear record in heaven -- and these Three are one. This is
unquestionable among all sound, Orthodox, and sober Christians.

through this faith to be defended -- And this also such, as I cannot well
imagine where it can be accounted faulty. For,

1. If by this faith, we understand the Doctrine of faith, the Fides, quam
credimus, which we profess concerning the Trin-Vnity; it is no more but this:
We pray, that in this Profession we may be protected and defended by God from
all things, which may hinder our free and open Confession; or may oppose our
faith; or interrupt our peace; or disturb that quiet, and joy of our souls,
which, in and through faith, we may, and hope to have.

faith we understand the Fides, qua credimus, the Grace of faith: by which we
Joh. 1.12.
receive Christ, as he is tendered to us in the Gospel, i.e. as Col. 2.6.
Christ Jesus the Lord: by which we believe, receive, and close with the whole
revelation of Gods mind, with affections suitable to the several revelations,
viz. His Threatenings, and angry dispensations, with fear, trembling, and
reforming; His Promises and Mercies, with joy, recumbency, confidence, and
affiance; His Commands and Precepts, with reverence and obedience. This is the
Evangelical faith; this is the faith, whereby Romans 11.20 Heb. 10.38, 39.
we stand; this is the faith, Ephesians. 6.16.
whereby we are enabled to conquer all difficulties; to go through all
streights; to scorn 1 John 5.4, 5.
the enticing allurements of honors, pleasures, and profits of the world; and
to despise and contemn the terrors: whereby, we are 1 Pet. 1.6, 7, 8.
supported in, and carried through, and delivered out of all tribulations; are
here enabled to go on with joy; and are with courage strengthened to hold out
to the end; and at last 1 Pet. 1.5, 9.
attain everlasting salvation. This, being by God appointed the work of a true
faith, is that which we pray for; that we may have this lively, and steadfast
faith, and through this be so upheld, and defended here, until we attain the
end of our Faith, The Salvation of our Souls.

Collect for the Sixth Sunday after Trinity, is this,

God, which have prepared for them that love thee, Coll. for the sixth Sunday
after Irinity.
such good things, as pass all men's understandings: pour into our hearts such
love toward thee, that we loving thee in all things, may obtain thy promises,
which exceed all things, that we can desire: through Jesus Christ, etc.

This, being in the Preface so agreeable to that of the Apostle, Answ. Sect. 18.
1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man
(to conceive) the things, which God has prepared for them that love him: and,
in the Petition begging of God, that we may obtain what exceeds all that we
can desire, so exactly answering that of the same Apostle glorifying God, as
Ephesians. 3.20.
Who is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we can ask or think: I
am not able to conjecture, what that should be in this Collect, that should
need to be altered.

8. The next excepted against, is, Sect. 19. Coll. for the twelfth Sunday after
Trinity.
the Collect for the twelfth Sunday after Trinity.

Almighty and everlasting God, which art more ready to hear, than we to pray,
and art wont to give more than we either desire or deserve: Pour down upon us
the abundance of thy Mercy, forgiving us those things whereof our conscience is
afraid, and giving unto us that, that our prayers dare not presume to ask,
through Jesus Christ, etc.

1. Answ. Sect. 20.
In this Collect, the Preface is beyond dispute, according to the Scriptures,
which magnify the rich goodness of God, Whose Isa. 59.1.
ears are not heavy, that he cannot hear; yea, are Psa. 34.15.
always open to the prayer of the righteous; who has promised to answer, not
only when Isa. 58.9.
they cry; but even Isa. 65.24.
before they cry: He will, and does, even Prevent their prayers; The Psa. 59.10.
God of my mercy shall prevent me (said David) even Psa. 21.3.
he preventeth us with the blessings of goodness. And when we pray, He gives
not only more than we can deserve, who are Genesis 32.10.
less than the least of his mercies; but more than we can desire: as when
Solomon asked Wisdom, He not only gave him that which he asked; but added also
Riches 1 King 3.11, 12, 13.
and honor in abundance, which he asked not. And he gives still exceeding
above Ephesians. 3.20.
what we can ask or think.

2. Sect. 21. Object.
But the Petitionary part is the matter questioned, wherein some have said that
we are taught to lie in our prayers, our actions in that very Petition giving a
contradiction to our words; when we not only dare, but do really ask, what yet
we say our prayers dare not presume to ask. And the same exception is made to
that in another Fifth Collect after the Communion.
Collect, Those things which for our unworthiness, and for our blindness we
cannot ask, vouchsafe to give us for the worthiness of thy Son, etc.

One answer will serve both these. There are (says that devout Abbot St.
Bernard) three special faults in prayer, Solut. Sect. 22.
which hinder its success, viz. Est trepida est tepida, est temeraria or at
io-Trepida ne procedit quidem, nedum ascendit. Tepida procedit sed in ascens^
lanques^it and deficit temeraria ascendit, sed resilit: nec tantum non obtinet
gratiam, sed meretur offensam. Bern. de Temp. 43.
Faintness, Coldness, and a Presumptuous Boldness. 1. There is a Faint,
fearful, distrustful prayer, which cannot get forth of the lips, much less
ascend so high as heaven. 2. A Cold, lazy, formal Prayer, which comes forth
fast enough, but freezeth in the way for want of spirit and fervor. And 3. A
Bold, Rash, and presumptuous prayer, which flies up apace, but is beaten b^ck
again for presenting it self over boldly and saucily in the sight of God, and
is so far from obtaining grace or favor, that it brings down a check, or a
curse. So that, to a prayer, that must prevail with God, besides that heat and
fervency of heart, which is a necessary ingredient to make it effectual, there
are these two things also especially required, Humility, and Faith.

Humility. The soul, that draws nigh to God, must lie low, as even with the
ground: this is the affection, that has promise of acceptance, Pla. 10.17.
Lord, thou hear the prayer of the Humble -- and again, Psa. 7.12.
He forgets not the cry of the Humble (said David.) Psa. 138.6.
The Lord is high, yet has respect to the lowly, but the proud he knows afar
off. Again, Psa. 51.17.
The Sacrifices of God ( i. e. the most excellent Sacrifices, wherein God
delights) are a broken and contrite heart. To such as these is the Lord near,
Psa. 34.18.
to save the broken heart, and contrite spirit. In these hearts Isa. 57.15.
only will the High and lofty One dwell. And to these alone, Isa. 66.2.
will he look with favor. It is Ecclus. 35.17.
the Prayer of the Humble (says the son of Syrach) that pierces the clouds,
and will not depart, till the most High shall behold to execute judgment. And
there are now these two considerations, which the Saints of God have made use
of still, to keep their souls in this lowly and humble frame of spirit.

The Majesty, and incomprehensible greatness of God, infinitely transcending
the highest perfections of earthly men; and the vile, low, contemptible
condition of men, infinitely unworthy to stand in the presence, much more to
draw near the most Glorious God. Gen 18.27.
Now (says that Patriarch Abraham) I who am but (...) and cinis.
dust and ashes, have taken upon me to speak unto my Lord. This made David cry
out, 2 Samuel 7.18
What am I? and what is my fathers house? And when he considers the Greatness
and Glory of God manifested in his glorious works, then, Psa. 8.4.
Lord, what is man? etc. this made the Centurion in the Gospel judge it Mat 8.8.
unworthy that Christ should come under his roof, and Luke 7.7.
himself unworthy to come into the presence of Christ.

sinful vileness in themselves, and the abominable evils of which they are
guilty. This made that holy Job confess, Job 40.4.
Behold, I am vile, what should I say? Psalm. 51.5.
I was born in sin (said that 1 Samuel 13.14.
Man after Gods own heart) and in iniquity conceived. And really, if the
Heavens, yea the most glorious part of them, Job 25.5, 6.
the stars be not clear in Gods sight; how much less is Man that is a worm,
and the son of man, that is a worm? yea, Job 15.14, 15.
how much more abominable is man, that drinks in iniquity like water? to whom
sin is as Cui peccatu^ aeque familiare est ac cibus and potus. Jun. in loc.
familiar, as his meat and drink. This makes a man come as the poor penitent
Prodigal, Luke 15.19, 21.
I am unworthy to be called thy Son. If Elijah, when God only spoke to him (and
that not dreadfully neither, but in a still small voice,) 1 King. 19.17.
cast his Mantle over his face: no wonder if the Saints of God, who yet are
conscious of abundance of vileness in themselves, when they come by prayer to
set themselves in the Eccl. 5.1, 2. Psalm. 42.2.
special presence of God, who then looks as with a full eye upon them, do then
tremble, and acknowledge their unworthiness to appear before the presence of so
Glorious, and to ask and expect any thing of so Righteous a God: themselves
being so vile, as they are, and do then especially see themselves to be. This
made Peter, when by the great draught of Fishes he saw the print of Christ's
Deity, cry out, Luke 5.8.
Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord: And holy Job, Job 42.5, 6.
I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine eye has seen
thee, therefore I abhor my self in dust and ashes. It was this, that made the
poor Publicans Luke 18.10 --
prayer to be accepted, when seeing his own vileness, and confessing his sin,
he stands afar off, as not daring to approach, and begs mercy, Lord be merciful
to me a sinner: when the proud Pharisees is rejected, who presumptuously drew
near in conceit of his own merits, and came not to beg mercy, but to brag of
his own righteousness; God I thank thee, I am not, etc.

Faith and confidence, whereby we having a certain warrant from the Word, and
being assured that what we ask is according to Gods Will, and the Subject of
his Promises, the Soul is now poured out in earnestness, and with an holy
confidence grounded upon the mercies of God, and merits of Jesus Christ, is
encouraged to hope for, and expect a gracious return. Thus, (says St. James)
Jam. 1.6.
Let him that prays, pray in faith; and it is Jam. 5.15, 16.
the prayer of faith, which is effectual. The Promises made to our prayers,
still require this condition in the Petitioner, Mat. 21.22.
If ye believe: And as men Romans 10.14
cannot call on him, on whom they have not believed: So, when they believe,
they have encouragement enough to pray, and may come with boldness and
confidence when they pray; and grounds enough of confident hopes we have from
the rich goodness and inconceivable mercies of our God, and the infinite and
invaluable merits of our Lord and Savior: So that as Joh. 15.5.
without Christ we can do nothing; nothing acceptable to God, Romans 8.26.
nor then can we pray as we ought, neither can we come to God, Joh. 14.6.
but by him, who only is the way: so Phil. 4.13.
through Christ we can do all things: and through faith we have an interest in
him, to him Joh. 6.35.
we come by believing; and now Ephesians. 3.12.
in him we have boldness and access with confidence, even by faith in him.
Christ Heb. 10.19, 20, 22.
has opened a way through the vail for us to enter into the Holiest of all, to
the Throne of Grace, and now we may draw nigh with a true heart in full
assurance of faith. The soul now sends up her prayers to Heaven with such
strength of Adhesion, and fullness of considence; as a Ship tears up, and flies
with full Sails to its Haven: And he that before being sensible of his own
weakness and vileness, and trembling before the Majesty and Purity of the most
High and Holy God durst neither speak not pray; now through this faith in
Christ has his tongue loosed, his lips opened, and can draw nigh with
confidence: Psa. 116.10.
I believe, therefore have I spoken.

Humility and Faith go hand in hand together in the faithfuls prayer; when we
are most humbled in regard of vileness and unworthiness in our selves, we are
yet to hope, and we may with confidence trust in the mercies of God, through
the merits of Jesus Christ: And when we are carried up with the strongest
affiance, and highest confidence in those saving mercies, and all-sufficient
merits, we yet must (as we have reason) disclaim all confidence in any dignity,
excellency, or worth in our selves.

piety and prudence of our Church in composing, and commending the use of these
prayers to her Members; wherein we are so excellently instructed in the matter
of prayer, and together taught the exercises of those necessary graces of
Humility and Faith. Consider what we are, and what we need; we are naturally as
the Laodicean Angel, Rev. 3.17.
miserable, poor, blind, and naked, and wanting all things; we know not what we
need, and therefore Romans 8.26.
know not what to pray for, nor how to pray as we ought: Here therefore we
pray, that God, who knows our ignorance in asking, and what things we have
need of before we ask, would give us those things, which for our blindness we
cannot ask. Again, we are persons guilty of much unthankfulness to God, of many
high provocations against God; and let any man seriously consider and compare
his own contemptible baseness, with Gods glorious incomprehensible Majesty; his
own filthiness and impurity, with Gods spotless purity and holiness; his own
frequent lapses, yea, rebellions, with Gods most exact justice and
righteousness: And then say, if (when he has nothing else to bottom his hopes
and confidence upon) his flesh do not tremble, and his heart quake in the
presence of God: If such a worm of earth, vile dust, sinful wretches, can dare
to send up any request to such a Glory. Here we must say, Our conscience is
afraid, and our prayers dare not presume to ask. But then, let this poor
penitent sinner set before him the long experienced mercies, the inconceivable
goodness, and rich overflowing grace of God; the meritorious sufferings, and
infinite merits of the blood of Jesus, and his continual intercession for us:
Here shall he see a large door of hope and mercy opened; his heart is now again
enlivened, and with an humble boldness he can pray, and hope to speed.

Collects; for,

When we consider our ignorance and blindness, we see, we cannot ask; when our
vileness and unworthiness, indeed we dare not ask: But God shall Zech. 12.10.
pour upon us a Spirit of grace and supplication, and make us willing and able
to pray: When Romans 8.26.
the Spirit it self helps our infirmities, then indeed we can; and when the
heart is inflamed, and the soul purified by the blood of Jesus; when we come in
the name of the Beloved, who are in our selves loathed in him Ephesians. 1.6.
we are accepted: When we consider our High Priest Rev. 8.3, 4.
standing beside the golden Altar, and perfuming the incense of our prayers
with the precious odours of his own merits; we are now bold to ask, what before
we durst not do. Thus, through Jesus Christ we ask, for his sake and worthiness
we beg, what otherwise by reason of our unworthiness we durst not presume to
do. These things I think are abundantly sufficient to clear these two Collects
from those exceptions which are laid against them: I go on, to

9. The next excepted against, which is the Collect for St. Lukes day. Sect.
30. Collect for St. Lukes day.


Almighty God, which calledst Luke the Physician, whose praise is in the
Gospel, to be a Physician of the soul: May it please thee, by the wholesome
medicines of his Doctrine, t heal all the diseases of our souls, through thy
Son Jesus Christ, etc.

I cannot easily make a rational conjecture, Answ.
what should in this short prayer be such a matter of scruple, or just ground
of offense; but that it may well stand and be used, as it is composed without
alteration: For these three things (I think) will readily appear and be evident
to any considering man.

Sirs, and lusts are the diseases of the soul. Hence are they in Scripture set
forth under the notion of wounds. 1. Bruises, rottenness, corruptions, and
putrefactions. The wounds by sin made in the conscience are as the Psalm. 51.8.
breaking of the bones; and the comforting, absolving, or restoring the
penitent is as the Gal. 6.1. (...) Luxata membra in locum suum restituite. A
Chirugis tractum.
setting of a dislocated member, or the binding up a broken joint. Pride of
heart is as an unnatural tumor or swelling in the flesh: Malice and Hatred, as
a blood-shot eye: Envy as the corroding, or, eating out of the heart and liver:
Lust, as a Pearl in the eye; upon what account there is an emphatical
elligancy in the Apostle, describing the filthiness of those impure Heretics,
(probably the Gnostics) of whom he says 2 Pet. 2.14.
They have eyes (...), full (not of adultery, as our version has it, but) of
an adulteress. We may know that the same word ((...) among the Greeks is used
to signify, both a Virgin, and, the Pupilla, or Apple of the eye: to this the
Apostle seems to allude; They have not (...), but (...), not a Virgin, but an
Harlot there, their lusts being as dear to them as the Apple of the eye. But
this by the way. The Book would swell too big, should I in every particular
parallel our sins and diseases; in a word, sin it self, all sin, is as the
fretting Leprosy that runs from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot,
and makes rottenness enter into the bones, the whole head sick, and the whole
heart faint. Yea, and all these diseases are certainly mortal, if by the mercy
of God some means and remedy be not timely applied, for the recovering and
saving the sin-sick soul.

Gilead? Is there no Physician there? yes doubtless, there is both a Medicine,
and Physicians to administer it. The most Gracious God, 2 Pet. 3.9.
who is not willing that any should perish; yea, who has sworn Ezekiel. 33.11
that he desires not the death of a sinner; who would not that that choice
piece of his own worship, Man, should miscarry for want of help, has provided
the Medicine, and given him an able and skilful Physician also. And now

General or Universal Medicine is only the Blood of Jesus Christ. But the
particular manner of administration, the several ways of application of this
for the particular relief of the sick soul, we have in the doctrine, and Word
of God. The Scriptures are that divine Pharmacopoea, that choice Dispensatory,
according to whose rules are all Medicines to be made up: There are those
precious Receipts, which the soul may take and live: There, as in a skilful
Apothecaries shop, we may find -- Efficax contra omne vulnus unguentum;
salatiferum contra omne venenum antidetum; salubre contra omnem dolorem
remedium. Grost Lincoln in Ocul Moral
approved ointments, for every wound; a sovereign antidete against every
poison; a saving remedy for every malady. In these may In Scriptura sacra
invenit ignorans quod discat; contumax quod timeat; laborans praemia;
pusillanimis solatia. Id. ibid.
the ignorant find what to learn; the perverse and stubborn, what may humble
him, and make him fear; the conscientious, working, and laboring Christian be
encouraged by rewards; the faint, drooping, and weak, dejected soul be
supported by comforts. This heavenly Word being given both for food; ( Milk 1
Cor. 3.2. 1 Pet. 2.2. Hebr. 5.13, 14.
for babes, and strong meat for those of age) and for Physic also: like the
tree mentioned in the Apocalypses, Rev. 22.2.
whose fruit is good for food; and whose leaves are for the healing of the
Nations. Here we find a word, that searches the secret lusts, and pierces
into the inward parts of the belly, 1 Cor. 14.25.
Laying open the secrets, and Hebr. 4.12
discerning the thoughts and intents of the heart. Here are Corrosives, to eat
out the proud flesh; Purgatives, to cleanse pollutions: sacred considerations,
to abate the pride, to aswage the malice, check the ambition, shame the
covetousness, and to destroy the lusts of men: Choice cordials to comfort the
afflicted, to revive the drooping spirit, and to bind up the broken heart: oil
and wine to the wounded conscience.

3. The Physicians to apply these remedies, and dispense these medicines for
cure of the soul, are under Christ, the Ministers of the Gospel, the Dispensers
of this word, The Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers, etc. As,
Christ only is 1 Pet. 2.25. and 5.4.
the (...), The chief Shepherd and Bishop of our souls; and yet these are Acts
20.28
Bishops, and Shepherds under him: So He is, (...), the chief Physician; yet
under him, are we, Physicians, also. To Us he commends the care of the Flock,
and souls to administer the prescribed remedies? but He only performs the cure:
The care is ours; the cure, Gods: We are means to heal by the Word of God, by
theDoctrine of Christ that we preach. This is all, that is meant by that
passage in this Collect. The wholesome medicines of His As before, (The Doctrine
of John) see Sect. 2.
(Lukes) Doctrine, not a Doctrine of his own, but of Christ in his mouth, which
he preached. And the very same may be said of any, of all the Ministers of the
Gospel, who preach the Doctrine of Christ. These Doctrines are medicines for
the soul, serving to reprove, convince, rebuke, exhort, to cleanse, enlighten,
comfort, save: and this according to the order of God himself, 1 Cor. 1.21.
Whom it has pleased by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe. So that, there is nothing now in this short Collect, but is sound and
good.

10. mentioned by our Brethren, which is, the Collect for Michaelmasse day,
which is this.

Everlasting God, Collect for Michaelmasse day.
who have ordained and constituted the services of all Angels and men in a
wonderful order, mercifully grant, that they which always do thee service in
heaven, may by thy appointment succor and defend us on earth, through Jesus
Christ our Lord. Now, to clear this, 1. Answ. Sect. 36.
That the Angels are by the Creator, who is the God of order, and not of
confusion, and who framed the whole creation in an admirable and beautiful
order, established also in an order, cannot be questioned: and that this order
is wonderful, must be acknowledged by us, who neither know, nor can yet
understand what those Colos. 1.16 Romans 8.38.
Thrones, Dominions, Principalities, and powers particularly are, which speak
the several degrees and dignities of the Angelical creatures. 2. And, that we
pray, that they may by Gods appointment defend and succor us on earth, is no
more than in the Scriptures we find them often appointed to do; and promised
that they shall do. We read expressly, it is their office Hebr. 1.14
to be ministering spirits, sent forth to minister to such as shall be heirs of
salvation. Several ways do we read (and it is acknowledged) that they have,
and do minister to the Saints. Not to mention their presence in our assemblies,
beholding the Decency and Order of Men and Women in their solemn services, (as
the 1 Cor. 11.10.
Apostle seems to intimate:) nor their Luke 15.7, 10.
rejoicing at our repentance, and with delight and complacence 1 Pet. 1.12.
stooping down to behold the things prepared through Christ for us. If we
acknowledge (as we must, and by sad experience we too often find) that the evil
Angels, the Devil by his suggestions can and does work upon the soul to provoke
us to sin; we must also acknowledge an equal power in the Angels of God to stir
up our affections, to direct us in the truth, and acquaint us with the Divine
Will. We often find them coming and going upon one message or other, teaching
men, That they Rev. 19 10. and 22.9.
will not be worshipped, because they are our fellow servants; and that God
only is to be adored. These we find directing Acts 8.26. --
Philip to the Eunuch to teach and instruct him; Act. 10.3. --
Cornelius to Peter to be taught and instructed by him. Per Angeles preces
nostras offerri ad Deum. -- Zanch. de Relig. l. 1. cap. 13. p. 297.
They are Messengers to carry our prayers to God, even in the judgment of no
mean persons, but known opposers of Superstition and Popery: such as Zanchy,
who tells us, that by the Angels our prayers are offered up to God, and being
heard, are returned to us: Such as Peter Martyr, Pet Martyr. in Genes. c. 32.
who says, that, The Angels offer up prayers not to teach God, as if he knew
not; but that themselves may know whereabout they are sent. And, Beza, Bez. in
Apocal. cap. 8. v. 3. Scimus Angelorum Ministerium sanctis in bacvita de
gentibus esse destinatum, Hebr. 1.14. Haes causa est, etc.
We know (says he) that the Ministry of Angels is appointed to the Saints,
while they live here: not that they should be worshipped as Gods, but that
according to the Will of God, they should help us by their service, as we may
understand by many places of Scripture. This is the reason, why John in the
Vision learned, that the Prayers of the Saints in this world, who daily offer
up those pure sacrifices --, are offered up to God by the Ministry of Angels.
But indeed he adds, What this Ministry of theirs is, it is a Quis novit? We
cannot define. Mediators they are not, See Aug. de Trinit. 13.15
nor may we pray unto them, for there is 1 Timothy 2.5.
one only Mediator between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus. Nor do they offer
up our prayers in their own name, nor upon any Merit of their own; but in and
by Christ, the only Mediator they may. And that they bring back answers from
God to the Prayers of men, the Scriptures have recorded several instances; as
Dan. 9.21. and 10.10. --
to Daniel, Luke 1.11, 13.
Zechary, and Acts 10.3, 4.
Cornelius, etc. As for Temporal deliverances, external succor, and defense,
we have many examples, as of Genesis 19.
Lot by two Angels delivered from Sodom, and sent to Zoar: Genesis 16.7, 9, 10.
Hagar in the Wilderness comforted by an Angel, and advised: 1 Kings 19.4. -- 9.
Elisah succored by an Angel providing him bread and water, in the strength of
which he was enabled to travel forty days; when before, he was even weary of
his life. Why should I add more particulars? when David has clearly assured
us of this in general to all Saints, Psalm. 34.7.
The Angel of the Lord excampeth about them that fear him, and delivers them.
So that even in a literal sense, they may in this case be said to be (as in
another, the Apostle 1 Pet. 1 5. (...).
says they are) kept as in a Garrison; secure by a guard of Angels, the
Heavenly Host pitching their Tents, and keeping Centry about them: for these
are the Host of God, used for the protection of his Church: even Psalm. 68 17.
Thousands of Angels. Such was the Guard afforded to 2 Kings 6.17.
Elisha, when the Syrian Army was sent to apprehend him at Dothan: The
Mountains being then full of Chariots and Horsemen of fire round about him. And
it is the Promise of God that they shall do so. Psalm. 91.9, 10, 11, 12.
When thou make the Lord thy refuge, and the most High thy habitation; there
shall no evil befall thee -- for he shall give his Angels charge over thee, and
they shall keep thee in all thy ways: they shall bear thee up in their hands
--


succor and defense by the Angels Ministry: I cannot apprehend any shadow of
reason, why we may not pray, that, They, who do always service to God in
Heaven, may also succor and defend us on earth. And this being the Subject of
the Promise of God, without dispute may be the matter of our Prayers to God.



CHAP. X. The Judgments of the Old Non-Conformists concerning the use of our
Liturgy, and this Practice showed to be 1. No Argument of weakness. 2. No Plea
for Idleness in the Ministry. But 3. From Conscience of Duty.
Form and Matter of it: it will not be amiss, but may add (at least with many)
some strength to this Argument, to add the judgment of the Old Non-Conformists
in this case, who looked upon the use of this book as burden enough: yet
conformed unto it, and thought they might lawfully do so; yea, judged that
during such a Law, it was their duty to do so, rather than forsake their
station. I shall give you but one testimony, yet that instar omnium, because he
declares not only his own, but the sense of them all. It is the so often cited
Mr. Ball. For a Set Form, or, Stinted Liturgy, his words are these. Trial of
the groands of Separat. chap. 7. p. 120. --
If the judgment of the Reformed Churches abroad, or of the Godly, Faithful,
Learned and Reverend at home, be of any weight; they are so far from
complaining of a stinted Form as burdensome, that in many cases they judge it
expedient. A Set Form (says he) of Prayer and Administration of Sacraments --
is approved by GENERAL CONSENT --. And a few lines after, The Ministers at
home, to whom the use of Common Prayer has been thought most burdensome, have
from time to time professed their liking, and approbation of a stinted Liturgy.

our Liturgy in particular: And they thought no faults objected against it to
be a sufficient ground to justify a Separation from the Communion of our
Church, but condemned it, as Schismatical; for so the same Author tells us
Ball. ibid. p. 121.
They have evermore condemned voluntary Separation from the Congregation and
Assemblies, or negligent frequenting of those public prayers: They have
ordinarily used the Communion Book in their public Administrations, and still
maintained Unity, Peace and Love with them, who in some particulars have been
of another judgment. All this (says he) is so notoriously known, that it is
waste labor to produce Testimonies herein. Again, in the next Chapter but one,
we have these expressions; Ibid. chap. 9. p. 176. --
To the praise of God be it spoken, Our Liturgy for purity and soundness, may
compare with Any Liturgy used in the third and fourth Ages of the Church. --
This I mention (says he) that we might learn to acknowledge Gods mercy, walk
worthy of what we have received, and strive forward to perfection by all lawful
means.

The Corruption of the Church, much decayed and fallen in those Ages from its
first purity; he Ball. ibid.
says (but a little after) Neither can it be imagined that they might hold
Communion in other Ordinances, but, not in their stinted Liturgies: for in
those Times, of all other parts, the Liturgies were most pure. God of his
endless mercies so providing for his Church, and the comfort of his people in
those hard and evil Times; when the Doctrine was miserably and dangerously
corrupted, in respect of Merit, of Works, Invocation of Saints, etc. The
Liturgies were long preserved pure and free; whereby the faithful might be
present with more comfort and freedom of conscience: To which he cites several
Testimonies of learned men, noted in the Balth. Lyd. Not. in Disp. Taborit. p.
133. Illiric. Catal. Test. l. 1. p. 70, 71. Musius. Praefat. in Anaph. Basil
Margin, and closes with this remarkable Conclusion, which does indeed speak a
pious and peaceable spirit; which I would therefore desire all our yet
dissenting Brethren seriously to ponder and consider, "This one thing ( viz.
The purity of the Liturgies of the Ancient Church, notwithstanding the
corruption of Doctrine; and that Our Liturgy for purity and soundness may
compare with the best of them) This (says he) duly considered, would put an
end to many scruples, and might serve to stop them, who out of overgreat heat
and forwardness, are ready to except against the means of their own comfort;
and to cast off what God offers, because they cannot enjoy what they desire.

impiety, or any material evil, and then the use of it cannot be charged as sin
upon us. Suppose there are (as some have reckoned) some expressions that need a
favorable interpretation, that they may (not be, for they already are so, but)
appear to be sound: Suppose some that might be expressed better; yet when they
are not evil in themselves, and may be used without sin; our private thoughts
that we could do better, cannot free us from obeying the Law which commands
the use of these; (though yet we are also left to the liberty of our conceived
prayers in the Pulpit, according to occurring necessities and emergencies,
provided we keep within the compass of the general Rule) whence it will also be
evidenced, that our use of this Liturgy, is, 1. weakness or inability in the
Ministers who conform unto the Law in this use. The World shall bear us
witness, and the experience of the years that are past, wherein we were not
permitted, but forcibly hindered from this, use of the Liturgy, shall attest
for us; that through the grace of God we have been enabled to perform the
Sacred Offices of the Church, and the matters of public Worship, and holy
Administrations, we hope, acceptably to God, and with as much sobriety,
gravity, modesty, and evidence of the Spirit (let it not be counted arrogance
and boasting, if we say) as any of the contrary-minded. 2. idleness; for our
work is all one, our Preaching as frequent; and if we consider the pains of
lungs, which is not little in so much speaking, it is now more; when we both
use all this, and continue our Preaching also. Sure I am, The use of the
Liturgy can be no Argument to prove, nor from any thing in it (if men through
their own laziness abuse it, let them that do so be charged only with the
crime) is it a means to make an idle Ministry. If we consider that in the
Primitive Church (as the above cited Ball. Trial of grounds of Separ. Chap. 4.
answ. to obj. 8. where he that please, may find, and peruse these evidences of
Antiquity. Chrysostom. in Genel. Hom. 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 27, 28, 29, 31, etc. Et
Conc. 3. de lazar. Hom. 2. and 5. in Math. Hom. 10. in Joan. Hom. 5. and 6. ad
Pop. Ant. Hom. 9. in Ep. ad Coloss, Aug. in Joh. Tract. 9.16, 21, 29, 35, 37,
50. De verb. Dom. in Evang. sermon. 15. De verb. Apost. Ser. 5, 6. Possidon. in
vita Aug. cap. 21, etc. Orig. Hom. 6. in Levit. Council. Carth. 4. Can. 2.
Council. Antioch. Can. 17, 18. Council. Tolet. 3. Can. 7. Council. Mogun. Can. 25,
etc.
Ball has well observed, and gathered together very many Testimonies of
Antiquity to prove it) The abetters, maintainers, and in part devisers of
stinted Liturgies, have been, and for ever will be Renowned in the Church of
God, for their constant, continual, and unwearied pains and industry in
preaching the Gospel. -- It is a thing not oriously known and confessed, that
Cyprian, Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Augustine, did all of them allow and approve;
Some of them devise stinted Forms of Liturgies: And yet who almost, for
diligence and labor in teaching the people in the ways of salvation, to be
compared to them? Of their learning and zeal it is needless to say any thing;
for three of them, there is plentiful Testimony that they preached every day in
the week and year, at least once or twice, without fail, Ye have heard
yesterday -- ye shall hear to morrow, is common in their Tractates and
Homilies. Augustine, even to the extremity of his sickness, preached the Word
of God in his Church cheerfully and boldly, with a sound mind, and without
intermission at all. The like diligence is noted in others, who lived before,
and about those Times; in all which, a stinted Liturgy was in use. Considering
then (I say) this practice of the Ancients, the use of a Liturgy can be no
Argument of; and considering the strict injunctions of Councels for Sedulity in
preaching, exhorting, instructing the people (even when they required also the
use of a Liturgy) this can be no plea for, or means to make an idle Ministry.
3. Conscience of the Duty that lies upon us to conform to the Laws that oblige
us, and really and cordially to consult the benefit and edification of the
people under our charge, that does engage us the use of this established Form;
wherein there being nothing sinful to be complied with; no part of it evil, or
unlawful in it self; certainly it cannot become unlawful by being commanded;
for what is lawful to be done without a command, cannot be made sinful by a
command, unless obedience it self should be made a sin; and nothing in this
matter should be sinful, but to obey Authority. And I judge, that to those who
understand the nature of a Law, and the obligation it has upon Conscience,
that which before was only lawful, now having the Fiat from Authority, becomes
a Duty.


CHAP. XI. The People exhorted to Charity and Obedience; and attendance of the
Public Prayers of the Church.
Ministers to the use of this Book of Common Prayer, let it not be accounted
impertinent, if I now add a few words to the People. For in deed the greatest
noise in the world is made by the Popular clamor, and those are readiest to
except against this Book, who neither understand where it is faulty, nor are
able to judge, nor have ever seriously considered the Form, the Matter,
Necessity, or Convenience, and Expediency of it. It is from such peoples mouths
that those Vollies of reproaches, and blackest slanders, of, Ungodly,
Superstitious men; Idle, and Idol Shepherds; Dumb dogs, etc. are poured forth
upon those Ministers, who conscientiously conform to the use of this Liturgy,
though they are otherwise as Holy, Humble, and Charitable in their lives; as
able, learned, faithful, and painful, diligent Preachers as any. They are such
people, who frowardly forsake their own Pastors (though never so able) only
because of the Liturgy, and run after those only who use it not: or when they
have not opportunity to hear, from any other, either wholly forsake the
assemblies for the Liturgies sake; or else will not present themselves there,
till the time of this service be past: Too many thus forsaking their own
mercies, because they are not dispensed their own way; and I do heartily wish
it be not (in some, at least) to follow after lying vanities, (as these two are
by the Jonas 2, 8.
Prophet joined together.) I appeal to the Consciences of all that fear God in
the Land, whether these Sallies of intemperance; these virulent violences of
unruly tongues; these dividing carriages can be judged, or rationally deemed
the fruits of a gracious heart, or that temper of spirit which the Gospel
requires: or agreeable to those ways of peace and piety, that Purity and
Unity, which our Lord Jesus has so expressly engaged all his Disciples to walk
in.

See above, chap. 10.
before was shown) condemned as the voluntary Separation (upon pretense of
faults in the Liturgy) of people from the Public assemblies; so their
negligent frequenting of these Public Prayers.

And, really, to a considering Christian, the same arguments, which do engage
us to use this Form, should have a force and efficacy upon the spirits of the
people to these three effects.

1. wicked as to call, so uncharitable as to judge all those men Ungodly,
Formal, Superstitious, etc. who conform themselves to the established Laws in
the public worship; when they have such obligations upon their consciences
even from God to do so: and their hearts may be (as without doubt many are, and
it is only their own fault if they be not) lifted up to God in these offices
with holy zeal and fervency; with a lively Faith and Hope, in true Contrition,
and brokennesse of spirit; with enflamed affections, and with as much devotion,
as any else in any other way of worship whatsoever. The miscarriages of some
particular persons must not lay an aspersion or reproach upon that service,
which they and all others are obliged to use; any more, than as great personal
miscarriages of some of another persuasion can prove the sinfulness of their
persuasions. Mat. 18.7. Luke 17.1. 2 Cor. 11.9.
Scandals will arise, and all sides will afford matter enough, such is the
corruption of men in this world, (yet indeed no scandal is like to that of
sideing, 1 Cor. 3.3, 4. -- and 16.1. v. 12, 13.
making parties, and factions in the Church, one says, I am of this way,
another, I am of that, a third, of another; when we are 1 Cor. 12.13. Ephesians. 4.3,
4, 5, 6.
all baptized into one body, and should be Gal 3.28.
all one in Christ Jesus) as it is therefore our duty, so it will be our
wisdom, as to remember the Luke 17.1.
Woe to him, by whom these come, so to be careful that none cast a stone John
8.7.
, till he be certain that himself is clear: that none pretend to take out a
mote Mat 7.3, 4, 5.
from his Brothers eye, until he have first cast out the beam in his own, Sure
I am, while we give way to Recriminations and Reproaches of persons, we shall
never hope to see that peace and love, which the Gospel so strictly charge, (
if it be possible Romans 12.18
and as much as in us lies) upon all Heb. 12.14 1 Pet. 3.11.
the followers of our Lord Jesus: who is the Isa. 9.6.
Prince of Peace, and whose Gospel is a Romans 10.19 Ephesians. 6.15.
Gospel of Peace and Love. And besides this general obligation of the Gospel,
all sober Christians have this particular also to engage them to Charity in
their Censures of us who use this Book, because what we do herein, we do in
conformity to, and as obliged by a Law. Our judgments being not convinced of
sin, or any material evil in the thing enjoined, God himself lays an
obligation upon the conscience to obey the Laws, that command it; and it is
then at least Our duty to use it. 2. Persons, but things: which is but this,
That they would Jam. 2.1.
not have the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect
of persous. This is sad, that some should be so much displeased, both with the
Liturgy, as that they will not hear it: and with those Ministers that use it,
that they will not hear them (though they be their proper Pastors, and able and
faithful ones too, under whose ministry the Providence of God has placed
them, and they might warrantably expect a blessing, far sooner than by
straggling abroad) and all the reason they can afford, is, because there are
such and such men, whom they esteem godly (and possibly are so) and learned
men, which will not, or do at least scruple to use it. But the Sea the case of
Examples largely and a solidly handled by that Reverend Judicious Dr. now
Bishop Saunderson, in his Lectures of Conscience. Lect. 3.
examples of men, yea of those, whom we account the best, are not the rule for
us to go by; we are not so much to consider persons, or enquire who do so or
so; but things, and reasons, what they do, and why they should, or should not
do so. Ipse Bernardus non videt omnia.
The most learned men see not all things; the best men have their errors; the
most learned and devout Fathers have their naevos, blemishes, which discover
them to be but men. Moses, Abraham, David, Peter, Paul, the best of mere men
have showed something of humane infirmity, which might be blamed, and may not
be imitated. And if examples of men be once made our rule, we are in danger as
well to follow men in error as in the truth. The Apohle himself would have us 1
Cor. 11.1
follow him, no farther than he follows Christ. When therefore, on the one side
we see a standing Law requiring this way of public worship, and we our selves
can see no sin in joining in it, we must know it is our duty: and let us not
say, we cannot, or we are unwilling to do it, until we see such and such godly
men use it, or because they use it not. For, the use, or disuse of this or that
Form, was never made by God to be a distinguishing Character of a godly, or
ungodly man: (though yet, I confess, obedience to lawful authority in all
lawful things is a very great part of such a Character.) And I fear, should
this appear to be a duty (as undoubtedly it is) when the denial of it shall
come to be charged upon the soul (as surely one day it will) then, That such
and such learned or godly did deny this use or practice, will be as poor and
insignificant a plea in the court of heaven, as it is (we know) in the courts
of men. Let us not then, in a case of conscience, consider what such or such
men do, but what God would have us to do. And in this case of the Liturgy, if
we see no sin in the matter enjoined (as I am sure there is not) and if it be a
duty in the Minister to use it (as indeed it is, while the Laws command it)
though others refuse, ler all who are conscientious, and peaceably minded,
submit unto it. For 3.
people should join with the Minister in the parts of Public Devotion and
Worship: The Minister being there not to act for himself alone, but for and
with them; the spirit of the people must go with the spirit of the Minister in
those solemn Services, in Prayers, Praises, etc. And they are to testify their
consent, by saying Amen: As appears both by the Deuteronomy. 27.15 Psalm. 106.48.
commands, and order of God, and the Neh. 5.13.8.6.
practice of Saints. Yea, we sometimes read how the Ministers, Saints, people,
all creatures join in praises, and the Angels also come in to make up the
Quire, and join their Amen to the praises of the Saints, as in that Vision to
St. John, Rev. 5.15. and 7.10, 12.
twice in the Apocalypse. Well then, there must be Public Services, wherein
both Minister and people, all are concerned, and all must join; and if so, then
these things must undeniably follow, viz.

1. a known Tongue, which the people understand, that they may all say Amen. It
is the Apostles 1 Cor. 14.16.
Argument: It is not enough that Ministers pray for the people, but they must
praywith the people, and they with the Ministers: They must therefore not be
Barbarians one to another. That wherein all must join, must be understood by
all. And this is one affection of our Liturgy, It is not a Romish Missal in a
strange language, but an English Service in our own Tongue. 2. easy and
intelligible expressions, such as the people are acquainted with. There may be
expressions even in English, which yet many of the people do as little
understand, as they do Greek or Hebrew. Such strains of Rhetoric, Metaphorical
and figurative Speeches, choice Phrases, as may become the language of a
Scholar, which yet edify not poor plain people, because their understandings
are not able to reach them. And here also comes a necessity of a Form for this
public edification of all; and the lawfulness, yea, expediency of the use of
this Form for the same end. It is not unknown, how some learned, pious men are
not so well able in their own conceived ways to stoop and condescend to the
low and vulgar capacities, whose souls yet are equally precious to Christ, and
should be to his Ministers: And some others have, and do affect too much,
strains of Eloquence, flowers of Rhetoric; yea, some, dark and obscure
notions, which may seem sublime, and be admired, because not understood: And
then the people do as little find the profit, as they understand the meaning of
them. Yea, the most knowing people in most, especially Country Congregations,
are so unacquainted with those more polite expressions; that because they
comprehend them not readily, they are forced to be studying the meaning of the
words, when they should be joining of hearts in the matter expressed, and so
cannot so freely add their seal, and say, A MEN. Now, we are sufficiently
secured against this fear, in our Liturgy: for, it is in a language of our own,
framed in expressions suited to the meanest capacities; and such as they are so
acquainted with, that their hearts may readily concur with all things as they
are uttered by the Minister. Let me but add one thing more. 3. same services
to the same God; they are also to join with the same hearts. There must be
unity of faith and spirit among Christians; Harmony, Consent, and Unanimity
among those, who are together Petitioners for the same things to One God: They
should send up One common Vote, and should be agreed with One Heart and Voice,
to worship, and pray before him. And if God will lend a propitious ear to Mat.
18.19, 20.
two or three, agreeing together, to ask any thing of him in the Name of
Christ; then the holy wrestling of a pious multitude will more prevail. This is
as the assault of an Army, with an holy violence sending up Batteries against
the gates of heaven.
matter, sound; for words, plain, easy, and significant: When our Brethren,
and Fellow Members of the same Body, come together, to send up these requests,
why should any withdraw themselves from this Communion? why should we refuse to
pray, or worship with them, only because they do it not in our Mode, or way?
why should we think it a cold kind of formal reading of prayer, rather than
praying, when the heart may be equally warmed and affected here, as in any of
our own conceptions? Here are offices, which all understand; the same matters
prayed for, which all desire; the same praises rendered, which all acknowledge
due; the same mercies magnified, which all have in some measure received. Now,
how unworthy is this for an holy, humble Christian (such should we all be) to
say, I would join in these duties, if they were not put in this Form, or sent
up in these words, or read thus out of a Book? If ye own the duties (as all
Christians must do) shall we divide and quarrel about words and phrase? Would
we not think it strange in a Family, if a child or servant should refuse his
Meals with his Brethren or Fellow Servants, because every Dish is not dressed
his own way? The hungry soul falls to the meat before him, if it be sound and
wholesome, and finds no leisure to dispute about the dressing, or garnishing of
the Dishes.

with, or in the spirit, as the Apostle advises? without doubt, these external
circumstances alter not the nature of the Duty; for, neither reading, nor
repeating by Rote, or uttering words without Book, is alone properly praying;
but the lifting up of the heart with faith and fervor, with humility and
devotion to God. And why the heart may not follow, and go along with the
Minister in Confession, Petition, Praises, etc. in a Form prescribed as well to
the Minister, as to the people; as well as in a prayer uttered, which, though
it be conceived by him, is yet a Form to them that hear it: I see not, nor
indeed can I see any reason, why in our joining together in Acts of Public
Worship according to this Form, we should be judged not to answer that of the
Apostle, of praying in, or with the Spirit; when it is most evident, that we do
walk according to that Rule, in the other part of it, Praying with the
understanding also.

CHAP. XII. The Objection, That Our Liturgy is taken out of the Mass Book, is
showed to be False for the Main, and in the whole, Frivolous.
Popular I call it, for I think it too too inconsiderable to be used by any
that pretends to Reason or Learning: Nor is it in any serious dispute (that I
know) made use of, but upon a design to raise an Odium in the hearts of people
against this Book; which yet indeed is a main Rub in the way of many
well-meaning, and pious-hearted, but not the most intelligent Christians; viz.

It is taken up as a confessed, Object. Of the Mass Book.
and nototious Truth; and with confidence avouched, as not to be denied, That
Our Common Prayer Book is wholly taken out of the Popish Mass Book; and that it
is nothing else but that Mass Book turned out of Latin into English; at least,
so framed out of that, that it may with a very little pains be turned into it
again: And therefore, it must upon this account be unlawful to be used by us,
or any Church Reformed from the Church of Rome.

This is indeed a Charge cried up with noise more than enough in the World.
Answered. Sect. 2.
The people take it, and it is generally believed; and those are most bold and
peremptory, who never saw a Mass Book; nor, if they did, could they understand
it. Whereas, indeed, taking this Assertion, as it is commonly received, and
generally taken upon trust, it is neither so, nor so: And as indeed it is,
there is no consequence or force at all in the Argument; for, 1. Prudence of
the Church to retain in her Public Forms of Prayer and Service some of those
things, which are in the Romish Ritual; it being neither consonant to Religion,
Reason, or Policy, to overthrow all that was before them; but only to Reform
that, which was amiss among them. Reformation is not a total Eradication, or
destruction of all that thing which is to be reformed; but a Separation of the
Evil from the Good, of Error from the Truth; of corruptions and abuses, from
the good, proper, and holy use of a thing. Our wise Reformers therefore did
their work, as became Christian Confessors, and Martyrs, when they rejected the
Dross, and kept the Gold; when they cast out that which was evil, and retained
still that which was good. So that something is yet preserved in our Liturgy,
which is in their Ritual, upon very good reason. And yet 2. Matter and Form, as
that they cannot rationally conclude the one to be the only foundation of the
other: or this to be wholly taken thence. For, Had not those holy and learned,
Reverend men, who were the Compilers of this Liturgy, the Scriptures, the holy
Word of God before them? Without doubt they had. And are not all those Chapters
of the Old and New Testament, all those Psalms and Scriptural Hymns; all the
Epistles and Gospels taken out of those holy Scriptures? Or can we with any
shadow of reason say, They are taken out of the Massbook, because happily some
of them may be there, as well as in ours; when it is evident, that these, at
least, are not taken thence, but from an higher, and purer fountain, The Word
of God. Again, Had not those holy Compilers many other Liturgies also before
them to consider, besides that Popish Ritual? questionless they had, Liturgies
used in the Ancient and Greek Church, which owed, and acknowledged no
subjection either to the Pope, or Church of Rome; and Forms of Prayer used in
several Churches before ever there was a Pope (as Pope is now taken) in the
world. And are not a very great part of our Prayers and Hymns; and many, yea
most, if not all, those short Versicles and Responds (such as the Sursum Corda,
the, Lord have mercy, etc. the Gloria Pairi, and several more, in the ancienter
and purer Forms of the Church? as those who compare them shall find, and those
who are acquainted with Antiquity know, they are. Why shall we say then, that
they were all taken out of the Mass Book, when those holy men had other Rituals
in their eye of an elder and purer composition? Further, what is retained in
ours, and sound among the Papists, is it not good? is it not agreeable to the
Word of God? and if so, how can we excuse our selves from the guilt of a very
great excess of uncharitableness, when we shall say, that the framers of this
Liturgy, took these things out of the Mass Book, and not out of the Scriptures,
with which so evidently they do agree? 3. Ball. Trial of grounds of Separ.
chap. 8. answ. to obj. 4. p. 153. --
Nonconformist in answer to this very objection urged with virulence enough by
the Separatists in those times. His words are, We are to note, that the Mass in
former times did signify the worship of God, which consisted in Public
Prayers, Thanksgivings, Confession of Faith, Singing of Psalms, Reading, and
Interpreting the holy Scriptures, and Receiving of the Lords Supper; and so,
the Ancient Mass and Liturgy were the same. (This is evident, for See Gratian.
de Consecr. did. 1. Can. 12. and 50. and 54. Ex Council. Fol. 4. Can. 12. Ambr.
Ep. 35. l. 5. Conc. Milev. Can. 12. Bellar. de Mis. l. 4. c. 1.
To hear Mass, was then but to be present at, and attend to the public Service
of the Church, as by the evidence of Antiquity it appears, which even the
Papists are forced to confess) But now the Roman Mass is put for the Unbloody
Sacrifice of the Body of Christ, which the Priest does offer up for the quick
and dead. And in this sense do they take it, when they say, our Service Book is
taken out of the Mass Book: but it should rather be said, The Mass Book was in
time added to our Communion-book, and by the purging out of the Mass, it is now
restored to its former purity. Popery is a Scab, or a Leprosy that cleaves to
the Church; and the Mass, an abomination ann xed to the Liturgy. Before the
Mass was heard of in the world, or began to be hatched, there was stinted
Liturgies in the Church, for substance much what the same with ours. -- The
Eastern Churches had their Liturgies first; and the Western borrowed many
things from them. -- The Ancient Liturgies, attributed to James, Basil,
Chrysostom, are Counterfeit; -- but diverse things in them contained were in use
in the Primitive Church without question. They had their appointed Lessons out
of the Law, and the Prophets, and the Psalms, and Evangelists; their stinted
Prayers, and Forms of Celebration, with some variety, but in substance all one
in a manner. -- The Forms were at first more brief, afterward enlarged, and by
enlargement (as it often happens) corrupted, and defiled. Corruption, as a
disease by this means cleaving to the Liturgy, it was necessary it should be
corrected, and recovered to its first integrity, and soundness. The Cardinal
Quignonius, by the command of Clement the Seventh, so changed the Roman
Breviary, that for the most part it was rather like an English Book of Prayers,
than a Roman Breviary. And the English Liturgy, gathered according to the Model
of the Ancients, and the Purest of them, is not a Collection out of the
Mass Book, but a Refining of that Liturgy which heretofore had been stained
with the Mass. -- If it was wholly taken out of the Mass Book, Note this
Dilemma.
I should desire to know, how the Mass Book came to have those things in it,
which are found in the Book of Common Prayer, sound and Holy for Matter, and
directly contrary to Antichristianism. If these things were in the book before,
then all things therein were not of Antichrist, but he only usurped them: and
it is lawful for the True Man to claim his own goods wherever he finds them. If
they were not in the Mass Book, then all things are not taken out of it, but
some things restored out of purer Antiquity, which the Man of Sin had wickedly
expunged. (And to this discourse he adds the judgments of other
Non-Conformists also) -- The Ministers of Lincoln Acts and Men. Vol. p. 1631.
of Dr. Taylor's Testimony concerning our Service Book.
never judged the use of the Book unlawful; never thought it lawful to separate
from the Prayers of the Congregation; never refused the use of the Book, though
in some things they desired to be excused. The Churches of God have been
evermore taught to prize and esteem these main and fundamental truths, and
Ordinances of woe ship at an higher rate, than that some petty dislike of this
or that in the external Form, when the matter is found and good, should cause
separation. (And to all this he adds this short, but true, and observable
conclusion, that) Our Service Book is not a Translation of the Mass Book, but a
Restitution of the Ancient Liturgy, wherein sundry Prayers are inserted, used
by the Fathers, and agreeable to the Scriptures. So far, He. 4. Liturgy, and
not take all upon a general report, and they will soon see this objection
vanishing. There is so vast a difference between these two, that I cannot but
wonder that any wise or considering man should lay this imputation upon our
Liturgy. I have seen several of the Popish offices, and have some by me, and
one entire Ritual; I have read them over; I have compared ours with them; and
what find I? even a vast difference, a Diametrical opposition. So palpably
false is that, which Ball. ibid p. 150.
Can, the separatist objected, that, Not only the Form of it is taken from the
Church of Antichrist, but the Matter also. For 1. Form, and Order, They begin
not as we do; they go not on as we do; our Confession of sins to God, with that
Declaration of Absolution to them that repent, annexed; with which we begin,
was never (that I have seen) in their Masse-books, therefore cannot be taken
thence. 2. Matter, there is evidently a far wider difference. For, that
multitude of Superstitious fopperies; those many ridiculous, and impious
trumperies; Prayers not only to God, but to the Virgin Mary, Angels, Saints;
for souls departed; the Mediation of others, besides Christ; and many, a number
of such things more in their Rituals, which we have cast out: Those many holy
things in ours, which they own not; yea, which are directly contrary to their
Doctrine and Practice: The matter of our Liturgy (says the Ball. ibid.
forecited Author) is the reading of the Scriptures in a known tongue, the
Calling upon God in the Mediation of Jesus Christ, and not upon Angels or
Saints departed; for the living, and not for the dead; the right administration
of the Sacraments (which we acknowledge only two, and expressly deny the other
five, (as such) which they maintain) and singing of Psalms. Are these (says
he, and with him I appeal to all rational men) the devises of Antichrist? Is
the administration of the Lords Supper, in both kinds, (which they admit but in
one to the people) in remembrance of Christ's death and passion, who by one
oblation of himself, Once (and but once) offered, has made a full, perfect,
and sufficient oblation, and satisfaction for the sins of the whole world (as
it is in our Rituall, whereas they pretend to repeat, and daily offer up this
sacrifice again for the quick and dead) Is this taken from the Church of
Antichrist? These imputations (says he) are not so gross, as their reasons
are weak, upon which they are built. These things show so much difference, so
great an opposition between ours and theirs, that we may well conclude, (as he,
a little after does express it) that, The Papists cannot sincerely approve our
public service; but they must condemn, and detest their own; their prayers in
an unknown tongue; their praying to Saints departed, much more to fained
Saeints; their receiving in one kind; their unbloody sacrifice; their real,
(i.e. corporal) presence, their satisfaction for venial sins, their blotting
out of the second Commandment, or, at least, confounding it with the first:
with others the like. Again, when I see those Prayers, which seem to be the
same in theirs, and ours, indeed not to be the same; but, though some passages
be in them, which we also use, yet the entire Prayer different; either
something in ours, which theirs have not; or something in theirs, which ours
admit not: (for one or two expressions in a Prayer, being the same which they
use, make not the Prayer the same, when they agree not in the rest of the parts
also: for throughout the Prayer, if it be the same, there must be the same
Preface, the same Petitions, and the same Conclusion, which in most of these
there is not.) And further, When I find that there are some indeed of the same
Prayers, (I say, some, for they are but few exactly the same) yet these such,
as are for matter, good, sound, wholesome, and necessary; for words and
expressions, savoury, and significant; and perfectly agreeable to the sacred
Canon, the Word of God; and not one of these Prayers made a matter of any
considerable exception, by those who have in many other things excepted against
this book: I say, not one of these prayers, which are the same as in theirs,
charged with any material error by any, no, not those, who have made it their
business to find the most faults in it: nor indeed can they be excepted against
for matter or words; let the particulars be examined, if they be not agreeable
to the holy Rule, and then judge, if therefore they be evil, because used by
the Papists.



Now when all these things are laid together, it is some matter of wonder to
me, how it can be so confidently taken up for a notorious Truth, That Our
Common Prayer Book is nothing else but the Popish Mass Book; or that it is
wholly taken thence, and may with so much ease be turned into it again.

Which, if it were true, I cannot imagine any considerable Reason the French
King and Bishops had,
to hinder the impression of it there (it having been here by the Order of His
Majesty translated into that language, for the use of the French Protestants
among us) which we are informed they lately did. But I fear, these imputations
have been laid, and these expressions and reproaches taken up, and given out,
but upon design to draw people to an aversness from, and to make them out of
love with these Forms of Prayer which are established among us, and for the
matter not to be excepted against. Sure I am, they have proved too sad snares
to entangle many tender consciences in needless fears, scruples and doubts.

Our Book is in the Roman Ritual, or taken thence; yet is this a sufficient
Argument to prove it evil, or unlawful to be used? Nothing less. Can we think
the Papists so void of all Christianity, yea, of common sense, as to have
nothing that is good among them? Or if it be good in it self, is it therefore
evil because they use it? Suppose a Minister either in his Prayer or Sermon
(for we may observe it sometimes in both) should borrow some expressions or
phrases from the Heathen Authors, shall his Prayer or Sermon presently for
this be accounted the devise or invention of an Heathen, or unlawful to be
heard? I trow not. I could tell you of many things, which we may take from an
Heathens mouth; and such expressions, as would shame most of us who are called
Christians: And which, if used by us in prayer, will be accepted with God, if
offered up with a Christian, that is, an holy, humble, and believing heart. It
is a prayer which an Heathen made, and may well become a Christians mouth.

Plato, in Alcibiade.
(...)
(...).
Which we may render thus, O God our King give us good things, though we
Pray or pray not: but although we pray,
Yet sad and evil drive from us away.


Is not this a necessary, holy Petition? May not, yea ought not a Christian to
put up the same request? and may he not, if he please, use the same words? Or,
are they therefore evil, because used by a Pagan? Let me add one passage more
from another Philosopher; and indeed I cannot without astonishment read this
passage in the Stoic Epictet. Dissert. l. 1. c. 16 -- (...). --
who having reckoned up variety of Divine Providence, says, What word is
enough sufficiently to praise these things? For, if we have any sense or
reason, can it become us to do any thing but to sing, and bless God; and
commemorate his benefits? Becomes it not all that dig or plough, or eat, to
sing this Hymn to God? Great is (or magnified be) God, for that he affords us
these instruments wherewith we till the ground. Great, or magnified be God,
because he has given us hands, mouth, and stomach; that we grow, and get
strength, when we observe it not; that we sleep, and are refreshed. For these
things ought every one to bless God, and to sing this great and most Divine
Hymn, etc. As much more follows to the same purpose.

Are these Meditations, Hymns, and Expressions unfit for us? May they not very
well become a Christian mouth? or, are they unlawful, because an Heathen used
them? No, no, good is good still, wheresoever it be found, and in whatsoever
hand it be. No wise man will refuse Gold, because taken out of the Dirt; or
despise a Jewel, because found in a Dunghill; or cast away his Corn, and sound
Grain, because it sometimes lay in an heap of Chafe: Nor will a wise humble
Christian, or devout soul therefore despise these prayers, and sacred Offices,
because some of them sometimes were among the dross and chafe of Romish
Trumperies: When that chafe is winnowed away, and that dross washed off: Who
knows not (says Ball) Ball. ibid. p. 151.
that many precious Truths may be called and picked out of the Mass Book? Good
Gold may have some dross; and among an heap of dross it is possible to find
some good Gold. A true man's Goods may be in a Thieves Den; and the Goods of the
Church in the possession of Antichrist. Antichrist has either by violence
broken in upon, or by secret insinuation, before he was spied, gotten the rich
Treasures of the Church into his hands; which the right Heirs may lawfully
require, and take back again; not as borrowed from him, but due to them. I
scarce know, (says he) how a man should more honor Antichrist,
or wrong the true Church of God, than to grant that all the good things that
he does usurp, do of right belong to him, and are borrowed from him. For, they
are the rich Legacies which Christ has bequeathed to his Church, to whom they
properly pertain.

rejecting, is to me an Argument for the use of this Liturgy, viz. That the
Papists have it, at least some of it. For, I am so far from thinking that we
are to cast away all that the Church of Rome uses; that I judge it a Duty to
use all, and to hold communion with them, and all the Churches of Christ in the
World, in all things wherein they swerve not from the Rule of the common
Christianity. For the Church is but One, the Head but One, the Body but One;
Ephesians. 4.4, 5, 6.
One Lord, One Faith, One Baptism, One God and Father of all. One Church, One
Christ, One Gospel, why should we then not walk in the same communion? If the
Church of Rome, or any other part of the Church whatsoever, walk in a different
way from the rest of the whole Body; or have a Service not agteeable to the
common Rule, The one Gospel, and Jude 3. Tit. 1.4.
the common Faith that was once delivered to the Saints. Here let us leave
them, and not be scrupulous of the particular communion of one part, whilst we
hold close to the common Rule; and Profession of the whole. But wherein also
they agree with the whole, let us not forsake them; let us not forsake them in
that which is good, because we must have no communion with them in things that
are evil: In these we must forsake them, in the others we may not go with them.

Papists, or this or that Party of men do, or do not; but what is fit for us,
and our Duty to do. If the thing required be evil, though we, though any, yea,
or an Gal. 1.8.
Angel from heaven require it, yet deny it; but if it be wholesome, good and
sound; though the Papists, though the worst of men practice it; yea, though the
very Devils themselves acknowledge it (as even they Acts 16.17. Mark 1.24.
sometimes are forced to confess the Truth) let us receive it. The Truth is of
God, though it may sometimes be conveyed to us through foul hands.

Substance of Religion, and the Circumstances of Worship. In this business, the
Religion and Substance of Worship, is Prayer and Praise: Or, that we call upon
God in the meditation of Jesus Christ according to his Will: But whether there
may, or ought to be a Form, or no; and whether it shall be in this or any other
Form (supposing the Form not dissonant from the holy Word of God, whencesoever
this Form be taken) this is purely matter of Order and Circumstance: And herein
we are to yield obedience to our Governors, whose care it must be to see, Ne
quid Ecclesia, vel Religio detrimenti capiat; That the Church, or Religion
suffer not; and that all things be done (according to the 1 Cor. 14.40.
Apostolical Canon) (...), Decently, and in Order.

Prince of Peace, as sons of the God of Peace, as Professors of the Gospel of
Peace; we set our selves to study; and walk in the ways of Peace? How shall we
pretend to the fear of God in our hearts, when the way of peace we will not
know? For Romans 3.17, 18.
they go together. How shall we answer to God our contempt of his Ordinance,
our disobedience to those strict injunctions of the Gospel, when we divide our
selves and the Church about such a Liturgy, wherein there must be confessed
nothing sinful, nothing unlawful, either in respect of Form or Matter. O would
we cordially strive for, and pray that the Lord would give us Jer. 32.39.
one heart, and one way; would we all encourage, and call up one another, Isa.
2.3.
Come let us go up to the house of the Lord, and there together worship God, as
our established Laws require we should, and in this way which the Law of God
does no where condemn; and thus with one lip, and with one mouth, glorify God,
and call upon his Name: How would Isa. 48.18.
our peace run like a River, and our righteousness as a flowing stream? What a
Glory would then be upon all our Assemblies?

Jewish Church, by the appointment of God, they had their Number. 4.16 and 29.6.
Isa 58.2. Dan. 8.11, 12, 13.
Juge Sacrificium, their daily Sacrifice; so in the Ancient and Purer Times,
the Christian Church had their daily prayers, and solemn public Worship. Their
Churches and Oratories open Vestram heri charitatem consolata fuit -- Etsienim
heri, and nudius-tertius de hac vobis locutus tam mut^rla. -- Chrysostom. Hom. 5.
ad Pop. Antioch. and Hom. 6. Heri admo^ui, hodie dicam. Et Hom. 13. in Genesis
Quotidie tamen hanc tenuem mensam vobis proponere studeo.
every day in some places, in others, Chrysostom. ad cap. 3. Joh. Hom. 24. Non
enim singulis diebus, sed duobus tantum, and brevi eorum part, ut vos labor
levemus, hortamur ut orationi nostrae aures adhibeatis.
twice, thrice, or oftener, every week; the Ministers attending constantly to
the work of Divine Service, and instruction of the people; the Aug. Tract. 8.
in Joh. Sunt forte hodie qui propter solennitatem diei venerunt: Crastino qui
venerint, venient audituri.

Et, Chrysostom. Adv. Jud. Quemadmodum homines -- singulo quoque die simul ac
surrexerunt obambulant -- sic and vos quotidie, simul ac surrexistis curiose
perquiritis utinam fu ura sit Exhortatio, ubi admonitio, ubi D^ctrina, ubi
Sermo.


people, even the Propter pauperes qui ad opera sua festinant, melius est, hoc
ut vobis in die crastina reservemus. August. Sermon. 82. de Temp.
poor, who were afterward to follow their labor for their daily bread, yet
attending and presenting themselves to worship, and to be instructed. But how
unlike are we to those days? how many Churches among us stand shut up, and
never open but upon one day in the week, if then; yet then also not filled (if
at all) till the Sermon begin, as if the Prayers of the Church were none of our
Concerns. It is true, that among those Ancients, where they had such constant
Assemblies, there were also preaching and instructing, and Exhortations: And it
is unquestionable, preaching of the Word is an undoubted Ordinance of God, for
the salvation of his people, on which they are bound to attend. Yet I have
observed in too many places, that whatever the pretenses of men have been, they
have showed as little regard to preaching, as to prayer; though they pretend
they come not to Church upon the week-dayes, because there is only the Formal
Service, but no instructions; yet when Sermons have been offered, yea preached,
either on stated Lectures weekly, or some special occasions, they have attended
as little there, as they now do upon the public prayers. But besides, with the
prayers do we not constantly read the Scriptures? and are not those matter of
instruction and edification? In the Jewish Church, they had their daily
Sacrifices, and reading of the Law; but we read not of their daily preachings
or expositions. O let us not think that all Religion lies in hearing of a
Sermon; it is indeed a Duty, and we are bound to attend: but the end of that is
but to instruct and teach us. There is yet somewhat to be done by us, some
public Sacrifice to be offered up by all. By the Word they are instructed; but
in this the people offer up no Worship; then do they their solemn homage to
God, when together they make their Confessions, and offer up their prayers and
praises. O let us in this show to the World what God we serve, what Religion we
own, that indeed we are Christians, by our daily offering Christian-Sacrifices,
and constant attendance on the Worship of Christ; that we are Reformed, English
Christians, by our constant attendance on the public Prayers, and Worship of
the Church of England. The Church of Rome enjoins her Members, and the people
think it their duty, every day to hear Mass: It is true, their Worship is
Superstition, but it is an ill Reformation to change Superstition into
Profaness: There is a medium between Superstitious worship, and No worship. O
let not the Papists have so just an occasion to cast this reproach upon us,
That under pretense of Superstition, we have cast off the daily public worship
of God: Let not their blind zeal for their way condemn our coldness, and want
of zeal in ours. We have a Liturgy Reformed from all Superstition, a Worship
that is holy; a Form of Confession, prayers and praises, sound and agreeable to
the sacred Word of God; let us conscientiously attend on these Services, daily
and sincerely offer up from the heart this holy Worship: And the God of peace
shall be with us.

I know but one thing more that can be matter of scruple, or a means to
interrupt our Peace, and that is, the Rites and Ceremonies in this Liturgy
prescribed. But these sheets have already multiplied beyond my first intention,
and therefore now, Manum de Tabula. The Courteous Reader may expect a full
account of those Rites and Ceremonies in another Tract by it self; which I
shall give him in my next Part.

(...) A PEACE OFFERING. Part III.
WHEREIN The Differences about the Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of
England are examined, the scruples resolved, and it is showed, that there is
nothing in these but may be submitted to for Peace-sake.
CHAP. I. The Fasts and Feasts of the Church of England Examined, and justified.
THere are two several lovers (said that August. in Psalm. 64.
learned Father) which have built two several Cities; 1.
The love of God builds a Jerusalem; the love of the world builds a
Babylon. We need not look far back for evidence of the one; This poor Church of
England has by woeful experience found, that our love of the world has
turned our Jerusalem into a Babylon; our Unity and Order, into Division and
Confusion; and consequently our Beauty and Glory, into Deformity and Misery.
That now it is high time we change our love. 1 John 2.15.
Love not the world, nor the things of the world. It is high time to break off
that unhappy match. We have bin too long adulterous with the world, and
disloyal to our God: Oh let us now give her a Bill of Divorce, for a perpetual
separation! and cordially resolve and say, Hos. 2.7.
We will go and return to our first Husband, for then it was better with us
than now. By our divisions, and our love of the world, we had almost destroyed;
Oh let us now show that we can, and will do more for the love of our God, to
repair the breaches, and set up the Walls of Jerusalem that were broken down!
Oh let the flames of love in our souls ascend to the God of Peace! then shall
we sincerely study, and endeavor the Peace of the City of God. To quicken
these flames, excite this love, and promote this Peace is the only design of
these Papers. Oh let my Peace Offering be accepted with God and his Church
though the slenderness of my stock will not reach to a Lev. 5.7, 11.
Lamb or Turtles, yet the Lord, (with whom 2 Cor. 8.12.
if there be a willing mind, it is accepted according to what a man has, and
not according to what he has not,) will accept this Free-will-Offering of my
soul, though it be but as Lev. 5.11.
Flower without Oil, even Lev. 14.31.
such as I am able to get. In magnis vel voluisse sat est.

Doctrine, the Doubts and Scruples about Government, Discipline, and the
Liturgy or Form of public Prayer and Administrations: Wherein I have
endeavored to remove all considerable Doubts and material Exceptions; that,
which (I hope) may satisfy the sober minded, that there is nothing in any of
those things Imposed upon us, but what the Conscientious, Peaceable Christian
may, and while enjoined by such Authority, ought to submit and Conform unto.

Rites, those several practices and observations prescribed in our Liturgy, and
enjoined by the Canons. These things we must acknowledge to have bin made both
of late, and of old the matters of as high Disputes, and as sad contentions as
the Church ever knew; not always from the nature of the thing, but most times
from the corruptions of men, both the over-rigidnesse of some, and the
frowardness of others, for long before their increase to that multitude, of
which See Pref. to Com. Pr. of Ceremonies, why some abolished and some retained.
Saint Austin is said to complain; and when yet they were not a bused to vanity
and superstion; even in the very next age to the Apostles, what sharp and
bitter contentions were there about the time of one Feast? How were the whole
Eastern and Westorn Church divided about the observation of Easter? And since
our Church has abolished that Pref. to Com. Pr. of Cerem. etc.
excessive multitude, and cast out the vain, unprofitable, and superstitious
Ceremonies, which obscured the glory of God; retaining only those that conduced
to Order, and Decency, and Edification: Yet what troubles and turmoyles in this
little Island the heats of men have raised heretofore, and do still continue,
about these innocent things, we have sufficiently seen, and can never
sufficiently lament.

Rites guilty of, that they should be so much spoken against? Is there any such
Idolatry, Superstition, Sin; any thing of so horrid a nature in these, or any
one of these, that a pious soul may not dare to approach near them; that a
conscientious Christian may upon no terms obey the Law that enjoins them, nor
on any hand conform in practice to them; no not to maintain, what we are so
much bound to promote, the Peace of the Church? I think not. Let us take a view
of the Particulars; whether the observation of Times or Things, for we have but
these two to consider; 1. The Times to be observed. 2. The Rites and Ceremonies
prescribed in the Sacred Services.

Times are either of Fasting or Festivity, here all that we have to do, is to
examine the Fasts and Feasts of the Church of England, and how far these are
lawful to be observed.

Fasts. 1. That Fasting and Prayer is not only lawful, but a Duty; and upon
some occasions to be publicly and solemnly kept and observed, I know no
Christian that ever yet denied. Which is to be expressed, both 1. In external
humiliation of the body in the forbearance of our ordinary food for a time,
that by that means we may mortify the flesh, and as by a solemn sign declare
that we for our sins are not worthy of our daily Bread; and that we may fit
our selves better for the service of God, and stir up our souls to more
earnestness in our suites and supplications to God: yea and in laying aside
all outward glories and Ornaments; and forbearing of delicacies in those things
which we must take for the necessary support of our body. Hence we read of
those practices of the Ancients, 2 Samuel 3.31. and 13.31. Esth. 4.1. Psa. 35.13,
14. Jon. 3.6, 8. Dan. 9.3.
Renting their clothes, girding with sackcloath, sitting on the ground, lying
on Ashes, and putting Ashes on their heads, bowing the head, and going
mournfully. It cannot become a solemn Fasting to appear in a garb or carriage
suited to Mirth or Festivity. But, 2. Especially in the humiliation of the
heart, Joel 2.12, 13. Isai. 58.4, 5. Ezekiel. 18.30, 31. 1 Samuel 7.4. Jon. 3.10.
A broken and a contrite spirit: that men resolve and endeavor seriously to
cast away sin, repent and reform both heart and life: Thus to Fast not to
themselves, but Zech. 7.5.
to the Lord; to seek his face and favor. All this we know has the command of
God, and the practice of Saints for its warrant and encouragement.

Fasting are, 1. When sin abounds, that we by this means may mortify and
subdue the flesh, and take as an holy revenge upon ourselves; because, like
Deuteronomy. 32.15.
Jesurun we have waxed fat, and kicked against our God, we now will Isai. 58 5.
afflict our souls, and keep under our body, and bring it into subjection: that
we may testify the Psalm. 35.13.
reality of our sorrow, the sincerity of our repentance; that we indeed turn to
God: that we now may with more earnestness beg, Genesis 3.8, 9, 10.
and with confidence hope to receive pardon. Or, 2. When Jud. 20 26. 1 Samuel
7.6. Dan. 9.3. 2 Chronicles. 20.3. Esth. 4.1, 16. Joel 1.3. with 2.12, 13, 14, 15 1
King 21.29. 2 King. 22.19, 20.
Judgments are upon us, or expected, or feared: to humble our souls, and mourn,
and weep, and pray, that so we may avert the indignation of God. Or, 3. When
some eminent service is to be performed, to which is required an especial
assistance; when solemn Prayers and Supplications are to be sent up; when Act.
13.3, 4. and 14.23.
Apostles or Preachers to be ordained to the work of the Gospel, and sent out
to Minister to the Gentiles: In these and such cases it is needful to Fast,
that we may be, as more serious in our Repentance, so more fervent in our
Prayers; more quick and lively in all those holy performances. Full stomachs
beget heaviness and security, and a filled body is more stupid and dull, that
the soal cannot so nimbly perform its operations. For this end, I suppose, did
Luke 2.37.
Anna the Prophetess, in the Gospel join Fastings to her Prayers, that by
this means she might better fit her soul, and compose her spirit for her
devotions. For this reason, among others, it is that we find so often Mat.
17.21. 1 Cor. 7.5.
Fasting and Prayer joined together.

Magistrates, and Governors both in Church and State may appoint the set and
solemn days of such Fasting and Religious exercises, I think all sober pious
men do as little doubt. I need not cite the stated Fasts in the Jewish Church,
nor those of the Christians in the elder times; our own constant practice
shows that we have ever esteemed it lawful, and have obeyed. How frequent is
it for our Kings, and Parliaments, upon solemn occasions to appoint days of
Fasting and Prayer to seek God; whether to remove his Judgments, or to bless
some great work in hand; and who ever (in his right wits) questioned this? And
this not only upon particular emergent occasions, but at constant times stated
and fixed: for those, who may command a Fast at one time, may also another; and
upon the continuance of the occasions continue also the solemnity of the Fast,
as with us, we were for some years enjoined by Royal Authority, and did
observe a monthly Fast, and if monthly, the same by like Authority may be
done quarterly, or yearly for ever: these constant occasions for ever
continuing, whilst we are in this state of corruption, and the Church
continues Militant. These things are in general acknowledged in Thesi. But

Hypothesis, and a particular case, we find a difference in the judgments of
men. The Lent, or Quadrages. Fast.
The main exception is to the Lent, or Quadragessimall Fast: and it is
therefore made one of the desires of the Divines in the conference, That there
may be nothing in the Liturgy to countenance the Lent as a Religious Fast, etc.

Lent, I shall propound but these things.

1. That it is a civil constitution, is evident, Stated and vindicated. 1. As
a civil Constitution.
and that it is a thing within the sphere, and under the power of the
Magisrate; and that the Act of 5. Eliz. forbidding the eating of Flesh for a
time, upon a politic consideration, for the breed of cattle; the health of
men's bodies; the encouragement of Fishing and Navigation, etc. is an wholesome
and good Law, may not be questioned; and that so far, we are bound toobey, none
that I know, denies: let us do so much; let us obey the Law in this
abstinence; and for the ground of it, though every man do abound in his own
sense, this matters not: our peace will be sufficiently secured. If we may obey
the Constitution so far, as the Law requires us, I know no reason that any
sober peaceable man can have, to start a new question; and find out a scruple,
to be a plea for disobedience, upon a dispute of Religion in that observance.
2. Religious observation. Is this of such a nature, 2. As a Religious
ab^^^ation how far to be owned?
so criminal, and so unlawful, that it may by no means be admitted? Consider
it well, we shall find no such matter. For 1. Can it be criminal? Yea is it
not laudable for the Church in her Constitutions? for us in our practice, from
temporal, and civil occurrents, to excit and promote Religious duties? Does
not Christ himself take occasion Jon. 4.7, 15.
from the water of Jacobs-well to instruct the Samaritan woman; and to show her
where is the living water, and how she may attain it? And from Joh. 6, per to
the Miracles of the loaves take occasion to preach himself the bread from
Heaven, that feeds to life eternal; and how can it be a sin, either in the
Governors of our Church upon occasion of a politic Law, made for some kind of
abstinence, to prescribe; or, in us, to obey such a prescription, the practice
of a religious mortification; and by an holy use of this abstinence to prepare
our souls for a solemn communicating at the Feast approaching? yea why it
should not be commendable, I confess, my eyes are too dull to discover. 2.
preach or write -- that any eating of Fish, or forbearing of Flesh, mentioned
there, is of any necessity for the saving of the soul of man, or is the service
of God, otherwise than other Politic Laws are, or may be, etc. For, Who does
so? who says so? The Statute is express against the Popish Doctrines, and
practices, and allows not the opinion of any worth, or holiness in the opus
operatum (as the Romanists speak) nor puts any difference, upon the account
of Religion, in Meats, or Drinks, or Times; perfectly agreeably to the 1 Cor.
6.12 13. 1 Timothy 4.3, 4, 5. Heb. 13.9. Col 2.16, 20.21.
Apostolical Canon. But when by occasion of this politic Law, the Church
calls upon us to improve it to an holy end, and from a civil observance to
perform an holy duty; where is the sin, where is the contrariety? who ever
taught that there was matter of Religion in eating Fish, or Flesh? but that we
may by sober abstinence, learn to practice an holy mortification, who ever
doubted? 3.

Apostles times no particular Laws, nor positive prescriptions of certain
times of fasting; but rather, the pressing upon Christians, and binding them to
laws of Meats and Drinks, and distinctions of days, is expressly declared to
be, and have their rise, from those impostors, and 1 Timothy 4.1.3. Col. 2.16.
seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils; yet this does make nothing at all
against this matter or practice now in debate. For, 1. Jewish solemnities, and
Mosaicall distinction of times, which the Gnostickes then also taught and
pressed, who labored to patch up a medley, and make a composition of Law and
Gospel, and so abridge the Evangilicall liberty, by laying on the Mosaicall
yoke upon the necks of Christians, which the Apostle disputes so much against
in those Epistles to the Galatians, and Colossians. This was indeed to destroy
the Christian liberty, and to make the Cross of Christ of none effect: and
here the charge upon us is, Gal. 5.1. --
stand fast in your liberty, and be not again entangled in the yoke of bondage.
But. 2. when, how often, and how long they pleased) The Cent. Magde. Cent. 2. c.
6. de jejuniis.
Centuriators inform us, that these Fasts were constantly observed in many
Churches always, with no less solemnity than Easter it self, and were as a
solemn preparation to it: and this they confirm by the testimonies of
Eusebius, Justin Martyr, and Irenaeus l. 2. adv. Haer. o. 57. And as the
differences about Easter day clearly show, that such a day was observed in the
first ages: so also, those Differences about the Quadragessimall Fast at that
time do infallibly evidence such a thing generally observed, some (as Eusebius
out of Irenaeus reports) thought they should Fast only one day, some two
Quadraginta hord, nocturnas and diurnas computantes, die in sunm statuunt.
reckoning forty hours by night and day, to make the day. The Centurists Cent.
Magde. ibid.
add the testimonies of Theophilus, that in Italy some fasted full forty
days; some twenty, some thought seven days enough, because the creation of
the world was finished in that time; some because Christ fasted forty days,
they did so also; some thought they did well enough in fasting forty hours.
Yea, even in their judgment, these diversities seem to have arisen Statim post
Apostolos. Centur. ibid.
presently after the Apostles days; and Irenaeus (as Eusebius reports out of
him) speaks of this as a thing even then very ancient, Cent. ibid. Neque nunc
primum, nequ; nostris temporibus, seu long, ante nos.
not then, or in his time arisen, but long before; and yet he lived whithin
little more than an hundred years after Christ, he being the auditor of
Polycarp, who was the Disciple of Saint John. As for the following ages, it
will be needless to cite testimonies: all that know any thing of those times
of the Church, know that volumes might be produced of their Sermons and
Homilies, purposely preached at such times.


viz. the wednesday, and Friday (as f Clemens Alex. seems to intimate) yet
they all called it Quadragessima. This shows, that they judged the practice
not unlawful, nor contrary to the Evangelicall Doctrine; and if the practice
be lawful, how should it become unlawful by being commanded? if the Church,
or Magistrates have power to appoint days of Public Humiliation, (as all
acknowledge) why not these days? if one day, why not two, ten, or forty?
These things then are enough to prove at least thus much to us, that the
observation of some kind of Religious Fast at such a time is no new thing in
the Church; nor thought unlawful by the Christians and those holy Confessors,
and Martyrs of those first and purest ages.

observation of a Lent: the politic Law requires it upon a civil account; the
Liturgy seems to intimate a Religious Fast: our obedience is required only in
the practick. Observe that abstinence, and contend not about the Reasons. We
are not called to give our judgments about the grounds, but to obey in
observing the constitution. And even that which is cited out of St. Hierom, may
be of use enough to preswade us to peace and obedience in this; Hieron. Epist.
ad Lucin. Vnaque provincia abundet in suo seusu, and praecepta majorum leges
Apostolicas arbitret.
Let every Province abound in its own sense, and account the precepts of their
Ancestors as Apostolical Laws, or constitutions. Here in this our Island we
know, it has been the constant practice of our Ancestors, not only in the
days of Popery, but the clearer light of the Gospel to observe a Lent; let us
do as they, and account their constant practice not lightly to be cast aside;
unless we can be able to prove it contrary to the Doctrine of Christ or his
Apostles.

2. As to the Feasts, and Holy days observed, and required to be observed;
which are excepted against,. 19. The Fasts of the Church justified.
and desired to be omitted, with their Vigils etc. or if kept, not to be called
Holy, but Feastivall days. I say,

These are not ordained, nor we are commanded to observe them as a Divine, but
only as an Ecclesiastical constitution (as the Account of proceed. p. 64.
Right reverend Bishops in the conference have declred) and in this case we
need not look for an express Law in the word; it suffices that they be not
repugnant to the Scriptures, and in general lawful to be observed. And that
they are so, appears 1. not to pray to, or worship those Saints and Martyrs;
but to preserve the honor of their memories; to worship God alone; to praise
him for his mercies to his Church by them; to be quickened by their zeal,
constancy, and piety to the same actions, and be encouraged to keep close to
the Faith of Christ, and ways of the Gospel; when we see it is no untrodden
path, but such as those, so many Holy, Heavenly, Devout, and Learned men have
not been ashamed of, but gloried in. And I am informed by one, whom I dare
credit (now I hope with God) that it was an expression of that Great Usher, the
late learned Primate of Ireland, that were the Feastivals of the Church of
England all well observed and understood; this alone would be a sufficient
Catechism to instruct any, in all the Fundamentals, and Principles of the
Christian Religion. And in none of all this is any thing of a contrariety to
the holy Scriptures: nothing that can be accounted sin to do, and how it should
be made a sin by being commanded, which without sin we might do if not
commanded; is such a riddle, as I could yet never understand; and will be a
paradox to any rational considering man. 2. Joh. 10.22.
Feast of the Dedication of the Temple, which was evidently not of Divine (for
we read of no Feast either appointed by Solomon for the Building, nor by
Nehemia for the Restoring of the Temple) but purely of Ecclesiastical
constitution, for Macch. 4.36, -- 60.
the cleansing and Repairing the Sanctuary, after the victory obtained by Judas
Macchabeus: And whether that of the Apostle may not refer to the Paschall or
Easter solemnity, I define not, but submit it to the judgment of the Learned,
when he says that 1 Cor. 5.7, 8.
Christ our passover is Sacrificed for us, and then infers, therefore
(...), let us keep the Feast, (or keep holy day) and goes on to show how, not
with the old leaven of malice -- but in sincerity and truth.


full Moon according to the Jewish order, what day soever it was, or upon the
Lords day following, both sides pleading Cent. Magd. Cent. 1. l. 2. c. 6. De
Festu in Irenaeo and Eusebio.
the practice of some of the Apostles for each way; which clearly proves the
observation of such a Feast, in which also we find by the same Authors Cent.
Magd. Cent. 2. c. 6. de Festis ex Theoph. Caesan. Epist. Paschali.
the celebration of the Nativity of Christ upon the 25th day of December.

Further also say they, It is clear out of Eusebius, that the Christians under
the Antonini, Emperors of that time also, were wont to celebrate the memories
of the Saints, who had been Martyrs; and kept their annual meetings, and
Eundem morem apud Naz. (...). in Julian legimus (...).
conventions at their sepulchers, not out of superstition, to worship them, but
gathering together with exultations and joy to celebrate their birth; both to
preserve their memory and to stir up others in succeeding generations to such
exercises and preparations.

Nazianzen on the birthday of Christ, Naz. Orat. (...).
which they called sometimes Theophania, sometimes Epiphania (i. e.) the
Appearance of Good in the flesh to be the Savior of the world. The Sermons and
Homilies of Basil, Eusebius Emissens, on those days; to which add the hymns
and Psalms made in the Syrian tongue by Ephrem, and those sung at the solemn
Feasts of the Martyrs; these are full evidences of such Festivals in that age.
Here we find Saint Austin intermitting his ordinary course of reading and
expounding the Scriptures upon Quia nunc interposita est solenitas sanctorum
dierum quibus certus ex Evangelio Lectiones oportet recitari. Aug. Tract. in
ep. Johan. prxf.
the intervention if such an holy day, which had its proper lesson. And his
very reproving the people Sunt forte hodie multi qui propter solennitatem diei,
non propter audiendum sermonem venerunt. Aug. Tract. 8. in Johan.
who came not for the word but for the day sake, evinceth the observation of
such a day; but to multiply testimonies of the practice of this and the
following ages, would be to light a Torch to the Sun.

Powder plot; for the never to be forgotten miraculous Restitution of his
Sacred Majesty: and we judge this no sin, yea a duty. And shall the like
services be a sin to be attended upon, when commanded by the same Authority on
these other Feasts? shall we meet for acts of worship, and praise for temporal
mercies; and is it unlawful to meet and keep annual memorials of the greatest,
and highest, the blessings which we receive by the Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension of the Son of God? Is it lawful to meet and praise
God every day for these mercies; and shall it be unlawful upon such days
only because they are commanded.

And in a great measure we have a full consent in these things Ba^ter. five
Disput. ditsp. 5. c. 2.. 46.
viz. thus far, that for such days as are appointed upon some emergent
occasions that arose since the Scripture was endited -- there is no more
question, whether the Magistrate may command them -- then whether a Fast, or
thanksgiving day may be commanded, etc. Yea for Saints and Martyrs days we
have consent enough: Bax. ibid.
no scruple to keep a day in remembrance of any eminent servant of Christ, or
Martyr, to praise God for their Doctrine or example, and honor their
memorial. And if this be yielded, why should we scruple those other
solemnities on the honor of Christ, as memorials of, and to bless God for
those rich mercies, which we have received through him? Some time for Gods
worship (says the same Baxt. ibid.
Author) besides the Lords day must be appointed: and God having not told us
which, the Magistrate may, on fit occasions. And that these are fit accasions,
I see not why it should be questioned.

1.. 26. Object.
I know what is the main thing objected. viz. though, where the occasion of the
day was not existent when the Scripture was written, and therefore the Scripture
could provide nothing concerning it, it is lawful for the Church or
Magistrates to appoint such upon several emergencies; yet in the case of See
Baxt. ibid.
days to Christ it is otherwise, for the occasion of these holy days were
existent in the Apostles days, and therefore to establish them as necessary to
be observed, when the Scripture has made no order or provision about them, is
to accuse the Scripture of being animperfect rule, and derogatory to the
Scripture sufficiency. But I answer,

1.. 27. Answ.
It is evident that Easter and Pentecost or Whitsontide were observed in the
Apostles days, which the same Mr. Bazter Baxt. ibid.
seems to acknowledge when he ranks them together with other Lords-days,
saying, [ These Holy Days, (excepting Easter and Whitsontide, and other
Lords-dayes) are of later introduction, etc.] These two then were of earlier
times, as early as the Lords-daies, as beyond all dispute we find them in the
very next age observed. Now the occasion of these was existent before a great
part of the Scripture was written, viz. The Resurrection of Christ, and the
Act. 2.1 --
Descent of the Holy Ghost on the day of Pentecost. Therefore if the Church
might lawfully observe, as they did, the Feast of the Resurrection, why should
it be unlawful to celebrate a day in memorial of the Nativity, or Ascension,
etc?

Saints and Martyrs days; The Doctrine and Examples of the Apostles, and the
Martyrdom of some of them were existent before some part of the Scripture was
written; neither in any Scripture which was afterward written, do we find any
order taken for the observation of these days. Yet may such (by Mr Baxters own
confession) be lawfully observed, and this no imputation on the
Scripture-sufficiency, therefore this Argument is of no force against the
solemnizing of a day to Christ.

necessary, and the matter of an universal Law to all ages and parts of the
Catholic Church; but as lawful (and so are they granted to be) and
consequently necessary to us pro hic and nunc, accidentally, and ex hypothesi,
by an Ecclesiastical constitution, established by a Law of a just authority
among our selves: And this ingageth us to obedience, and makes the observation
of these days to us a duty, whatsoever it be to others. Which consideration
sufficiently answers all the Arguments which I have seen brought against
Christmas Day; whose hard fate it is, that when others shall be allowed their
Festivity, this shall be denied it. But even in this also we have a concurrence
enough to preserve our peace; for says our Author, Baxt. ibid.. 50.
If I lived under a Government that peremptorily commanded it, I would observe
the outward rest of such an Holy Day, I would Preach on it, and join with the
Assemblies in Gods worship on it. Yea I would thus observe the day, rather than
offend a weak Brother, -- much more, rather than I would make any division in
the Church. We need no more, we ask no more. We live where these things are
commanded, let us thus far obey, and not dispute, and our Peace is secure.

Festivals or Holy Days, no repugnancy to Scripture; but some example in
Scripture warranting, and the constant practice going before us in the
observation of these solemnities; I see not why a sober, peaceably minded man
should deny obedience in this thing: nor why we should scruple to assemble
together to worship God; to bless his name for his mercies; to preserve the
memory of the holy Apostles, Confessors, and Martyrs; ( whose memory, Prove.
10.7. Psalm. 112.6.
the Scripture says, is blessed, and the remembrance of them everlasting, when
the name of the wicked shall rot, and their memorial perish with them) and by
such examples to quicken our dull hearts to piety and constancy, upon stated
times appointed us, when we may lawfully do all this upon any day of
Assemblies, were they not enjoined us.

CHAP. II. Several Rites and Ceremonies Prescribed, Examined, and Vindicated.
Rites and Ceremonies prescribed to be used. These are of different natures.
Some only of particular practice, or perhaps the matter of particular command
to some persons in some places: Others, the matter of a general Law upon all.
Some purely civil: Some used only in the parts of Religious Worship. Yet when I
find acknowledged, Baxt. five Disp. Disp. 5. chap. 2.
by the most zealous Non-Conformists, a lawfullnesse in the use of most of
these, (yea of all but one, sc. the Cross,) so far as to submit to the use
being imposed, (though they question the lawfullnesse of Imposing) rather than
break the Peace of the Church: And when I see nothing but a clear unspotted
innocence in all, yea the use of the Cross it self, I cannot but conclude,
that in these there is nothing, but what we may submit to with a good
conseience, and not sin. And then being enjoined, we ought to do so for peace
and for conscience sake. Let us take a view of the particulars.

1. For those Ceremonies which are not generally enjoined, but only a
particular practice in some places, and it may be, a particular command there,
such as Altars, Adoration, or Bowing to the East, Organs, etc. I say

1. Until we are called to such places where the practice is required, or
until these are commanded us in our places, (if we indeed consult the Peace of
the Church,) let us be silent, and move no doubts about them. If we are
unsatisfied in the use of them, let us not accept of those places where they
must be practiced, and we are free: But be sure, censure not those who do, who
possibly may see reason enough to warrant their practice though we do not.



1. As to the Name and Form of an Altar,. 4. Of Altar and Railes.
and the Railes about it, he says thus; Baxt. ibid. Disp. 5. cap. 2.. 51.
I conceive that the dislike of these things in England, was not as if they
were simply evil. Well, if not evil in themselves, they may then for any thing
in the nature of them, be used without sin: And why then should we deny
obedience (when a Law is made) when we should not sin in obeying; but should
certainly sin in disobeying a Law? but if not evil, why disliked? For this

They were (says he) illegal innovations forced on the Church without Law or
just Authority. 1. If indeed they were so, then were we not bound to obey, for
where there is no Law, there can be no transgression; if no Law commanded them,
we were not bound to use them; and to what purpose then should we make a stir,
and raise Disputes about them? But, 2. Suppose no particular Law or Act of
Parliament to establish these in specie; yet we cannot properly say, they were
forced (if forced) without Law: for there was a standing Law, an Act of
Parliament in force until 17. Car. 1. impowering the King to call together,
and commissionate the Bishops and Clergy to consult and determine about the
affairs of the Church; and this confirmed by the Royal Assent, to be valid and
binding: So that if these things were Imposed by the Bishops, so assembled,
with the Authority of the King, we cannot call them illegal, because they are
clearly founded in the Law. This therefore was no ground of dislike, where the
things Imposed are confessed not to be simply evil. But

because the way of those things did cause men to suspect, that somewhat worse
was intended to be brought in by such preparations. Here I cannot but take
notice of the much want of Christian Charity, that should be in men who study
the interest of the Gospel and Religion. It is not the property of Charity to
be suspicious: for as it 1 Cor. 13.5. (...).
thinks, (i.e.) plotteth or casts no evil; so it suspecteth none
causelessly, Verse. 7. (...).
it believes all things, hops all things, it believes all good, hops all
good of our neighbor, until it evidently see the contrary. It could not be
well done to be suspicious of worse, when the things enjoined were confessed
not bad.

Object. But the way of those times did give ground of suspicion.

Sol. But what was the way of those times? was it not in these very disliked
things; the Name and Form of an Altar, the Rails, Adoration, etc? and these all
acknowledged not evil in se, and how then were they the cause of suspicion of
worse? of these we have this full expression, Baxt. ibid.
For the Name and Form of an Altar, no doubt it is a thing indifferent, and the
Primitive Churches used the names of Sacrifice, Altar, and Priest, and I think
lawfully for my part -- but Metaphorically as the Scripture does.

2.. 8. Adoration and Bowing toward the East.
As to Adoration or Bowing toward the East, etc. hear again the same Mr
Baxter; Baxt. ibid.. 17.
God, who has commanded us to express our minds in several cases about his
worship, (as Profession of Faith, Confession of Sins, etc.) has by that means
made it our duty to signify our consent by some convenient sign -- And the
special sign is left to our own, or our Governors Determination. Id. ibid.. 18.
And to this end, and on these terms, (says he, among some other things there
mentioned,) was Adoring with their faces toward the East used heretofore by
Christians -- as a signification of their own mind instead of words. This then
also is lawful in his judgment.

3. As to Organs, and Church-Musick,. 9. Organs and Music.
the same Author speaks as much as is desired; and thus far consonant to truth,
Baxt. ibid.. 22.
He that has commanded us cheerfully to sing his Praises, has not told us,
whether we shall use the Meeter, or any melodious tune to help us; or whether
we shall use, or not use a Musical Instrument, or the help of more artificial
Singers and Choristers. These are left to our reason to determine, etc. And
again, Id. ibid.. 45.
The Organs or other Instruments of Music in Gods Worship, being an help
partly natural, and partly artificial, to the exhilerating our spirits for the
Praise of God; I know no Argument to prove them simply unlawful, but what
would prove a Cup of Wine unlawful, so the Tune, and Meeter, and Melody of
Singing unlawful --: But these things are but the particular practices of some
certain places, and if enjoined, yet not generally, only in Cathedral, and
Collegiate Churches and Chapels. We need not therefore busy our selves in
Disputes of this nature, when they are not, nor are like to be matters of
general imposition.



1. One purely Civil, though used in a sacred Action,. 11. Of the Ring in
Marriage.
this is the Ring in Marriage. What imaginable scruple can be in this I cannot
divine. Hear by Mr Baxter himself, Baxt. ibid.. 23.
In Civil Actions that are Religious only finally, and by participation, it is
lawful to use Symbolical Rites, that are in their kind near of kin to
Sacraments in their kind, and may be called Civil Sacraments; such as the
sealing and delivering of Indentures or other Covenant-Writings; the delivery
of Possession of an House by a Key; of the Temple by a Book and Bellrope; of
Land by a Turfe or Twig; and of Civil Government by a Crown, Scepter, or Sword,
etc. And again, Id. ibid.. 43.
For the Ring in Marriage, I see no reason to scruple the lawfullnesse of it:
for though the Papists make a Sacrament of Marriage, yet we have no reason to
take it for an Ordinance of Divine Worship, any more than the solemnizing of a
Contract between Prince and People -- The Ceremonies of a Kings Coronation
might as well be scrupled as those of Marriage, etc. The truth is, I could
never yet see any thing that had a shadow of reason against this use; nor can I
imagine, what any sober Christian, who has not a mind to quarrel, can have to
say against the use of such a Symbolical Rite, as the use of a Ring in such a
business as Marriage. I pass this therefore as not worth a Dispute: But

Rites there are enjoined to be used in Actions purely Religious, prescribed in
the offices and parts of Divine Worship. These are they which are the matters
of most doubt, and made the Subjects of the sharpest contentions; and they are,
The Surplice, Kneeling at the Lords Supper, and the Cross in Baptism. For two
of these we have enough yielded; but the third stiffely opposed. Let us examine
them severally.

1.. 13. The Surplice justified.
For the Surplice. I cannot but wonder what any rational man should in this
make a matter of scruple; when any garment of any color is a thing perfectly
indifferent by the confession of all, and perfectly lawful in genere to be
worn; and therefore if a particular garment in specie be determined, and
prescribed to some persons in some actions, how should the use of that become
unlawful, when the constant practice and custom of all times, persons, and
places, has justified in some cases such a determination? We never scruple the
use of particular and distinctive Habits or Ornaments used for the solemnity of
other public Actions; none ever questioned the Royal Robes of the King on the
Throne; The Robes of Nobles in Parliament; of Judges on their Tribunals; of
Professors in the Chair, in the Schools: Why should we quarrel at the Robes
of Bishops in their Consistories; or of Ministers in the solemnity of Religious
Worship? But in this we have enough acknowledged by our Brethren, in their
account of the Conference. Those (say Account of proceed. Reply to Answ.. 13.
they) that scruple the Surplice, do it not, as it is an habit determined of as
decent; but as they think it made an holy Vestment, and so a part of external
worship as Aarons Vestments were. Well then, it is allowed as determined of as
decent: Our Church determines no more, requires no more. Why shall we Dispute
against it as an holy Vestment as Aarons was, which was never so Imposed? when
by such a Dispute we must either violate the Laws of Charity, by affixing an
imputation upon our Church, as if she did teach us to Judaize, which she does
not; or break the Peace of the Church, by setting up a man of straw of our own
framing, and fighting against that which none maintains, that we may find our
selves matter of Dispute and contention. And how this agrees with the Rules of
Piety, and sentiments of the Gospel, let the world judge.

But if not required as an holy Vestment,. 14. Object.
yet it is as a Symbolical Sign, to signify purity and beauty, to which
nothing more suitable than white Linen, wherein the Rev. 15.6.
Angels have appeared, as the Bishops Account of proceed. Ans. to. 13.
say in their Answer.

They say so indeed, but what then? let it be considered

1. Whatsoever those Reverend Fathers,. 15. Sol.
or any else may rationally conceive as the Reason of the Law; or may in
Dispute use as a Medium to prove the decency or convenience of such an Habit:
yet this proves not that it is Imposed on us under such a notion, or for such
an end or signification; nor indeed does the Law prescribe it as such, but at
most as decent; yea it only requires the use or wearing of it. Which if we may
do (as it is confessed we may, as accounted decent) I see not how we can be
acquitted of Sedition and Disobedience, in contending and raising Disputes
against it, in such a notion as the Law mentions not.

symbolical or teaching Sign, to resemble purity and beauty, may we not wear
it? Let even Mr Baxter be judge, who tells us, Baxt. five Disput. disp. 5. c.
2.. 40.
1. If the Magistrate do Impose the Surplice, who is a lawful Governor, as a
decent Habit for a Minister in Gods service,) though he there passes a hard
censure upon the Magistrate for so doing, for which let himself be accountable,
yet he acknowledges, that) he medleth with nothing, but what is within the
reach of his own power (then he lawfully may do it.) Some decent Habit (says
he) is necessary, either the Magistrate or Minister himself, or associated
Pastors must determine what (by the same reason, may the Bishop or a Synod
legally Convened and acting by the Authority of the King.) -- If the Magistrate
or Synod (says he again) tie all to one habit, (suppose it indecent) yet this
is but an imprudent use of Power, it is a thing within their reach, they do not
an alian work, but their own work amiss, and therefore, the thing it self
being lawful, I would obey and use that Garment. 2. Yea though secondarily the
whiteness be to signify purity, and so it be made a teaching sign, yet would
I obey: for secondarily, we may lawfully and piously make teaching-signes of
our food and raiment, and every thing we see. I know not, what need be added
more to justify this use, we have here enough acknowledged to engage a full
compliance with, and a peaceable submission to Authority in this case. For what
is added of the unlawful use of it; if the Magistrate make the Primary-reason
thereof to be an Instituted Sacramental sign, to work grace on the soul, or to
engage us to God; is nothing at all to the purpose, but to seek knots in a
Bullrush, or to raise Disputes, and trouble the waters that are quiet; when we
know the Surplice is not Imposed on us, nor pretended to be so, on any such
account, or to any such end.

wearing a Surplice, I shall only add this one Argument, which that truly
Pious, and eminently learned Mr Gataker sometimes used to one who came to him
for resolution in this very case, which I had from his own mouth; it is this

To wear the Surplice, if it be unlawful, it is so, either as a thing sinful
in it self, and so sinfully evil; or only as inconvenient or inexpedient:

But it is neither evil in it self, nor inconvenient, or inexpedient;

Therefore, Upon no account unlawful.

And if neither sinful, nor inconvenient, what should hinder any from
obeying the Law that enjoins it? 1. It was granted, and it must be confessed,
that it cannot be said to be sinful or evil in it self, for all Garments are
equally lawful. 2. If the doubt be about the inconvenience or inexpediency of
it, the best way is to compare things and cases, and so judge. And thus did
that Learned man resolve it. We are called to the Ministry, and enjoined to
Preach the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9.16.
Woe unto us if we do it not, viz. where we may have liberty to do it. Now the
Laws enjoin us in our sacred Ministrations to wear this Habit, if we Conform
and wear it, we have leave and liberty in our places to exercise our Ministry;
if not, it is denied. Now let any sober and rational man judge which of these
two is more convenient or expedient: To wear a Surplice, which is not evil, and
then to exercise our Ministry, which is our necessary duty: or to lay aside our
Ministry, and deprive the Church of the benefit of those parts and abilities
which God has given us, and we are necessarily bound to employ for their
edification; rather than comply in the circumstance of an Habit, which beyond
all dispute may be worn without sin. So that in the matter of the Surplice,
there is no such matter of scruple to a serious man as to interrupt our peace.

2. And as little ground of scruple or contention is there in the gesture of
Kneeling at the Communion;. 18. Kneeling at the Communion.
if men would seriously consider the nature of the Action, and what is
required. For there are (that I know) but these three things considerable
objected against it. 1. Excepted against.
It was not used by Christ and his Apostles at the first Institution. 2. Nor by
the Church for many hundred years after them. 3. Vindicated.
It seems to justify the Papistical Adoration of the Elements, as of a
Corporal presence of Christ there.

But to all these it will be no difficulty to give a satisfactory answer.

Kneeling was not the gesture of Christ and his Apostles, may be probable, but
it cannot be proved. That they used the Table Gesture, (which yet was not
sitting, but lying, and leaning on the Elbow round about the Table; the Feet of
the first behind the Back of the second; and his Head in the Bosom of the
former, as thus is St John said John 13.23.
to lie in Jesus Bosom, as all who have read any thing of those Ancient
Customs know;) I say, that they used this Tricliniary Gesture at the Passover
(...) Discupuit. Matthew. 26.20. sic (...) Discumbentibus illis, etc. Mark 14.18.
the same is also (...) Luke 22.14.
is out of Question: But that Paschal Supper was ended, and (...), Luke 22.20.
after this was the Lords Supper instituted and taken. It was a Post-Coenium,
an After-Supper: and whether this were the gesture in those Post-Caenia, I have
not seen yet particularly proved; there is nothing that I can see in Scripture,
which does necessarily prove this eaten in the same gesture that the Passover
was. But grant it so, (as probably it was) what will thence follow? that we may
not alter the gesture? or that we may not take this Supper in any other, but in
the same manner, in every circumstance, as Christ gave it, or the Apostles
received it? surely nothing else. For 1. Let it be remembered, in the business
of the Passover the Jewish Church varied as much from the first institution,
and are blameless, for Christ (without doubt) did with his Apostles eat the
Passover according to the way of that Church, which he would not have done,
had it not been warrantable; and yet in how many circumstances did even he
differ from the first Rites of that Ordinance? The Lord, when he gave the Law
of the Passover, was exact in prescribing every particular Rite about it. The
Lamb, the preparation, time, and manner, both of dressing and eating it, etc.
among the rest, the Exodus 12.3. with 6.
preparing of the Lamb four days before; the verse. 7.
striking the blood upon the Posts of the doors; eating it in have verse. 11.
with shoes, (i. e. not sandals, as they wore within doors, but shoes for a
journey) their loins girded, and a staff in their hands; and consequently
standing, as now in have, ready to depart, in a 2 King. 4.29.
journeying posture; which lying or sitting, they could not be in; and the
Apostle seems to allude to this ceremony, when he says Ephesians. 6.14.
stand -- having your loins girt -- all which things neither did the Jews in
after ages, nor Christ and his Apostles at that time observe; for here we read
of no striking the Posts with blood; the Lamb not prepared till the same day;
no shoes on their feet, no staff in their hand; in a word, at the first they
stood, and were enjoined in this posture, because they were to eat in have, as
just upon departing, and probably too, (as it is the opinion of the Hebrews)
they were then to eat standing, in token of their servitude in Egypt; for so
did their servants use to eat. But now being settled as Lords and Possessors of
their own Land, they lay down to eat, for a token of their liberty and freedom
gained, (as Jun. in Matthew. 26.20. Antiquissima est apud Hebraeos Doctores
traditio (quod in Talmud. tractat. de Pascha commemoratur) ut manducaturi
Pascha in signum libertatis adepta discumberem.
Junius informs us from the Hebrew Doctors.) Now then, an argument in this
case from the Analogy of the Sacraments is vallid enough; for I would fain see
a fair account given, how it should come to pass, when so many particulars of
the first example, and these the express commands of God too, did not oblige
after ages in the same Ordinance of the Passover, but they varied from them
and were guiltless; that yet in this Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the bare
example of Christ with his Apostles, in a matter of no higher moment than the
circumstance of a Gesture, and this by no word of Christ ever enjoined us,
should still oblige us; that we are guilty of sin against him if we vary from
it, But, 2. Action, but of Gesture in the Action. Now the four last
praedicaments (as is Sanders. Cases of cons. Lect. 3.. 16. p. 87-96. See this
there handled at large.
observed by that judicious and truly Reverend (now Bishop) Saunderson) Vbi,
Quando, Situs, Habitus; the where, the when, the Gesture, the Habit, are all of
a like account in respect of those Actions to which they are concomitant; and
are nothing else, but some relations of an inferior note, and circumstances
altogether extrinsecall to the Actions themselves. So that if we are by the
example of Christ obliged to the Gesture; why not equally to the place, where,
to eat as he did, in a private house, and there, not below, but in (...) Mark.
14.15.
an upper room? Why not also to the time, when, not at noone after morning
Sermon, Fasting, or at least, before dinner, but Luke 22.20.
after supper, in the Mat. 26.20.
duske of the evening, or 1 Cor. 11.23.25.
within night? Why not to the Habit; that as Christ did, so Ministers still
should celebrate it in a seamelesse Coat? For all these particulars were
observed in the first institution, as the Sacred History does fully evidence,
nor are they denied, if we are not obliged by, but may recede from the practice
of Christ and his Apostles in these three, which are of equal weight; why must
we be tied up only in this one, which is of no higher consideration than they?
3. Gesture of Christ be to be observed, why not the same specificall Gesture?
which was the Tricliniary posture, or else we know not what it was; sure I am,
if an Argument from example prove any thing ( viz. as to this being a duty) it
will prove this also. For if it prove any thing, it must be upon this ground,
that all the imitable actions of Christ are to be imitated of us: but now this
Action is Imitable, we may provide such Beds, and Tables, and Eat in that
posture of Leaning, or Lying, and we do as much differ from that Gesture by
Sitting, or Standing, as we do by Kneeling: that if from this example we
condemn the one, we must condemn also the other.


Sitting, is now the Table posture, and succeeds the Tricliniary Gesture.

1. Sol.
The Standing, at least, is as unlawful, and indifferent from the Prime
pattern, and first examplar, as Kneeling, but yet this posture is allowed by
all (where it thwarts not a Public settled practice of a Church) and practiced
by many of our Brethren at home and the French Churches abroad; when yet, the
same Argument that condemns Kneeling condemns that. 2. Sitting to be the
Table Gesture now? is it not by a silent custom among Nations? and it is
strange, that the silent custom of a Nation, should be enough to change the
Gesture at our ordinary Tables; and yet a Positive Law of the same Nation
should not suffice in such a case at the Sacred Table, If a Custom, without
Authority, can so prevail, that what was before not Decent, should now be
Decent; and what was before Decent should now be not so; cannot a Law made by
public Authority, established by an express consent of the people, and
allowed by daily use, prevail, that what was upon no sound reason ever found
unlawful, should be esteemed lawful now for the time to come; Custom is
enough to satisfy us in our ordinary Tables: why should not both Law and
Custom together suffice for Satisfaction here? when, if there were no Custom,
but Custom and Law, did seem to oppose each other, yet as to a Case of
Conscience it may be soberly concluded, that Custom should rather give place
to Law, than Law to Custom. These things and much more to this purpose may he
that please see in that Reverend Bishop, in the place before cited, where he
solidly and largely handles the Question of the obligation of Christ's example
in this case.
that Kneeling was not used by the Church for many hundred years after Christ:
this signifies as little, for even in their Prayers, Kneeling sometimes was
not publicly in use, yea expressly forbidden; the Custom being (as it is by
Mr Baxter Baxt. five Disp. Disp. 5. chap. 2.. 41.
confessed) both Ancient and Universal in the Church, and every where
observed; and established afterward in the last Cannon of the Council of
Nice; and renewed by others. That none should Kneel in public worship on the
Lords day, no not in Prayer. No wonder then, that we find not this practice
there, where they Kneeled not at all in the public worship. But as they
worshipped, so they communicated; the manner of receiving being See Account of
proceed. Answ. to. 15. e ^ Auge in Psalm. 98. and, Cyril. Gatech. Onystag 5
more adorantium, so that there can be nothing drawn from their practice,
against Kneeling at the Communion, which is not also as strong against Kneeling
at any other parts of public worship even Prayer also.

Papisticall adoration. of the Elements, as Christ corporally present, we are
sufficiently secure, for our Kneeling tends to no such thing. We are informed
clearly enough of the Doctrine of our Church, by what is expressly set down in
the Rubric Printed in the Common Prayer Book, of Edw. 6. at the end of the
Communion (though since left out, whether (as some say) by negligence, or for
what other reason it matters not, when still we maintain the same Doctrine,
and our Church does publicly declare it in our established Articles, sc. Art.
28.) in that Rubric there is this expression concerning Kneeling; We do
declare: that it is not meant thereby, that any adoration is done, or ought to
be done, either unto the Sacramental Bread or Wine there bodily received, or
unto any real or essential presence there being of Christ's natural flesh and
blood. For as touching the Sacramental Bread and Wine, they remain in their
very natural substances, and therefore may not be adored, for that were
Idolatry to be abhorred of all faithful Christians, and as concerning the
natural Body and Blood of our Savior Christ, they are in heaven, and not
here, for it is against the truth of Christ's natural body to be in more places
than one at the same time. But further,

people Kneel not only at the receiving of the Elements, but during the whole
ministration, which as it cannot be said to adore a corporal presence which is
not there, nor by the Papists pretended to be there until the Vm, the very
last syllable of the Hoc est cropus meum, (i. e.) this is my body, be
pronounced; so it shows us, why we Kneel, and whom we adore, viz. That in all
humble devotion we present our selves before God, and with humility of soul
confess our sins, beg his mercy, offer him praise for his benefits,
especially his unspeakable gift of Jesus Christ for the life of the world; and
with all reverence receive from the hand the Seals of his Covenant, assurances
of our pardon, and peace, and life upon our unfeigned faith, sincere repentance,
and persevering obedience; and put our Seals to the same Covenant, solemnly
engaging our selves to those duties, and expecting mercy only on those
Evangelicall terms. And thus the forenamed Rubric, which is still the sense
of our Church, informs us, that this thing (viz. the Communicants Kneeling)
was well meant for a signification of the humble and grateful acknowledgement
of the benefits of Christ given unto the worthy receivers, and to avoid the
profanation and disorder, which about the holy Communion might ensue it



1. Let this one Argument be weighed, he that receives the Communion Kneeling,
either sins in that act, or sins not; if any say he sins, let him show
wherein; every sin is a transgression of some Law; but here is no Law
transgressed: not a Law of the Church, for that commands it; not a Law of
God, for there is neither any precept in the Decalogue, nor any precept in the
Gospel, that forbideth it (let any man produce any such, and we yield) and the
example of Christ is no more an obliging Law in this, than in the Place, Time,
and Habit, as before was shown, and there is acknowledged no obligation in
these. But if in this act men sin not, what imaginable reason can there be
produced, why it should be unlawful to do it, when by a just Authority they
are required? 2. In Dubiis, tutissimum, etc. In doubtful things we must choose
the safest. Now suppose this a matter of doubt, yet which is the safest way for
us to go, it is easily to judge; for we are sure, it is our duty, and we are
obliged by command to partake in the Communion, to receive this Sacrament: we
are sure, that we are obliged to maintain the peace, and keep in the Communion
of the Church: we are sure, that we are bound to obey a just Authority in all
lawful things: we are sure, that Kneeling is in it self lawful; and in
genere, as free as any other Gesture, or Posture whatsoever: we are sure, we
must not lay aside a necessary duty upon some mere doubts of an unnecessary
circumstance or accessory: we are not sure, that every particular Gesture or
Action of Christ does oblige us to imitation, yea we are sure of the contrary.
Now then, whether it be safe to forsake Communion, to keep from the Lords
Table, and refuse the Sacrament, where we are beyond all controversy obliged;
upon a plea of a Gesture to which we are not sure that we are obliged, yea
indeed we may be sure that we are not obliged; let any sober conscientious man
that minds the peace of his own soul judge.
Brethren, who in the conference disputed against the imposition, profess,
that yet some of them would Kneel, rather than be deprived of the benefit of
that Sacrament. And Mr Baxter, though he pleades high against it, as a sinful
imposition, yet says, that when it was imposed Baxt. five Disp. disp. 5. c.
2.. 42.
he did obey the imposers, and would, if it were to do again, rather than
disturb the peace of the Church, or be deprived of its Communion. For (says
he) God having made some Gesture necessary, and confined me to none, but left
it to human determination, I shall submit to Magistrates in their proper work
even when they miss in the manner. I am not sure (says he, and it is worth
our noting) that Christ intended the example of himself or his Apostles as
obligatory to us, that shall succeed; I am sure it proves sitting lawful. I am
not sure, it proves it necessary: But I am sure, He has Commanded me Obedience
and Peace.

Obedience, and Peace which are acknowledged, as indeed most unquestionably
they are certain commands, and indispensible duties of the Gospel: and our
peace will be sufficiently secured, and our disputes and contentions about
these extrinsecall circumstances soon be superseded.

CHAP. III. The Sign of the Cross in Baptism examined, and its lawful use
justified, and 1. Proved to be no sin against Piety.
3.. 1. The Cross in Baptism challenged as sinful.
THere remains now only one Rite, or Ceremony, more, which will by no means be
allowed lawful, viz. The Cross in Baptism. This indeed is made the grand
Stone of Stumbling (as Isa. 8.14. 1 Pet. 2.8. Defended as lawful.
Christ Crucified is said to be) but not from any nature of the thing, but from
the weakness or misprision of them that take it so. This is that which we find
still pleaded against, as sinfully imposed, yea and unlawfully used: The Church
charged, as incroaching upon the Royalty and Sovereignty of Christ, instituting
new Rites, and Covenanting signs, which God has not commanded; and the People
skared with apprehensions of Idolatry, and Abomination.

presence of God, I must profess, that I can yet find nothing, that can in the
least convince me of sin in this, so far as our Church does practice, or
require the use of it. The maine objections I shall answer hereafter; in the
mean time these things have satisfied me, and I have some hopes they may give
the like satisfaction to others also.

Cross in the Church of Ancient times, both in, and out of the holy
Ordinances; and this not condemned, but for those times approved. Cyprian
exhorting to Martyrdom, in the time of persecution, among the rest presses
this Argument from the sign of the Cross which they had received, Cypr. l. 4.
ep. 6. Muniatur frons ut signum Dei incolume serve^ur.
Arm your forheads with all boldness, that the sign of God may be kept safe.
By this they were encouraged to bear up their heads, and glory in the service
of a Crucified Christ, which the world so much despised, and persecuted; In
part, ubi pudoris signum est, etc. Aug. de verb. Apost.
The Sign being set in that place, where shame soonest appears, viz. the
forehead. Again in the forenamed Cyprian, we read this passage, that Cyprian,
de unit. Eccl. Ozias in front percussus offenso Domino, etc.
Vzziah was smitten in the forehead, the Lord being offended; even in the same
part of the body, wherein others are signed that do please the Lord. These
passages do evidently prove at least thus much, a confessed and known practice
of Signing the forehead with the Cross in those days. But besides these I
find a Hutton. answ. to reasons for refuse of subscript. page 162. See also
Cent. Magd Cent. 4. c. 6. p. 258. etc. Hieron. ad Rustoch. ad Demetrian.
Prudent. Him. ante somnum. Ruffin. l. 2. c. 19.
Learned man calling into witness this, these many more, Justin Martyr,
Cornelius cited by Eusebius, Turtullian, Cyprian, Oirgen, Ambrose. Austin,
Jerome, Chrysostom; Athanasius; Epiphanius, Cyrill, Basil, the Latin, and
Greek Fathers of those higher ages; and of this (says he) there is no doubt.
Hutt. ibid. ex.
Concluding with these two passages out of Saint Austin, giving the reason of
this use. 1. Aug. de verb. Apost.
Because of the Gentiles and Pagans Scoffing. 2. Aug. de catech. rud.
Because Christians would be no way inferior to the Jews, who marked their
doors with the blood of the Paschall Lamb, in token of their deliverance out
of Egypt; therefore the Christians would, and did also mark their foreheads in
token of their Redemption. Not to dispute the force of these reasons, they are
sufficient to prove the practice: and this too, in Baptism, in immortali
lavaco, Act. of proceed. answ. to. 14.
as is acknowledged.

Papists only, but by the Pious Reformers of the later ages. Musculus upon
that action of Jacob, Crossing his hands, when he blessed Ephraim and Manasseh,
says, Musc. in Genesis 28. Adumbrabatur Mysterium crucis in quo est omnis
benedictionis fons est origio.
Herein was shaddowed the Mystery of the Cross, in which is the fountain and
beginning of all true blessing. If we will take learned Bucers judgment of the
use of the Cross in our Church of England, he tells us, -- Non tam quod usus
in Ecclesia antiquissimi, sed quod est admodum simplex -- Buc. inter Anglic.
Script.
it is neither uncomely, nor unprofitable -- Not so much because it is of most
ancient use in the Church, as because it is very simple, and plain, and gives
present warning of Christ and his sufferings. Shall I add Peter Martyr,
Scilicet insignia propriae familiae gestare, licet etiam signo crucis
Christianam religionem profiteri -- Justin Mart. loc. com. clas 2. c. 5. p. 222.
justifying it by persons bearing the Arms and Escutcheons of their Familes?
If it be lawful (says he) for men, (Princes or Nobles, etc.) to wear the
Arms of their proper Families, (so to profess their Descent) it is also
lawful for a Christian by the Sign of the Cross, to profess his
Christianity: Nor was it ever accounted Superstition, for Princes to wear the
Cross in their Crowns, and Diadems, by which Sign they profess and witness,
that they defend and embrace Christian Religion. Thus will Goulartius Quamvis
veteres Christiani externo Signo Crucis usi sunt, id tamen fuit sine
Superstitione. Sim. Goulart. annot. in Pamelij Cyprian. lib. ad Demet. cap. 19.
inform us, that the Ancients used this Sign of the Cross without
Superstition. And Danaeus against Bellarmine acknowledges Finis, propter quem
Patres lauds Signo Crucis tribuunt, Sanct^^ est. Danae. cont. Bell. controv.
7. c. 29. p. 14 26.
an holy end of magnifying it among the Fathers. We have also Zanehy clearing
it from Danger, who, having declared some things used in antiquity well, but
afterward turned to Superstition; Some things in Ecclesiastical stories
fabulous; some true and laudable; Adds this, -- Alia denique, quae tolerari
etiam possunt, cum nihil in tali Crucis usu insit periculi. Zanch. de Imagine.
l. 1.
Other things, lastly, which may now also be tolerated, there being no danger
in such use of the Cross. Yea Beza himself allows a liberty, Scio nonnullos,
sublata Crucis Adoratione, aliquem Signi Crucis usum retinuisse -- Bez. respon.
ad. Franc. Baldvin.
I know (says he) some having taken away the Adoration, retain some use of the
Sign of the Cross; let them (as it is meet) use their own liberty. And our
Famous Willet, that Papistarum Malleus, the Mall of Papists, (as he is called)
has acquitted it from Superstition; Willet. Syncps. Papism.
We find (says he) that the Cross has been of Ancient time used in Baptism,
and is now, in some Reformed Churches without Superstition. Here then we have a
confessed practice among the ancient Christians; and the sober Reformers (some
of them no friends to Episcopacy or Ceremonies) not charging it with
Superstition, Popery, Idolatry, etc. but acknowledging an holy, laudable, at
least, lawful use of it; distinguishing between the Popish abuse, and the
innocent use of the Cross: the very same, which our Church has largely done
in her 30th Canon, where the Popish abuse is condemned, the lawful use
retained.

Baxter shall be instar omnium. To this end (says Baxt. five Disputat. Disp.
5. c. 2.. 18, 19.
he) viz. to be a professing sign, was the Sign of the Cross used heretofore
by Christians -- And therefore, I durst not have reproved any of the ancient
Christians, that used the Sign of the Cross, merely as a professing signal
action, to show to the Heathen and Jews about them, that they believed in a
crucified Christ, and were not ashamed of his Cross. -- Nor will I now
condemn a man, that living among the enemies of a crucified Christ, shall wear
a Cross upon his Hat, or on his Breast, or set it on his Doors, or other
convenient place, merely as a professing sign of his mind, to be but instead of
many words, q. d. [I thus profess my self the servant of a crucified Christ,
of whom I am not ashamed.] Whether these things be fit or unfit, the time, the
place, and occasions, and other circumstances must show, but the lawfullnesse I
dare not deny. So then, thus far we are secure, that even in these men's
judgments, there is no unlawfullnesse in the thing it self. And from this
acknowledged and not condemned practice of the Ancients, we draw these certain
Conclusions.

1. among them, is so still among us, for any thing in the nature of the thing
it self. If the use, as such, be evil now, it was so then; if then, not
contrary to the Word of God, neither is it now; if Superstition might be
separated from the use of it then, it may be so still. Prove a thing has been
good and lawful, and the same proves it may still be so. Ab esse ad posse is
an argument valid enough. 2. fitness or unfitness (as Mr Baxter there seems
to intimate, the thing in his own judgment being lawful) these circumstances
come not under our consideration, when a Law is made, and we are bound to obey.
The thing commanded is acknowledged lawful, and then the obligation of a Law
supersedes our disputes about convenience or inconveniency: of these things our
Superiors are to judge, when they make a Law; but when the Law is made, we
must obey, and not dispute the fitness of what we confess is lawful, and the
intervening of a Law has made now necessary in our practice. 3. Cross
laudable then, to be a sign, professing to the scoffing Gentiles, that they
were not ashamed to confess, and serve a crucified Christ; may be of use even
now; for though we live not among the Pagan, yet we are still among too many
scoffing Gentiles, and Atheistical Mockers, profane men, who, though they bear
the name of Christians, yet make a mock of Christianity, and scoff at
Religion, and deride the Doctrine of the Cross: and we have as much reason to
profess a resolute owning of these things now as then; that we are not Mark
8.38.
ashamed of Christ, his Words, Doctrine and Ways, now in this adulterous and
sinful generation, no more than they, among the idolatrous and persecuting
Heathens. Such an answer gave that learned Hutt. Answ. to Reas. 88. c. 26. p.
141.
Hutton. It was objected, The Cross was used because of the Gentiles, now they
are not, among us it needs not. He answers, This is no argument at all --
Though we are not as the Gentiles, who from Paganism were converted to
Christianity; yet all of us are of the Gentiles and their children, whose
Fathers inherited lies. Their reason seems like, as if when one should exhort
in the words of St Peter, 1 Pet. 2.12.
I beseech you, as strangers and pilgrims, abstain from fleshly lusts -- having
your conversation honest among the Gentiles, etc. One should reply, I, among
the Gentiles, enemies to the Cross of Christ; but, God be thanked, we are
Christians, and only among Christians, and therefore need not this admonition.
The one argument is as weak, and to little purpose as the other. See we not
daily, how Atheism abounds? The time was, when Gentiles became Christians;
and now, Christians turn Gentiles; yea many, and more profane scoffers, and
deriders of the Cross of Christ, and that exceeding glory in that honorable
service, than ever was Julian that gross Apostata. So he. But 4. ancient
Practice for this use of the Cross, this were not inconsiderable, viz. that we
might testify our full Communion with the ancient Church. By using this Rite,
(confessed in it self lawful) we profess that we are Christians as they were;
believing in the same Christ; professing the same Faith; walking in the same
way; and not ashamed of the Cross, wherein they gloried. Upon these accounts,
the avowed practice of the ancient Christians, and this not contrary to the
sacred Rule, may well be an argument to a sober minded man, of not the least
weight, to sway him to a compliance in this thing.
2. The ends for which our Church has established this, are not Superstitious,
but holy, just and Good. For

Canons, Can. 30.
That the Sign of the Cross was greatly abused in the Church of Rome,
especially after that corruption of Popery had once possessed it -- So she
declares, That the use of this Sign in Baptism was ever accompanied, here,
with sufficient Cautions and Exceptions against all Popish Superstition and
Error, as in like cases are either fit or convenient.

retains the use of the Cross, only upon those true Rules of Doctrine
concerning things indifferent, which are consonant to the Word of God, and
judgment of the antientest Fathers: professing it a Rite perfectly indifferent
in it self, only made necessary, as to our present practice during the
standing of a positive Law, which we are to obey: and requiring this practice
chiefly, and only on these two grounds.

It is observed, that though the Jews and Ethnicks derided both the Apostles,
and the rest of the Christians for Preaching and believing on him, who was
crucified upon the Cross; yet they all were so far from being discouraged from
their profession, by the ignominy of the Cross, that they gloried, rejoiced,
and triumphed in it. Yea the holy Ghost by the mouths of the Apostles, did
honor the name of the Cross (being hateful among the Jews) so far, that
under it he comprehends, not only Christ Crucified, but the force and merits
of his Death and Passion, with all the comforts, fruits, and promises, which we
expect thereby. 2. The honor and dignity of the name of the Cross begat a
reverent estimation even in the Apostles times (this, we see, was the judgment
of our Church) of the Sign of the Cross, which the Christians shortly after
used in their actions; thereby making an outward show and profession, that they
were not ashamed to acknowledge him for their Lord and Savior, who died for
them upon the Cross. And this Sign they did use among themselves with a kind
of Glory, when they met with any Jews; and Signed therewith their Children,
when they were Christened -- This Sign being used in the Primitive Church, both
by the Greeks and Latins, with one consent and great applause. When, if any
had opposed themselves against it, they would have been censured as enemies of
the name of the Cross, and consequently of Christ's merits, the Sign whereof
they could no better endure. All this does our Church declare; why? but to show
her consent to the Doctrine; and perfect Communion with the Christian Church in
those first and purest ages? yea, and not to forsake the Churches of later
days in any thing, wherein we might lawfully hold Communion. For so she
declares in the same Canon. So far was it from the purpose of the Church of
England, to forsake or reject the Churches of Italy, France, Spain, Germany, or
any such like Churches, in all things which they held and practiced; that, as
the Apology of the Church of England confesses, it does with reverence retain
those Ceremonies, which do neither endamage the Church of God, nor offend the
minds of sober men: and only departed from them in those particular points,
wherein they were fallen from themselves in their ancient integrity, and from
the Apostolical Churches, which were their first founder. And this I am so far
from accounting a crime, that I judge it a duty, and, I think have proved it so.

signal as verbal, of our faith in a crucified Christ; to signify what we
believe, and to teach us, that we have no reason to be ashamed of the Cross of
Christ, which is our glory and our joy. So are the words used at the
application of it -- In token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed, to
confess the Faith of Christ crucified -- As the Christians of old, by this
made open profession, even to the astonishment of the Jews, that they were not
ashamed to acknowledge Him, Lord and Savior, who died on the Cross (as it is
in the Canon.) And the lawfulness, and expediency of such a professing Sign,
Mr Baxter himself has acknowledged, as we have seen.

3. Let me add. Though we place no efficiency or efficacy in the Sign of the
Cross, (as indeed we do not, neither does our Church allow, but condemn it,)
yet upon the account of the end for which it was applied, the remembrance of
such a thing applied to us in our Batipsme, may be, and is an argument to keep
the soul constant to Christ, and consequently, a bar against Apostasy. It was
so of old, The Fathers See Cyprian in the place before cited.
used it as an argument to that purpose, and being recovered to the right use,
may be so still: Baptism (it is true) is Sacramentum Militiae, The Soldiers
Oath, there we have engaged our selves, there have we taken our Prest-money, to
serve under our (...), Heb. 12.2.
Captain General, Jesus Christ, against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil.
This is strong and effectual, to engage our constant obedience to Christ, and
to challenge any one, that shall afterward revolt to the service of sin and
Satan. But we are too apt to be drawn aside: but then, as when a Soldier comes
into the field, and sees his Colors, he now remembers himself whose he is,
and whom he ought to serve, and against whom he ought to fight; and these
after-circumstances (though they are nothing in themselves to bind him, for he
is bound by Oath already, yet) are an outward inducement, they put him in mind
of his duty, and are a means to preserve his Loyalty: So, Baptism is the bond
and engagement upon the soul; yet when we have forgotten that, the remembrance
of this added Sign, with the revesent application of it, the place where it was
done, the end or signification wherefore, That we should not be ashamed of our
crucified Lord -- These as external circumstances, may have no small effect
upon the soul, to quicken the affections, rouse up the memory, and make a man
bethink himself what he is to do: viz. not, as an enemy, to trample the Cross
of Christ under his feet; but, as a Christian, to glory in it, bearing the
remembrance of it in his heart, as an Ouch or Frontlet on his Brow, that Pagan,
Turk, Jew, Infidel, Apostate, Atheist, yea the very Devil may understand, it
is a Noverint universi, that he is so far from being ashamed of the Faith,
and Cross of Christ, Romans 6.3.
into whose death he was baptized, even that most ignominious death upon the
Cross; that now to the defiance of Hell, Sin, and the World, he professes
himself a Soldier under Christ his Cross, and accounted this ignominy and
reprouch, his Glory and his Crown.

use of the Cross is not unlawful, as received in the Church of England, is
evident by this, which, to my apprehensision, is argumentum (...), which I hope
to make good; it is this.

If this use of the Cross (according to the practice of our Church) be a thing
evil in it self, or unlawful to be practiced; then it must needs be a sin,
either against Piety in the first Table, or against Charity in the second.

But it is neither a sin against Piety, nor against Charity,

Ergo, Upon no account is it unlawful.

Proposition and the Consequence of it is clear and evident by its own light,
for (...) 1 John 3.4 (...), Romans 4.15.
every sin must be a transgression of a Law: and consequently every
morall-evill must be a breach of Gods Law, the whole sum and substance
whereof is comprised in those Deuteronomy. 10.4. December verba, (i. e.) december edicta for
so is (...) used in Esth. 3.15. and 4.3. and 8.14.
ten Edicts of the Exodus 31.18. Deuteronomy. 9.10. and 10.1.
two Tables, and every breach thereof must of necessity be brought within the
compass of one of these two, and so consequently be convinced to be a branch
either of Impiety against the one, or of Iniquity against the other.

The Assumption or Minor shall be proved by parts.

1. That our use of the Cross is no sin against Piety, or no matter of
Impiety, and so not against the first Table, it will appear, thus

All impiety must be referred to one of these two heads,. 17. The Cross in
Baptism no impiety.
either, 1. An hallowing of things that are profane, making holy, that which
is not holy; as, setting up new Gods, or a new Worship not commanded, against
the first and second Commandment: Or, 2. Profaning that which is holy; as the
Name, or, Sabbaths of God, against the third and fourth. For it cannot be
imagined, how any impiety should be committed, but either denying to holy
things their due respect, or giving that where it is not due.

But our use of the Cross is neither guilty of Hallowing a thing profane, nor
of profaning that which is holy. Ergo,

This use is no matter of impiety.

In this argument, it is the Minor only which needs proof.

Now then

The use of the Cross cannot be pretended, nor was it ever charged to profane
that which is holy. The Sign being never accounted a matter of holiness, but
purely Indifferent: nor then by this use can an holy thing be said to be
profaned.

hallowing of that which is not holy. For here indeed lies the main strength
of all the Arguments that I have seen against it. viz. Baxt. five Disputat.
Disp. 5. c. 2. 53, 54.
That it is a substantial humane Ordinance of Worship, and so a new Worship,
not appointed of God; a new mystical Sign; which a man, or Magistrate has
nothing to do to institute; and if he do, his action is like the act of a Judge
in alieno foro, where he has no power, and his judgment therefore is Null. An
Instituted Sign, which has not its place as a natural or artifical help, but
by institution, as a solemn stated Ordinance, which God will not accept from
the invention of man; and is a mere usurpation, and a nullity, or worse: Yea it
is made an humane Sacrament, either fully so, or, so near of kin to Sacraments,
as that man has nothing to do to institute it: Account of Proceed Genesis Excep.
18. 2.
That has at least, the semblance of a Sacrament of humane institution, being
used as an engaging Sign in our first solemn Covenanting with Christ.

Here is an high charge, such,. 20. Answ.
as I confess has sometimes started my soul, and made me fear exceedingly,
least in the use of this Sign I should sin against my God; and during those
fears I durst not use it; for were these things clear and evident, I should as
much condemn the practice as any. But really, I must profess, that upon a
serious examination of them, and considering what is the Doctrine and usage of
our Church; the nature of the thing, as it is allowed and enjoined by our
English Constitutions; The charge is unjust, the practice is innocent, to my
apprehension; and I dare not but use it for fear of sin against God, which I am
sure I should be guilty of, in disobeying a righteous Law made by a just
authority. For

this use of the Cross is not made any substantial part of Divine Worship; but
only, an external circumstance added to the Worship: clearly declared in the
Can. 30.
Constitutions of our Church to be a thing indifferent, and continuing so in it
self, being necessary only in our present practice upon the account of a Law
enjoining it, as commanded by a lawful Authority. Those who declare it
indifferent, and press the use of it, only as of other indifferent things,
which are to be used or forborne according to the commands or prohibitions of a
lawful Magistrate, cannot with any reason be deemed to make it a part of
Worship. Whatsoever it may seem to some men to resemble; yet to charge the
Church with such a thing as it never intended, yea, as it has declared
against, cannot be just, yea, must be an high violation of that Christian
Charity, which I am sure is our duty. Here then cannot be an hallowing of a
thing not holy, when it is still professed, indifferent in it self, necessary
only in praxi, because of a positive Law: there is no new worship set up, nor
is this in our Constitutions made any substantial part of worship at all.

use of the Cross with us is no Sacrament, nor part of a Sacrament. It is
neither so acknowledged, nor upon any such ground enjoined. Howsoever some may
Wyre-draw the words to some such sense, yet the Church which appoints them,
and best knows her own meaning and intentions, expressly has declared
otherwise. These are her words, Can. 30. Cant. 1, and 2.
1. The Church of England, since the abolishing of Popery, has ever held and
taught, and so does hold and teach still, that the Sign of the Cross, used in
Baptism is NO PART of the substance of that Sacrament: for when the Minister
Dipping the Infant in Water, or laying Water upon the face of it (as the manner
also is) has pronounced these words, [I Baptize thee, in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost,] the Infant is fully and
perfectly Baptized. So as the Sign of the Cross being afterward used, does
NEITHER ADD any thing to the virtue or perfection of Baptism, NOR being
omitted does detract any thing from the effect and substance of it. 2. It is
apparent in the Communion-Booke, that the Infant baptized is by virtue of
Baptism, BEFORE it be SIGNED with the Cross, received into the Congregation of
Christ's Flock, as a perfect Member thereof, and NOT by ANY POWER ascribed to
the Sign of the Cross -- These two things clearly show the sense and mind of
our Church in this practice;. 23. Object.
and do give a full answer, and clear solution to those arguments which are
brought against this use, whereby they would prove it, at least, an humane
Sacrament, and consequently unlawful.

A Sacrament (says Baxt five Disput. disp. 5. c. 2.. 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59,
60, 61.
Baxter) is (in the definition of the Church Catechism) an outward visible
Sign of an inward spiritual grace, given to us, ordained by Christ himself, as
a means, whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof. But
now, excepting the Divine institution, in this practice there are all these. 1.
The outward Sign, the Cross made in the Forehead. 2. The inward Grace, an holy
resolution to fight manfully under the Banner of Christ, and to persevere
therein. The Cross signifying the instrument of Christ's sufferings, and that
we do own a crucified Savior. So that here is, 1. A signification of grace to
be given us by God, that we are to receive Qualitative, or Actual grace, and
Relative grace. And, 2. An engagement to perform the duties of the Covenant
our selves. And this he would prove to be the end of this institution among us,
because the Preface to the Book says, that, Our Ceremonies are not dumb and
dark, but so set forth, that every man may understand what they mean -- and
that they are apt to stir up the dull mind of man, to the remembrance of his
duty to God, by some special signification, whereby they might be edified. And
now (says he) this is the same way of working. 1. Real grace, as the Word and
Sacraments do, viz. Morally, propounding the objects, and objectively,
teaching, remembering, exciting, etc. And, 2. For Relative grace, the Sign of
the Cross is made an investing Sacramental-Sign, entering us into the state of
Christianity, and listing us under the Banner of Christ: and further, an
engaging covenanting Sing to fight under Christ, etc. In token hereafter he
shall not be ashamed, etc. This is the full strength of his argument prosecuted
so largely in all those Paragraphs. In answer to which, I say,

Let us examine the matter seriously,. 24. Answ.
consider the nature of a Sacrament, as defined by this Church, and compare the
particulars in the use of the Cross, and the Churches end in that use,
together with that definition; and we shall see so much difference between
them, that a rational man can neither conclude this a Sacrament, nor, so near
of kin to a Sacrament, of man's invention, as to be therefore unlawful to be
used. For

a Sacrament properly so called it cannot be deemed.

2. And that it is made an humane Sacrament, imposed by Usurpers on the Church,
cannot be said by any who guides himself by the principles of Christian
Charity, nor is it, or can it with any reason be pretended to be (as it is
said) the same thing, which we call a Sacrament. For,

Sacrament there must be (as the forecited Definition does express, and all
protestants hold) an offer of Grace to us by God: the outward figne being
ordained to that end, as a means to convey, and a pledge to assure the worthy
receiver of the Grace signified. Now here is no such thing intended by this use
of the Cross; it is a Sign indeed; and consequently signifies some thing;
but sure, it may signify what it conveyeth not, what it assures not, it may
signify something, besides either Real, or Relative Grace; and be neither a
means, or a pledge of either. It does signify (as in Scripture the word is
used to signify) a Christ crucified, Gal. 6.14. Phil. 3.18. Ephesians. 2.16. Heb.
12.2.
with the fruits and benefits of his Passion and Resurrection, etc. and the
Doctrine of such a Christ. The Sign is used with us to signify our consent to
this Doctrine, our profession of this Faith, and acknowleding this crucified
Christ for our Lord. 1 Cor. 1.17, 18. Gal. 5.11. and 6.12.
But all this comes not up to a means, or pledge, or assurance of grace: nor
does our Church so take it. There is not one expression used at the application
of that Sign, that has any shadow of our acknowledging such an offer of grace
to be wrought in us by God. Expressly contrary is it declared in the forecited
Canon, viz. 1. That the child is perfectly baptized, before this is used. 2.
The child received into Christ's flock, entered into the Church, and so listed
under his Banner in that Baptism, before it is thus Signed. So that, it is not
used, to give either Real or Relative grace; to work holiness in the soul, or
to enroll him among Christians: But it is only as his Badg, or Colors, and so
accidentally, and ex consequenti, may be a remembrance to him of his duty,
being listed already. All the Real, or Relative grace, which is offered,
exhibited, given or sealed, is already offered, exhibited, given, assured in
Baptism, which is perfect before this is added, and so declared in the Doctrine
of our Church. Therefore, this use of the Cross, in this place, after Baptism,
can lay no claim to this part of a Sacrament, and so cannot be said to be the
same thing with it.

2. In every Sacrament (which is a Romans 4.11.
Seal of the Covenant, and every Covenant consisting in mutual stipulations,
as God Promises to man, so man engages to God) there is a solemn engagement
from man to perform the duties of the Covenant, of which that Sacrament is a
Seal. As he that was Circumcised, was even by that Gal. 5.3. Act. 15.1, 15.
obliged to do the whole Law of Moses: so he who is now Baptized, stands as a
Debtor to the Gospel, by virtue of his Baptism engaged to perform (according
to his 1 Pet. 3.21. (...).
stipulation there) the whole new Law of Christ. He that receives the Lords
Supper, may be said to set to his Seal to the Covenant, as renewing this
Stipulation, which he made with God in his Baptism. The Sacraments being a
visible Gospel, and sealing that Covenant, which stands upon these terms,
Mar. 16.16.
If ye believe. ye shall be saved,; if ye believe not, ye shall be damned. The
Scripture under the word, Believing, comprehending the whole duty of the
Gospel, (i e.) a closing with the whole Revelation of God, with affections
suitable thereunto. He that receives such a Sacrament, in that act testifies,
that he expects salvation upon no other terms; and so does engage himself to
Repent, Believe, and obey the Gospel, and to persovere in so doing, as he
hopes to find the mercy promise and expected. Now tell me seriously, can ye
find any such Stipulation in the use of the Cross in our Churches practice?
Can the Church with any shadow of reason, or Charity, be charged to intend such
a stipulation, or engagment by it? When she has expressly declared this done
already by Baptism, which is perfect before the sign is made. Is there any
word or expression, which declares this used for a Covenanting engageing Sign,
as is pretended? Examine the words, they run thus: We receive this child, (i.
e. by Baptism, as the Canon has declared) into the Congregation of Christ's
flock, and (being already received, we now) do Sign it with the Sign of the
Cross, in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed to confess the Faith
of Christ crucified, and manfully to fight under his banner against the world,
the flesh and the Devil, and continue Christ's Faithful Soldier and servant
to his lives end. What is all this; but the Cross expressly used as a Sign,
or token, to show, into what Church we are Baptized, viz. a Church of
Christians; under whose banner we are by this Baptism listed, viz. the Banner
of Christ crucified; and so an intimation of our duty, as his Soldiers, to be
Faithful to him, and Loyal to the last? If this be not the genuine
Grammatical sense of the words, I know not what is, and to find in these, any
thing of a listing, or Covenanting Sign in the use of the Cross, must be such
a forcing of the words, as Prove. 30.33.
the wringing of the nose till it bring forth blood. So then, here is no part
of a Sacrament, no efficient cause of Grace; the Book says not; nor do we
say, we Sign with the Cross to work this effect, to make the person so Signed
not to be ashamed etc. but the words hold out only a memorial, a token, or
remembrance, and the Crossed is used (...). The Church openly professing before
God, Angels, men, and Devils, that they are not ashamed of Christ crucified,
but are themselves Baptized, and do Baptize their children into this name and
Faith; and acknowledging it their duty to continue his faithful Soldiers to
their lives end. Other meaning than this, the words have not; other sense, than
this our Church allows not, and then to dispute against the use of the Cross
in other notions, and upon other grounds to prove it unlawful, here is
illogicall and irrational.

Objections made against Teaching signs, and significant Ceremonies. For 1.
Ceremonies, as were significant of Christ to come, and Typical, they are
vanished, and we acknowledge them to be now, and mortua and mortifera, both
dead, and deadly, to use them is Gal. 5.2, 4.
to deny Christ. 2. Rites as are Sacramental, and are instituted by a positive
Law to signify a Covenant between God and man, or to be Covenanting engaging
signs, these must have a Divine institution. Man can no more make a new
Sacrament, than a new Gospel: and it is as unlawful to institute a new
Sacrament, not Ordained by God; as it is to establish a new Article of Faith
not revealed by God. Yet, 3. Rite, or Ceremony, if it be altogether
insignificant. Natural, or Artificial helps in the worship of God, the
Divines in the conference allow: but how dark, and insignificant things should
be such helps, I understand not. God has made a profession of our minds
necessary; therefore necessary also in genere, to do this by some Convenient
sign; but he has not in specie tied us to any particular, but Humane prudence
must determine that; and such a Sign is equally lawful, whether it be by
Words, or Actions: In such things men may command, and we may obey, every
addition of a new circumstance makes not a new Worship, or a new Sacrament; nor
does the significancy of such a thing make it unlawful. Nihil addi licere, quo
Sacramenta, ut mutila suppleantur; addi vero licere, quibus. -- Hutton, Ans. to
Reas. p. 141. ex Defens. li. de Officio pii viri.
Nothing (says a Learned Author) may be added to supply the Sacraments, as if
the Sacraments were lame, or imperfect without this addition; but yet those
things may lawfully be added, whereby (as by circumstances, and such is the
Cross) men may be stirred up and moved to attend to and consider the dignity
of those Sacraments. Such helps as these, those who are weak, and dull, or
infirm do need: and they, that want them not, yet may lawfully use them, for
Peace and Union, even in the judgment of Calvin himself, who calls them
outward Rudiments, Externa infirmitatis rudimenta, quibus etsi non
indigemusomues, omne, tamen utimur, quia alii aliis ad fovend am Charitatem^
sumus obnoxii. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 10.. 31.
and so helps, of men's infirmities, which though we all need not, yet we all
use them, because we are bound to serve one another in love. Such things as
these, he acknowledges the Churches power to retain, -- Prout Ecclesiae
utilitas requiret, tam usitatas mutare, and abrogare, quam novas instituere
convenit. Calv. ibid.. 30.
to change; or institute new ones, as the profit of the Church shall require.
And he declares, that these things being thus instituted, it is the Christiani
populi officium est, quae sie instituta -- Pia and facili ad obsequendum
propensione servare, non contemptim habere, non supina negligentia praeterire.
Tantum abest ut per fastum and cnotumatiam violare debeat. -- Vbi si imprud
entia and oblivione quid erratum est, nullum admissum crimen est: sin
contemptu, improbanda est contumacia. ibid.. 31.
Christian peoples duty -- with a pious and due obedience to observe them, not
to despise or neglect them: much less may they through pride or stubbornness
violate such constitutions. -- Wherein (says he) if men fail, or err through
imprudence, or forgetfullnesse, there may be no crime; but if in contempt,
their contumacy must be condemned. 4. Baxters own confession in this case of
the Cross after he had disputed so highly against it, yet he concludes thus:
z Had it been but a bare professing sign like writing, Baxt. ut supra disp. 5.
c. 2.. 62.
or lifting up of the hand, to signify consent, instead of words, I durst not
have concluded so hardly of it: and thus it seems in ancient times it began to
be brought into use. Well then it is no more; it is pleaded, no more; it is
proved no more, in the intent of the Church, than such a Solemn professing
Sign; (be it with words, it is all one, as to this as if it had been instead
of words.) Why may we not then submit to it? To what purpose is the dispute
against an humane Sacrament, or a Sacramental engaging Sign, which our Church
urges not, owneth not in this practice and use?


I know but one objection more of any weight, and that is this;. 34 Object.
The Cross is brought into the worship of God, and yet has no command or
institution of God, and is therefore contrary to that Law of God, Deuteronomy. 12.32.
Whatsoever I command, that observe -- thou shall not add thereto, nor
diminish from it. And therefore was Nadab and Abihu their fire called Lev. 10.1.
strange, and their works condemned, because God commanded them not. But I
answer, 1. In all matters of positive worship, and not only substantials, but
circumstances also, which are determined by the work of God (such as were those
things to the Jews,. 35. Answ.
who were by positive Laws determined almost to every Action and circumstance,
even to the Pins in the Tabernacle, etc.) in these things, and such determined
cases, such things only are lawful, as the word of God has enjoined: and here
does that rule take place, Omnia sunt prohibita quae non reperiuntur concessa.
Gloss. ad dig. l. 47. leg. 3. tit. 23.
that all things are forbidden that are not commanded, or appointed. But in
circumstances and matters of order, not determined by God, no particular is
necessary (and of such a nature are the Ceremonies, which we plead obedience
to, and such I have proved our use of the Cross to be) all such are lawful,
as are not repugnant to the word of God, but agreeable to the general rules of
Scripture, which are, Order, Decency, and Edification. Here that maxim holds
true, viz. that Omnia sunt per legem concessa, quae non inveneuntur prehibita.
Gloss. ad dig. l. 4. tit. 6. leg. 28.
all things (of this nature) are lawful, which are not forbidden. Of the
former, viz. the matters determined by God, do these texts only speak, and
therefore concern not the business in hand, where there is no such particular
determination; which will be evident, by considering that even in the Jewish
Church we find the same things sometimes free, and lawful either way, when
they are not particularly determined; but at other times, some one particular
so determined, that another is made unlawful. As for instance; Sacrifices
might lawfully be offered in Genesis 8.20. and 17.7. and 13.18. and 20.15. and
26.25. and 33.20. Exodus 17.15. and 24.4.
any place, before a particular determination, because no place was specially
designed: but that place being determined, it was lawful to Sacrifice Deuteronomy
12.5, 6, 11, 13, 14, 26, 27.
no where but there. So for the voluntary, or free-wil-offerings, they might be
offered at Levit. 1.2, 3. and 2.1. Deuteronomy. 12.5, 6, 26, 27.
any time, because for them no time was appointed: But the Passover might be
celebrated only at one time, because the Exodus 12.6. Numb. 9.3.
precise time and hour was determined, and no time else allowed. It is
unreasonable therefore, from the necessity of a command, and the unlawfullnesse
of things not commanded, in those things which were particularly determined by
God in the Jewish Church, to argue the like necessity, or unlawfullnesse,
either in things left free to them, or in matters of order and circumstance in
the Christian Church, which God has never made the subject of any such
particular determination. In the Jewish Church, where God had determined the
Vtensils, the Matter, the Fashion of them; the vestments of the Priest, etc.
they might not vary in the least; they might not use Brass where God appointed
Silver, nor place a Nail where God had not appointed. So in the Christian
Church, in what we have a particular determination, we must not change; we may
Baptize with nothing but water, the elements in the Lords Supper must be no
other than Bread and Wine; because these are particulars of express
institution; but for the Quality or Species of the Wine, the Matter, or Fashion
of the Cup in the Eucharist, we are left free because these particulars are not
determined to us, as they were to the Jews. Apply this to the other Rites the
reason is altogether the same. But further, 2.. ^6.
We may well collect (as that Reverend and Judicious Prelate has observed)
that Sanders case of consc. Lect. 6.. 31.
As from that, that Moses both in Retuals, and Judicials, from God did give
many particular Laws to the people of the Jews; it was the will of God, that
that people should be so restrained in their duties under that Paedagogy, and
Mosaicall discipline, as under a yoke or servitude, so that very few things
should be left free to them: so from that also, that Christ the most faithful
interpreter of his Fathers will, did give unto the Christian Church but a very
few Laws of ceremonies, we do truly collect, that it is the will of God, that
the Magistrates, and Christian people, should be permitted in there things
their own liberty; so that it is now free, for any private man of his own
accord (no command or prohibition of his superiors intervening) to do, as
shall seem in his own judgment to be most expedient; and to the several
Churches, and their Governors to prescribe those thiugs, which according to the
condition of the times, and place, shall seem to them to be most subservient to
Order, Honesty, Edification, and Peace. 3. Sand. ibid.. 31.
same Reverend person has noted) That even under Paedagogy of Moses, the Jews
themselves (to whom so many particulars were determined) had not all the
liberty of Rites in things pertaining to the worship of God so taken away, that
it was not lawful for them by their own authority to observe, and to
institute those things, which it is manifest, were never commanded either by
God himself, or by Moses his servant. Of many, take these few instances. 1. The
solemn Feast of the Passover, by the Law expressly determined to Exo.
12.18.19.
seven days, yet by a Law of Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 30.23.
and consent of the people continued seven days longer, and neither King nor
people charged with sin for doing what God had not commanded. 2. The Feast of
Purim Esth. 9.
instituted by Hester, and Mordecay. 3. Several solemn annual Fasts; in the
time of the three last Prophets, four Zech. 8.19.
solemn Fasts every year, observed among the Jews when Moses commanded but
one, and that one day only in the year to be observed in the seventh month. 4.
The Encaenia, or Feast of the Dedication of the Altar, not commanded of God,
but set up by Macch. 4.59. Joseph Antiq. l. 12. cap. 11.
Judas Macchabaeus and his Brethren, which yet Joh. 10.22.
Christ honored with his presence. 5. In their solemn Fasts and penitential
mournings, they wore sackcleth, sat on Ashes, or strewed Ashes on their heads,
to which custom Mat. 11.21.
Christ alludes in his manner of speaking of Repentance, without the least
dislike, and these were things by no Law commanded. 6. A custom among the
Jews before the Paschall supper, for the Master of the family to wash the feet
of his own household, with which Rite, Christ John. 13.
complied, and yet had this no Divine institution or command. And, 7. If to
these we add the great number of Synagogues built in every City almost, and
Town for Sacred conventions which yet had no such command from God, it will be
apparent, that even among the Jews, who were in so many particulars
determined, in their Rites and circumstances about worship, many things were
yet instituted and taken up, and used without any special command of God, and
without sin, as in the place cited, is largely showed by that learned Pen. 4.
so many things pertaining to the worship of God were lawful for the Jews to
alter, and by their own authority to appoint, under that yoke of severer
Dicipline; and yet in these things they were not charged with sin against that
Law, Deuteronomy. 12.32. There can be no probable argument drawn thence against us;
nor any reason given, why in such things the Christian Church, may not use and
take the liberty of such constitutions, when God has not so severely tied us
up under such, or so many particular Laws, and special determinations of his
own; when all these things, which are enjoined us, are agreeable to the
General rules of Order, Decency, and Edification.


special command, or Institution of God, does not make the Cross in Baptism,
or any other Rite that we use, unlawful to be either enjoined, or used when in
our use of it there is nothing contrary to the Law, or word of God. So that
this branch of the Assumption that was to to be proved; notwithstanding all
these objections stand good? and it is apparent, that the Sign of the Cross
in Baptism, as the Church of England retains it, cannot be charged with
impiety, either by profaning that which is holy, or by hallowing that which is
profane or not holy.

CHAP. IV. 2. Our use of the Cross, no matter of iniquity, or breach of the
Second Table by a violation of charity, nor any just occasion of Scandal;
proved.
AS the Sign of the Cross in our practice,. 1. The Cross in Baptism no sin
against Charity.
is no sin against Piety in the breach of any command of the first Table: so
neither is it a sin against Charity, in the violation of any precept of the
second Table, which will be also manifestly evident by this Argument.

violation of Charity, and so a sin against the second Table by the use of
the Cross, unless it be in this one thing, as it is matter of Scandal, and
gives offense to many weak Brethren, and pions hearted Christians; and so is
contrary to the Sixth Commandment. Thou shall not kill. Scandal, or giving
offense, being in the Romans 14.15, 20.
Apostles language a kind of killing, or destroying.

But the use of the Cross, according to the costitution and practice of the
Church of England, is not directly, or by any thing in it self, or its use,
chargeable as guilty of Scandal, or giving offense etc. Ergo.

This use of the Cross is no sin against Charity.

Major is evident, and not denied by any, that I know, nor was the Cross, in
the use of our Church, charged with any other crime in reference to the second
Table, than this of Scandal, or offense.

Minor shall be made good; That the guilt of Scandal or giving offense, is not
imputable to us, or chargeable on us for this use of the Cross, will be
manifest by these following considerations.

1. purely spontaneous, voluntary, or free Act, left to our liberty to use or
use it not: but we are bound up by a Law to use it. Now when the comparison is
between a Law, and a private Scandal, it is no hard matter to judge how we
must walk. When the question is, whether we must obey a Law, or disobey for
fear of giving offense to some by obeying; supposing the matter enjoined by the
Law to be lawful in it self, and nothing to be objected against obeying, but
the offense given to some particular men. Here the positive determination of a
Law must supersede the consideration of scandal. For, it is beyond dispute, a
duty, to which conscience is obliged, to obey a lawful authority in all
things, which are not sin against God; and consequently, to do, what a Law made
by such authority requires: And in this case, we are not to consider, what the
event is like to be as to privative offense, but to do our duty. Now, here is a
Law, made by a full and just Authority, commanding this use of the Cross,
which is proved to be in it self lawful to do: The scandal then of some men at
our practice is no fault of ours; nor can we be charged with that guilt,
because we are not lest free to forbear this practice, but are obliged by a
Law. Were the act purely spontaneous, wherein we had a perfect liberty; in such
a case, not to consider a weak brother, and to be an occasion of offense, is an
high breach of Christian Charity: and such were the cases, which the Romans 14. 1
Cor. 8, and 10.
Apostle puts, about days and meats, wherein the Christians had perfect
liberty; and he that knew his liberty, might do as he saw expedient: being not
bound by any Law, he was free as to himself; but only bound in charity, in
case of scandal to his brother. But, when we are tied up by a Law, we are not
free to act as we please; The case is different, and the scandal cannot be
charged upon as who do but our duty in obeying a Law, which we are bound not to
resist. Again, 2. offense will be given by us, or taken by others. Some are
for, some are against this use of the Cross: Our Superiors command it, our
Laws enjoin it; some of our Brethren oppose it, and are offended at it: if we
use it, we offend these Brethren; if we use it not, we offend our Superiors,
we despise a public Law. In this case, what is to be done? without doubt we
must compare the offenses; and since that, unavoidably we must do one, then, e
malis minimum, of evils choose the least. Compare the scandals, (whether given
or taken) avoid the greater, when ye cannot avoid both. One is public, the
other private; one is a scandal to Authority, to our Superiors, against a
public Law; the other only a scandal to some particular, doubting, weak
Brethren. Now certainly, the sin is greater to offend a Community, than to
offend a private person. If scandal be taken by some particulars, we cannot
help it; we are obliged to obey, and to disobey, would be a scandal of an
higher nature, a sin of a far deeper dye. But farther. 3. 7. The nature of
scandal opened.
Howsoever some of our Brethren may take offense, yet it is unjustly. For by
our use of the Cross, as enjoined, there is no scandal, nor by any thing in
this use, occasion of scandal given by us. Let us consider a little the notion
of scandal, as the Scripture uses the word, and then apply it to the present
case. I know but two words used in Scripture to express this. The one is,
(...), which, though it be scarce found in the ancient pure Greek Authors, yet
it is very frequent and familiar in the Hellenists, and the Greek of the holy
Text. The Septuagint use this word to interpret, sometimes the Hebr. (...)
Psalm. 50 20.
reproach or slander; sometimes (...) Josh. 23.13. Jud. 2.3. and 8.27. 1 King.
18.22. Psalm. 69.22. and 106.35. and 140.5. and 141.9.
an halter or snare; sometimes (...) Psalm. 49.10.
which they seem to have mistook for (...) and, (which is from the same root)
(...) Levit. 19.14. 1 Samuel 25.31. Psalm. 119.165.
a stumbling block, or, occasion of falling or tripping. And in the New
Testament we meet it every where almost. If we consider the notation of the
word, in its primary signification, (whether it be deduced from the Hebrew
(...), or, (...) by an easy mutation made (...), and then (...), or from the
Greek (...), to halt, though this may seem also to come from the Hebrew Radix,
it comes all to one,) it is the same with (...), and signifies a stake, or such
like piece of Wood, sharpened, and (...), Hesych. and etymol. ex Hom. Pl. v. v.
564.
burnt at one end, and so hardened by the fire; which they used instead of a
Dart, etc. but afterward it was used more generally, for any thing lying in
the way, that we are apt (...), Eustath.
to trip or stumble upon, or be hindered by, in our going, hence Per suros
praeacutos, and offendicula incedere.
(...), is to walk among sharp stakes, or stumbling blocks; such a thing is
scandalum, such a stumbling block in the way: or as others say, some crooked
piece of wood bearing up a trap or a grin, whereon who so happens to trip, he
falls into the snare, or is taken by the trap; by means whereof he halteth or
falls. The other word is (...), or sometimes (...), any thing that lies in
the way, that men stumble upon or trip against. Now then being translated to a
metaphorical and moral sense, that is a scandal, or matter of offense, which
any way is an occasion to interrupt our even and free progress in our
Christian course.
That then is a scandal 1. occasion of sin, which being laid before men,
occasions them to stumble and fall. Thus there is a scandal, 1. By corrupt
Doctrines. These are scandalous, when they encourage to looseness, and Ezekiel.
13.22.
strengthen the hands of the wicked, etc. 2. By evil example. Thus our sins
are scandalous, when by our example, others are encouraged to sin so with us:
thus was Peter's dissembling a scandal Gal. 2.8.
to Barnabas. 3. By indiscreet managing of our Christian liberty. Doing that
which in it self is no sin to us, who know the indifferency, before others who
know it not; by which means they also, either, 1. Do so, and sin, because they
mistake the end. Such was the scandal of eating meat offered to idols: The well
instructed Christian knew an 1 Cor. 8.4, 8.
Idol was nothing, and meat nothing; he regarded no such thing, but 1 Cor. 10
25, 27.
ate whatsoever was sold in the Shambles, and gave God thanks. But when this
was declared to be 1 Cor. 10.28. and 8.7, -- 13.
meat offered to idols, he was to abstain, least others should be scandalized,
(i. e.) stumble by his example, and eat also, and sin by eating in conscience
to the idcl. Or, 2. They do so, and sin, because they do it doubting, fearing
they may not do it; Romans 14.21, 22, 23.
not in faith, only drawn by example. Or, 3. They being weak, and knowing not
our liberry, are induced to judge, Romans 14.10, 15.
and condemn us and our way; and so sin by rash or uncharitable censures. 2.
Scandal it is, when the thing, which we do, interrupts and hinders, and
troubles our brother in his way: though it occasion not his sin or falling,
yet, it hinders his free, cheerful, and peaceable progress; that he cannot go
on with that alacrity, as otherwise he would. So is the word in the Psalmist;
Psalm. 119.65.
Nothing shall offend them, or be a stumbling block to interrupt their peace.
Thus was the coming forth of Judge. 11.35.
Jephtha's Daughter, accidentally a scandal, (as the Septuagint render (...)
there by (...)) or such a stumbling block, as did much hinder the progress of
his joy, and raised a trouble in his soul. Such is that, which is matter of
grief and sorrow to a soul; as in the words of Abigal to David, 1 Samuel 25.31.
This shall be no grief to thee, (i.e.) according to the Hebrew and Septuagint,
no staggering, or stumbling, or scandal;) nor offense to my Lord. Such a
scandal as this the Apostle condemns in the use of meats, If thy Brother be
grived, (...). Romans 14.15.
or made sad -- thou walk not charitably. Such was the scandal mentioned by
the Prophet, given by those lies of the false Prophetesses, Ezekiel. 13.22.
Which made the heart of the righteous sad, which God would not have made sad.
3. Scandal it is, when it is an occasion of slander or reproach, against which
the Apostle advises, Romans 14.16.
Let not your good be evil spoken of. Every thing is pure to the pure, ye know
your liberty; but by the abuse and indiscreet ordering of this, there often comes
a reproach upon our profession, and upon the way of the Gospel, as if that
opened a door to all licentiousness, and did embolden us to any thing, to
break all Laws of God; because ye regard not that, wherein those weak ones
think they still are bound. Take heed of this, for this is a scandal or
stumbling block, 1. To the weak, or not well-instructed Christian; to alienate
his mind from the Christian Profession, and so becomes the Ruin, or, Romans
14.15. 1 Cor. 8.11.
destruction of him for whom Christ died. 2. To the Heathens, and those
without; while it lays a block in their way, and discourageth them from coming
in to the Church, who, by such carriages, judge the way of Christians to be no
better than their own; yea, or such as becomes not a sober peaceable man; or
wherein a man may expect no joy or comfort more. Thus are the Idols of the
Papists, a scandal to the Jew: Thus are the divisions, schisms, unjust and
treacherous dealings of Christians, a scandal to the Turks and Pagans; The
rebellions and schisms of some Protestants, a scandal to the Papists; The sins
of Professors, a scandal to Religion; when they bring a reproach upon the
Gospel Romans 2.23, 24.
, and cause ungodly men to speak evil of all zealous faithful Christians, and
judge them all evil doers, and men of no Conscience, yea, even Religion to be
but a mask and a pretense. Therefore, does the Apostle so earnestly press an
honest conversation 1 Pet. 2.11, 12.
to avoid this scandal. These things, I judge, fully comprize the whole nature
of scandal, nor can I conceive any thing to be a matter of scandal, but as
under one of these notions.


use of the Cross, as it is enjoined us, there is none of all these scandals
given by us; nor can it be justly taken from this our use, as it will appear by
a review of the particulars.

1. It is not, it cannot be, by any just inference,. 12. The Cross no scandal,
as occasion of sin.
an occasion of sin to any, and so, no scandal in the first notion; which will
be clear by these things.

1. The thing it self is proved for the matter of it, and in our practice
lawful: and by our example should others use it, if they do no more than we
do, and by the Laws are enjoined to do, they shall not sin; they cannot sin in
doing a lawful thing: if they do more, or make more of the Cross than is
meet, or the Church allows, the sin is theirs, there is no occasion of such a
thing given by the Church, which has publicly declared how far she allows,
and commands this practice.

The only Objection, that I know,. 13. Object.
that can be laid against this, is, That by this means some are encouraged to
do it, who yet doubt whether it may lawfully be done. And then as Romans 14.25.
He that doubts is damned if he eat, so by parity of reason, He that
doubts is damned if he use the Cross; because he does it not of faith, and
whatsoever is not of faith is sin.

But I answer, the Case is not the same, nor indeed alike. Answ.
For,

matter of meats, there was an express Law of God putting a difference, making
some meats unclean, and not to be eaten by the Jews. These being now brought
to Christ, some of them did not know whether this Law were repealed or no, yea
did conceive still the obligation of it to lie upon them. He that knew his
liberty, and that now Acts 1^.13, 14, 15.
nothing was unclean, but all things 1 Timothy 4.4, 5.
sanctified by God, to them that received them with tanks giving; that 1 Cor.
8.8.
meat commends not us to God, whose Kningdome consists not in meats and
drinks, and such low, carnal observance, but in Romans 14.17, 29.
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, those high and spiritual
duties; This man might eat any thing, (as in reference to himself) Kom. 14.22.
Happy is he that condemns not himself in that, which he allows; so that he
was no occasion of offense to his Brother, who understood not this liberty:
For, he, that was (not, doubting, but) (...)
putting a difference, according to the Law, juding that he ought still to make
and observe that distinction of meats; This man, if he eats, he sins, and
is in danger of being condemned, because in his practice he goes against that
Law, to which he judges yet he is obliged. The Law makes it unclean, this Law
he judges to stand still, and therefore esteems the meat unclean; if he yet
eat, he sins against conscience. His sin is not, because he doubts whether
he may eat or no; but because he does (...) make a difference of meats, as the
Law did, and judges himself obliged not to eat, and yet eats. But in the use
of the Cross with us, there is no Law of God expressly forbidding it, nor ever
was there such a Law declaming it, not to be used; and therefore there cannot
be any such scruple, whether such a Law (as never was; but there was about
meats) should oblige us now. It is one thing to make such a distinction, as the
Law certainly once did make, and we do not know it repealed; to judge it does
so still, and therefore dare not eat: another thing to be only scrupulous, or
have some doubt, whether ever there were such a Law; or suspicious there may be
something consequentially forbidden, where we are not clearly and fully
convinced. And this is our case, which therefore, the Apostles argument
reaches not. Again

eating or forbearing meats there, was a spontaneous act of their own, they
were not by any constitution of Church or state required not to make that
distinction, nor enjoined to eat all things; they were thus far free, and while
they judged the distinguishing Law obliging, they must needs sin, because they
had liberty to keep it if they would: it was their own voluntary spontaneous
act, if they would eat, what they judged forbidden meats. But in the case of
the Cross, our act is not spontaneous, freely taken up by our selves; but
imposed on us and enjoined by those who have authority to command. And this
much alters the case. A bare scruple, and single doub^^s enough to oblige us to
supersede an action, wherein we are at liberty, and may forbear; but such a
doubt is not sufficient to deny a work, which the Law requires. For obedience
to a Law is a duty to which we certainly are obliged; our scruples may be
groundless, at most they are but doubts, and uncertain fears: and the bare
fears of uncertain sins, cannot be a ground sufficient to oblige us to deny, or
to justify us in denying a certain duty. So that notwithstanding this
objection, if any use the Cross, being thus obliged, here is nothing to prove
that they should sin, in so doing.

sin, in their censures, and judging of those that use it, this cannot be
charged on the users, who are not at liberty to gratify the weakness of men,
because they are obliged by a Law, and must do it. And if any shall condemn
them, as Formalists, or harshly censure them for doing their duty, (in Signing
with the Cross;) the sin must lie, not at the doors of them that obey, but
of them that so unjustly censure them. The scandal is unjustly taken by the
one, not given by the other. The sin is his, who so censures the practice; it
cannot be his, who must so do, and cannot be excused from it.

2. As for scandal, as it is a matter or occasion of reproach,. 17. The Crose
no scandal, as occasion of reproach.
neither in this sense can our use of the Cross be charged with it. For

1. It cannot be charged with any such enormous crime (as scandalous sins
are) that should (as those false Teachers by their destructive sects,
covetuousnesse, and other pernicious ways, did) 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of. In this its greatest enemies will
clear it, and malice it self never durst charge such a thing upon it.

reproach to the Gospel, or Christianity, as to be a just stumbling block in
the way of the Jews or Pagans, to hinder them from embracing the Christian
Faith and Doctrine. True it is, both Jewe and Pagan Gentile did, and do still,
stumble at the Cross; yet not at the Sign, but the thing, viz. A crucified
Lord and Savior. It is Christ who is that 1 Pet. 2.7, 8. (...).
stone of stumbling and rock of offense, to the unbelieving and disobedient,
who stumble at the Word. That we Sign children with the Cross, troubles not
them; but, that we adore and worship him as God, who died like man: that we
profess the same Person, God and man, (...), Isa. 7.14. John 1.14.
God Man: That we believe him a second Person, Luke 1.35.
a Son, yet the same, John 20.30.
Coeternal and Coessential with the Father: that we adore and worship Three,
yet acknowledge them but One, and the same God, a 1 John 5.7.
Tri-Vnity: That we expect life from him, Mat. 27.40, 42, 43.
who could not save his own: that we believe in him, trust on him, follow and
obey him, as the Col. 2.6.
Lord Redeemer, and Romans 9.5.
over all God blessed for ever; who yet was most shamefully, and basely Matthew.
27. Mark 15. Luke 23. John 19.
crucified among the Isa. 53.9, 12.
worst of Malefactors, without the gates of Jerusalem. This is that which is to
the 1 Cor. 1.23.
Jews a scandal, or stumbling block, and to the Greeks, the Pagan Gentiles,
(...), unsavory vanity and folly. And if we should remove this
stumbling block, it would be the way, not to bring them over to our Faith, and
make them turn Christians; but for us to forsake our Faith, and go over to
them, and turn Jews or Pagans. For that which is the scandal, is the very
substance of our Faith and Religion: This, with the 1 Cor. 2.2.
Apostle, we are to Preach and maintain, even Christ crucified, which,
whatsoever it be to them, yet is to us, 1 Cor. 1.24.
Christ the wisdom of God, and the power of God, even Romans 1.16.
the power of God to salvation. This we glory in, and are bound to glory in,
and we therefore use this Sign, that Jews, Turks, Pagans, all may know that we
Gal. 6.14.
glory in nothing, save in the Cross of Christ, which they so much deride and
reproach.

scandal (in this notion) in the way of weak Christians, who looking upon this
use of the Cross as bordering upon Idolatry, take occasion to think and speak
evil of the way of God, and of the truth, and worship of God amongst us, as if
it were nothing but a way of Superstition and Formality, or worse, This
scandal, though it is not given by the Churches practice, as any thing in the
use of this Sign, yet I know it is taken (but unjustly) by many, whose great
argument (as I have sometimes heard it urged) is this,

What has been abused by the Papists to Idolatry, and is not commanded of God,
is unlawful to be continued in use by us.

But the Cross has been so abused by them, and not commanded by God,

Therefore, it is unlawful to be continued among us.

The Minor they take for granted: the Major they prove by analogy, from the
instance of the Brazen Serpent, which (though set up upon good grounds, as a
memorial of their deliverance, and the Number. 21.9.
Healing of the stings of the fiery Serpents, yet) when abused to Idolatry, was
2 King. 18.4.
broken to pieces by Hezekiah.

The Ministers in the Diocese of Exon, who refused subscription, soon after
the conference at Hampton Court, go yet higher, and would prove it an See
Hutton answ. to Reas. etc. c. 26. p. 142, 152, etc.
Idol, and the use, Idolatry. Strange! but thus they venture on it.

Whatsoever is an Humane similitude of a thing, whereunto any give Religious
worship, and is by some worshipped, that is an Idol.

But the Sign of the Cross is asimilitude, whereunto many give Religious
worship, and it self is religiously worshipped.

Ergo, It is an Idol, and the use of it, consequently, Idolatry, and to be
abolished.

And these also urge the example of Hezekiah, and the Brazen Serpent.

Here is indeed a Scandal taken: and a great one too:. 20. Answ.
and we see, by some the Reproach is laid high against the Church. Whether it
be justly taken, or any real occasion of such a Reproach or Scandal, be given
by the Church through this use of the Cross, we shall now consider.

Ministers in their use, and therefore is the Scandal unjustly taken at us, is
evident; because we are not free, but by a Law determined ad hoc possibly, were
we every one left fully to our own liberty: where the weakness of our
Congregations would bear it, but they would be ready to judge it Idolatrous,
and Superstitious; I conceive we were bound by the law of charity so far as to
condescend to their weakness, as pro tempore, during the time (at least) of
their weakness, ignorance, or misprission; until they are betrer instructed,
informed and established; to forbear such an use, and not to lay any such
occasion of Scandal before them. But when we are bound up by a Law, and a
public constitution, the case is otherwise: if any through weakness or
mistake will judge evil of us, we cannot help it; the sin is theirs, we give
not the occasion, but do our duty.

the Church, or her Governors, or the Public constitution? No, in no wise. To
charge Scandal upon a Church, and an established Law, is a sin of an higher
nature than men generally are aware of, let us see if we cannot clear them
also. Scandal is indeed taken against the Church-constitution, and Reproach is
laid upon her Public worship, as being Superstition, Idolatry, or bordering
upon Idolatry: at least, as using that, which has been abused to Idolatry, and
ought therefore to be abolished. But has the Church by her constitution or
practice in this thing given any just occasion of these hard thoughts,
censures, or Reproaches? I think not, which I shall manifest by applying these
answers to the above mentioned arguments.

Minor of the former argument, that the Sign of the Cross is abused by the
Papists to Idolatry, which is taken for granted, is not perfectly true, unless
it be meant of the material Cross, which they worship indeed with an (...)
(in their own language) yea a (...). But the Sign of it (as it is used in
Baptism) they do not, that ever I read, that they abuse it to Superstition,
and to many ridiculous actions, and odd ends, we grant; but to Idolatry, may
seem too high a charge. Let us (as the proverb is) give the Devil his due,
and not charge the Papists with more than they are really guilty of.

Major is evidently faulty, and to be denied, for though we grant it, not
commanded of God, and abused by the Papists, yet the abuse among them proves
not the use unlawful among us. For,

Idol generally to all, but only to themselves who so worship it. It may be an
Idol there, and Idolatry, among them, who worship it: but it is no Idol, nor
Idolatry, nor bordering upon Idolatry among those who worship it not; but
professedly, and publicly condemn such an abuse, or our Church openly and
expressly both the Cannons and constitutions about the use of this Sign; who
though she leave it out of her Rubricks, yet retains it, and publishes her
mind sufficiently in her constitutions. Were we guilty of this abuse; had our
Church ever worshipped, or required us to worship the Cross; and so been
guilty of Idolatry or Superstition in this use; there had been somewhat to be
grounded on that argument; and some reason to remove the occasion. But what
they do beyond the Seas, what is done among the Papists, whom we acknowledge a
most corrupted Church; how that should concern us, who are nothing at all
concerned in their practice, and have cast out their Superstitions, I
understand not. Yea farther,

2. I conceive, that had we also so abused this, yet the former abuse is not a
necessary ground of abolishing this Rite, unless that abuse had still
continued. When corruption and abuse is so closely joined and annexed to the
use of a thing, that we cannot separate the one from the other in the practice
of men; here we must abolish the thing, that we may destroy the corruption. But
when the abuse may be separated, yea and actually is separated from the lawful
use; I see, not why we may not retain that thing, and the lawful practice, I
see no reason why a former abuse, should make a present use unlawful. when we
really see that abuse is taken away. This has our Church done in the use of
the Cross in Baptism, where! cannot but much commend and reverence her
practice in reforming her self from the Romish coruptions in these two things.

charity, and love to Peace and communion; that as many things as we may
retain fellowship and communion in with the Ancient Church, with them of Rome,
yea all Christians in the world; all things that are lawful to be used, and
where she can separate the corruption from the laudable and proper use; these
she retains; to show that though she reformed, yet she cut not off her self
from the body of Christians, nor denied the communion of Saints; nor forsook
the fellowship of the Church.

2. Her wisdom; when she must differ from them, and forsake them, or forsake
the uncrring rule which her Lord has given her; she knows when and where to
differ. When she finds such an intolerable abuse in a Rite or Ceremony,
which (like 2 King. 5.27.
Gehezies leprosy) inseparably cleaves to it, and cannot be cured till the
Ceremony it self die, or be abolished; here she will abolish the Ceremony, that
she may avoid the corruption; but where she can make a separation, and purge
the Rite from all such abuse; she knows how to retain the Rite, and banish the
corruption from the use of it. This we see evidently she has done in this, the
Sign of the Cross in the two Sacraments. Take it in the Learned Huttons words.

1.. 29. Hutton. Answ. to Reas. etc. c. 26. p. 156, 157.
The Sign of the Cross, in the Lords Supper, we allow not, because neither so
Anciently, nor so genarally, nor so simply received. Not so Anciently; for it
came in but of late years, in the Eucharist; not so generally, for it had not
that public approbation, as in Baptism: not so simply applied, for it is
rather taken from Sorcerers than good Christians, and beholding to
Heildebrand's Magic, almost one thousand years after Christ. The danger, in
the use of it there, appears, because it nourishes the grounds of conjuring,
and odd principles in the mystery of the Black Art by Mass Priests crossing
the Bread and Wine, both at once, and severally. At once together three times,
then each severally apart, once; then again once and thrice; and afterward
thrice and once; with a Crossing of himself between all this; first with his
hand, then with the Host he Crosses the Chalice three times, then two odd
times more, to make up the five wounds of Christ; then with the Patin he
Crosses himself once, and the Chalice three times with a piece of the Host;
and once himself again with the Host over the Patin: and lastly once, himself
again with the Chalice. All which vanities stand not with the simplicity of
Christ's holy institution, but take their beginning from Sorcerers and
Magicians, who do glory in one, three and five, and the like Necte tribus nodis
ternos Amarilli colores. Virg. Eccl. 8. See more in Vierg. de praestig. daem.
l. 5. chap 4. Corn. Agr. de vanit. scien. c. 47, and 48. and de occult. Philos.
l. 2. c. 4, 6, 8.
odd numbers.

Baptism we still allow the Sign of the Cross, because Anciently generally
received, and simply applied; and though abused by the Papist, yet we could
separate (and have done so) the corruption that is among them from the lawful
use that is retained with us. Though they, and we, both us do use the Sign of
the Cross, and that in the Sacrament (Baptism) yet to a man of understanding
the difference is great. (For indeed the Popish corruptions are all purged out
of it, as we see in the particulars) sc. For 1. They hold that with it they
Gre^z. de crnce. l. 4. c. 36. and 59.
Consecrate Baptism it self; we only use it on the child Baptized. 2. They
make it a part of Divine worship, we do not. 3. They in an unknown tongue, not
giving a reason why, nor to what end; we in an known language, giving all to
understand, that we are far from Popery, or superstition. 4. They hold the
Sacrament of no force, or very small, many of them denying a child without the
Cross can have his Christendom (as they call it) we disclaim that Doctrine.
5. They make it a matter of merit to deserve by; we neither know, nor preach
any but the merits of our Lord and Savior. 6. They judge the Sign of the
Cross De consecrat. did. 5. c. nuuquid.
a matter of necessity unto salvation; we only a thing indifferent in its own
nature, that may be left, or retained, as Authority sees good. 7. They, as of
the Gretz. de cruce l. 4. c. 13.
essence, that without sin may not be omitted; we as an accident, that upon
lawful cause may be separated. 8. They Bellar. de sanct. Imag. l. 2. c. 30.
worship it; we do not. 9. They use it Gretz. de cruce l. 4. c. 36.
to drive away Devils; we ascribe no such virtue to it. 10. They use it daily,
hourly, every moment, upon every occasion; we but once in Baptism. 11. They in
every Part of the body; we only in the Child's Forehead, and but once only, in
token he is not to be ashamed, etc. 12. They write, it satisfies for sin, and
Per crucis hoe signum depellitur omne malignum.
preserves from evil; we prove the contrary. 13. They teach it an infallible
mark, to distinguish a true professor from an Heretic. 14. They teach, that
nothing can be consecrated without it; we disavow that Doctrine. 15. They say
it can, and does Gretz. l. 4. c. 49.
cure bodily diseases; we find no such thing. 16. They teach, it has a virtue
against all Enchantments; we rather doubt it, as they use it, an Enchantment it
self. 17. Some among them Gersom. sermon. de B. Virg. part. 3. consideratione.
2. Cajetan. in Thom. etc.
hold it may stead children in place of! Baptism; we deny it. Here we see
then, there are such, and so many differences between us and the Papists, that
though we use the same Sign once, yet we are far from owning their
superstitions; nor can our Church be therefore charged with Popery in this
thing, nor indeed, Duo cum faciunt idem, non est idem.
to do the same thing as they do. So that possible it is to retain (as we do) a
lawful use, separate from all superstitious, or Idolatrous abuses. Therefore
whatsoever abuses have been, or yet are in the Church of Rome, they are not
chargeable on us who deny them: nor is it necessary for us to lay aside the use
of this Sign of the Cross, when we have thus purged it from the Popish
corruptions, and may keep it so purged still: nor nor do the abuses of others
of which we are not guilty, former abuses among our selves (if any have been)
which are not continued sull, necessarily engage or oblige us to do it.

Analogicall Argument drawn from Hezekiahs act in Breaking the Brazen Serpent;
for indeed the Analogy holds not, the case is different. For,

Brazen Serpent, was not a sign only, but that very material, numericall
Serpent, Number, 21.8-2 King. 18.4.
which was made by Moses, and was the instrument of the deliverance of their
Fathers, and was preserved to that day; and people therefore were more ready to
worship that, as if that had saved them; and so it was a more difficult thing
to separate the Idolatry from the memorial: But in this Rite, we have only a
transient resemblance of a Cross, and nothing remains visible after the
Action; and so nothing to be objected to our eye, or in danger to be abused,
or, so to be worshipped.

Brazen Serpent was so abused, and Idolized, not by others, but by themselves;
and there was reason therefore to take from them that object of their own
Idolatry. But this Sign of the Cross, was not so abused by us, but by the
Romanists, who widely differ from us in many main points and practices of
Christianity. Though there may be some Argument from this Act of Hezekiah, to
take away the Cross, and the use of the Sign among them, who do so abuse it;
but it concerns not us, who are not chargeable with such abuses.

Idolatry about the Brazen Serpent was not only sometime the sin of that
people; but it continued among them till the very time of the breaking of it.
That Zealous King therefore justly removed that Monument, because the Idolatry
accompanying it could not otherwise be removed. Had it been free from that
abuse, it might have stood, and served still as a remembrance of Gods
goodness; but being not so, it must away, it is but Nehushtan. But there is no
such thing in our use of the Cross; no superstition, in the practice of the
Church of England, cleaving to it, or continued among us. Therefore from
Hezekiah's destroying that, to which they still burned incense, to argue the
necessity of abolishing the use of the Cross with us, who so abuse it not, but
condemn such abuses, is a most illogicall way of arguing, whereas were there
abuses, yet wise Reformers will consider first, whether they can remove them,
and not destroy the subject to which they cleave. To cure always by Abscission
does seldom commend the Surgeon, or is pleasing to the patient: He cures
best that can (...), so restore the part ill affected, that it still shall
continue an Ornament, or Grace to the body, as it was before. To use a thing
ill, and not to use it at all, are both extremities, and to be avoided: he
rightly makes a redress, who stripping off the abuse, preserves the good use
of a thing. There is an error both on the Right, and on the Left, and Prove.
4.27.
both to be shunned. It is a madness, for the avoiding of a few drops, to
plunge over head and ears in water; to Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare
Charybdin.
shun a gulf and strike upon a Rock; to Dum vitant stulli vitia, in contrariia
currunnt
avoid one vice, and embrace another. Blessed are those pious, holy, humble,
and peaceable spirits, that know how (and take care to do so) (...), to make
straight steps, and turn aside neither to the Right hand, nor to the Left:
Neither sinning against charity, by giving occasion of offense, when they can
avoid it; nor against duty, and Justice, by disobeying a Law, under which they
live, when the matter commanded is lawful to be done: such as is this Rite,
the Sign of the Cross, which being enjoined by a Law, is cleared also to be
no just occasion of this kind of Scandal; nor matter of just Reproach to us,
or the Church.

3.. 35. The Cross no Scandal, as justly Grieving a Brother.
There remains but one notion of Scandal more, and that is, as it does
interrupt the peace and joy of our Brother, being matter of Trouble, or Grief
to him. Here, I think, no sober dissenter will be so uncharitable as to charge
it so high, as a Crime, or Abomination equal to the Lies of those Prophetesses
in Ezekiel, Ezekiel 13.22.
which made the heart of the Righteous sad, which God would have not made sad:
But it is indeed charged with such a Scandal, as was given by eating of some
meats among the Romans, and it is thus argued: If when a weak Brother was
grieved with that use of their liberty in eating such meats, as the Law made
unclean, they Romans 14.15.
might not eat them; then if our Brother be grieved by the Sign of the Cross,
we may not use it, etc.

But howsoever it be urged,. 36. Answ.
the same answer will serve both. And the answer, which I shall make, I shall
take from those hints, which I have seen in a transcript of a private letter,
written long ago (and was in many hands) said to be that most judicious Doctor,
now Bishop Saundersons, in reference to the use or forbearance of the public
Liturgy, during the late troubles, and the violent extrusion of it out of the
Church; about the nature of Scandal, and the vilidity of the Argument drawn
from thence, which will be very applicable to our present case, Now then.

use of the Cross is expressly required of us by a Law, which, for any thing
in the matter of it, has been proved, may lawfully be complied with: But yet
some out of weakness or misprission judge otherwise of it, and are offended,
or grieved by such an use. The only question is now, what are we to do in this
case? Are we to obey the Law, though some be offended? Or are we so far to
condescend to the weakness of these, as for their sakes to disobey the Law? Is
this Argument of Scandal sufficient to oblige us to, or justify us in
forsaking the Public constitutions?



1. It seems a very unreasonable thing in such cases as these, when we are not
left to our own acts; or discretions, but bound up by a positive Law, that the
fear of Scandalizing our weak brother, (which is only Debitum Charitatis)
should lay upon us such a peremptory necessity of complying with their
weakness, as that for their sakes we must disobey the Law, whatsoever
inconveniences or mischiefs may ensue thereupon: whereas, the duty of obedience
to our known, and legally established Governors, (which is Debitum Justitiae,
and therefore obliges more,) imposes upon us a necessity of doing that, which
if we should not do, we should sin against God, who has commanded us to be
subject, and to obey Romans 13.5.
for Consciencesake. Besides,

Seandal, in things neither in themselves unlawful, nor (setting only this
matter of Scandal aside) inexpedient; (such as our use of the Cross is
presumed to be) as they are subject to many frailties otherwise, so are they
manifestly of no weight at all, when they are counterpoysed with an apparent
danger of evil consequents; and equal, yea greater Scandal on the other side:
for in such cases there is commonly equal (if not more) danger of Scandal to be
taken the quite contrary way. We may see it clear in the case in hand. It is
alleged on the one side; if we use the Cross, many weak, scrupulous
Christians will be offended, and grieved at us, and judge ill of us, and our
worship. But on the other side it is apparent, if we do not use this Sign as
the Law requires, then, 1. Our Governors are offended, the Church
scandalized, because her public constitutions are violated. And, 2. Men, that
are not over-scrupulous, will, when they see us take liberty of disobeying in
one thing, be encouraged to take a greater liberty in dispensing with the Laws
in other things, to the despising both of the Laws and Governors, yea and
Government it self. And, 3. By our denying or disputing against this use of an
Innocent Rite, men that have tender Consciences, or scrupulous Spirits, will be
induced to entertain scruples, where they need not, nor is there cause of them;
sometimes, possibly, to their own undoing, and to the damage of the people
under their charge and Ministry. And really, these Scandals are so much the
greater, as they are too manifestly given, and are more than probable occasions
of those sins and stumblings; whereas the former sort, though taken by
others, is not given by us.

3. But, what comes home to the matter, and takes off the Objection fully, is
this: That in judging cases of Scandal, we are not to look so much at the
event, what it is, or may be; as at the cause whence it comes. For sometimes,
there is just cause of Scandal, and yet no Scandal follows, because it is not
taken: Sometimes, Scandal is taken, and yet no just cause given: Sometimes both
cause of Scandal given, and Scandal thereat taken. But no man is concerned in
any scandal, that happens to another by occasion of any thing done by him;
nor is chargeable with it, farther than he is guilty of having given it. If
then we give Scandal to others, and they take it not; the whole guilt is ours,
and they are faultlesse. If we give it, and they take it; we are to bear a
share in the blame, as well as they; and that a deeper share too, for vae
homini, Matthew. 18.7.
Woe to that man, by whom the Scandal, or, offense comes: But if they take
offense, where we give none; it is a thing we cannot help; and therefore the
whole blame must lie upon them, and not upon us. The guilt of Scandal is no
more chargeable upon us, who give not the occasion, than upon Christ, who was
to the Jew 1 Pet. 2.8.
a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, but through their unbelief and
disobedience; or, than the guilt of those Matthew. 10.34, 35.
divisions of Father against Son, etc. are chargeable on Christ, or the Gospel,
by which corrupt men took occasion, though neither Christ, nor the Gospel gave
any occasion of such things. Wherefore if at any time any doubt shall arise in
the case of Scandal, how far the danger thereof may, or may not, obliege us to
the doing, or not doing of any thing proposed; the resolution will come on much
the easier; if we shall but rightly understand, what it is to give Scandal; or,
how many ways a man may become guilty of scadalizing another by his example.
The ways, I conceive, are but these four.

1.. 41. Four ways of giving Scandal.
When a man does something before another, which is in it self evil, unlawful
and sinful. In which case, neither the intention of him, that does it, nor
the event, (as to him, that sees it done) is of any consideration. For whether
the doer had an intention to draw the other into sin or no; the very matter
or substance of the action being evil, and done before others, this is
sufficient to render the doer guilty of having given Scandal; though he never
had any intention so to do, nor was any other scandaelized thereby. Because
whatsoever is of its own nature evil, is of it self, and its own nature
scandalous, and of ill example. Thus did the 1 Samuel 2.17, 22.
sons of Eli give Scandal by their wretched prephanenesse, and greediness
about the sacrifices of the Lord, and their shameless abusing of women at the
door of the Tabernacle: Thus did David give great Scandal also, 2 Samuel 12.14.
in the matter of Vriah. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that is evil, for fear of
Scandal.

When a man does something before another, with a direct intention and formal
purpose of drawing him to commit sin. In which case, neither the matter of
the action, nor the event is of any consideration. For it makes no difference
(as to the sin of Scandal) whether any man be enticed thereby to commit sin or
not: or, whether the thing done were unlawful or not: So as if it had but 1
These. 5.22.
an appearance of evil, and from thence an aptitude of drawing another to the
doing of that, (by imitation) which would be really and intrinsecally evil.
The wicked intention alone (whatsoever the effect prove, or what means so ever
be used to promote it) suffices to induce the guilt of giving Scandal upon the
doer. This was Jeroboams 1 Kings 12.27-32.
sin, in setting up the Calves, with a formal purpose and intention, thereby
(for his own secular and ambitious ends to corrupt the purity of Religion, and
to draw the people to his idolatrous worship. For which cause he is so often
stigmatized with it, as with a note of infamy to stick on his name while the
world lasts; being scarce ever mentioned in Scripture but with this addition
-- 1 King. 14.16. and 15.26. and 16.19. and 22.52. 2 King. 10.31. and 13.2, 6,
11. and 15.9. and many more.
The son of Nebat who made Israel to sin. Here then the Rule is, Do nothing,
either good or evil, with an intention or purpose to give Scandal.

When a man does something before another, which in it self is not evil but
indifferent, (and so according to the Rule of Christian-liberty, lawful for
him to do as he shall see cause, yea perhaps otherwise commodious and
convenient, for him to do so) yet whereat, he probably foreseeth, the other
will take Scandal and be encouraged thereby to do evil. In such cases, if the
thing to be done be not in some degree (at least prudentially) necessary for
him to do, but that he might without very great inconvenience or prejudice to
himself, or any third person, leave it undone; he is bound in Charity Romans
14.15.
to his brothers soul (for whom Christ died) and for the avoiding of Scandal,
to abridge himself in the exercise of his Christian-liberty for the time, so
far as rather to suffer some inconvenience himself by not doing it, than by
doing of it, to cause his brother to offend or be grieved; as will appear by
these many Texts, Romans 14.13, -- 21. and 15.1, 2, 3. 1 Cor. 8.7-13. and 9.12,
15, 19, 22. and 10.23-33.
wherein the Apostle handles this, case. Here the Rule is, Do nothing that may
reasonably be forborne-whereat Scandal may be taken.

When a man does something before another, which is not only lawful, but
(according to the exigency of present circumstances) pro hic and nunc, very
behovefull, and even (prudentially) necessary for him to do, but foreseeth that
the other will be like to make an ill use of it, and take encouragement thereby
to commit sin; if he be not careful withal, as much as in him lies, to
prevent the Scandal that might be taken thereat: for he Qui non prohibet
peccare, quando potest, jubet.
who hinders not sin, when, and so far as he can, does encourage and
command it. In such case, the bare neglect of his brother, and not using his
utmost endeavor to prevent the evil, that might ensue, makes him guilty. Upon
which consideration stands the equity of that judicial Law given to the Jews,
which orders, that in case Exodus 21.33, 34.
a man dig a pit for the use of his Family, and looking no farther than his own
convenience, puts no cover over it, but leaves it open, whereby it happens
that his neighbors beast falls thereinto and perishes; the owner of the pit
shall make it good; in as much as he was by his carelessness, the occasion of
that loss to his neighbor, which he might, and ought to have prevented. Here
then the Rule is, Order the doing of that which may not be left undone, in such
sort, that so far as you can help it, no Scandal may be taken thereat.

cases and rules of Scandal. Now then to apply these generals to the particular
under debate. The action proposed to the present enquiry, is the using of the
Sign of the Cross in Baptism: an usage enjoined us by an undoubted Law, and
the public constitution of the Church of England. The inquiry is, Whether it
may be done with a good conscience, in regard of the Scandal that is given, or
at least may be taken thereat; yea or no?

Now for resolution in this case:

so unreasonable, as to judge the bare use of such a Sign, to be a thing in its
own nature simply evil, there is no shadow of reason to induce such a belief.

most earnest contenders against this Rite, and most eager dissenters from the
public constitutions, are not, cannot be, so uncharitable, as to judge so
severely, and unjustly of those, that use the Cross; as if they did it
(whether well or ill it matters not) with a formal purpose, or, the least
intention to give a Scandal; either to vex or grieve their brethren; or to draw
others into sin by their example. They must forfeit their Christianity, yea
even Humanity, that can admit, or pass such a censure. It is manifest then,
that the two first mentioned cases of Scandal, with the rules appending, are
not at all pertinent to this case of the Cross: for neither is it in it self
evil, and so scandalous; nor, do we use it (be it good, or evil) with any
intention to give Scandal.

third Case and Rule be applied to this particular, any more than the former.
For, though where a thing may reasonably be forborne, we must do nothing,
whereat Scandal may be taken; yet with us the case is otherwise; we are not
free, our act is not spontaneous; To Sign with the Cross is not only lawful,
but to us, at least prudentially necessary; which we cannot forbear, without
incurring those great inconveniences upon our selves, that we rationally must
expect to ensue upon our contempt and breach of the Law; yea and upon others
also, by the violation of the Peace, and order of the Church: yea, in
conscience, necessary it is to us, who acknowledge it lawful, and are to it
obliged by a Law, which we must not disobey. It is not a thing then, that can
reasonably be forborne; nor can we be obliged to such a Charity, as we are not
at liberty to perform. So that neither does this Case or Rule concern this
matter before us.

last only, that comes up to our case. Here then, we have no more to do for
the settling of our judgments, the quieting of our consciences, and the
regulating of our actions in this affair, than to consider, what the Rule in
the case given obliges us unto. Which is, not to leave the action undone, (for
the danger of Scandal) for we are obliged to do it; and to leave it undone,
besides the inconveniences formerly mentioned, would, not so much avoid one,
as, raise more Scandals; and, start new Questions, and, these beget more to the
multiplying of scruples in infinitum. But, so to order our doing of it, that
(if possible) no Scandal may ensue thereupon, or, at leastwise not through our
default, by our careless and indiscreet managing of it. Even as the Jew, that
stood in need to sink a pit for the service of his house, or ground, was not
(for fear of his neighbors beasts falling into it) bound by the Law, to
forbear the making of it; but only so provided a sufficient cover for it, when
made. In this case, the use of the Cross, the thing is not to be left undone,
when we are so expressly enjoined it, and it so much behooves us to do it; but
the action is so managed (as to the manner of doing of it, in all respects and
circumstances thereto belonging) that the necessity of our so doing, with the
true cause thereof, may appear to the world, to the satisfaction of those, who
are willing to take notice of it: And that, such persons, who would be ready by
our example to do the same thing to another purpose, or, an ill end, in an ill
way, when they have not the like reason, may do it only upon their own score,
and not be able to vouch our practice for their excuse: and those who are
offended at us, may see, that if they are troubled, we cannot help it; we do
but our duty; the Scandal being unjustly taken by them, and not rationally
chargeable on our practice, nor indeed given by us.

true end of this use in our Church; if we be careful to remove those abuses
which the Church of Rome has continued with it; if we declare it to be no part
of the Sacrament; no essential part of Worship; no necessary duty of
Christianity; no new covenanting, or engaging Sign; if we declare to the world,
that, we worship it not; we use it not for those ends, as the Papists do; but
only as an Ecclesiastical Constitution, an innocent Ceremony; not, to offer,
exhibit, give, or seal grace to us; but to signify and declare our profession
of Faith in a Crucified Jesus; that we acknowledge him our Lord, and
Captain General, under whose Banners we are by our Bapitsm (not by this Sign)
listed, and engaged to fight constantly against the World, Flesh, and Devil:
and that we use this, not for any secular, or unworthy ends, not out of any
superstitious design, or innovating humor; but, to show our Communion with the
ancient Christians; to testify our obedience to our lawful Governors, and
the Laws established. All which, the Church of England, in her Offices,
Rubricks and Canons, has taken care for, and sufficiently declared.

bona fide, and with our utmost endeavors, in singleness of heart Colos. 3.22.
, as men whose aim is, not to please men, but to fear God; and with a goldly
discretion: perhaps; it will not be enough to prevent either the censures of
inconsiderate or inconsiderable men; or the ill use that may be made of our
example, through the ignorance and negligence of some (which is the Scandalum
Pusillorum.
Scandal of the weak;) or through the perverseness or malice of others, (the
Scandalum Pharisaeorum.
Scandal of the Pharisees, as some term them:) But assuredly, it will be
sufficient, abundantly sufficient, in the sight of God, and in the witness of
our own hearts, and to the conscience of all charitable and considering men, to
acquit us from all guilt of Scandal in any, yea the least degree.

innocent, harmless, Rite, The Sign of the Cross in Baptism fully cleared,
and vindicated from all guilt of Scandal, and consequently from all breach of
Charity. And now, it being free from all breach of Piety, the sum of the
first Table; and of Charity, the substance of the second Table: it cannot upon
any account be judged sinful, or unlawful to be used, (...).

not unlawful, neither upon the account of Piety, nor, Charity; and being by
the public constitutions required, and by the Law of our just Superiors
enjoined; what other pretense or shadow of reason we can find to refuse it, I
see not. And, for a close, let me request, that it may be seriously considered,
whether in our denial, we should not be guilty of a manifest sin against the
fifth Commandment, which without doubt requires a due Let me here commend to
the Reader for his full satisfaction, that Lecture of the Reverend Sanderson,
of the Obligation of both Political and Ecclesiastical Laws of things
indifferent. See Case of Conse. Lect. 6.. 22. ad fin. in answ. to Doubt 6, 7.
due obedience to the just Laws of our Governors both in Church and State.

CHAP. V. The Expediency of our Conforming to the established Liturgy and
Rites, examined and asserted.
lawfullnesse of using the public Form of Confession, Prayer, Praises, and
Administration of Sacraments, in the Church of England, prescribed; and of the
Rites and Ceremonies there enjoined, in all Administrations of public Worship.
This lawfullnesse now being cleared, the matter of expediency, or,
inexpediency, will with much more ease and facility be resolved. To this
therefore I shall now offer these few Conclusions.

1. not being evil, yea being just, (as is proved) this must supersede all
Disputes about expediency. We are here positively commanded, and in Conscience
obliged to Conform: it is necessary, that we obey; it cannot be expedient that
we Dispute our duty. 2. Expediency is either of a public or private
consideration; and consequently, particular men, Ministers and others, may be
judges what is expedient in the one, but not in the other. In matters of
private concernment, and which only respect our selves, or the particular
flocks under our charge, or some few persons therein. The particular Pastors,
who by their Residence among them, and experiences there, are best acquainted
with them, their wants, necessities and conditions, are the most competent
judges, (as indeed best able to judge) what is most convenient or expedient for
them: and in those things, wherein they are left at liberty, they are to be
guided by their own prudent, and godly discretion, to do and act, as they shall
see most expedient for the benefit and edification of their particular charge.
But in things of public consideration, which concern the public peace, order,
and unity of the whole Church, wherein we live, here is not the private
discretion of any one particular person to be the judge, who may well
understand the needs of his own flock, but is not so well acquainted with what
is fit to be done for all the Congregations of the Land. Here our lawful
Governors are the judges of such public expediences; and though they may
mistake in some things, and their decrees, perhaps, be inexpedient as to some
particulars, yet we are bound up in our practice, if they be not sinful. 3.
matter of obedience, we have nothing to do, but to examine the matter of the
Law, if it be evil, we must not Conform; but in the business of expedience,
we are to judge by those various circumstances of time, place, and several
emergencies, according to which a thing is more, or less expedient, as those
circumstances and exigencies do more, or less preponderate either way. Let us
then consider the several circumstances, and apply them to the case in hand.
1. expediency is only lawful things: it must be first certain, that 1 Cor.
10.23.
all things are lawful, before we dispute, whether they be expedient. But now,
a Law made by a just authority, makes that unlawful, by its prohibition, as to
our present practice, (pro hic and nunc,) which was free, and not unlawful for
us to do, before such an established constitution. And this in our case, on the
one side does take away the subject of the dispute: for now to deny or forbear
the use of the public Liturgy, and innocent Rites, is no longer lawful to us,
who by a Law are obliged to use them. Here therefore can be no pretense of
expediency in denying a duty. 2. most expedient, which most tends to
edification. For in this does the Apostle seem to place the matter of
expediency, viz. so far as it edifieth, when he says, 1 Cor. 10.23.
All things are lawful for me, but all things are not expedient: All things
are lawful for me, but all things edify not. The expressions are two, but the
thing is one; the latter being but exigetical of the former, at least an
illustration of it. Now then it will be no difficulty for a rational man to
judge, which way is best, and which practice of these two will most edify the
people. Whether, 1. To submit to the Law in a peaceable Conformity to the
Liturgy and Rites established; and not troubling our selves, or our flocks,
with trifles, and disputes about circumstances, matters only of external
order, and of a most inferior nature, to set our selves conscientiously to
advance the interest of Religion; to instruct our people in the Fundamentals of
Faith; to acquaint them with the mysteries of the Gospel, the rich overflowing
grace and goodness of God, to show them, what is their real and indispensable
duty both to God and man; both by Doctrine and example, leading them to the
practice of the essential parts of Christianity; the practice of faith and
obedience, of piety and purity, humility and love; teaching them the only way
of the Gospel, Titus. 2.
To deny all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously,
and godly in this present world: which is indeed not to put on a show, or
(...). 2 Timothy 3.5.
disguise of godliness; but to be endued with, and show forth the power,
truth, and sincerity thereof. Whether does this edify most? Or, 2. To be
froward, and dispute against these constitutions when we should be instructing
them in the forenamed Fundamentals of Piety; to be Preaching against Rites and
Ceremonies, filling the peoples ears with the names and notions; and their
hearts with the fears of Innovations, Superstition, etc. by which means they
are filled with scruples and disquieting doubts, and please themselves in a
conceit of their own piety, zeal, and holiness, when yet some give no better
evidence of it, than their earnest oppositions to the public constitutions: in
the mean time, they forget the most essential, and necessary practices of
Religion and Piety, and begin to place the main of Religion in these
unnecessary things; and make Conformity and Nonconformity the (...), or
distinguishing Character of an ungodly and godly man. Hence arise those bitter
invectives, animosities, and heart-burnings, harsh censures, envyings,
railings, and revilings one of another, the very bane and pests of Piety and
Charity; a reproach and scandal even to Religion; as too sad experience does
woefully witness. Now which of these two does most edify, and so is most
expedient; he who has but half an eye may readily see, and the weakest reason
may soon judge. 3. the Law enjoynes this practice, the public Constitution of
the Church requires it: on the other side, one, or some particular Christians
are offended at it. Judge now, which is, and must be concluded, most expedient;
whether to refuse obedience by Nonconformity, and so offend against a public
establishment; scandalize an whole Church, and Christian Nation; break an
uniform order, and public peace; offend your lawful Governors and
Superiors; and by an eager contending against them, give too much occasion to
be censured, as men, that 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
Despise dominion, presumptuous, self-willed, and not afraid to speak evil of
dignities. Or, on the other side, humility to submit to Authority in all
lawful, though not necessary things; to Conform to the Law; which can be but
an offense to some particular men, who either through weakness or
frowardness, may take offense when none is given? Which is more blameable, to
scandalize one, or more, a few private Christians; or a Community, and a
public body? Which is more expedient to obey a Law and offend but a few; or
despise a Law, and scandalize all? 4. Ministry of that Church, whose Laws we
despise; nor receive the legal maintenance, annexed to this Ministry. Now
then, (supposing still the matter lawful,) consider which is more expedient
for men, to deny Conformity and obedience, for the sake of such inconsiderable
Circumstances, and so become obnoxious to the censure of the Law, and deprive
themselves of the opportunities of discharging those great duties, that lie
upon them in their Ministerial Calling; and withal, deprive their Churches of
the benefits of those labors, and pains, and parts, and endowments which God
has given them, which they are called to exercise, and might by the blessing
of God, successefully exercise among them to their everlasting advantage; yea,
and possibly, expose themselves to misery and want, and hunger, and thirst,
when being deposed from their Ministry, they may also be deprived of the
profits of their places, which should buy them bread. Or, on the other side by
a sober compliance, an humble obedience, in these things, (which though they
like not, yet they cannot condemn as simply evil in themselves, and unlawful)
to preserve themselves secure in their place and Ministry; where they may
freely do the work of their Calling; Preach the Gospel, on which errand they
are sent; lay forth themselves for the good of the Church; and employ their
Talents for their edification and salvation. Which of these two is more
expedient? Compare these two together, which is the more noble work, and more
necessary duty, to Preach the Gospel, or, to wear a Surplice, or to use any
other external Ceremonies? Which is then more expedient to Silence our selves,
or, occasion our being Silenced, for the sake of a Surplice, etc, or rather,
not to scruple these low things, but use them as enjoined, for the sake of
Religion? Let the Preaching of the Gospel, and the main essentials of Piety,
have their due esteem in our hearts; and the matters of Order, Circumstance,
Habits, Rites, which are not materially evil, will not be set in any
competition with them; and we shall then be able easily to decide the business
of expediency.
The Liturgy, Rites and Ceremonies of the Church of England, being now proved,
neither unlawful, nor, inexpedient; this is abundantly sufficient to prove the
main Conclusion, That there is nothing in either of them, but what a sober
Christian may with a good conscience comply with. That we may lawfully Conform
to the Law in reference to all these; yea during the continuance of this Law
and Obligation upon us, we ought in conscience to obey; and are bound to
maintain Peace and Charity in the use of them.

CHAP. VI. The Conclusion of the whole, pressing the main design, exhorting,
and showing the way to Unity and Peace.
Government, Liturgy and Rites being discussed, and nothing appearing in them
as established, but what may be submitted to without sin; I cannot see, what
imaginable thing can remain, to be justly a Rock of offense, and yet hinder
our peaceable communion. For 1. fundamental and material points, and
substantial parts of Doctrine and Worship. We take it for granted, (say those
Propos. to his Majest. Pap. 1.
Reverend Presbyterian Divines) that there is a firm agreement between our
Brethren and Us in the Doctrinal truths of the Reformed Religion, and in the
substantial parts of Divine Worship. 2. extra-fundamental, of a low, inferior
consideration. The Differences (say those Pap. of Propos. ibid.
Brethren) are, ONLY, in some various conceptions about the Ancient Form of
Church Government, and some particulars about Liturgy and Ceremonies. And it is
farther granted, that these things thus contended against, and desired by them
to be removed, are Account of Proceed. Genesis Except. ad fin. p. 11.
Not of the foundation of Religion, nor, the essentials of public Worship.


Rites, Ceremonis, etc. being of so low and inferior a nature, is it not sad,
and to be bitterly lamented, that they should be made the foundation of so many
evils in the Church and State; Account of Proceed. p. 10.
and the occasion of such sad Divisions between Ministers and Ministers;
Ministers and their Flocks; yea between Subjects and their Rulers: an occasion
of Sedition and Disobedience to Authority, and so exposing many an
otherwise-able Minister, to the displeasure of their Governors; casting them
on the edge of Penal Statutes, to the loss of livings, livelyhoods, and of
their opportunities for the service of Christ and his Church?

sound Liturgy, an innocent Ceremony, a lawful Rite? God forbid. What? upon
the imposition, and too rigorous exactions of our Governors? Where is our
warrant? perhaps, they have just reasons for such impositions; how then shall
we justify our disobedience? Suppose, they mistake, suppose they have their
sins, and may abuse their power; yet it is their own power, and they alone must
answer it: if they sin, will that excuse or justify us? No, no. Ask your own
souls, 2 Chronicles. 28.10.
Are there not with you, even with you sins against the Lord? Is it not our
sin, that by our eager contendings, we do make these lawful things, occasions
of so much disquiet in the Church? Is it not a sin in us, by our earnest
oppositions of these things, to give the people occasion to think some horrid
impiety imposed upon them; and that all Religion is like to be lost in
Formality; and so to fill their hearts with animosities, and heart-burnings
against their Rulers; which is but too sad a preparative (I am not so lost to
the sentiments of Piety or Charity, as to judge, that those who make these
scruples, and raise these disputes, have any design or intention to lay such
preparations in the souls of men: only the dismal event shows, that these
things too often prove such a preparative) to make them ready to take fire, and
flame in Sedition and Rebellion, when any factious Beautifier shall stir up the
coals, and blow them up to it?

Gods-sake, Brethren, let us lay our hands upon our hearts, and give a
faithful answer. Would we be willing to appear before the dreadful Tribunal
of Jesus Christ, in these heats and animosities; flaming with these
contentions; and have no better plea than the imposition of an innocent Rite,
etc. or some mistake in our Governors? Will the sins of our Governors, the
mal-administration of our Rulers, their mistakes, error, or faylures in making
a Law, or some inequality in the Law it self (the matter of it not being
sinful) excuse us, or be a sufficient plea for disobedience in the day of our
great account? I am much mistaken if it be, and so are they that think so. Will
it not justify us in the Court of Heaven? and shall it satisfy us in the
Court of Conscience? God forbid!

Liturgy, Rites, Government, etc. that may not be approved, yet may they not be
borne? No, not for Peace-sake? The things in difference are of a low
consideration; but the peace of the Church is of high moment: Separations from
the Church, divisions in it, contentions against her Constitutions, are sins
so great and heinous; the evil consequences of them so many and fearful; that
all Christians should be well advised before they turn aside: they should wait,
and tarry, and never vary from, much less oppose and contend against her Laws
and public practices; until they be perfectly and fully assured that the Lord
goes before them. It has been the judgment of the sober, pious and learned
in all ages. That (as Irenaeus Iren. de Hares. l. 4. c. 61.
says) they, that for trifling and small causes deride the body of Christ --
such can make no Reformation of such importance, as will countervaile the
damage of division. Many things of this inferior nature we must endure; yea,
and we may bear with them, though perhaps, we may not approve them. It is not
the same thing (said that wise Non est idem far siquid ferendum est, ac
probare siquid probandum non est. Cicer. Famil. l. 9. Ep. 6.
Roman) to bear or suffer, what may be borne, as to approve, what may not be
approved. We may, questionless, yea, we ought to bear with many things in
others, for charity and peace sake, yea, in the Church too, when yet we may not
have reason to give them our full approbation, but may sometimes have reason to
wish them better.

will not, but, it may be, indeed they cannot, without a greater inconvenience,
reform; possibly what we judge to be amiss, they may see no reason to change.
If we must needs contend, and deny peace, and forsake Communion with a Church,
until all those things, which we judge corruptions, be purged out; if we
cannot bear with the ignorance, frailties, or mistakes of men in inferior,
inconsiderable matters; (and the best of our Rulers are but men; and the
matters of our differences are of no higher concernment;) if we will not
maintain peace in, nor hold Communion with a Church, while some men shall judge
her in some things too remiss, in others over-rigorous and zealous; we must
then stay till there be no Church in the world, to maintain Peace in, and hold
Communion with.

tongue of the Learned, and the Pen of a ready Writer, that I may persuade to,
and prevail for Peace and Obedience? Here lies the great interest of Religion;
This is an essential part of our Christianity: The Romans 14.17.
Kingdom of God consists not in meats and drinks; not in Ceremonies and
circumstances; not in using or not using this or that Liturgy, these or those
Rites; but in righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. This is the
Character of the Jam. 3.17, 18.
Heavenly wisdom, that it is first pure, then peaceable -- Here only springs
the fruit of righteousness, it is sown in peace of them that make peace. This
is the duty of Christians, 1 Pet. 3.8, 9.10, 11.
To love as Brethren, not rendering railing for railing, but contrariwise,
Blessing: Let him refrain from evil, and his lips from speaking guile; let him
not banish peace, yea, if peace shall seem to fly from him, and be difficult
to be attained, let him by all honest ways, and earnest endeavors seek peace
and pursue it. How zealously does the Apostle stir up the Church against the
disturbers of her Peace; and exhorts them, (...). Romans 16.17, 18
to watch, and note who they are, that cause divisions and offenses among them,
that they may avoid them? Yea, he does stigmatize them sufficiently, and lays
this black character and brand upon them, that They that are such, serve not
the Lord Jesus, but their own bellies, and by good words, and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple. How earnestly zealous against such, and
passionately angry at them does he discover himself to be? when he breaks out
into this expression, Gal. 5.1^.
I would they were even cut off which trouble you.

Church of Israel under the afflicting hand of God: So, the poor afflicted,
distracted Church of England now, under the sad divisions and contentions of
her own Children, seems to cry out bitterly, Lam. 1.12.
Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold and see, if there be any
sorrow like unto my sorrow that is done unto me: and most passionately calls to
her contending children, wooing them in the Apostles words, Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4,
5.
If there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any
fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies; Fulfill ye my joy, that ye
be like minded one toward another, having the same love, being of one accord,
of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vainglory, but in
lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better than himself. Look not every
man on his own things, but every man also to the things of others. And as the
sum of all, which does indeed comprise all, let the same mind be in you that
was also in Christ Jesus. --

And I am confident we should answer this call of our Mother, 11.
and do our parts; and our Peace would be sufficiently secured, if we would
every one in our places seriously and conscientiously set our selves to
perform these following duties.

1. inte rest of Rligion, and set our selves sincerely to the Practice of
piety, and Holiness. O let it be our endeavors to keep up the fear of God in
our hearts, and to show forth in our lives a good conversation, such as indeed
Phil. 1.27.
becomes the Gospel of Christ. This is the only ready way to Peace Isa. 57.21.
: there is no Peace says my God, to the wicked. They have no Peace with God;
they have no true Peace with men, either with the Righteous, or among
themselves. For indeed, how can men have Peace, when by their delight in sin,
they make God, who only is the God, and fountain of Peace, an enemy? O how
happy should we be! how peaceable would our communion be? if we despising all
disputes about external circumstances, did all strive with an holy emulation,
by the practice of Repentance, Faith, Holiness, Humility, Obedience, Justice,
Sobriety, Charity, etc. who should get first into Heaven; and by an holy kind
of Mat. 11.12. Luke 13.23. (...).
violence, press, and crowd in at that straight gate? Really did we cordially
make this our business, we should find our business so much, this work so
great, that we should find no time to busy our selves in these fruitless
contentions. But alas! this is our misery, our sin and shame, that the r
by-matters of circumstance and order, we labor in, and contend about, as if
they were our principal works, but the practice of Piety, and that great
business of Phil. 2.12.
working out our own salvation with fear and trembling, which should be the
chief business of our lives, we put off, or slightly go over it, as if it
were none, or no very great part of our business. But let us awake and arise
to our work; follow Piety and ye shall find Peace. 2. If we give not up our
selves, our judgment, Reasons, and consciences to the interest of a party; but
wholly, to the rule and guidance of the Sacred Oracles, the word of God. It is
almost incredible, what an affection for a party can do, and what influence it
has upon the soul, both as to matters of Belief, and practice, even against
the arguments of the clearest reason, and the just dictates of conscience it
self. This was it, that made the Jesuit Mal donat in Joh. 6.62.
reject that interpretation of a Text in Saint John, which was Saint Austins,
and which himself confessed the best, and most probable; and to prefer a new
singular sense of his own before it: Why? Because he did indeed judge it the
truest? No, but to maintain his side; because it was more contrary and
repugnant to the sense of the Calvinists. So it is in practice also, when men
have espoused a party, they consider not, what is really true, just, honest,
good, but what those account so, to whom they resolve to adhere and follow; and
what is most differing from the sense of that party, whom they oppose: this
they will maintain, whatsoever come of it, be it never so contary to the light
of reason or the convictions of their own judgment. O let us sincerely study
the word of God, conscionably order our selves by that rule, and (as the
Apostle says in another case) not have the Faith of Christ with respect of
persons. Let us not make the being of a side, or the joining with a party; but
only the constant practice of obedience to the commands of the Gospel; the
charecter of a Godly man, and doubt not, but we shall live in love, as
becomes the Gospel. 3. If we understand and consider, how to distinguish
things that differ: how to make a difference between things propounded to us
for belief or practice, that we be neither overheated by a preposterous zeal;
nor too remiss in a loathed lukewarmnesse: but that we may judiciously
discern where to be zealous and fervent; and where to exercise an (...), or
Christian moderation. In the Foundations of Faith, the substantials of
Religion, the Fundamentals of Christianity, the rule is (...), Jude. 4.
contend earnestly for the Faith, which was once delivered to the Saints, Reve.
3.19.
be zealous. In such a case as this, Saint Paul Gal. 2.5.
would not give place, no not for an hour. But in this, be sure of your hand;
call not your own opinions such essentials. We must not, indeed, be ambitious
of peace with men, when if we have it, we must forsake the Faith of God: yet be
sure the matter of your contendings be such, as may be put in the balance
against; and weigh down all advatages of external peace. For in Circumstances,
Rites, Order, etc. in some doctrines not of the Foundation, God commands us
moderation, and mutual forbearance. Of particular private persons (says Ball,
Ball, Trial of separat. c. 9. p. 179. --
A partial, Rigid, irregular adhering to some branches of holy Doctrine has
been no less pernicious to themselves, than troublesome to others: For the
fond admiration of their zeal and forwardness, in this one particular,
breeds neglect of Christian watchfullnesse, and uniforme walking with God;
disregard of Gods ordinances, and of the good they might get thereby;
disesteem, and contempt of others, who will not comply in the same way; and
what can follow hereupon, but contentions and jarres, evil surmisings,
censurings, and uncharitableness, rentes and divisions in the Church: -- A
zeal in such a case, as this, is like fire out of the chimney, nor for the
profit, but for the destruction of the house, if not soon quenched. It must be
confessed, it would be ill done of our superiors, and an error in Government,
to lay the peace of the Church upon things of inconsiderable import; he that
strikes fiercely (said a judicious Dr. Jackson of the Church (as I find him
cited by) Ball.
Divine) at feathers with his spiritual sword, does always either wound
himself, or wrest his arm. But though this be granted an error in the managing
of power; and should our Governors be guilty, yet it will be a greater error,
and sin in us, of an higher nature, to break the peace of the Church for such
inconsiderable things. For though the things are light in themselves, and the
use, or not use of an indifferent ceremony be of no weight in it self; yet
obedience in a duty, disobedience to a lawful Authority, where we might
without sin obey, is a crime: and it will be our sin, that we put a light
ceremony in the scale against our obedience and duty, together with the peace
of the Church therein concerned. Let us then learn (...), to put a due
distinction, and discern between things that differ; and accordingly walk: be
zealous where only we should be zealous: and in things of a lower nature bear
with, and forbear one another, and not contend, and we shall have peace. 4. If
we carefully avoid all profane janglings, needless and unprofitable disputes
about questions of little, or no concernment. It was a tart motto, which that
Learned Sr. H W^tton.
Knight gave, Pruritus disputandi, est scabies Ecclesiae; but it is true
enough. For Cui bono? to what purpose: but to fill the brain with notions and
empty speculations, and so to fit men for wrangling? I never knew any other
fruit of such aerie disputes about questions of Rites, Habits, Forms, etc.
than that while the head is warmed by the heat of of these contentions; the
heart and affections, grow cold in their love to God, zeal for piety, and the
Power of Godliness. Such questions are the bones, which the Devil throws in
to divert the souls of men from those truly Divine studies, and spiritual
speculations, that should inflame them with an holy zeal for the glory of God,
and the sober and faithful practice of Christian duties. This effect we find
in the Joh. 4.18.
woman of Samaria, when Christ is convincing her of sin, and showing her
adultery: she presently finds a way to divert the discourse to circumstance of
the place of worship: whether it be tied to Jerusalem, or may not as well be in
that mountain. The like we see in our days, let Ministers press the duties
of Repentance, and Mortification, of Piety, and Peace: and go about to convince
men of their sin, of Rebellion, Schism, and uncharitableness: presently men
have a way to put off these discourses; Questions, and disputes shall be
started about Church Government, Liturgy, Ceremonies, and Rites; circumstances
and things of so low a consideration, that a good Christian may believe either
way and not prejudice his salvation; and were it not for the public
constitutions, and matter of Scandal, might practice either way without sin.
These are Questions and disputes, which the Devil scatters among us to
interrupt our peace; to fill the Church with divisions, that he may rule more
freely among us. They are at the best (as they are managed) but as those
questions mentioned by the 1 Timothy 4, 5, 6.
Apostle, which tend not to Godly edifying, but make men turn aside to vain
janglings, and to swerve from that Christian charity, which is the great duty
of the Gospel, and the whole end of the Commandment. Let us avoid such
Questions, silence such disputes, whose product is Strife, whose fruit is
contention, and we shall have Peace. If we would seriously set our selves to
practice that Apostolical rule, 2 Timothy 2.22.23.
Flee youthful lusts, and follow after Righteousness, Faith, Charity, Peace,
with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart; but foolish and unlearned,
(or, (...).
unsavory and undefying) questions avoid, for they gender strife. Then should
we soon see, Jsa. 66.12.
our Peace run like a river, and our glory as a following stream: Then shall
all places of the Church be no longer, as a barren wilderness; but abound in
Grace, and Goodness; Righteousness, and uprightness: Jsa. 32.15.16, 17.
Then shall judgment dwell in the wilderness, and Righteousness in the
fruitful field: Then shall the fruit be Peace, Joy, Prosperity, and
Tranquillity; The work of Righteousness shall be Peace, and the effect of
Righteousness quietness and assurance for ever. 5. If we seriously study that
Christian Grace of Humility, and conscionably make it our work Mic. 6.8.
to walk humbly with our God. For, really, the Original, and source of all
our contentions, is chiefly the Pride, and Presumption in man; that some are so
conceited of themselves, and their own spiritual parts, that they, can content
themselves with their own private devotions; and suppose they can as well, yea
better, and more holily sanctify a Sabbath by Reading, Praying, Meditating,
apart by themselves, and in their own way; than by being present at the Public
worship, which they like not; or joining with the Public Assembles of Gods
people, whom they proudly censure, as Formal, Superstitious worshippers, a
Profane mixture, at least. not Isa. 65.5.
so holy as themselves. A spirit far different from that truly Pious,
enlightened, heavenly, yet Humble spirit of David, though 1 Samuel 13.14.
a man after Gods own heart, and had the word of God not only dwelling
plentifully in him, (the Col. 3.16.
Apostles phrase is) but flowing abundantly from him (as Joh. 7.38.
Christ promised his Saints.) Able, not only Psalm. 16.7.
to admonish himself, but Psalm. 32.8. and 34.11. and 5.13.
to instruct, direct, and edify others also; not to sing only, but himself to
make and compose Hymns of Prayer and praise, for the use of the Church, being
the 2 Samuel 23.1.
sweet Psalmist, or songster of Israel. Yet it was the Psalm. 122.1.
joy of his heart, when he was at home, to repair to the Temple, to the
public assemblies there held, Psalm. 42.4.
to go to the house of God, with the voice of joy and praise among those who
kept holy day: and nothing made his Banishment and exile more bitter, than that
he was deprived of the opportunity of those public devotions, and kept from
joining with the Church in those holy duties and services there performed.
Those Psalms Psalm. 27.4. Psa. 42. and 63. and 84.
penned by him, during those restraints, show how bitterly he bewailes this his
great unhappynesse; and instantly sueth to God for his freedom and liberty to
return to those Assemblies. It is the Pride of man, that fills him with a
delight in, and applause of his own conceptions, and will not suffer him to
admit, that another may be more intelligent, judicious, and holier than he: and
having now entertained notions (though never so strange, or paradoxall, and of
never so light moment, yet) they shall be maintained: Hence, arise those eager
contentions and oppositions, though this knowledge, which they so much pretend
to, and are 1 Cor. 8.1, 2.
puffed up with, is no true, genuine sound knowledge, not properly, but 1 Timothy
6.20.
falsely so called. It is Pride, (...).
that when we have espoosed an opinion, or party, will not suffer us to forsake
what we have once chosen; nor confess our selves to have erred in the least,
(which yet is to be Humanum est, errare.
but men) least, we should lose any thing of that inconsiderable credit, or
vain reputation, which we have or presume we have in the world. It was the
Pride of the Pharisee, that made him oppose Christ, and contend so violently
against the Dcctrine of the Gospel; it was this made the Rulers afraid to
confess him, because Joh. 21.43.
they loved the praise of men, more than the praise of God. So infallible, and
unquestionable a truth is that of Solomon, Prove. 13.10.
only by pride comes contention; but with the well advised (and he I am sure,
is an humble man) there is wisdom: and there will then follow Charity, and
Peace. The best way to Peace (if the Apostle may judge) is by Humility: Think
that others know as much, see as far, be as holy, zealous, faithful, yea more
than we. Phi. 2.3.5.
Let nothong be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind
let each esteem other better than themeselves. In a word, Let the same mind be
in us, that was in Christ Jesus. What was that? why, he was meek and lowly in
heart. Zech. 9.9. Math. 21.5. Humilis venit Humilitatem docere venit. Math.
11.29.
He came Humbly, and he came to teach us Humility. These are the two virtues
especially, that Christ has commanded us; and commended to us. Dicite a me,
inquit, quid discimus a te? nescio quid magnum a magno artifice, numquid ut
eadem faciamus? Qui potest, quae solus Deus facit? Hoc disce a me, quod factus
sum pro te. Quid prodest si miracula facis and Humilis non sis? August. in
Joan. 25.
Humility, in his life, John 13.34, 35.
Love, and Charity in his death. These are the Cognizances of Christ, these are
the marks and Badges, whereby we are known to be his, and they go together,
they cannot be divided; practice the one, the other will certainly follow:
walk in Humility, and ye shall also walk in Charity and Peace.
If we remember that we are a Body, all one body, and still account our selves,
but part of a community. We are not to live every one by our selves, or to our
selves; nor to lie like Absyrtus his scattered limbs; this would speak us
dead, not living Christians. But we are to live, as men brought together under
one Head, in one Body. The Church is a 1 Cor. 12.12. Ephe. 4.16. Col. 1.18.
Body, a Psalm. 122.3. Heb. 12.22.
City, an Can. 6.4, 10.
Army, a (...) the Church is a (...), Phil. 3.20. Ephe. 2.12. Saints, (...).
Ephesians. 2.19.
Corporation, or, Body politic, a Ephesians. 2.21.
Temple; all which speak an Union; or joining in one, a being Psalm. 122.3.
compact together: wherein the great end of every member is to preserve the
whole: and every part is necessary, not for it self, but for the common
interest of the body. When each particular member looks only upon it self,
and men sacrifice to their own Ambition, Credit, profit, Pleasure, etc. they
neglect the Common profit, seeurity, peace, and advantage of the community.
Hence it is, that Divisions arise in the body, Contentions between the several
members, even to the overthrowing of the Body, and the Ruin of the City of
God. O let us remember, we are not borne for our selves alone; we have not our
place and station in the Church only for our own sake, but for a public
profit: the Hand, the Eye, the Belly, are not made for themselves, but for the
service of the Body. The Ministers, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors, Teachers,
are placed there, and called to these employments, in the Church, not to serve
themselves, but to serve the flock; to Ephe. 4.11, 12.
Edify and build up the Body of Christ; to Edify, and instruct themselves and
others Jude, 20.
in the most holy Faith. O how happy were it for the Church, if we would not
any longer not as those Phil. 2.21.
seek our own things, but the things of Christ; if we did not so much 1 Cor.
10.33.
seek our own profit, but the profit of others, that they may be saved? What
an happy progress would this be to our peace, if we did cordially mind the
interest of the Church, the general profit of the whole community? would we
but remember this one thing, the Union of all the members of Christ in one
body; then as we should readily conclude, the public peace and tranquillity of
the whole is far to be prefered before the private content and satisfaction of
a part, so it would be easy to convince our souls of the necessity of our
practice of these four duties, the due and conscionable performance whereof
would exceedingly conduce to our peace.

1. Order, a just and due distinstion, and Imparity in respect of place and
office, as a thing Sacred, and at no hand to be violated; it being a thing
essential to a well constituted Body. There wust be Governors, and Governed:
some to command, and some to Obey; some to Guide, Teach and Instruct, some to
be Taught, to be lead, and to follow. This puts a beauty and luster upon the
Church; makes her Cant. 6.4.
Beautiful as Tirzah, comely as Jerusalem, and makes her hand strong against
her adversaries, as a well Marshalled Army. Destroy Order, and ye bring the
most potent Kingdom to a wilderness, and lay the most flourishing Church in
the dust. Parety, breeds nothing but contention, ubi par omnium potestas, impar
ingenium; and the end of Anarchy is confusion. It is Order, which supports a
Family, preserves a City, strengthens a Kingdom, upholds a Church, and
secures her peace. Excellently, and Rhetorically does Nazianzen Greg. Naz.
Orat. (...).
set forth the necessity of Order as to the beauty, and peace of the Church;
which is too often impared, through the dullness, laziness, and
carelessenesse of some, and the overmuch heat and fervor of others. Here we
find the benefit of Order, when there are some to quicken the dullness of the
one; and to allay the heat, and set bounds to the fervor of the other. Look
into the world, behold the way of nature, observe the dictates of Reason; look
up to the Heavens, and down again to the earth; there is Order in all (...). --
; Order among the intellectual, among the sensitive creatures: Order among the
Angels; in the Stars, as to their motion, magnitude, splendour, and mutual
aspects one to another; 1 Cor. 15.41.
one Glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of the Stars. -- He that
made all things of nothing, made them in Order, and placed them in Order being
made. Where Order (...). -- (...) --
is maintained, the universe stands fast in its strength, is preserved in its
beauty: This being destroyed, there follow Thunders and storms in the air,
Earthquakes in the land, Inundations of the Sea; Seditions in Cities and
houses, sicknesses in the bodies, sins in the souls of men. All which are
not names of Order and Peace, but of Trouble and Confusion. Again, Order is the
security of all, that existeth; therefore has God so appointed in his Church,
that some should be Pastors; some Shcep; some command; others obey: one as the
Head; some as Eyes, Hands, Feet, etc. All are of the same Body; yet all have
not the same Place, or Office: The Eye goes not, but directs; the Feet see
not; the Tongue hears not; nor does the Ear speak: but all in their own
place and Order. So in the Church, we are one hody, all joined to the Lord by
the same spirit; yet is there difference in our places: Governors
distinguished from Subjects; and the (...). --
guides also among themselves, for as much as 1 Cor. 14.32.
the spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets. Contend not,) says
he) when Saint Paul tells you God has set in his Church, first Apostles
secondarily Prophets, then Teachers etc. those distinct Orders, and offices.
All must not be Tongue, nor all Prophets (as he there goes on exactly agreeable
to the Apostles 1 Cor. 12.12. -- 31.
Doctrine) keep up Order, sacred and inviolate in the Church, and we preserve
our Peace. 2. 19.
Being placed in this Order, let us be especially careful of the duties and
works of our own place. To what purpose is Order, if we will observe none? To
what purpose distinct places and offices, if we strictly keep not to the works
of those places where we are set? Never expect peace, while we do (...), 1 Pet.
4.15.
act as an over-busie Bishop in another Diocese; and Poly-pragmatically busy
our selves in other men's matters, offices, and places. They are noted as
disorderly walkers (...), 2 These. 3.11.
, who are idle, careless, do nothing of their own works; but are over-workers,
too too busy in things which do not concern them, and in works to which they
are not called: and it will be strange if they be not found evil-workers also.
The Apostle -- (...). 1 Pet 4.15.
puts them together as very near of kin. These are the constant Seedsmen of
Rebellion and Sedition in the State; of Schism and Contention in the Church.
This therefore is the strict charge of the Gospel, that 1 Cor. 7.20, 24.
every one abide in his own place: and in doing the works of that place, Phil.
2.12.
work out his own salvation: He must bear his own Gal. 6.4, 5.
burden; it will be then his wisdom to employ himself in doing and proving his
own works. This is the way to quietness and peace, in the Apostles account,
who gives this Order in the Church. That all men 1 These. 4.11
study to be quiet, and to do their own business. 3. obey our Superiors in
all things, where we should not sin against God. This follows upon the
former. If ORDER be of God, (as no doubt it is, he has commanded some to Rule,
some to obey) then whilst we are under command, a necessity of obedience is
laid upon us by the same God. It is not our work, to examine whether our
Governors discharge the duty of their places; but to see that we do our own.
We are not called to examine what power they have in every thing to command;
nor does it concern us to enquire, whether all these impositions, and strict
injunctions of such Circumstances, Rites or Forms be justly laid upon us by
them; they shall bear their own burden; and if they have not well used their
Authority, they alone shall be accountable. But all that we have to do, is to
consider how far we may obey: howsoever they may mistake in imposing, yet we
are to look how far we may comply with the things, when they are imposed.
When the Gospel has laid such an indispensible obligation upon us to obey our
lawful Superiors in all lawful things; if we would preserve our peace, let
us look upon a due obedience, as a thing so sacred, that no lower matter than
sin against the most high God may excuse us from it. 4. peace be sacred; and
that with difference of opinions we maintain Love and Charity. Particular
judgments, and the interest of an opinion, especially in matters of
circumstance, are but private things; and concern but particular persons. But
peace and love is the interest of the body; it concerns the public profit,
and the good, yea, the very being of the Church: for it is not a Church, unless
united and embodied. It is not possible that we should all see with the same
eyes; or, that every thing should have the same relish, and savor to every
palate; that all men should be of the same judgment; All are not perfect: yet
it is not only possible but a duty, that we should all be of one heart Jer.
32.39. Acts 4.32. Phil. 2.2.
, and walk in one way, and bear the same affections of love one to another.
Some are weak, others strong; but let not the strong despise Romans 14.3, 10.
the weak, nor the weak judge the strong: so shall both together maintain a
peaceable Communion. There may be variety of Ceremonies, and about these,
variety of opinions; yet when love is continued, that variety commends the
unity of faith. Faith is the bond, that binds Christians in one body, and this
must be the same, can be but one: but variety of opinions (if without
pertinacy, and in lower matters) may well stand with unity: But nothing is so
contrary to the Church as schism and division. There were in the ancient
Churches as great differences in such matters, as about Easter, Fasting, etc.
and yet they maintained love among themselves: Irenaeus sharply reproving
Victor for breaking peace, by excommunicating the Eastern Churches, (over which
he had no power) for the only difference in a circumstance of a day. It was the
Character of the Christians in those days, that Christiani amant, paene
antequam norunt. Tertul. alicubi.
They loved one another, before they knew one another. Though they knew not one
another by face, though they varied in their several Rites, yet they loved one
another as Christians. What Basil the Great says of (...). Basil. apud. Greg.
Nazian. in Epitaph.
Faith, the same says Chrysostom (...). Chrysostom. in Heb. Hom. 31.
of Love and Peace, that they are the Badges of Christians, the Characters of
Christianity. For the truth is, if in these low things we cannot bear one with
another; if we cannot love our Brethren, because in all things they will not,
or cannot be of our mind; if we shall continue to hate and revaile one another,
and give way to such animosities and contentions, for the business of a
Ceremony, for matters only of Order and Circumstance; howsoever we may bear on
our selves, and profession the Name of Christ, yet really shall we be (as
Nazianzen upon another account says of Nazianz. Onat. in praesent. 150. Episc.
-- (...).
Valens the Arrian) A reproach to Christians. I heartily pray, that the Lord
would at length give us better, more humble, and charitable spirits, that
howsoever we do, and may differ in some notions, and in our judgments about
some practices, which are confessed to be neither of the Foundation of
Religion, nor the essentials of Worship; we may yet keep close to that genuine
Ephesians. 4.2, 3.
Apostolical Canon: To forbear one another in love, and so, to keep the unity
of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.
these Rules, and conscionably practice all these duties, (and really, Duties
they all are, to which we are obliged) then the matter of Forms, Rites,
Ceremonies will not not trouble us; all rents will be made up, divisions
prevented, contention banished from our Churches, and confusion from our
Assemblies: Then shall we live as Brethren, as Christians; and it shall be
beyond the powers of Hell to interrupt, much more to overturn our Peace: Then
shall we again Psalm. 42.4.
Go together to the House of God, with the voice of joy and praise, and not
scruple the Form of the Service, or, Order of Worship. We have not all attained
to the same perfections, the same measure of knowledge, grace, or strength;
But, Phil. 3.15.
Let as many as be perfect be thus minded; even, go onward still, that we may
perfectly Phil. 3 10.
know Christ, and the power of his Resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, etc. and despising all disputes about these unnecessary things,
strive with all earnestness to lay hold on the reward prepared, that Caeleste
Brabaeum, Ibid. verse. 14.
The prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus. In the mean time, live
as Brethren, in the same Communion, and Ibid. verse. 16.
Whereunto we have already attained, let us all walk by the same rule, let US
MIND THE SAME THINGS. And Gal. 6.16.
To as many as walk according to this Rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

Now, 2 These. 3.16.
The Lord of peace himself, give us peace always by all means: even for his
sake, who is the Isai. 9.6.
Prince of peace, and Colos. 1.20.
has made peace for us with the Father by the Blood of his Cross, Jesus
Christ the righteous.

And, Thou, O God of peace, Heb. 13.20, 21.
who broughtest again from the dead the Lord Jesus, that Great Shepherd of the
Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make us, every one
perfect in every good work to do thy will, working in us that which is well
pleasing in thy sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and
ever. Amen.

(...). Vid. Lil. Gyrald. in Pythagor. Symbol. in conclusione.

In Part 3. Chap. 2.. 21.
After these words -- After Supper, in the dusk of the evening, or within night
-- add this in a Parenthesis -- (and really, if the practice of Christ in the
first Institution oblige us to his Gesture; the argument seems much more strong
to oblige us to the time, which St Paul (who speaks not a word of the Gesture)
does again expressly take notice of, when he is instructing the Corinthians in
the right use of that Sacred Ordinance; wherein yet we vary, nor does any, that
I know, condemn us for so doing.)

FINIS.
The have of the Press has caused some Errata. Mistakes and mispointings will
soon be discovered, and I hope excused.
Page 2 l 34. r. who is. 15. l. 3. omen. 79. l. 14. none. 166. l. 28. prudence.
250. mar. at the letter o for Genesis r. Jonah. 255.. 19. for Fasts r. Feasts.
262. l. 8. for things r. times. 271. l. 23. for by r. but. 275. l. ult. for
nothing else r. nothing less. 278. l. 1. for indifferent r. different. 279. for
Cropus r. Corpus. 293. for sing r. Sign. 298. for work r. word.

The Greek will be glad of a critical Reader sometimes to rectify a letter,
and the Hebrew hopes for the same.


