Clayton Mayor.
Martis quarto die Maij 1680. Annoque Regis Caroli secundi, Angliae, etc.
xxxii.
THis Court does earnestly desire the Reverend Dr. Stillingfleet, Dean of St.
Paul's to Print his Sermon Preached at the Guild Hall Chapel on Sunday Morning
last, with what further he had prepared to deliver at that time.

Wagstaff.

THE Mischief of Separation.

A SERMON Preached at GUILD HALL CHAPEL, May II. MDCLXXX. Being the First
Sunday in EASTER-TERM, Before the Lord Mayor, etc.

By Edw. Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard,
and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1680.

TO THE Right Honorable Sr. Robert Clayton LORD MAYOR of the City of LONDON.
My Lord,
IN obedience to Your Lordships Order I now present to Your hands, not only the
Sermon You lately heard, but those Additions, which the straits of time would
not then permit me to deliver. In all which, I was so far from intending to
stir up the Magistrates and Judges to a Persecution of Dissenters, as some ill
men have reported, that my only design was to prevent any occasion of it, by
finding out a certain foundation for a lasting Union among our selves. Which is
impossible to be attained, till men are convinced of the Evil and Danger of the
present Separation; it being carried on by such Principles as not only
overthrow the present Constitution of our Church, but any other whatsoever.
For, if it be lawful to separate on a pretense of greater Purity, where there
is an Agreement in Doctrine, and the substantial Parts of Worship, as is
acknowledged in our Case; then a bare difference of opinion as to some
circumstances of Worship and the best constitution of Churches will be
sufficient ground to break Communion and to set up new Churches: Which
considering the great variety of men's fancies about these matters, is to make
an infinite Divisibility in Churches, without any possible stop to farther
Separation. But, if after themselves are pleased with condescensions to their
own minds, any think it fit that others should be tied up, notwithstanding
their dissatisfaction; the world will judge it too great partiality in them to
think that none ought to separate but themselves, and that the same Reason will
hold against themselves in the judgment of others; it thereby appearing, that
it is not Uniformity they dislike, but that they do not prescribe the Terms of
it.

But, my Lord, I intend not to argue the Case of Separation here, (which is at
large done in the following Discourse) but only to show, how necessary it was
in order to the laying a Foundation for Peace and Unity, to have this matter
thoroughly discussed. And if once the People be brought to understand and
practice their duty as to Communion with our Churches, other Difficulties which
obstruct our Union will be more easily removed.

I have endeavored to pursue my design in a way suitable to the nature of it,
without sharp and provoking reflections on the Persons of any; which often set
Friends at distance, but never reconciled or convinced Adversaries. However, I
must expect the Censures of such who either make our Divisions, or make use of
them for their own ends: but I am contented to be made a sacrifice, if thereby
I might close up the Breaches among us.

God Almighty bless this great City and Your Lordships care in the Government
of it; and grant that in this our day, we may yet know the things that belong
to our Peace, and to the Preservation of the true Protestant Religion among us.

I am, my Lord, Your Lordships most faithful and obedient Servant, Edward
Stillingfleet.

PHIL. III. 16. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained, let us walk by
the same rule, let us mind the same things.
ALthough the Christian Religion does lay the greatest obligations on mankind
to Peace and Unity, by the strictest commands, the highest examples, and the
most prevailing arguments; yet so much have the passions and interests of men
overswai'd the sense of their duty, that as nothing ought to be more in our
wishes, so nothing seems more remote from our hopes, than the universal Peace
of the Christian World. Not that there is any impossibility in the thing, or
any considerable difficulty, if all men were such Christians as they ought to
be; but as long as men pursue their several factions and designs under the
color and pretense of zeal for Religion; if they did not find Names and
Parties ready framed, that were suitable to their ends, the difference of their
designs would make them. So that till men's corruptions are mortified, and their
passions subdued to a greater degree than the world has yet found them, it is
in vain to expect a state of peace and tranquillity in the Church. We need not
go far from home for a sufficient evidence of this; for although our
differences are such as the wiser Protestants abroad not only condemn but
wonder at them; yet it has hitherto puzzled the wisest persons among us to
find out ways to compose them; not so much from the distance of men's opinions
and practices, as the strength of their prejudices and inclinations. Judges 5.
15, 16.
What those divisions of Reuben of old were, which caused such thoughts and
searching of heart, we neither well understand, nor does it much concern us:
but the continuance, if not the widening, of these unhappy breaches among our
selves do give just cause for many sad reflections. When neither the miseries
we have felt, nor the calamities we fear; neither the terrible judgments of
God upon us, nor the unexpected deliverances vouchsafed to us, nor the common
danger we are yet in, have abated men's heats, or allayed their passions, or
made them more willing to unite with our established Church and Religion. But
instead of that, some rather stand at a greater distance if not defiance, and
seem to entertain themselves with hopes of new revolutions; others raise fresh
calumnies and reproaches, as well as revive and spread abroad old ones; as
though their business were to make our breaches wider, and to exasperate men's
spirits against each other; at such a time, when Reason and common security,
and above all our Religion obliges us to follow after the things that make for
peace, Romans 14. 19.
and things wherewith one may edify another; and not such as tend to our
mutual destruction; as most certainly our divisions and animosities do. Yet all
parties pretend to a zeal for Peace, so they may have it in their own way; by
which it appears that it is not Peace they aim at but Victory; nor Unity so
much as having their own wills. Those of the Roman Church make great boasts of
their Unity and the effectual means they have to preserve it; but God deliver
us from such cruel ways of Peace, and such destructive means of Unity as
Treachery and Assassinations, and an Inquisition. Their feet are swift to shed
blood; Romans 3. 15, 16, 17.
destruction and misery are in their ways; and the way of Peace they have not
known. But it were happy for us, if all those who agree in renouncing the
Errors and Corruptions of the Roman Church, could as easily join together in
the great duties of our common Religion, that is, in our Prayers, and Praises,
and Sacraments, and all solemn acts of Divine Worship. For this would not only
take off the reproach of our Adversaries, who continually upbraid us with our
Schisms and Separations, but it would mightily tend to abate men's passions, and
to remove their prejudices, and to dispose their inclinations, and thereby lay
a foundation for a blessed Union among our selves. Which would frustrate the
great design of our enemies upon us, who expect to see that Religion destroyed
by our own folly, which they could not otherwise hope to accomplish by their
utmost care and endeavor. And we may justly hope for a greater blessing of God
upon us, when we offer up our joint Prayers and Devotions to him, 1 Timothy 2. 8.
lifting up, as St. Paul speaks, holy hands without wrath and disputing. This
is therefore a thing of so great consequence to our Peace and Union, that tends
so much to the Honor of God, and our common Safety and Preservation; that no
person who has any real concernment for these things, can deny it to be not
only just and fitting, but in our circumstances necessary to be done, if it can
be made appear to be lawful, or that they can do it with a good Conscience.

And this is the subject I design to speak to at this time; and for that
purpose have made choice of these words of the Apostle, Nevertheless, whereto
we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule, let us mind the same
things.

For our better understanding the full scope and meaning of the Apostle in
these words, we are to consider, that an unhappy Schism, or wilful breach of
the Churches Unity, had begun in the Apostles times, upon the difference that
arose concerning the necessity of keeping the Law of Moses. And that which made
the Schism the more dangerous, was that the first beginners of it pretended a
Commission from the Apostles themselves at Jerusalem, Act. 15. 2^*
and were extremely busy and industrious to gain and keep up a party to
themselves in the most flourishing Churches planted by the Apostles. At Antioch
they bore so great a sway, that St. Peter himself complied with them, Gal. 2.
12* 13*
and not only other Jews, but Barnabas also was carried away with their
dissimulation. Insomuch that had it not been for the courage and resolution of
St. Paul, all the Gentile Christians had been either forced to a compliance
with the Jews, or to a perpetual Schism, (of which St. Peter had been in
probability the Head, and not of the Churches Unity if St. Paul had not
vigorously opposed so dangerous a compliance) But finding so good success in
his endeavors at Antioch, he pursues those false Apostles, who made it their
business to divide and separate the Christians from each others Communion
through all the Churches, where they had, or were like to make any great
impression. He writes his Epistle to the Galatians purposely against them; he
warns the Christians at Rome of them. ^om. 16. 17.
Now I beseech you Brethren mark them which cause Divisions and Offenses
contrary to the Doctrine which you have learned, and avoid them. And because he
had understood they had been busy at Philippi to make a party there too,
therefore the Apostle to prevent their designs, makes use of this following
method.

1. He exhorts the Philippians to an unanimous and constant resolution, in
holding fast to the faith of the Gospel, in spite of all the threats and
malice of their enemies: ^hil. 1. 27, 28.
That ye stand fast in one spirit, with one mind, striving together for the
faith of the Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your adversaries. If once the
fears of troubles and persecutions make men afraid to own and maintain their
Religion; it will be an easy matter for their enemies first to divide, and
then to subdue them. But their courage and unanimity in a good Cause baffles
the attempts of the most daring Adversaries, and makes them willing to retreat
when they see they can neither disunite them nor make them afraid.

2. He beseeches them in the most vehement and affectionate manner, not to give
way to any differences or divisions among them, If there be therefore any
consolation in Christ, ^hil. 2. 1, 2.
if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and
mercies; fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love; being
of one accord, of one mind. As though he had said unto them, I have seen the
miserable effects of divisions in other Churches already; how our Religion has
been reproached, the Gospel hindered, and the Cross of Christ rendered of little
or no effect by reason of them; let me therefore entreat you, if you have any
regard to the Peace and Welfare of your own souls; if you have any sense of
your duty you owe to one another as members of the same body; if you have any
tenderness or pity toward me, avoid the first tendencies to any breaches among
you; entertain no unjust suspicions or jealousies of each other, show all the
kindness you are able to your fellow members; live as those that are acted by
the same soul ((...)) carry on the same design; and as much as possible prevent
any differences in opinions amongst you.

3. He warns them and gives cautious against some persons from whom their
greatest danger was, viz. such as pretended a mighty zeal for the Law: And very
well understanding the mischief of their designs under their specious
pretenses, he bestows very severe characters upon them, verse. 2. Beware of
Dogs, beware of evil workers, beware of the Concision. All which Characters
relate to the breaches and divisions which they made in the Christian Churches;
which like Dogs they did tear in pieces, and thereby did unspeakable mischief,
and so were evil workers; and by the Concision St. Chrysostom understands such
a cutting in pieces as tends to the destruction of a thing; and therefore,
says he, the Apostle called them (...): because they endeavored to cut in
pieces, and thereby to destroy the Church of God. But lest they should give out
that St. Paul spoke this out of a particular pique he had taken up against the
Law of Moses, he declares that as to the spiritual intention and design of the
Law it was accomplished in Christians, verse. 3. For we are the Circumcision
which worship God in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no
confidence in the flesh. And for his own part, he had as much reason to glory
in legal privileges as any of them all, verse. 4, 5, 6. but the excellency of
the Gospel of Christ had so prevailed upon his mind, that he now despised the
things he valued before, and made it his whole business to attain to the
glorious reward which this Religion promises. This he pursues from verse. 7, to
verse. 15.

4. Having done this, he persuades all good Christians to do as he did, verse.
15. Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded. But because many
disputes and differences as to opinion and practice might happen among them, he
therefore lays down two Rules for them to govern themselves by.

1. If any happened to differ from the body of Christians they lived with, they
should do it with great Modesty and Humility, not breaking out into factions
and divisions, but waiting for farther information, which they may expect that
God will give upon a diligent and sober use of the best means; And if in any
thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you. By leaving
them to Gods immediate care for farther illumination, he does not bid them
depend upon extraordinary revelation; but requires them to wait upon God in his
own way, without proceeding with the false Apostles to the ways of Faction and
Separation, and in the mean time to go as far as they could.

2. For those who were come to a firmness and settlement of judgment upon the
Christian principles, he charges them by all means to preserve Unity and Peace
among themselves. Whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same
rule, let us mind the same things.

Wherein the Apostle supposes two things.

I. The necessity of one fixed and certain Rule, notwithstanding the different
seize among Christians. Nevertheless, whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule.

II. The duty and obligation which lies upon the best Christians to observe it.
He does not speak to the ignorant and unthinking multitude; not to the
licentious rabble, nor to the carnal and worldly Church; which some think are
only desirous of Uniformity; but to the very best Christians; to those who had
got the start of others (as the words here signify) that they would be an
example of Peace and Unity to their Brethren.

I. The necessity of one fixed and certain Rule, notwithstanding the different
seize, of Christians. (...) which Phrase seems to be a continuation of
the former allusion to a Race. For as Eustathius observes, (...), Iliad. 3.
the first thing the Greeks were wont to do as to their exercises, was to
circumscribe the bounds within which they were to be performed. That which
fixed and determined these limits was called (...) by the Greeks, and Regula
and Lineae by the Latins: thence transilire lineas in Cicero is to commit a
fault, to break the bounds within which we are confined.

All the question is, what the Apostle means by this Rule, whether only a Rule
of Charity and mutual forbearance, with a liberty of different practice; or
such a Rule which limits and dermines the manner of practice. It cannot be the
former, because that is the case, the Apostle had spoken to just before. If in
any thing ye be otherwise minded; therefore now subjoining this with respect to
those who had gone beyond them, he does imply such an agreement and uniformity
of Practice as does lie in observing the same standing Rule. For which we must
consider, that they understood already what orders and directions he had given
them when a Church was first formed among them; and therefore when the Apostle
mentions a Rule without declaring what it was, we have reason to believe, it
was such a Rule which they very well knew, which he had given to them before.
So we find elsewhere the Apostle refers to such Rules of Government and Order,
which he had given to other Churches, and were already received and practiced
among them. For the Apostles did not write their Epistles for the founding of
Churches, but they were already in being; only they took notice of any
disorders among them, and reformed abuses, and left some things to their own
directions, when they should come among them. And the rest will I set in order
when I come. As the Lord has called every one, so let him walk; 1 Cor. 11. 34.
and so ordain I in all the Churches. Which shows that the Apostles did not
leave all persons to act as they judged fit, 1 Cor. 7. 17.
but did make Rules determining their practice, and obliging them to uniformity
therein. For might not men pretend that these were not things in themselves
necessary, and might be scrupled by some Persons, and therefore were not fit to
be imposed upon any? But I do not find that the Apostles on this account did
forbear giving Rules in such cases, and to oblige Christians to observe them;
and that not on the mere Authority of Apostles, but as Governors of Churches,
whose business it is to take care of the welfare and preservation of them.
There are many things which seem very little and inconsiderable in themselves,
whose consequence and tendency is very great; and the wisdom of Governors lies
in preventing the danger of little things, and keeping the zeal of well-meaning
persons within its due bounds. For, those who are engaged below in the Valley,
fighting in small parties, and pursuing their advantages, do run into their
enemies Camp before they are aware of it, may receive an unexpected check from
their Commanders in chief, who from the higher ground epsy the hazard they are
in by their over-forwardness, and the arts which their enemies use in drawing
them into little Companies to fight separately, and the danger they may thereby
bring upon the whole Army; and therefore send them a peremptory order to give
over fighting by themselves and make good their retreat into the Body of the
Army: They wonder, they complain, they think themselves hardly used; but no
understanding man blames their Generals who regard their safety more than they
do themselves, and know the allowing them the Liberty they desire, would
endanger the destruction of them all. The Wisdom and Conduct of Governors, is
quite another thing from the Zeal and Courage of inferior Persons; who knowing
their own resolution and integrity, think much to be controlled; but those who
stand upon higher Ground and see further than they can do, must be allowed a
better capacity of judging what makes for the safety of the whole, than they
can have: and such things which they look on in themselves, and therefore think
them mean and trifling, the other look upon them in their consequence, and the
influence they may have upon the public safety. It were extremely desirable
that all good and useful men should enjoy as much satisfaction as might be, but
if it cannot be attained without running great hazards of unsettling all, it is
then to be considered, whether the general safety or some men's particular
satisfaction be the more desirable. And this is that, which the example of the
Apostles themselves gives us reason to consider, for although there were many
doubts and scruples in their times about several Rites and Customs, yet the
Apostles did give Rules in such cases, and bind Christians to observe them; as
we find in that famous decree made upon great deliberation, Act. 15. 28
in a Council of the Apostles at Jerusalem; wherein they determined those
things which they knew were then scrupled, and continued so to be afterward,
wherever the Judaizing Christians prevailed. But notwithstanding all their
dissatisfaction, the Apostles continued the same Rule; and S. Paul here
requires the most forward Christians to mind their Rule, and to preserve Peace
and Unity among themselves.

But does not S. Paul in the 14th Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans lay down
quite another Rule, viz. only of mutual forbearance in such cases, where men
are unsatisfied in conscience?

I answer, that the Apostle did act like a prudent Governor, and in such a
manner, as he thought, did most tend to the propagation of the Gospel, and the
good of particular Churches. In some Churches that consisted most of Jews, as
the Church of Rome at this time did, and where they did not impose the
necessity of keeping the Law on the Gentile Christians (as we do not find they
did at Rome) the Apostle was willing to have the Law buried as decently, and
with as little noise as might be; and therefore in this case, he persuades both
parties to Forbearance and Charity, in avoiding the judging and censuring one
another, Romans 14. ^, 6, 10.
since they had an equal regard to the honor of God in what they did. But in
those Churches, where the false Apostles made use of this pretense, of the
Levitical Law being still in force, to divide the Churches, and to separate the
Communion of Christians; there the Apostle bids them beware of them, and their
practices; as being of a dangerous and pernicious consequence. So that the
preserving the Peace of the Church, and preventing Separation was the great
measure, according to which, the Apostle gave his directions; and that makes
him so much insist on this advice to the Philippians, that whatever their
seize in Christianity were, they should walk by the same Rule, and mind
the same things.

II. We take notice of the Duty and obligation that lies upon the best
Christians, to walk by the same Rule, to mind the same things.

From whence arise two very considerable Enquiries.

1. How far the obligation does extend to comply with an established Rule, and
to preserve the Peace of the Church we live in?

2. What is to be done, if men cannot come up to that Rule? For the Apostle
speaks only of such as have attained so far; Whereto we have already attained,
let us walk by the same Rule.

1. How far the obligation does extend to comply with an established Rule, and
to preserve the Peace of the Church we live in? This I think the more necessary
to be spoken to, because I cannot persuade my self that so many scrupulous and
conscientious men as are at this day among us would live so many years in a
known sin; i. e. in a state of Separation from the Communion of a Church, which
in Conscience they thought themselves obliged to communicate with. It must be
certainly some great mistake in their judgments must lead them to this; (for I
am by no means willing to impute it to passion and evil designs) and out of the
hearty desire I have, if possible, to give satisfaction in this matter, I shall
endeavor to search to the bottom of this dangerous mistake, to which we owe so
much of our present distractions and fears.

But for the better preventing all misunderstanding the design of my
Discourse, I desire it may be considered

1. That I speak not of the Separation or distinct Communion of whole Churches
from each other; which according to the Scripture, Antiquity and Reason, have a
just Right and Power to Govern and Reform themselves. By whole Churches, I
mean, the Churches of such Nations, which upon the decay of the Roman Empire,
resumed their just Right of Government to themselves, and upon their owning
Christianity, incorporated into one Christian Society, under the same common
ties and Rules of Order and Government. Such as the Church of Macedonia would
have been, if from being a Roman Province it had become a Christian Kingdom,
and the Churches of Thessalonica, Philippi and the rest had united together.
And so the several Churches of the Lydian or Proconsular Asia, if they had been
united in one Kingdom, and Governed by the same Authority, under the same
Rules, might have been truly called the Lydian Church. Just as several Families
uniting make one Kingdom, which at first had a distinct and independent Power,
but it would make strange confusion in the world to reduce Kingdoms back again
to Families, because at first they were made up of them. Thus National Churches
are National Societies of Christians, under the same Laws of Government and
rules of Worship. For the true notion of a Church is no more than of a Society
of men united together for their Order and Government according to the Rules of
the Christian Religion. And it is a great mistake, to make the notion of a
Church barely to relate to Acts of Worship; and consequently that the adequate
notion of a Church, is an Assembly for Divine Worship; by which means they
appropriate the name of Churches to particular Congregations. Whereas, if this
held true, the Church must be dissolved as soon as the Congregation is broken
up; but if they retain the nature of a Church, when they do not meet together
for Worship, then there is some other bond that unites them; and whatever that
is, it constitutes the Church. And if there be one Catholic Church consisting
of multitudes of particular Churches consenting in one Faith; then why may
there not be one National Church from the consent in the same Articles of
Religion, and the same Rules of Government and Order of Worship? Nay, If it be
mutual consent and agreement which makes a Church, then why may not National
Societies agreeing together in the same Faith, and under the same Government
and Discipline, be as truly and properly a Church, as any particular
Congregation? For, is not the Kingdom of France as truly a Kingdom consisting
of so many Provinces; as the Kingdom of Ivetot once was in Normandy, Rob.
Coenalis Hist. Gallic. l. 2. p. 126.
which consisted of a very small territory? Among the Athenians, from whom the
use of the word (...) came into the Christian Church, it was taken for such an
Assembly, which had the Power of Governing and determining matters of Religion
as well as the affairs of State. For the Senate of 500 being distributed into
fifties according to the number of the Tribes, which succeeded by course
through the year; Iul. Pollux. Onomast. l. 8. c. 9. Schol. in Arist. Acharn.
Act. 1. s. 1.
and was then called (...); every one of these had 4 (...) Regular Assemblies;
in the last of which, an account of the Sacrifices was taken and of other
matters which concerned Religion; as in the Comitia Calata at Rome. From whence
we may observe, that it was not the meeting of one of the single Tribes, was
called (...), but the General Meeting of the Magistrates of the whole City and
the People together. And in this sense I shall show afterward, the word was
used in the first Ages of the Christian Church, as it comprehended the
Ecclesiastical Governors and the People of whole Cities; and why many of these
Cities being united under one Civil Government, and the same Rules of Religion
should not be called one National Church, I cannot understand. Sacrilegious
desertion, p. 35.
Which makes me wonder at those who say they cannot tell what we mean by the
Church of England; Separation yet no Schism, p. 59.
in short we mean, that Society of Christian People which in this Nation are
united under the same Profession of Faith, the same Laws of Government, and
rules of Divine Worship. And every Church thus constituted, we do assert to
have a just Right of Governing it self, and of reforming Errors in Doctrine and
Corruptions in Worship.

On which Ground, we are acquitted from the imputation of Schism in the
separation from the Roman Church, for we only resume our just Rights, as the
British Nation did, as to Civil Government, upon the Ruin of the Roman Empire.

2. I do not intend to speak of the Terms upon which Persons are to be admitted
among us to the Exercise of the Function of the Ministry; but of the Terms of
Lay-communion; i. e. those which are necessary for all Persons to join in our
Prayers and Sacraments and other Offices of Divine Worship. I will not say,
there has been a great deal of Art used to confound these two, (and it is
easy to discern to what purpose it is;) but I dare say, the Peoples not
understanding the difference of these two Cases has been a great occasion of
the present Separation. For in the Judgment of some of the most impartial men
of the Dissenters at this day, although they think the case of the Ministers
very hard on the account of Subscriptions and Declarations required of them;
yet they confess very little is to be said on the behalf of the People, from
whom none of those things are required. So that the People are condemned in
their Separation, by their own Teachers; but how they can preach lawfully to a
People who commit a fault in hearing them, I do not understand.

3. I do not confound bare suspending Communion in some particular Rites, which
persons do modestly scruple, and using it in what they judge to be lawful; with
either total, or at least ordinary forbearance of Communion in what they judge
to be lawful; and proceeding to the forming of Separate Congregations, i. e.
under other Teachers, and by other Rules than what the established Religion
allows. And this is the present case of Separation which I intend to consider,
and to make the sinfulness and mischief of it appear.

But that I may do it more convincingly, I will not make the difference wider
than it is; but lay down impartially the state of the present Controversy
between us and our dissenting Brethren, about Communion with our Churches.

1. They unanimously confess they find no fault with the Doctrine of our
Church, Peace Offering in the name of the Congregational party, A. D. 1667. p.
10, 11.
and can freely subscribe to all the Doctrinal Articles; nay they profess
greater zeal for many of them, than, say they, some of our own Preachers do.
Well then! The case is vastly different as to their separation from us, Baxters
Defense of his Cure, p. 64.
and our separation from the Church of Rome; for we declare, if there were
nothing else amiss among them, Separation yet no Schism, p. 60.
their Doctrines are such, as we can never give our assent to.

2. Discourse concerning Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity, 1672. p. 84,
85, 86.
They generally yield, that our Parochial Churches are true Churches; and it is
with these their Communion is required. They do not deny that we have all the
essentials of true Churches, true Doctrine, true Sacraments, and an implicit
Covenant between Pastors and People. And some of the most eminent of the
Congregational way have declared; that they look upon it as an unjust calumny
cast upon them, See Corbet of Schism, p. 41.
that they look on our Churches as no true Churches.

3. Many of them declare, Baxters Defense of his Cure, p. 38.
that they hold communion with our Churches to be lawful. Yea we are told in
Print, by one then present, that A. D. 1663. diverse of their Preachers in
London met to consider, how far it was lawful, or their duty to communicate
with the Parish-Churches where they lived, in the Liturgy and Sacraments; and
that the Relator brought in twenty Reasons to prove that it is a duty to some
to join with some Parish-Churches three times a year in the Lords Supper; after
he had not only proved it lawful to use a form of Prayer, and to join in the
use of our Liturgy, but in the participation of the Sacrament with us; and no
one of the Brethren, he adds, seemed to dissent, but to take the Reasons to be
valid. Such another meeting, ^^^a for ^^ace, p. (...).
we are told, they had after the Plague and Fire, at which they agreed that
Communion with our Churches was in it self lawful and good. Who could have
imagined otherwise, than that after the weight of so many Reasons, and such a
general consent among them, they should have all joined with us in what
themselves judged to be lawful, and in many cases a duty? But instead of this,
we have rather since that time found them more inclinable to courses of
separation, filling the people with greater prejudices against our Communion,
and gathering them into fixed and separate Congregations; which have proceeded
to the choice of new Pastors upon the death of old ones; and except some very
few, scarce any, either of their Preachers or People here, come ordinarily to
the public Congregations. And this is that which at present we lament as a
thing which unavoidably tends to our common ruin, if not in time prevented;
for by this means the hearts of the People are alienated from each other, who
apprehend the differences to be much greater than their Teachers will allow,
when they are put to declare their minds; and our common enemies take as much
advantage from our differences, as if they were really far greater than they
are.

But you may ask, what then are the grounds of the present Separation? for that
there is such a thing is discernible by all, but what the reasons of it are is
hard to understand after these concessions; yet it is not conceivable that
conscientious men can in such a juncture of affairs persist in so obstinate and
destructive a course of separation, unless they had something at last fit to
answer the twenty Reasons of their own Brethren against it?

I have endeavored to give my self satisfaction in a matter of so great moment
to the Peace and Preservation of this Church, and consequently of the
Protestant Religion among us; which I never expect to see survive the
destruction of the Church of England.

And the utmost I can find in the best Writers of the several Parties, amounts
to these two things.

1. That although they are in a state of separation from our Church, yet this
separation is no sin.

2. That a State of Separation would be a sin, but notwithstanding their
meeting in different places, yet they are not in a state of Separation.

And herein lies the whole strength of the several Pleas at this day made use
of to justify the Separate Congregations: both which I shall now examine.

1. Some plead, that it is true they have distinct and separate Communions from
us, but it is no sin, or culpable separation so to have. For, say they, Our
Lord Christ instituted only Congregational Churches, Discourse
concerning-Evangelical Love, Church-Peace and Unity, p. 68.
or particular Assemblies for Divine Worship, which having the sole Church
power in themselves, they are under no obligation of Communion with other
Churches, but only to preserve Peace and Charity with them. And to this
doctrine, Baxters true and only way of Concord, A. D. 1680. p. 111.
others of late approach so near, that they tell us, that to devise new species
of Churches (beyond Parochial or Congregational) without Gods Authority, and to
impose them on the world (yea in his name) and call all Dissenters
Schismatics, is a far worse usurpation, than to make or impose new Ceremonies
or Liturgies. Which must suppose Congregational Churches to be so much the
Institution of Christ, that any other Constitution above these is both unlawful
and insupportable. Which is more than the Independent Brethren themselves do
assert.

But to clear the practice of Separation from being a sin on this account, two
things are necessary to be done.

1. To prove that a Christian has no obligation to external Communion beyond a
Congregational Church.

2. That it is lawful to break off Communion with other Churches, to set up a
particular independent Church.

1. That a Christian has no obligation to external Communion beyond a
particular Congregational Church. They do not deny, that men by Baptism are
admitted into the Catholic visible Church as Members of it; Evangelical Love,
etc. p. 49. 52.
and that there ought to be a sort of Communion by mutual Love among all that
belong to this Body: and to do them Right, p. 54.
they declare that they look upon the Church of England, or the Generality of
the Nation professing Christianity, to be as sound and healthful a part of the
Catholic Church, as any in the World. But then they say, Communion in
ordinances must be only in such Churches as Christ himself instituted by
unalterable Rules, p. 59.
which were only particular and Congregational Churches.

Granting this to be true, how does it hence appear not to be a sin to separate
from our Parochial Churches; which according to their own concessions have all
the Essentials of true Churches? And what Ground can they have to separate and
divide those Churches, which for all that we can see, are of the same nature
with the Churches planted by the Apostles at Corinth, Philippi or Thessalonica?
But I must needs say further, I have never yet seen any tolerable proof, that
the Churches planted by the Apostles were limited to Congregations. It is
possible, at first, there might be no more Christians in one City than could
meet in one Assembly for Worship; but where does it appear, that when they
multiplied into more Congregations, they did make new and distinct Churches,
under new Officers with a Separate Power of Government? Of this, I am well
assured, there is no mark or footstep in the New Testament, or the whole
History of the Primitive Church. I do not think it will appear credible to any
considerate man, that the 5000 Christians in the Church of Jerusalem made one
stated and fixed Congregation for divine Worship; not if we make all the
allowances for strangers which can be desired: but if this were granted, where
are the unalterable Rules that as soon as the company became too great for one
particular Assembly, they must become a new Church under peculiar Officers and
an independent Authority?

It is very strange, that those who contend so much for the Scriptures being a
perfect Rule of all things pertaining to Worship and Discipline, should be able
to produce nothing in so necessary a Point. If that of which we read the
clearest instances in Scripture, must be the Standard of all future Ages, much
more might be said for limiting Churches to private families, than to
particular Congregations. For, do we not read of the Church that was in the
House of Priscilla and Aquila at Rome; Romans 16. 3. 5.
of the Church that was in the House of Nymphas at Colosse; Colos. 4. 15
Philem. v. 2.
and in the House of Philemon at Laodicea? Why then should not Churches be
reduced to particular Families, when by that means they may fully enjoy the
Liberty of their Consciences, and avoid the scandal of breaking the Laws? But
if, notwithstanding such plain examples, men will extend Churches to
Congregations of many Families; why may not others extend Churches to those
Societies which consist of many Congregations? Especially considering, that the
Apostles when they instituted Churches, did appoint such Officers in them, as
had not barely a respect to those already converted, but to as many as by their
means should be added to the Church; as Clemens affirms in his Epistle; The
Apostles, says he, went about in Cities and Countries preaching the Gospel;
Clem. Ep. ad Corinth, p. 55.
and appointed their First Fruits, having made a spiritual trial of them, for
Bishops and Deacons, (...), of those who were to believe. From hence the number
of Converts were looked on as an accession to the Original Church, and were
under the care and Government of the Bishop and Presbyters, who were first
settled there. For although when the Churches increased, the occasional
meetings were frequent in several places; yet still there was but one Church,
and one Altar, and one Baptistry, and one Bishop, with many Presbyters
assisting him. And this is so very plain in Antiquity, as to the Churches
planted by the Apostles themselves in several parts, that none but a great
stranger to the History of the Church can ever call it in question. Vnicuique
civitati erat attri^uta certa regio, quae Presby^eros inde sumeret, and velut
corpori Ecclesiae illius accense^etur, Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 4. ^. 2.
I am sure Calvin, a person of great and deserved reputation among our
Brethren, looks upon this as a matter out of dispute among learned men, that a
Church did not only take in the Christians of a whole City, but of the adjacent
Country too: and the contrary opinion is a very novel and late fancy of some
among us, and has not age enough to plead a Prescription. It is true, after
some time in the greater Cities, they had distinct places allotted, and
Presbyters fixed among them; and such allotments were called Titles at Rome,
and Laurae at Alexandria, and Parishes in other places; but these were never
thought then to be new Churches, or to have any independent Government in
themselves; but were all in subjection to the Bishop and his College of
Presbyters, of which multitudes of examples might be brought from most
authentic Testimonies of Antiquity; if a thing so evident needed any proof at
all. And yet this distribution even in Cities was so uncommon in those elder
times, that Epiphanius takes notice of it as an extraordinary thing at
Alexandria; and therefore it is probably supposed there was no such thing in
all the Cities of Creet in his time. Petav. not. in Epiphan. haer. 69. n. 1.
And if we look over the ancient Canons of the Church, we shall find two things
very plain in them, (1.) That the notion of a Church was the same with that of
a Diocese; Canon. Nicaen. 6. 15, 16.
or such a number of Christians as were under the inspection of a Bishop.
Constan. c. 6.
(2.) That those Presbyters who rejected the Authority of their Bishop,
Chalced. 17. 20, 26.
or affected separate meetings, where no fault could be found with the Doctrine
of a Church, Antioc. c. 2.
were condemned of Schism. Codex Eccl.
So the followers of Eustathius Sebastenus, Afric. c. 53. c. 55.
who withdrew from the public Congregations on pretense of greater sanctity
and purity, in Paphlagonia, Council.
were condemned by the Council at Gangrae; Gangr. c. 6.
so were those who separated from their Bishops, Council. Constable. c. 6.
though otherwise never so orthodox, by the Council at Constantinople, Council.
Carthag. c. 10, 11.
and the Council at Carthage; wherein before St. Cyprian had so justly
complained of the Schism of Felicissimus and his Brethren, Cyprian. Ep. 40, 42.
who on pretense of some disorders in the Church of Carthage had withdrawn to
the Mountains; and there laid the Foundation of the Novatian Schism. But when
false Doctrine was imposed on Churches, Theod. Eccl. hist. l. 1. c. 22. l. 2.
c. 24. c. 17.
as by the Arian Bishops at Antioch, then the people were excused in their
separation; so at Rome when Felix was made Bishop; and at Sirmium when Photinus
published his Heresy; Vincent. c. 16.
but I do not remember one instance in Antiquity, wherein separation from
Orthodox Bishops and setting up Meetings without their Authority and against
their consent, was acquitted from the sin of Schism. Indeed some Bishops have
sometimes refused Communion with others upon great misdemeanors; as Theognostus
and St. Martin with the Ithacian party on the account of the death of
Priscillian; but this does not at all reach to the case of Presbyters
separating from Bishops, with whom they agree in the same Faith. The followers
of St. Chrysostom, did, I confess, continue their separate Meetings after his
banishment, and the coming in of Arsacius: but although they withdrew in his
time, being unsatisfied in the manner of his choice; yet when Atticus restored
the name of St. Chrysostom to the Diptychs of the Church, they returned to
communion with their Bishop, Baron. A. D. 404. n. 41. 412. n. 47.
as St. Chrysostom himself advised them (as appears by Palladius) which is far
from justifying the wilful separation of Presbyters and People from the
Communion of their Bishops, when they do agree in the same Faith.

2. But suppose the first Churches were barely congregational, by reason of the
small number of Believers at that time, yet what obligation lies upon us to
disturb the Peace of the Church we live in to reduce Churches to their
infant-state? They do not think it necessary to reduce the first Community of
Goods, which was far more certainly practiced, than Congregational Churches;
Joh. 13. 14.
they do not think it necessary to wash one another feet, although Christ did
it, and bad his Disciples do as he did: they believe that the first civil
Government was appointed by God himself over Families; do they therefore think
themselves bound to overthrow Kingdoms to bring things back to their first
institution? If not, why shall the Peace of the Church be in so much worse a
condition than that of the Civil-state? It is very uncertain whether the
Primitive form were such as they fancy; if it were, it is more uncertain
whether it were not so from the circumstances of the times, than from any
institution of Christ; but it is most certainly our duty to preserve Peace and
Unity among Christians; and it is impossible so to do if men break all Orders
in pieces for the fancy they have taken up of a Primitive Platform. It is a
great fault among some who pretend to great niceness in some positive Duties,
that they have so little regard to comparative Duties: For that which may be a
duty in one case, when it comes to thwart a greater Duty, may be none. This
Doctrine we learn from our blessed Savior in the case of the obligation of the
Sabbath; Mat. 12. 7.
which he makes to yield to duties of Mercy. And can we think that a Duty lying
upon us, which in our circumstances makes a far greater Duty impracticable? Is
there any thing Christ and his Apostles have charged more upon the Consciences
of all Christians, than studying to preserve Peace and Unity among Christians?
Romans 14. 19.
This is that we must follow after, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11.
even when it seems to fly from us; this is that, we must apply our minds to,
Phil. 3. 15. 2. 3.
and think it our honor to promote; this is that which the most perfect
Christians are the most zealous for; Ephesians. 4. 2, 3.
this is that, for the sake of which we are commanded to practice meekness,
humility, patience, self-denial and submission to Governors. Heb. 13. 17.
And after all this, can we imagine the attaining of such an end should depend
upon men's conjectures, whether five thousand Christians in times of persecution
could make one Assembly for Worship? Or whether all the Christians in Ephesus
or Corinth made but one Congregation? On what terms can we ever hope for Peace
in the Church, if such Notions as these be ground enough to disturb it? What
stop can be put to Schisms and Separations, if such pretenses as these be
sufficient to justify them? Men may please themselves in talking of preserving
Peace and Love under separate Communions; but our own sad experience shows the
contrary; for as nothing tends more to unite men's hearts than joining together
in the same Prayers and Sacraments; so nothing does more alienate men's
affections, than withdrawing from each other into separate Congregations. Which
tempts some to spiritual Pride and scorn and contempt of others, as of a more
carnal and worldly Church than themselves; and provokes others to lay open the
follies, and indiscretions and immoralities of those who pretend to so much
Purity and Spirituality above their Brethren.

2. Others confess, True way of Concord, part 3. chapter 1. Sect. 40.
that to live in a state of separation from such Churches, as many at least of
ours are, were a sin; for they say, that causeless renouncing Communion with
true Churches is Schism, especially if it be joined with setting up
Anti-Churches unwarrantably against them; but this they deny that they do,
although they Preach when and where it is forbidden by Law; and worship God,
and administer Sacraments by other Rules and after a different manner than what
our Church requires. This is not dealing with us with that fairness and
ingenuity which our former Brethren used; for they avow the fact of separation,
but deny it to be sinful; these owning it to be sinful, have no other refuge
left but to deny the fact, which is evident to all Persons. For do they not do
the very same things and in the same manner, that the others do; how comes it
then to be separation in some and not in others? They are very unwilling to
confess a separation, because they have formerly condemned it with great
severity; and yet they do the same things for which they charged others as
guilty of a sinful separation.

For, the Assembly of Divines urged their dissenting Brethren to comply with
their Rules of Church Government, and charged them with Schism if they did it
not; whereas they only desired to enjoy such liberty as to their separate
Congregations, as is now pleaded for by our dissenting Brethren. Papers for
Accommodation, printed 1648. p. 16. p. 20, 21.
This, say they, would give countenance to a perpetual Schism and Division in
the Church, still drawing away some from the Churches under the Rule, which
also would breed irritations between the Parties; and would introduce all
manner of Confusion. And they thougt it a very unreasonable thing for them to
desire distinct and separated Congregations, as to those parts of worship where
they could join in Communion with them: and they thought no Person was to be
indulged as to any Error or Scruple of Conscience; P. 22.
but with this Proviso, that in all other parts of worship they join with the
Congregation wherein they live; and be under the Government to be established.
To this the dissenting Brethren answered, P. 25.
that such a variation, or forbearance could neither be a Schism, nor endanger
it; and that the great cause of Schism has been a strict obligation of all to
Uniformity; that as long as in their separate Congregations they did practice
most of the same things, and the most substantial in their Rule, it could not
be called a total separation, especially considering, that they professed their
Churches to be true Churches; and that they had occasional Communion with them,
P. 28, 29, 30.
which is the very same Plea made use of at this day among us. To which the
Assemblies party smartly replied, that since they acknowledged their Churches
to be so true, P. 47.
that they could occasionally join in all Acts of worship, they conceived they
were bound to act with them in joint Communion by one Common Rule, and not by
different Rules and in separated Congregations. P. 55.
And they add, that to leave all ordinary Communion in any Church with dislike,
when opposition or offense offers it self, is to separate from such a Church in
the Scripture sense; such separation was not in being in the Apostles times,
unless it were used by false Teachers; all who professed Christianity held
Communion together, as in one Church, notwithstanding differences of Judgment,
P. 56.
or corruptions in Practice; and that, if they can hold occasional Communion
without sin, they know no reason why it may not be ordinary without sin too,
and then separation would be needless. To which they subjoin these remarkable
words, which I heartily wish our Brethren at this day would think seriously
upon, To separate from those Churches ordinarily and visibly with whom
occasionally you may join without sin, seemth to be a most unjust separation.
So that whatever false colors and pretenses some men make use of to justify
their present practice, if the judgment of their own Brethren may be taken
upon the most weighty debate, and most serious deliberation, it is no better
than plain and downright separation. And I must needs say, I never saw any
Cause more weakly defended, no, not that of Polygamy and Anabaptism, than that
of those, who allow it to be lawful to join in Communion with us, and yet go
about to vindicate the separate Meetings among us, from the guilt of a sinful
separation. For although they allow our Churches to be true, and that it is
lawful to communicate with them, which is the most plausible Plea they have,
this is so far from extenuating, that it does aggravate the fault; for as the
Brethren of the Assembly said, Though they do not pronounce an affirmative
Judgment against us; P. 71.
yet the very separating is a tacit and practical condemning of our Churches,
if not as false, yet as impure.

But whatever may be said as to other Pleas for their present practices, my
Text seems to afford the strongest of all, viz. that men are to be pressed to
go no farther than they have already attained, and not to be strained up to an
uniformity beyond the dictates of their Consciences, but to be let alone, as
the Apostle directs in the foregoing verse, If any one be otherwise minded, he
must be left to God, and that manifestation of his will, which he will be
pleased to give him.

The clearing of this will give a full answer to the second enquiry, viz.

2. What is to be done, if men cannot come up to the Rule prescribed.

To this therefore I answer in these particulars.

1. This can never justify men in not doing what they lawfully may do. For
this Rule of the Apostle makes Communion necessary, as far as it is lawful; and
that upon the account of the general obligation lying upon all Christians to do
what in them lies for preservation of the Peace of the Church. Therefore as far
as ye have attained walk by the same Rule, do the same things; which words,
says Cajetan, the Apostle subjoyns to the former, left the persons he there
speaks to should think themselves excused from going as far as they can as to
the same Rule. Which plainly shows that men are bound in Conscience to go as
far as they can; and I cannot see how it is consistent with that tenderness of
Conscience which our Brethren pretend to, for so many of them to live so many
years in a neglect of that Communion with our Church, which themselves judge to
be lawful.

I dare say, if most of the Preachers at this day in the separate Meetings were
soberly asked their judgments, whether it were lawful for the People to join
with us in the public Assemblies, they would not deny it; and yet the People
that frequent them, generally judge otherwise. For it is not to be supposed,
that faction among them should so commonly prevail beyond interest; and
therefore if they thought it were lawful for them to comply with the Laws, they
would do it. But why then is this kept up as such a mighty secret in the
breasts of their Teachers? Why do they not preach it to them in their
Congregations? Is it for fear, they should have none left to preach to? that is
not to be imagined of mortified and conscientious men. Is it lest they should
seem to condemn themselves, while they preach against Separation in a Separate
Congregation?

This, I confess, looks oddly, and the tenderness of a man's mind in such a
case, may out of mere shamefacedness keep him from declaring a Truth which
flies in his face, while he speaks it.

Is it that they fear the reproaches of the People? which some few of the most
eminent persons among them, have found they must undergo if they touch upon
this Subject (for I know not how it comes to pass, that the most Godly People
among them, can the least endure to be told of their faults.) But is it not as
plainly written by S. Paul, Gal. 1. 10.
If I yet please men I should not be the Servant of Christ; as Woe be unto me
if I preach not the Gospel? If they therefore would acquit themselves like
honest and conscientious men, let them tell the people plainly that they look
on our Churches as true Churches, and that they may lawfully communicate with
us in Prayers and Sacraments; and I do not question but in time, if they find
it lawful, they will judge it to be their Duty. For it is the Apostles Command
here, Whereto we have already attained let us walk by the same Rule, let us
mind the same things.

2. If the bare dissatisfaction of men's Consciences do justify the lawfulness
of Separation, and breaking an established Rule, it were to little purpose to
make any Rule at all. Because it is impossible to make any, which Ignorant and
injudicious men shall not apprehend to be in some thing or other against the
dictates of their Consciences. But because what we say may not weigh so much
with them in this matter, as what was said on this Occasion by their own
Brethren in the Assembly, I shall give an account of their Judgment in this
matter.

The dissenting Brethren were not so much wantting to their Cause, as not to
plead tenderness of Conscience with as much advantage and earnestness as any
men now can do it. To which they answer,

1. That though tenderness of Conscience may justify non-communion in the
thing scrupled, Papers for Accommodation, p. 51. V. p. 61.
yet it can never justify Separation.

We much doubt, say they, whether such tenderness of Conscience, as arises out
of an opinion, cui potest subesse falsum, (which may be false) when the
Conscience is so tender, that it may be withal an erring Conscience, can be a
sufficient ground to justify such a material Separation, as our Brethren plead
for; For though it may bind, to forbear or suspend the Act of Communion in that
particular wherein men conceive they cannot hold Communion without sin (nothing
being to be done contrary unto Conscience) yet it does not bind to follow such
a positive prescript as possibly may be diverse from the Will and Counsel of
God, of which kind we conceive this of gathering Separated Churches out of
other true Churches to be one.

2. That it is endless to hope to give satisfation to erring Consciences. p. 66.
The Grounds, say they, upon which this Separation is desired, are such upon
which all other possible scruples which erring consciences may in any other
cases be subject unto, may claim the privilege of a like Indulgence. And so
this Toleration being the first, shall indeed but lay the Foundation and open
the gap, whereat as many divisions in the Church, as there may be scruples in
the minds of men, shall upon the self same equity be let in. And again, p. 68.
that this will make way for infinite Divisions and sub-divisions; and give
Countenance to a perpetual Schism, p. 73.
and Division in the Church.

3. That scruple of conscience is no protection against Schism; p. 68.
no cause of Separating; nor does it take off causeless Separation from being
Schism, p. 73.
which may arise from Errors of Conscience as well as carnal and corrupt
Reasons; and therefore they conceive the causes of Separation must be shown to
be such as ex natura rei will bear it out.

4. That the Apostles notwithstanding the differences of men's Judgments did
prescribe Rules of Uniformity. p. 111.
For, say they, they suppressed the contentions of men by the Custom of the
Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16. and ordain the same practice in all the
Churches, notwithstanding our Brethrens distinction of difference of light. 1.
Cor. 7. 17. And did not the Apostles bind the burden of some necessary things
on the Churches, albeit there were in those Churches gradual differences of
light?

5. That the Apostle by this Rule in the Text, p. 113, 114.
did not intend to allow Brethren who agree in all substantials of Faith and
Worship, to separate from one another, in those very substantials wherein they
agree. Is this, say they, to walk by the same Rule, and to mind the same
things, to separate from Churches in those very things wherein we agree with
them? p. 115.
We desire no more of them than we are confident was practiced by the Saints at
Philippi, namely to hold practical Communion in things wherein they doctrinally
agree.

6. That there is a great deal of difference between Tyranny over men's
Consciences, ibid.
and Rules of Uniformity. For the dissenting Brethren charged the Assembly,
with setting up an Uniformity for Uniformities sake, i. e. affecting Uniformity
so much, as not to regard men's Consciences; and without respect had to the
varieties of Light* in matters of a lesser nature; which, say they, will prove
a perfect tyranny, and it is in effect to stretch a low man to the same length
with a taller, or to cut a tall man to the stature of one that is low, for
Uniformities sake. To which the others answer, That they do not desire
Uniformity for the sake of Tyranny, but only for order, and order for
Edification. But for ought they could perceive, any thing that is One must be
judged the foundation of Tyranny (which are their own words.) p. 116.
As to variety of light, they desired their Brethren to answer them in this one
thing, whether some must be denied liberty of their Conscience in matter of
practice, or none? If none, then, say they, we must renounce our Covenant and
let in Prelacy again; and all others ways; if a denial of liberty unto some may
be just, then Uniformity may be settled notwithstanding variety of lights, p.
117.
without any Tyranny at all. As to their similitude, they grant it to be pretty
and plausible; but such arguments are popular and inartificial, having more of
flourish than substance in them. For did not they endeavor to raise lower
Churches to a greater height? would they permit other Church-Governments if it
were in their power, because men must not for Uniformities sake be pared or
stretched to the measure of other men? would they endure the lower suckers at
the root of their tree to grow till they had killed the tree it self? Ad
populum phaleras.

From whence we see the Church of England's endeavor after Uniformity is
acquitted from Tyranny over the Consciences of men by the Judgment of the most
learned of the Assembly of Divines; for such we do not question they chose to
manage this debate, upon which the turn of their whole affairs depended.

3. A wilful Error or mistake of Conscience does by no means excuse from sin.
Thus if a man think himself bound to divide the Church by a sinful Separation;
that Separation is nevertheless a sin for his thinking himself bound to do it.
Act. 26. 9.
For S. Paul thought himself bound to do many things against the name of Jesus
of Nazareth, yet he calls himself a blasphemer and the greatest of sinners, 1 Timothy 1. 13, 15.
for what he did under that obligation of Conscience. S. Joh. 16. 2.
The Jews thought themselves bound in Conscience to do God service, but it was
a horrible mistake, when they took killing the Apostles to be any part of it.
From whence it appears, that men may do very bad things, and yet think
themselves bound in Conscience to do them. I do not hence infer that the
pretense of Conscience is not to be regarded, because it may be abused to so
ill purposes; for no man that has any Conscience will speak against the Power
of it, and he that declares against it, has no reason to be regarded in what
he says. But that which ought to be inferred from hence, is, that men ought
not to rest satisfied with the present dictates of their Consciences, for
notwithstanding them, they may commit very great sins. I am afraid, the common
mistating the Case of an Erroneous Conscience has done a great deal of
Mischief to conscientious men, and betrayed them into great security, while
they are assured they do act according to their Consciences. For the question
is generally put, How far an Erroneous Conscience does oblige? And when men
hear that they must not act against their Consciences though they be mistaken,
they think themselves safe enough, and enquire no further. But if they would
consider, that no man's Conscience alters the nature of Good and Evil in things;
that what God has made a Duty or a Sin remains so, whatever a man's Conscience
does judge concerning them; that no man's Conscience can strictly oblige him
either to omit a Duty, or to commit a sin; the utmost Resolution of the Case
comes to this, That a man may be so perplexed and entangled by an erroneous
Conscience that he may be under a necessity of sinning, if he acts either with
or against it. Not that God ever puts a man under the necessity of sinning,
(for then it would be no sin to him, if it were unavoidable) but that by their
own neglect and carelessness, without looking after due information, and running
on with violent Prejudices, which was the case of S. Paul and the Jews (and I
wish it were not of many Christians) they may make false and rash judgments of
things, and so sin either in doing or not doing what their Consciences tell
them they are bound to do.

The most material Question then, in the case of an erroneous Conscience, is,
What Error of Conscience does excuse a man from Sin in following the Dictates
of it? For, if the Error be wholly involuntary; i. e. if it be caused by
invincible Ignorance, or after using the best means for due information of his
Conscience, though the Act may be a fault in it self, yet it shall not be
imputed to him as a Sin; because it wanted the consent of the Mind, by which
the Will is determined; but if men fall into Wilful Errors of Conscience; i. e.
if they form their Judgments rather by Prejudice and Passion and Interest than
from the Laws of God or just Rules of Conscience; if they do not examine things
fairly on both sides, praying for divine direction; if they have not patience
to hear any thing against their opinion, but run on blindly and furiously, they
may in so doing Act according to their Consciences, and yet they may be in as
great danger of committing heinous sins as S. Paul and the Jews were. Thus if
men through the Power of an Erroneous Conscience may think themselves bound to
make Schisms and Divisions in the Church, to disobey Laws and to break in
pieces the Communion of that Church, which they are, or ought to be members of,
they may satisfy themselves that they pursue their Consciences, and yet for
want of due care of informing themselves and judging aright, those very Actions
may be Wilful and Damnable Sins.

Nothing now remains but to make Application of what has been said to our own
Case. And that shall be to two sorts of Persons, 1. to those who continue in
the Communion of our Church, 2. to those who dissent from it.

I. To those who continue in the Communion of our Church. Let us walk by the
same Rule, and mind the same things. Let us study the Unity and Peace, and
thereby the Honor and Safety of it. While we keep to one Rule, all People know
what it is to be of our Church; if men set up their own fancies above the Rule,
they charge it with imperfection; if they do not obey the Rule, they make
themselves wiser than those that made it. It has not been either the Doctrine
or Rules of our Church which have ever given advantage to the Enemies of it;
but the indiscretion of some in going beyond them; and the inconstancy of
others in not holding to them.

Such is the Purity of its Doctrine, such the Loyalty of its Principles, such
the Wisdom, and Order, and Piety of its Devotions, that none who are true
Friends to any of these, can be enemies to it. Let us take heed we do not give
too much occasion to our enemies to think the worse of our Church for our
sakes. It is easy to observe, that most quarrels relating to Constitutions and
Frames of Government are more against Person than things; when they are
unsatisfied with their management, then they blame the Government; but if
themselves were in place, or those they love and esteem, then the Government is
a good thing, if it be in good men's hands. Thus do men's judgments vary as
their interests do.

And so as to Churches, we find Uniformity and Order condemned as Tyrannical,
till men come into Power themselves, and then the very same things and
arguments are used and thought very good and substantial, which before were
weak and sophistical. Those who speak now most against the Magistrates Power in
matters of Religion had ten substantial Reasons for it, ^nsw. to 2 Questions.
6, 9.
when they thought the Magistrate on their own side. Those who now plead for
Toleration, did once think it the Mother of Confusion, the Nurse of Atheism,
the inlet of Popery, the common Sink of all Errors and Heresies. But, if there
be not much to be said against the Churches Constitution, then they are ready
to lay load upon the Persons of the Governors and Members of it; and thence
pretend to a necessity of Separation for a purer Communion. Let us endeavor to
remove this objection, not by recrimination (which is too easy in such cases)
but by living suitably to our holy Religion, by reforming our own lives, and
redressing (what in us lies) the Scandals and Disorders of others. Let us by
the innocence and unblameableness of our lives, the life and constancy of our
devotions, the meekness and gentleness of our behavior in our own Cause, our
Zeal and Courage in Gods, add a luster to our Religion and bring others to a
Love of our Church.

II. To those who dissent from our Communion. Whether they hear, or whether
they will forbear, I cannot dismiss this subject, without offering some things
to them, 1. By way of Consideration. They that are ruled must consider, that
the best Policy or Constitution, so far as it is of man's regul^ting, has
defects and inconveniences, and affairs will be complicated; an^ therefore they
must not be too unyielding, but bear with what is tolerable, a^^ not easily
remediable. Corbett of the sound State of Religion, p. 75. 1679.
2. By way of Advice.


(1.) I shall offer these things to their Consideration.

1. Let them consider How many things must be born with in the Constitution of
a Church; which cannot be expected in this World to be without Spot or Wrinkle.
And if men will set themselves only to find faults, it is impossible, in this
state of things, they should ever be pleased. And if they separate where they
see any thing amiss, Ball against Can. p. 13.
they must follow his example who pursued this Principle so far, till he
withdrew from all Society, lest he should communicate with them in their Sin;
in which condition he continued till his Children lay dead in the house, and he
became utterly unable to help himself; and because no humane inventions were to
be allowed about the worship of God, he had cut out of his Bible the Contents
of the Chapters, and Titles of the Leaves, and so left the bare Text, without
Binding or Covers. This is the Case the rigid and impracticable principles of
some would bring our Churches to, by cutting off all Rules of Order and
Decency, as encroachments on the Institutions of Christ.

2. I desire them to consider how impossible it is to give satisfaction to all,
and how many things must be allowed a favorable interpretation in public
Constitutions and General Laws; which it is hardly possible so to frame, but
there will be room left for Cavils and Exceptions. Yea when the wisest and best
men have done their utmost, some of themselves confess, there may be
dissatisfaction still; and if Christian Humility, Charity and Discretion, will
then advise persons to acquiesce in their private security and freedom, A
discourse of the Religion of England in its due Latitude. Sect. 19.
and not to unsettle the public Order for their private satisfaction. Why
should not men practice the same virtues themselves; which they do confess,
will be necessary for some at last?

Wise and Good men will consider the difficulties that always attend public
Establishments; and have that esteem for Peace and Order, that they will bear
with anything tolerable for the sake of it. Such is the complicated condition
of humane affairs, that it is exceeding difficult to devise a Rule or Model
that shall provide for all whom Equity will plead for. Therefore the prudent
and sober will acquiesce in any constitution that is in some good sort
proportionable to the ends of Government. A Discourse of the Religion of
England, etc. Sect. 14. Printed 1667.
It is a very hard case with a Church when men shall set their Wits to strain
every thing to the worst sense, to stretch Laws beyond the intention and design
of them, to gather together all the doubtful and obscure passages in Calendars,
Translations, etc. and will not distinguish between their approbation of the
Use and of the Choice of things, for upon such terms as these men think to
justify the present Divisions. I much question, whether if they proceed in
such a manner, they can hold Communion with any Church in the Christian world.
See Baxters Cure of Divisions. p. 264.
If men be disposed to find faults, no Church can be pure enough; for something
will be amiss either in Doctrine, or Discipline, or Ceremonies, or Manners; but
if they be disposed to Peace and Union, then Charity will cover a multitude of
failing; and then according to S. Paul's Ephesians. 4. 2, 3.
advice, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in Love, they will be endeavoring to preserve the Unity of the Spirit
in the bond of Peace. And without the practice of the former Virtues, no
Metaphysical Discourses of Unity, will signify any thing to the Churches Peace.

3. They would do well to consider, How Separation of the People from our
Churches comes to be more lawful now, than in the days of our Fathers. It has
been often and evidently proved, that the most sober and learned
Non-conformists of former times, notwithstanding their scruples in some points,
Papers of Accommodation. p. 52.
yet utterly condemned Separation from our Churches as unlawful. And they
looked upon this, not as a mere common sin of humane infirmity, but as a wilful
and dangerous sin; in that it is so far from tending to the overthrow of
Antichrist, Ball against Can. Pref. p. 2.
that it upholds and maintains him; calling it a renting the Church, the
disgrace of Religion, the advancement of Pride, Schism and Contention, the
Offense of the Weak, the grief of the Godly, who be better settled, the
hardening of the Wicked, and the recovery or rising again of Antichristianism;
nay, even persecuting the Lord Jesus in his Host, which they revile in his
ordinances, which they dishonor; and in his Servants whose footsteps they
slander, whose Graces they despise, whose Office they trample upon with
disdain. These are the very words of one of the most learned and judicious
Nonconformists before the Wars. And surely the mischiefs that followed after,
could not make Separation to appear less odious. Was it a sin? was it such a
sin then? And is it none now? Either our Brethren at this day, do believe it to
be a Sin for the People to separate, or they do not: If not, it must either be,
that there are new and harder terms of Communion, which were not then; which is
so far from being true, that they confess them to be rather easier for the
People: or it must be, that they are gone off from the peaceable principles of
their Predecessors, which they are unwilling to own. If they do believe it to
be a Sin, why do they suffer the People to live in a known Sin? Why do they
encourage them by Preaching in Separate Congregations? Bradshaw against
Johnson. S. 40. 91.
For their Predecessor did not think it lawful much less a Duty, to preach when
forbidden by a Law: neither did they understand what warrant any ordinary
Minister has in such a case by Gods word, Gouges whole Armor of God. p. 570.
so to draw any Church or People to his private Ministry in opposition to the
Laws and Government he lived under. They understood the difference between the
Apostles cases and theirs; and never thought the Apostles Woe be unto me if I
preach not the Gospel, did extend to them; but thought that silenced Ministers
ought to live as private Members of the Church till they were restored, and the
People bound to learn. Of which there can be far less ground to dispute, when
themselves acknowledge the Doctrine by Law established to be true and found.

4. Lastly, Let me beseech them to consider the common danger that threatens us
all by means of our Divisions. Nothing that I know of in the world, does so
strongly tempt some sober conscientious men to think Popery necessary for the
Concord of Churches, and a violent Church Government necessary to our Peace, as
the woeful experience of the Errors and Schisms, the mad and manifold Sects that
arise among those that are most against them. Baxters last Answ. to Bagshaw. p.
30.
We have Adversaries subtle and Industrious enough to make use of all
advantages to serve their own ends; and there is scarce any other they promise
themselves more from, You little know what a pernicious design the Devil has
upon you, in persuading you to desire and endeavor to pull down the interest
of Christ and Religion, which is upheld in the Parish-Churches of this Land:
and to think that it is best to bring them as low in reality, or reputation as
you can, and to contract the Religious interest all into private meetings. Id.
p. 31. n. 25.
than the continuance of these breaches among our selves: This some of our
Brethren themselves have been aware of; and on that account have told the
People of the danger of the Principles of Separation, as to the interest of
Religion in general, and the Protestant Religion in particular among us.

Certainly, Nothing would tend more to our common security than for all true
and sincere Protestants to lay aside their prejudices, and mistakes, and to
join heartily in Communion with us: which many of their Teachers at this day
allow to be lawful. And how can they satisfy themselves in hazarding our
Religion by not doing that, which themselves confess lawful to be done?

(2.) But if we are not yet ripe for so great a mercy as a perfect Union, yet I
would entreat our Brethren to make way for it by harkening to these following
Advices.

1. Not to give encouragement to rash and intemperate zeal; which rends all in
pieces, and makes reconciliation impossible. Those who see least into things,
are usually the fiercest condenders about them: and such eager Disputants are
fitter to make quarrels than to end them; for they can be contentious for
Peace-sake, and make new differences about the ways of Unity. Wisdom and
Sobriety, a good judgment, a prudent temper, and freedom from prejudice will
tend more to end our differences, than warm Debates, and long Disputations;
which as Greg. Nazianzen said once of Councils, seldom have had any good end.
But there is a more fiery sort of zeal, and more dangerous than this; which may
lie smothering for a time, till it meets with suitable matter and a freer vent,
and then it breaks out into a dreadful flame. This we have already seen such
dismal effects of in this age, that we should think there were less need to
give men caution against it again, were it not to be feared, that where Reason
connot prevail, Experience will not. All that we can say to such persons that
may be like to move them, is, that if their blind zeal transport them, as it
did Sampson, to pull down the House over their Heads, they will be sure to
perish themselves in the fall of it; but here will lie the great difference of
the case, while they and their Friends perish together, the Philistims without
will rejoice to make others the instruments to execute their designs.

2. Not to be always complaining of their hardships and Persecutions; as though
no People had suffered so much since the days of Dioclesian; whereas the
severity of Laws has been tempered with so much gentleness in the execution of
them, that others have as much complained of Indulgence, as they of
Persecution. It does not look like the Patience, and Humility, and Meekness of
the Primitive Christians, to make such noise and outcries of their suffering so
much, when they would have been rather thankful that they suffered no more. Is
this the way to Peace, to represent their case still to the world in an
exasperating and provoking manner? Is this the way to incline their Governors
to more condescension, to represent them to the People as an Ithacian
persecuting Party? Where are the Priscillians that have been put to death by
their instigation? What do such insinuations mean, but that our Bishops are the
followers of Ithacius and Idacius in their cruelty; and they of the good and
meek Bishop S. Martin, who refused Communion with them on that account? If men
do entertain such kind thoughts of themselves, and such hard thoughts of their
Superiors, whatever they plead for, they have no inclination to Peace.

3. Not to condemn others for that which themselves have practiced, and think
to be lawful in their own cases. What outcries have some made against the
Church of England, as Cruel and Tyrannical, for expecting and requiring
Uniformity? And yet do not such men, even at this day, contend for the
Obligation of a Covenant, which binds men to endeavor after uniformity in
Doctrine, Discipline and Worship? Judge. 1. 7
But they want the ingenuity of Adonibezek, to reflect on the Thumbs and the
Toes, which they have cut off from others; and think themselves bound to do it
again, if it were in their power. Who could have been thought more moderate in
this way, than those who went upon the principles of the dissenting Brethren?
And yet we are assured, that even in New England, See Clarks Narrative of
New-Englands Persecution, A. D. 1651.
when their own Church Way was by Law established among them, they made it no
less than Banishment for the Anabaptists to set up other Churches among them,
or for any secretly to seduce others from the Approbation and use of
Infant Baptism. And how they have since proceeded with the Quakers, is very
well known. Nay, even these, notwithstanding the single Independency of every
man's light within him, have found it necessary to make Rules and Orders among
themselves to govern their Societies, to which they expect an uniform
Obedience; and allow no Liberty out of the Power and the Truth; See Spirit of
the Hat. ^. 12, etc.
as they love to speak. From all which it appears, the true Controversy is not
about the Reasonableness of Uniformity; but who shall have the Power of
prescribing the Rules of it. Is it not now a very hard case, that the Church of
England must be loaded with bitter reproaches, and exposed to the common hatred
of all Parties for the sake of that, which every one of them would practice if
it were in their Power; and think it very justifiable so to do?

4. Not to inflame the Peoples heats, by making their differences with the
Church of England to appear to be greater than they are. Let them deal honestly
and faithfully with them, by letting them understand that they look on our
Churches as true Churches, and occasional Communion at least with them to be
lawful: (and it is hard to understand, if occasional Communion be lawful, that
constant Communion should not be a Duty.) This were the way to abate men's great
prejudices, and to soften their Spirits, and to prepare them for a closer
Union. But if instead of this, they endeavor to darken and confound things,
and cast mists before their eyes, that they cannot see their way clear before
them; all understanding men will conclude, they prefer some little interests of
their own, before the honor of Christ and the Peace of his Church.

5. Not to harb^^ or foment unreasonable jealousies and suspicions in Peoples
minds concerning us. This has been one of the most successful arts of keeping
up the distance and prejudices that have been so great among us, viz. by
private whispers, by false suggestions, by idle stories, by unreasonable
interpretation of words beyond the intention and design of those who spoke
them. By such devices as these, great mischief has been done among us, and I
am much afraid, is doing still. For nothing sets men at a greater distance from
our Church, than the apprehending that we are not hearty and sincere in the
Protestant Cause: which although it be a most groundless and malicious calumny,
yet there have been some, who have had so little regard to Conscience, or
common ingenuity, as not only to charge particular Persons, but our Church it
self with Marching toward Popery. What injustice, what uncharitableness, what
impudence is it, to fasten such an imputation upon a Church that has hitherto
continued (and long may it do so) the chief Bulwark of the Protestant Cause?
Little do such persons consider, how much they serve the design of our enemies,
who cannot but be mightily pleased to find their most formidable adversaries
represented to the People as their Secret Friends.

6. Not to run the hazard of all for a show of greater Liberty to themselves.
For under this pretense our Adversaries endeavor to make them their
Instruments to bring upon our Necks (...) Yoke which neither we nor our Fathers
were able to bear. An universal Toleration is that Trojan Horse, which brings
in our enemies without being seen, and which after a long Siege they hope to
bring in at last under the pretense of setting our Gates wide enough open, to
let in all our friends.

And then think with your selves what advantages they will have above others;
considering some men's coldness and indifferency in Religion; others uncertainty
and running from one extreme to another; others easiness in being drawn away by
the hopes and fears of this world; which have a wonderful influence upon
changing men's opinions, even when they do not think it themselves. So that
those seem very little to understand mankind, who do not apprehend the
dangerous consequences of a general Toleration.

Those who pretend there is no danger, because by this means the Folly of their
Religion will be exposed, do not consider what a catching disease folly is; and
how natural it is for men that are fanciful in Religion to exchange one folly
for another. If all men were wise and sober in Religion, there would need no
Toleration; if they are not, we must suppose, if they had what they wished,
they would do as might be expected from men wanting Wisdom and Sobriety, i. e.
All the several Parties would be striving and contending with each other, which
should be uppermost, and gain the greatest interest.

And what would the fruit of all such contentions be, but endless disputes, and
exposing the follies of one another, And verily you will keep up the Papists
hope, that by an Universal Toleration, they may at last come in on equal Terms
with you, or by connivence, be endured as much as you. And if they be equal in
England with you, their transmarine advantages will make them more than equal,
notwithstanding their disadvantages in their cause, and their contrariety to
Kingly interest. Baxters last Answ. to Bagshaw. p. 31.
till at last Religion it self be sunk into the greatest contempt; or men,
through mere weariness of contending, be willing even to submit to Papal
Tyranny, because it pretends to some kind of Unity?

So that, upon the whole matter, if we would consult the Honor of God and
Religion, the Peace and Tranquillity of the Church we live in; if we would
prevent the great Designs of our enemies, and leave the Protestant Religion
here established to Posterity, we ought to follow the Apostles Advice, in
walking by the same Rule, and in minding the same things.

The End.
Published by the same Author,
SEveral Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine
of the Church of England, concerning the Idolatry of the Church of Rome: Being
a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G.


