THE GRAND QUESTION, Concerning the Bishops Right To VOTE in PARLIAMENT In Cases
Capital, STATED and ARGUED, FROM The Parlament-Rolls, and the History of former
Times. WITH An Enquiry into their Peerage, and the Three Estates in Parliament.

LONDON, Printed for M. P. and sold by Richard Rumball Book-binder, at the Ball
and Coffin in the Old Change, 1680.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I.
THE Question stated; and general Prejudices removed.
CHAP. II.
The Right in point of Law debated. Concerning the Constitution of Clarendon,
and the Protestation 11. R. 2.
CHAP. III.
The Precedents on both sides laid down: those against the Bishops examined and
answered.
CHAP. IV.
The Peerage of the Bishops cleared; how far they make a third Estate in
Parliament. Objections against it answered.
CHAP. 1.
The Question stated; and general Prejudices removed.
THE Question in debate, as it is stated by the Author of the Letter, is,
Letter p. 1.
Whether the Bishops may be present and Vote Iudicially in Capital Cases, which
come to be judged in Parliament, either in giving the Judgment it self, or in
resolving and determining any circumstance preparatory and leading to that
Judgment?

For our better proceeding toward a Resolution of this Question, it will be
necessary to take notice of some things granted on both sides, which may
prevent needless disputes, and be of great use in the following Debate.

1. It is granted, Let. p. 93.
That the Bishops do sit in Parliament by virtue of their Baronies, and are
bound to serve the King there. And one part of the Service due to the King
there, is to sit in Judgment: for the Author of the Book entitled, The
Jurisdiction of the House of Peers asserted, proves at large, that the Right of
Judicature belongs to the Barons in Parliament; and that the Lords Spiritual
have a considerable share therein, appears by this passage, in the Title Page
of that Book, translated into English.

The Judgment of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal is according to the Use and
Custom of Parliament.

The Use and Custom of Parliament is the Law of Parliament.

The Law of Parliament is the Law of England.

The Law of England is the Law of the Land.

The Law of the Land is according to Magna Charta.

Therefore the Judgment of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal is according to
Magna Charta.

Some Right then of Judicature in Parliament the Bishops have by Magna Charta:
which, whatever it be, is as much theirs by that Charter as any Right of
Temporal Persons; and cannot be invaded or taken from them without breach of
that Charter, any more then the Rights of the Lords Temporal, or of any other
Persons whatsoever. But how far that Right does extend, is now the thing in
Question.

2. It is not denied, that the Bishops do sit in Parliament by the same kind of
Writs that other Barons do. They are summoned to advise and debate about the
great and difficult Affairs of the Kingdom; cum Praelatis, Magnatibus and
Proceribus dicti Regni nostri Angliae colloquium habere and tractatum; i. e. to
join therein with the Bishops and other Lords of the Kingdom. So that by the
King's Writ of Summons they are empowered and required to confer and treat of
all the weighty Affairs that shall be brought before them. And no Instance is
so much as offered to be produced of any Writ wherein the King does limit and
restrain the Bishops, any more then any other Lords of Parliament, as to any
matter of Consultation, or Point of Judicature, belonging to that House. They
have then by their Writ of Summons as good right to sit in all Cases, as in
any: and since the other Lords by their Writs are summoned to advise with the
Prelates in all matters that shall come before them, without limitation, it is
not to be conceived how this can be done, if the Bishops in some of the most
important Debates be excluded.

3. It is yielded, Let. p. 3. 118.
That if the House proceeds in a Legislative way by passing Bills of Attainder,
the Bishops have a Right to sit and Vote therein as well as other Lords: at
these it is said, that the Bishops are or should be all present at the passing
of them, for then they act as Members of the House of Lords in their
Legislative capacity. But men do as certainly die that are condemned in the
Legislative, as in the Judicial Way. Is not this then really as much a Case of
Blood as the other? If the Bishops should give their Votes in the Legislative
way to condemn a Person for Treason, and yet think they had not Voted in a Case
of Blood; they would then indeed be like Chaucer's Friar, mentioned by the
Author of the Letter, that would have of a Capon the Liver, Let. p. 66.
and of a Pig the Head, yet would that nothing for him should be dead. Does a
Bill of Attainder cut of a man's Head without making it a Case of Blood? There
can be then no objection now made against the Bishops Right from any Canons of
the Church; for those allow no such distinction of proceeding in the
Legislative, or Judicial Way. P. 21.
And the late Author of the Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual
does grant, that the Canons do prohibit the Bishops voting in Bills of
Attainder, as much as in any Case whatsoever.

But we are not to suppose a Person of such abilities as the Author of the
Letter, would go about to exclude the Bishops from their Right of Voting in a
Judicial way in Cases Capital, unless there were some great appearance of Law
on his side; because he professes so great a Desire that Right may prevail;
Let. p. 2, 3.
and that his design in writing was, to satisfy himself and others where that
Right is. The discovery whereof is our present business. Yet before the Author
of the Letter comes to a close debate of the matter of Right, he lets fall some
general Insinuations to create a prejudice in the Reader's mind, as to the
Bishops meddling at all in Secular Affairs, as though it were inconsistent with
their Function, and with some passages in the Imperial Law. And because men may
sometimes do more harm by what they tell us they will not say, then by what
they do say; it will be fit to prevent the danger of such Insinuations, before
we come to consider his Arguments.

1. The first is, Let. p. 5.
that meddling at all in Secular Affairs seems to be the doing that which the
Apostles declared they would not do, viz. leave the Word of God, and serve
Tables. But are all Persons of Estates now bound to part with them, as the
Christians then did? The serving of Tables was a full employment; and they who
attended that Office were the Treasurers of the Church, to distribute to every
one as they judged fit, out of the common Stock. Is it no Service to God, to
do Justice, and to show Mercy? to attend upon the public Affairs of the
Kingdom, when they are called to it by their Sovereign? Or are all Bishops now
in the same circumstances the Apostles were when the Christian Church was to be
planted in the World, and so few persons as the 12 Apostles made choice of for
that Work? Is there no difference to be made between a Church constituted and
settled and incorporated into the Commonwealth, and one not yet formed, but
laboring under great difficulties, and making its way through constant
persecutions? May it not be as well argued, that Bishops are not to stay in one
Country, nor to have any fixed habitation, because the Apostles passed from
place to place preaching the Word of God? Does not the Author of the Letter
himself confess, that the Clergy are one of the Three Estates of the Kingdom?
Let. p. 86.
and by the Act 8 Eliz. 1. the Clergy are called one of the greatest States of
this Realm. And is there not then great Reason, that those who are the chief
part of it, as he confesses the Bishops to be, should have a share in affairs
that concern the whole Nation? And would it not seem strange to the Christian
World, that we alone of all the Kingdoms of Europe should exclude the Bishops
from having an equal Interest with the other Estates in Parliament? For it were
easy to prove from unquestionable Testimonies, that as soon as the Christian
Religion was well settled in any of these Northern Kingdoms, the Bishops were
admitted into all the public Councils: and have so continued to this day,
where the Convention of the Estates has been kept up; Bohemia only excepted
since the days of Sigismond.

I begin with France, where Hincmarus says, Hincmar. Epist. de Ordine lalatii.
there were two great Councils every year: one of the States of the Kingdom,
for ordering the Affairs of the ensuing year, and redressing of Grievances; and
in these the Bishops were always present: and the other of the King's Council,
which managed the intervening Affairs; and into this the chief of the Bishops
were chosen. It were endless to repeat the several Parlaments in France in the
time of the Merovingian and Caroline Race, wherein Laws were passed, and the
great Affairs of the Kingdom managed by the Bishops, Noblemen, and others.
Those who have looked into the ancient Annals and Capitulars of France, cannot
be ignorant of this. There is one thing remarkable to our purpose in the famous
Council of Frankford, which opposed the Worship of Images so stoutly, viz. that
after the matters of Religion were agreed, then, according to the Custom of
that Age, the other Estates being present, they proceeded to other matters: and
then Tassilo Duke of Bavaria was brought upon his Knees for Treason; and the
Cause of Peter Bishop of Verdun was heard, who was likewise accused of Treason,
and there purged himself. Concerning both which Cases there are 2 Canons still
extant among the Canons of that Council: Council. Franc. c. 3. and 9.
and in another, the Bishops are appointed, by consent of the King, to do
Justice in their several Dioceses. And that they had not only a share in the
Legislative, but in the Judiciary part, appears by one of the ancient Formulae
in Marculphus, Marculph. Form. l. 1. c. 25.
where it is said, that the King sat in Judgment una cum Dominis and Patribus
nostris Episcopis, vel cum plurimis Optimatibus nostris; (vel, in the language
of that Age, is the same with and.) This was the Palatine Court, Not. in Marc.
p. 287.
where Bignonius says the greater Causes were heard, the King himself being
present, (or the Comes Palatii,) Episcopis and Proceribus adsidentibus, the
Bishops and Lords sitting in Judicature together with him. And this was not
only the Original of the Parliament of Paris, as a standing Court of
Judicature; but the like in England was the true foundation of the Supreme
Court of Judicature in the House of Peers. So that in the eldest and best times
of France, after Christianity had prevailed there, neither consultation about
public Affairs, nor administration of Justice were thought inconsistent with
the Function of Bishops.

In Spain, during the Gothic Power, all the great Affairs of the Kingdom, and
even the Rights of their Princes, were debated and transacted by the greatest
of the Clergy and Nobility together; as may be seen in the several Councils of
Toledo in that time, Council. Tolet. 4. c. 75. 5. c. 7. 6. c. 17. 8. in Praef.
12. c. 1. 17. c. 1. 17. c. 1.
in the case of Suintilas, Sisenandus and others. And in one of them it is
said, that after they had dispatched matters of Religion, they proceeded ad
caeterarum Causarum negotia, to the handling of other Causes. Cont l. Tolet.
13. c. 2.
In the 13. Council of Toledo, the Case of Impeachments of Treason is brought
in; and Rules set down for due proceedings therein. And yet from one of these
Councils of Toledo it is, that all the stir has been made in the Canon Law
about Bishops not being present in cases of blood.

In Germany, the first Laws that were ever published were those by Lotharius
II. in Comitiis Regni, Rer. Aleman. To. 2. Cod. Leg. Antiq. B. 362.
says Goldastus; and there were present 33 Bishops, 34 Dukes, 72 Counts,
besides the People. And by the Matriculation-Roll of the States of the Empire,
it appears what a great Interest the Clergy have preserved there in from the
first times of the prevalecy of Christianity there. Arumae. de Comitiis ^. 35.
c. 4. ^. 98.
And Arumaeus, a considerable Protestant Lawyer of the Empire, says, the
Bishops of Germany sit in a double capacity in the Diets, both as Bishops, and
as Princes of the Empire. And he commends the prudence of that Constitution
with respect both to Justice, and the Honor and Safety of Religion.

For the Kingdom of Bohemia, Goldast. Bohem. l. 5. c. 1.
Goldastus, a learned Protestant, says, that there, as in all other
well-constituted Kingdoms among Christians, there were 3 Estates, of Prelates,
Nobles, and Commons; and this continued, he says, from the time Christianity
was received, till the days of Sigismond.

No sooner was Christianity received in Hungary, Bonfin. dec. 2. l. 1.
but their Princes, Stephanus and Ladislaus, called their great Councils of
their Prelates and Nobles: and the Laws made in the Concilium Zabolchianum were
passed by the King, Decret. Ladiss. p. 12.
with all his Bishops and Nobles, and with the consent of the whole Clergy and
People.

In Poland, Starovolse. ^olon. p. 2^5.
Starovolscius says, that their Ancestors, after they received Christianity,
out of regard to Religion, gave the Bishops the first place in the Senate; and
admitted the Clergy to the great Offices of the Kingdom. Herburt. Stat. Regni
Pol. p. 263.
And Sigismond in his Constitution says, the States of Poland consist of the
Bishops, Barons, and Delegates, called Nuntii terrestres.

In the Northern Kingdoms, Adam. Brem. de situ Dan. n. 85.
Adamus Bremensis says, that the Bishops, after the People received
Christianity, were received into their public Councils. Loccen. Antiq. S^eco.
Goth. c. 8.
And Loccenius reckons up among the several Estates, the Bishops, Nobles,
Knights, and Deputies of the Country and Cities. And it appears by the
Hirdstraa, Ius Aulicum N^rveg. c. 3. c. 36.
or the ancient Laws of Norway, the Bishops as well as Nobility were present in
the Convention of the States, and all public Councils.

The like might be proved here in the Saxon times, from the Conversion of
Ethelbert downward. This is so very evident, that he must blind his eyes that
does not see it, if he does but cast them on the History of those times.

These things I have laid together with all possible brevity and clearness,
that in one view we may see a consent of all these parts of the Christian
World, in calling Bishops to their public Councils, and most solemn Debates;
and how far they were from thinking such Employments inconsistent with their
Sacred Function, and charging them, that thereby they left the Word of God to
serve Tables. Neither can this be looked on as any part of the Degeneracy of
the Church, or the Policy of the Papacy; since, as the forecited Arumaeus
says, they were admitted to this honor before the Papal Power was advanced;
and were so far from carrying on the Pope's designs, that they were, in most
Countries, the greatest Opposers of them. And when the Popes began to set up
their Monarchy, their business was, to draw them off from meeting in these
Councils, under several pretenses of Cases of Blood, and other things; the
better to keep them in a sole Dependency on themselves. As will appear by the
following Discourse.

2. The next thing suggested is, that the Imperial Law does forbid Clergymen
having any thing to do with Secular matters. Let. p. 3, 4.
And for this a Rescript of Honorius and Theodosius is mentioned, and a Decree
of Justinian. To which I answer,

1. The Imperial Edicts are not the Law of England. Our dispute is about a
Right by our own Laws; which a Rescript of Honorius and Theodosius can neither
give nor take away. What would become of the whole frame of our Government, and
of our just Rights and Properties, if the producing of Imperial Edicts would be
sufficient to overthrow them? When the Bishops once pleaded hard in Parliament
in behalf of an Imperial Constitution, lately adopted into the Canon Law, the
Answer given by all the Temporal Lords was, Stat. Merton c. 9. 20 H. 3.
Nolumus leges Angliae mutare, quae huc usque usitatae sunt and approbatae.
They did not mean, they would make no alterations in Parliament, for that very
Parliament did so in several things: but their meaning was, Dissert. ad Flet. c.
9. 2.
as Mr. Seldom observes, that they owned neither Canon nor Imperial Laws here,
any farther then they were agreeable to the Laws of the Land.

2. The Imperial Constitutions do give liberty to Churchmen to have to do in
Secular Affairs. The Emperor Constantine, whose Constitutions deserve as great
regard as those of Honorius and Theodosius, to show his respect to the
Christian Religion, permitted all men to bring their Causes before the Bishops,
without ever going to the other Tribunals, Soz. hist. l. 1. c. 9.
as Sozomen, a Lawyer of Constantinople, relates. And this is the true
foundation of the Constitution De Episcopali Iudicio; as Gothofred confesses.
Which is at large inserted into the Capitulars, Capitul. Carol. and Ludov. l.
6. c. 281. ed. Lindenb. c. 366. ed. Baluz.
with a more then usual introduction; and made a Law to all the Subjects of the
Empire, Franks, Saxons, Lombards, Britons, etc. and therefore is more
considerable to these parts then a bare Rescript of Honorius and Theodosius.
And yet, these very Emperors, Cod. Just. de Epise. Audient. l. 1. tit. 4. c. 8.
in a Constitution of theirs, do so far ratify the Judgment of Bishops upon
Trial by consent before them, that no Appeal does lie from their Decree. What
Rescript then is this of theirs which so utterly forbids Clegy-men having any
thing to do with public Functions, or things appertaining to the Court? I
suppose that Constitution of Honorius is meant, which confines the Bishops
Power to what concerns Religion; and leaves other Causes to the ordinary Judges
and the Course of Law. But two things are well observed by Iac. Gothofred
concerning this Rescript of Honorius: Cod. Theodos. l. 16. tit. 11. c. 1.
1. that it is meant of absolute and peremptory Judgment without Appeal; 2.
that whatever is meant by it, not many years after, this Constitution was
repealed by Honorius himself, and the Bishops sentence made as absolute as
before. So that Honorius is clearly against him, if a man's second judgment and
thoughts be better.

3. The practice of the best men in those Ages shows, that they thought no Law
in force to forbid Churchmen to meddle in Secular Affairs: as might be at
large proved from the practice of Gregory Thaumaturgus and S. Basil in the
East; Greg. NysS. vit. Greg. Basil. in ep. Socr. l. 7. c. 37.
of Silvanus Bishop of Troas, of S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, and others of the
greatest and most devout Churchmen of those times. Ambros. de Offic. l. 2. c.
24.
And S. Augustine was so far from thinking it unlawful, Aug. ep. 147. in Ps.
118. conc. 24.
that in his opinion S. Paul commanded the Bishops to do it. Constituit enim
talibus Causis Ecclesiasticos Apostolus Cognitores. And the learned Gothofred
of Geneva says, Jac. Goth. in cod* Theod. ad Extrav. de Episc. judicio.
Mos hic frequens and legitimus eundi ad Iudices Episcopos. It was then a
common and legal practice to go to Bishops as to their Judges. Which would
never have been, if there had been a Law in force to forbid Bishops meddling in
Secular Affairs.

4. The Emperors still reserved to themselves the power of dispensing with
their own Rescripts, and the Canons of the Church. Council. Sardic. c. 7.
Therefore the Council of Sardica, when it prohibits Bishops going to Court,
excepts the Princes calling them thither. Upon which Balsamon has this Note;
that although the Canons prohibit, yet if the Emperor commands, the Bishops
are bound to obey, and to do what he commands them; without any fault either
in the Emperor or them. And in other places he asserts the Emperor's power of
dispensing with the strictest Canons against Church-mens meddling in Secular
Affairs: Balsam. in Can. 4. Council. Chalced.
Thence he says, the Metropolitan of Side was chief Minister of State under
Michael Ducas; and the Bishop of Neocaesarea made the Laws of the Admiralty for
Greece. And the Gloss upon Iustinian's Novells observes, Auth. Collat. 1. tit.
6. Novell. 6. c. 2.
that Bishops may meddle with the Affairs of the Commonwealth, when their
Prince calls them to it. And this is the present Case; for the Bishops are
summoned by the King's Writ to serve him in the public Council of the Nation:
and therefore no Imperial Rescript, if it were of force in England, could have
any in this Case, which was allowed by the Imperial Laws themselves.

5. There is a great Mistake about Iustinian's Decree. Justin. Cod. l. 1. tit.
3. c. 41.
For the Bishops are not so much as mentioned in it; but the Defensores
Ecclesiarum; who were Lawyers, or Advocates of the Church: as appears by a
Constitution of Honorius; where Gothofred proves they were not so much as in
Orders. Cod. Theod. l. 16. tit. 2. n. 38.
It is true, Justinian does appropriate the Probat of Wills to the Master of
his Revenue; but the Law and Custom of England, Lindwood l. 3. de Testam.
as Lindwood observes, has altered that Constitution: and which must we regard
more, Justinian, or our own Laws?

I find one thing more suggested by way of Prejudice to the Cause in hand, viz.
the Common Law of England, Let. p. 4.
which has provided a Writ upon a Clergyman's being chosen an Officer in a
Manor, saying it was contra Legem and Consuetudinem Regni, and non consonum.
The Argument had been altogether as good, if it had been taken from a Minister
of a Parish not being capable of the Office of Constable; and it had as
effectually proved that Clergymen ought not to meddle in Secular Affairs.

CHAP. II.
The Right in point of Law debated. Concerning the Constitution of Clarendon,
and the Protestation 11 R. 2.
HAving removed these general Prejudices, I now come to debate more closely the
main Point. For the Author of the Letter undertakes to prove, that Bishops
cannot by Law give Votes in Capital Cases in Parliament. Let. p. 68.
Which he does two ways: 1. by Statute Law; 2. by Use and Custom, which he
says is Parlament-Law: and for this he produces many Precedents.

I. For Statute Law; two Ratifications, he says, there have been of it in
Parliament; by the Constitutions of Clarendon, and the 11 R. 2.

1. The Constitutions of Clarendon; Let. p. 69.
which he looks on as the more considerable, because they were not the enacting
of new Laws, but a declaration of what was before. And for the same Reason I
value them too, and shall be content this Cause stand or fall by them.

The Constitution in debate is the 11th, which is thus repeated and translated
in the Letter. Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and universae Personae Regni qui de
Rege tenent in Capite, habeant possessiones suas de Rege, sicut Baroniam, and
inde Respondeant Iusticiariis and Ministris Regis, and sequantur and faciant
omnes consuetudines Regias: Et sicut ceteri Barons, debent interesse judiciis
Curie Regis, quousque perveniatur ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem.

The Archbishops, Bishops, and all the dignified Clergy of the Land that hold
of the King in Capite, shall hold their possessions from the King, as a Barony,
and answer for their estates unto the King's Justices and Ministers, and shall
observe and obey all the King's Laws: And together with the other Barons, they
are to be present at all Judgments in the King's Courts, till it come to
require either loss of Member or Life.

The Argument from hence he enforces from the solemn Recognition and public
confirmation of these Constitutions, Let. p. 71, 72.
and the Oath taken to observe them; from whence he concludes this to be
Testimonium irrefragabile, An irrefragable and invincible Testimony. And so I
foresee it will prove, but to a quite contrary purpose from what he intended it.

The whole Question depends upon the meaning of the latter Clause of this
Constitution. The meaning he gives of it is this, Let. p. 61.
that the Prelates of the Church should not be present at the Judgments given in
the King's Courts when loss of Member or Life was in question.

The meaning of it I conceive to be this, that the Bishops are required to be
present in the King's Courts as other Barons are, till they come to give
Sentence as to Dismembring, or loss of Life.

Whether of these is the true meaning is now to be considered: and that will
best be discovered these three ways. 1. By the Occasion. 2. By the plain Sense
of the words according to their true Reading. 3. By the subsequent Practice
upon this Constitution in the Parliament at Northampton soon after.

1. By the Occasion. The Author of the Letter assigns that Occasion for this
Constitution, for which there is not the least color; viz. That the Prelates of
that time were ambitious of a kind of Omnipotency, Let. p. 73.
(in Judicature I suppose he means,) and that to restrain their power of
Judging Capital Cases this Constitution was made: and because this seemed to be
a diminution of their Power, therefore Matt. Paris ranks it among the
Consuetudines iniquas, the wicked Customs of the former times. For all which
there is not the least shadow of Proof; besides that it is so repugnant to the
History of those Times, that I can hardly believe a Person of so much Learning
and Judgment, as is commonly said to be the Author of the Letter, could betray
so much unskilfulness in the Affairs of those Times. For this is so far from
being true, that the Bishops did then affect such a Power of Judging in all
Secular Causes, that they looked on their attendance in the King's Court in the
Trial of Causes, as a burden which they would fain have been rid of; because
they accounted it a Mark of Subjection to the Civil Power, and contrary to that
Ecclesiastical Liberty, or Independency on Princes, which from the days of
Gregory VII. they had been endeavoring to set up. Which H. II. being very
sensible of, resolved to tie them to the Service of their Baronies, and to an
attendance on the King's Courts together with other Barons. But lest they
should pretend any force on their Consciences, as to the Canons of the Church,
this Constitution does not require, but suffers them to withdraw, when they
came to Sentence in matters of Blood. And that this was the true Occasion, I
prove by these two invincible Arguments.

1. By the complaint which they made of the Baronies, as too great a mark of
Subjection to the Civil Power. This is plain from Matt.Paris Matt. Paris ad A.
D. 1070.
himself, to whom the Author of the Letter refers: for when he speaks of
William the Conquerour's bringing the Temporalties of the Bishops into the
condition of Baronies, i. e. forcing them to hold them of him in Chief upon
certain Duties and Services, he calls it Constitutionem pessimam, a most wicked
Constitution; just as he calls the Customs of Clarendon Consuetudines iniquas,
wicked Customs. And he adds, that many were banished rather then they would
submit to that Constitution. For their Privileges were so great with the
Frank-almoign they enjoyed in the Saxon times, and their desires so hearty
(especially among the Monks, who from Edgar's time had gotten into most
Cathedral Churches) to advance the Papal Monarchy, that they rather chose to
quit all, then to give up the Cause of the Church's Liberty by accepting of
Baronies. Therefore Matt. Paris calls the Rolls that were made of the Services
belonging to these Baronies, Rotulas Ecclesiasticae Servitutis, the Rolls of
Ecclesiastical Slavery; then which nothing could be more contrary to that
Ecclesiastical Liberty which was then setting up by Pope Hildebrand. And to put
this out of all dispute, Petrus Blesensis, a Name well known in this dispute,
in that very Book where he complains of the Bishops Hypocrisy about Cases of
Blood, in being present at hearing and trying Causes, but going out at
Sentence, complains likewise of their Baronies, as those which gave occasion to
that Hypocrisy, and as the marks of the vilest Slavery. Pet. Bles. de Institut.
Episc. p. 451.
Et in occasion turpissimae Servitutis seipsos Barons appellant. They may
think it an honor to be called the King's Barons, but he accounts it the
greatest Slavery; and applies that place of Scripture to them, They have
reigned, but not by me; they are become Princes, and I know them not. Now Pet.
Blesensis lived in the time of H. II. and knew the whole proceedings of the
Constitutions of Clarendon, and was a zealous maintainer of Becket's Cause, or,
which was all one, of the Liberties of the Church, as they called them, against
the Civil Power.

2. By the fierce Contest between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power, about the
Liberties of Churchmen. This was carried on from the time that William I.
brought them into Subjection by their Baronies: his Sons stood upon the Rights
of the Crown; whilst Anselm and his Brethren struggled all they could, but to
little purpose, till after the death of H. I. Then Stephen, to gratify the
great Prelates, by whose favor he came to the Crown, yielded all they desired:
but he soon repented, and they were even with him for it. Malmsbury takes
particular notice, that he yielded they should have their Possessions free and
absolute; Malmsbur. hist. Novell. p. 100. b.
and they promised only a conditional Allegiance to him, as long as he
maintained the Liberties of the Church. When K. Stephen broke the Canons, as
they said, by imprisoning 2 Bishops, the Bishop of Winchester and his Brethren
summoned him to answer it before them in Council; and there declared, that the
King had nothing to do with Churchmen, till the Cause was first heard and
determined by themselves. All his time, they had no regard to his Authority,
when it contradicted their Wills: and when the Peace was made between Him and
H. II. Radulphus de Diceto takes notice that the Power of the Clergy increased
by it. Rad. de Diceto Imag. histor. p. 509. 528.
In this state H. II. found things, Gul. Neuburg. l. 2. c. 16.
when Gul. Neuburgensis says, the great business of the Churchmen was to
preserve their Liberties. Upon this the great Quarrel between Him and Becket
began: this made the King search what the Rights of the Crown were which his
Ancestors challenged; to these he was resolved to make Becket and his Brethren
submit. For this purpose the Parliament was called at Clarendon, and after great
debates the 16 Constitutions were produced; which were those the King was
resolved to maintain, and he made the Bishops as well as others swear to
observe them. Now when the rest of them relate to some Exemptions and
Privileges which the Churchmen challenged to themselves, about their Courts,
Excommunications, Appeals, and such like, and which the King thought fit to
restrain them in; (From whence in Becket's Epistles it is said, Bar. ad A. D.
1164. n. 3.
those Constitutions were framed ad ancillandam Ecclesiam, to bring the Church
in subjection, as Baronius shows out of the Vatican Copy. And Fitz-Stephen
Fitz-Stephen vit. Th. Beck. M S.
says, All the Constitutions of Clarendon were for suppressing the Liberty of
the Church, and oppressing the Clergy: I say, considering this,) is there not
then great Reason to understand this 11th. Constitution after the same manner:
viz. that notwithstanding K. Stephen's Grant, H. II. would make them hold by
Baronies, and do all the Service of Barons in the King's Courts, as other
Barons did; and he would allow them no other Privilege, but that of withdrawing
when they came to Sentence in a Case of Blood? What is there in this sense, but
what is easy and natural, and fully agreeable to the state of those Times?
whereas there is not the least foundation for the pretense of the Bishops
affecting to be present in all Causes, which the King must restrain by this
Constitution.

This sense of it is not only without ground, but is absolutely repugnant to
all the History of that Age. For if this Constitution was intended to restrain
the Bishops from trying Causes of Blood, then the Bishops did desire to be
present in those Causes, and the King would not suffer them. Whereas it is
evident that the Bishops pretended scruple of Conscience from the Canons, that
they could not be present; but in truth stood upon their Exemption from the
Service of Barons, which they called Ecclesiastical Slavery. And therefore that
could not be the sense of the Constitution, to restrain them in that which they
desired to be freed from, and which by this Constitution of Clarendon was
plainly forced upon them against their wills. For Lanfranc had brought the
Canon of the 11th. Council of Toledo into England, Spelm. Council. To. 2. p. 8,
9, 11.
That no Bishop or Clergyman should condemn a man to death, or give vote in the
Sentence of Condemnation: at which Council were present 2 Archbishops, 12
Bishops, and 21 Abbots. And before H. II's time this Canon of Toledo was
received into the Body of the Canon Law, made by Ivo, Burchardus, Regino, and
Gratian who lived in the time of K. Stephen: and when they saw such a Canon so
generally received, is there not far greater Reason to think they desired to
withdraw, then that they should press to be present, and the King restrain
them? But the Constitution is so framed on purpose, to let them understand,
that the King expected in all Judgments they should do their Duty, as other
Barons: but lest they should think he purposely designed to make them break the
Canons, he leaves them at liberty to withdraw when Sentence was to be given. So
that I can hardly doubt but the Author of the Letter, if he please calmly to
reflect upon the whole matter, will see reason to acknowledge his mistake; and
that this Constitution was so far from intending to restrain the Bishops from
all Judicature in Cases of Blood, that, on the contrary, it was purposely
framed to oblige them to be present, and to act in such Causes as the other
Barons did, at least till the Cause was ripe for Sentence: which last Point the
King was content to yield to them, out of regard and reverence to the Canons of
the Church. For the words of the Law are not words of Prohibition and restraint
from any thing, but of Obligation to a Duty; which was, to be present and serve
in the King's Courts of Judicature, in like manner as the other Barons did.

From all which it is evident, I think, beyond contradiction, that the Occasion
of this Law was not the Ambition of the Prelates, P. 73.
(as the Author of the Letter suggests) to thrust themselves into this kind of
Judicature; but an Ambition of a worse kind, (though quite contrary) viz. under
a pretense of Ecclesiastical Liberty and Privilege, to exempt themselves from
the Service of the King and Kingdom, to which by virtue of their Baronies they
were bound, sicut caeteri Barons, as well as the other Barons. And therefore
it is so far from being true, that the Bishops exercise of this Jurisdiction
together with the Temporal Lords is a Relic of Popery, and one of the
Encroachments of the Clergy in those Times of Ignorance and Usurpation, as some
well-meaning Protestants are now made to believe; that, on the contrary, the
Exemption of the Clergy from this kind of Secular Judicature was one of the
highest Points of Popery, and that which the Pope and his Adherents contested
for with more zeal then for any Article of the Creed. This was one of those
Privileges which Thomas Becket said Christ purchased for his Church with his
blood, and in the obstinate defense whereof against the King he himself at last
lost his life. And now to put the matter beyond all doubt, I appeal to any man
skilled in the History of those Times, whether Thomas Becket opposed the
Constitutions of Clarendon to the death, and broke the Oath he had taken to
observe them, because by them (among other things) the Bishops were excluded
from Judicature in Cases of Blood; or for the quite contrary reason, (among
others) because this Service of the King in his Courts, imposed on them by
virtue of their Baronies, was looked upon by him as a violation of the
Privileges of the Church, and a badge of Ecclesiastical Slavery, which by all
means he desired to cast off. And if the latter be the true Reason, I leave it
to the impartial Reader, and even to the Author of the Letter himself upon
second thoughts, whether he have not widely mistaken both the Occasion and
Meaning of this Law.

2. Let us consider the plain Sense of the words according to the true reading
of them. The Author of the Letter has made use of the most imperfect Copy,
viz. that in Matt. Paris; I cannot tell for what reason, unless it be that in
the last Clause [in Iudicio] is there left out, which is put in in the Copy
extant in Gervase, and in the Vatican Copy, and in several MSS. in all which it
runs thus, Et sicut Barons caeteri debent interesse judiciis Curiae Regis cum
Baronibus, usque perveniatur in judicio ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad
mortem. Now here are two things to be distinguished.

1. Something expressly required of the Bishops as to their presence in the
King's Courts, viz. that they must attend as other Barons, and sit together
with them: and therefore it is expressed twice; Et sicut caeteri Barons, in
the beginning of that Clause, and cum Baronibus, again after, and debent
interesse, in the middle. And can any one soberly think, that the meaning of
all this is, they must not be present in cases of Blood? No: the Constitution
says, they ought to be present as other Barons, and sit with other Barons in
the Trials of the King's Courts. And yet the Author of the Letter does (to
speak mildly) very unfairly represent this Constitution, as if it did forbid
the Prelates to be at all present in the Judgments of the King's Courts in Cases
of Blood; and that in express words. For, speaking of the Constitutions of
Clarendon, he has this passage, page 61.
And one of these Constitutions was, that the Prelates of the Church should not
interesse Iudiciis Curie Regis, be present at the Judgments given in the Kings
Courts. Whereas this Constitution (as he himself cites it afterward) runs
thus, debent interesse Iudiciis Curie Regis, quousque, etc. they ought to be
present in the Judgments of the King's Courts, till it come to loss of Members
or Life. So that this Law expressly says, that they ought to be present in the
Judgments of the King's Courts, till it come, etc. And when it comes to loss of
Members or Life, it does not say (as the Author of the Letter affirms) that
they should not be present then, nor do the words of the Constitution imply any
such thing; but only require (as I shall evidently make appear) their presence
so far; and when it should come to Sentence, leaves them at liberty to withdraw
in obedience to the Canons of the Church, which they pretended themselves bound
in Conscience to observe. And this is the true Reason why, among the 16
Constitutions of Clarendon, Baronius ad Ann. 1164.
(whereof 10 were condemned, 6 tolerated, but none approved, by Pope Alex.
III.) this 11. was one of the 6 which escaped with an Hoc toleravit, this the
Pope was content to tolerate; because in the last Clause of it there was regard
had to the Canons of the Church. Of this misrepresentation of the Constitution
under debate, though it might have deserved a more severe animadversion, I
shall say no more, because I have no design to provoke the Author or any body
else, but only to convince them.

2. Something allowed to the Bishops as peculiar to themselves, viz. That when
the Court has proceeded so far in judicio, in a particular Trial, (for before
it is Iudiciis in general) that Sentence was to be given either as to
dismembring, or loss of life, then they are at liberty; but till then they are
required. As, suppose Charles V. had required the Protestant Princes to attend
him to Mass, as other Princes did; only when the Mass-Bell tinckled they
might withdraw; would not any reasonable man understand by this, that they were
obliged to their Attendance till then? So it is here: the King commands their
Attendance till it comes to such a point; therefore before it comes thither,
their presence is plainly required by this Constitution. And so in stead of
there being a Statute Law to exclude the Bishops at such Trials, there is one
to require their presence in judicio, in the proceedings of such a Trial, till
it comes to Sentence. All that can be said in this case is, that the last
Clause is not to be understood of the Sentence, but of the Kind or quality of
the Cause; i. e. they are to be present in the King's Courts, till they come to
a Cause wherein a man's Life or Members are concerned. But that this cannot be
the meaning will appear.

1. There is a great deal of difference between quousque perveniatur ad
judicium mutilationis membrorum, vel mortis, that might have been understood of
a Cause of Blood; and quousque perveniatur in judicio ad mutilationem
membrorum, vel ad mortem, for this supposes a Trial already begun, and the
Bishops present so far in it; but when it comes to the point of mutilation or
death, then they have leave to withdraw. So that this last Clause must either
be understood of Execution, which no one can think proper for the King's
Courts; or for the Sentence given by the Court, which is most agreeable.

2. The Sense is best understood by the Practice of that Age. For, if the
meaning of the Constitution had been, they must not be present in any Cause of
Blood, and the Bishops had all sworn to observe it; can we imagine we should
find them practicing the contrary so soon after? And for this I appeal to
Petrus Blesensis, Pet. Bles. de Instit. Episc. p. 454.
whose words are so material to this purpose, that I shall set them down.
Principes Sacerdotum and Seniores Populi, licet non dictent judicia sanguinis,
eadem tamen tractant disputando and disceptando de illis; seque ideo immunes a
culpa reputant, quod mortis aut truncationis membrorum judicium decernentes, a
pronuntiatione duntaxat and executione poenalis sententiae se absentent.
Whereby it is evident that the Bishops were present at all Debates, and gave
Votes in Causes of Blood; but they absented themselves from the Sentence, and
the Execution of it. It is true, Pet. Blesensis finds fault with them for this.
But what is that to the Law, or to the practice of that Age? I do not question,
but Pet. Blesensis condemned the observation of the other Constitutions of
Clarendon, as well as this; and in all probability this passage of his was
levelled at those Bishops who did observe this 11. Constitution.

3. We have a plain way to understand the meaning of this Constitution, by what
happened soon after in the Parliament at Northampton, which was summoned upon
Becket's Obstinacy and Contempt of the King's Authority: where Fitz-stephen
says, he was accused of Treason; and the Bishops sat together with other
Barons; and because it did not come to a sentence of Death, after great debate
between the other Lords and the Bishops about pronouncing the Sentence, the
Bishop of Winchester did it. Wherein we have as plain evidence as can be
desired, that the Bishops did sit with the other Barons, and vote with them in
a case of Treason.

To this Precedent the Author of the Letter answers several things.

1. That none of the ancient Historians of those Times say any thing of his
being accused of Treason: Let. p. 60.
and therefore he thinks one may modestly affirm, page 62.
that it was a mistake in Fitz-stephen to say so. But what if H. II. and Becket
himself both confess that he was charged with Treason? Vol. Epistol. Becket in
Bibl. Cotton. MS. l. 1. ep. 65.
H. II. in his Letter to Reginaldus says, that by consent of his Barons and
Clergy he had sent Ambassadors to Pope Alexander, with this Charge, that if he
did not free him from that Traitor Becket, he and his Kingdom would renounce
all Obedience to him. And Becket did not think this a bare term of reproach;
for in one of his Letters he says, that defending the Liberties of the Church
laesae Majestatis reatus sub persecutore nostro est, Ep. 52.
was looked on as Treason by the King. Gervas. Chronic. p. 1391.
And even Gervase himself, to whom the Author of the Letter appeals, says,
some of his friends came to him at Northampton, and told him, if he did not
submit to the King, he would be proceeded against as a Traitor, for breaking
the Allegiance he had promised to the King, when he did swear to observe the
ancient Customs at Clarendon. And Fitz-stephen says, Fitz-stephen Vit. Th.
Becket. de Concilio apud Clarendon.
the King's Council at Clarendon said it was Treason, or taking the King's
Crown from his head, to deny him the Rights of his Ancestors.

2. That it was a strange kind of Treason Becket was charged with at
Northampton, Let. p. 63.
viz. for not coming when the King sent for him; which at the most was only a
high Contempt; and Fitz-stephen, who was a Creature of the Archbishop's, might
represent it so, to draw an odium on the King. And therefore he looks on this
as a weak precedent for the Bishops to lay any weight upon, being at best out
of a blind MS. of an Author justly suspected of partiality, against the tenor
of all the ancient Writers that give an account of the same business. What
truth there is in this last suggestion appears in part already, and will do
more by what follows. Must all the unprinted Records be answered with saying
they are blind MSS? I cannot but take notice how unreasonable a way of
answering this is. It is like turning of that pressing Instance, of the Bishops
making a Proctor in Capital Cases, by saying it was Error temporis; page 79.
which because it will answer all Instances whatsoever as well as that, is
therefore an answer to none. Just so it is equally an answer to all MSS, to say
they are blind; and to all printed Books too, because they were once MSS, and,
for any thing that appears to the contrary, as blind as Fitz-stephen's. For
surely no authority is added to a Book by its being printed; unless in the
opinion of the common people, who are said to take all for true that is in
Print. I do not go about to parallel Fitz-stephen with Parlament-Rolls; but I
say, his Authority is very good, being present upon the place, and the best we
have, of all the proceedings in the Parliament at Northampton. And if the
Author of the Letter had taken the pains to peruse him, he would not have
contemned the Precedent drawn from thence; which being so near the Parliament at
Clarendon, (that, as himself confesses, page 61.
the one was in February, the other in October following,) it gives the best
Light into this matter of any thing in that Age; and being not yet fully
printed, it will be worth our while to set it down. Mr. Seldom has indeed
printed very exactly the Proceedings of the first Judgment upon Becket, Titles
of Honor, p. 2. c. 5. n. 20.
about the Cause of Contempt, for not coming upon the King's Summons, at the
complaint of John the Marshall; wherein the Bishops did certainly sit in
Judgment upon him with the other Barons: but there is a farther strength in
this Precedent, not yet taken notice of. Which is, that after this Judgment
passed, Becket behaved himself with so great insolency toward the King and the
Bishops, upon the King's calling him to farther account, for many other things
laid to his Charge, as diverting the King's Treasure, and applying it to his
own use, and great Accounts to the King while he was Chancellor, etc. that the
King required him to stand to the Judgment of his Court. Becket gave a dilatory
Answer: the King summons the Bishops, and Earls and Barons, to give Judgment
against him: the Bishops tell the King, Becket had appealed to the Pope, and
prohibited them to give any farther Judgment upon any Secular Complaint against
him. Whereupon the King sent some Earls and Barons to him, to expostulate the
matter, since he was the King's Subject, and had so lately sworn to the
Constitutions at Clarendon; and to know whether he would give Security to the
King about making up his Accounts, and stand to the Judgment of his Court.
Becket refuses to give answer to any thing, but the Cause of John the
Marshall, for which he was summoned to appear; slights his Oath, as contrary to
the Rights of the Church, and confirms his Appeal to the Pope. And such an
owning of the Pope's Power, in derogation to the Rights of the Crown, Sir
Edward Cook says was Treason by the ancient Common Law, before any Statutes
were made. However, the King charges the Bishops by virtue of their Allegiance,
that, together with the Barons, they would give Judgment upon the Archbishop.
They excused themselves on the account of the Archbishop's Prohibition. The
King replied, That had no force against the Constitution of Clarendon, so
lately made and acknowledged by them. The words of Fitz-stephen are these: Rex,
responso Archiepiscopi accepto, instat Episcopis, praecipiens and obtestans per
homagium and fidelitatem sibi debitam and juratam, ut simul cum Baronibus de
Archiepiscopo sibi dictent sententiam. Illi se excusare coeperunt per
interpositam Archiepiscopi Prohibitionem. Rex non acquievit, asserens, quod non
teneat haec ejus simplex Prohibitio contra hoc quod Clarendonae factum and
initum fuerat. So that H. II. in the Parliament at Northampton declared, that
Bishops were bound, by virtue of the Constitution of Clarendon, to be present,
and to give their Votes in cases of Treason. And the Bishops' did not deny
this, but used prudential arguments to dissuade the King from proceeding any
farther, the Appeal being made; and that it was for the good of King and
Kingdom, for them to submit to the Prohibition. And the Bishop of Chichester
told Becket, he made them go against the Constitutions of Clarendon, which they
had so lately sworn to observe; in these remarkable words; Quo contra nos
venire compellitis, interdicendo, ne ei quod de nobis exigit adesse possumus
Iudicio. By which we see this Constitution is indeed an irrefragable Testimony;
but it is to prove that Bishops are bound to be present even in Cases of
Treason, when the King summons them. And as to the case of Becket's Treason,
the same Bishop told him, it lay in breaking his Oath about those
Constitutions, wherein the Rights of the Crown were declared. And if this be
not Treason by the Common Law, Sir Edward Cook's Preface to his fifth Book of
Reports signifies nothing.

The late Author of the Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual takes
it for granted, page 14.
that by the Constitution of Clarendon the Jurisdiction of Bishops was limited,
that it should not extend ad diminutionem membrorum, vel ad mortem. But the
foregoing discourse has, I suppose, made it evident, that those words contain
no Limitation, but a Privilege or Indulgence to them with respect to the
Canon Law. And he takes very needless pains to prove this to be declarative of
the Common Law; and that the Meeting at Clarendon was a full Parliament: which
are very much besides the business.

All that looks toward this matter, is, that he says, this Statute was
confirmed by a Council at Westminster; for which he cites Rog. Hoveden's
Authority. But I wish he had produced the Canon entire as he there found it;
for then the sense of it would have been better understood. In this Synod at
Westminster, Richard Archbishop of Canterbury produces several ancient Canons,
which he thought fit to be observed here. Among the rest, he mentions that of
the Council of Toledo. The words are these: His qui in Sacris Ordinibus
constituti sunt, judicium sanguinis agitare non licet; here he makes his etc.
and leaves out the Prohibition which declares the meaning and extent of this
Canon: Vnde prohibemus, ne aut per se membrorum truncationes faciant, aut
inferendas judicent; Wherefore we forbid them, either to dismember any persons
themselves, or to give Judgment for the doing of it. Both which were practiced
in Spain in the time of the Council of Toledo, which was the occasion of this
Canon. And then follows the Sanction of Deprivation if men did otherwise. And
what now does this signify more to the Constitution of Clarendon, then that
the same Canons were now revived, which gave the occasion to that permission of
withdrawing, when the Sentence came to be pronounced as to dismembring, or loss
of Life?

But he urges farther about this Constitution, page 18.
that it must be so understood, as to exclude the Bishops from all antecedent
and praeliminary things which do relate or tend ad diminutionem, etc. or else,
says he, it must be only the exemption of the Prelates from doing the Office
of Executioners, which is Nonsense. Why so? though it be not the whole sense
of the Canon, yet surely it is sense. But he might have thought of giving
Sentence, which the Canons forbid, and is different from Execution, and does
not exclude the Bishops presence at Praeliminaries. The Constitution of
Westminster, he says, is plainer, Non debent agitare judicium sanguinis;
which, he says, excludes the exercise of any Judicial Power in Cases of Blood.
Whereas it appears by the Prohibition there extant, nothing is forbidden but
giving Sentence; at which the Constitution of Clarendon allows them to withdraw.

2. The second time we are told that the Exclusion of the Bishops in Cases
Capital rereived a Confirmation in Parliament, Let. p. 73.
was the 11. of R. II. When the Archbishop and the other Bishops, upon their
withdrawing then from the Parliament, in regard matters of Blood were there to
be agitated and determined, in quibus non licet alicui eorum personaliter
interesse, as they say, in which it was not lawful for any of them to be
present in person, did therefore enter a Protestation, with a Salvo to their
Right of Sitting and Voting in that and all other Parlaments, when such matters
were not in Question: which Protestation of theirs was at their desire enrolled
in full Parliament by the King's Command, with the Assent of the Lords Temporal
and Commons. So that it is here said to be a perfect and complete Act of
Parliament; and if it had not been a Law before, would then have been made one.
This is the substance of what is more largely insisted on in another place; ^.
19* etc.
and what strength is there added shall be duly considered.

To understand this business aright, it will be necessary to set down the
Protestation it self at large, as it is taken out of Courtney's Register, Rot.
Parl. 11 R. 2. n. 9.
and the Parlament-Rolls; and then examine the Points that do arise from
thence. The Protestation runs thus.

In Dei nomine Amen. Cum de jure and consuetudine Regni Angliae, ad
Archiepiscopum Cantuariensem, qui pro tempore fuerit, necnon caeteros suos
Suffraganeos, Confratres and Coepiscopos, Abbatesque and Priores, aliosque
Praelatos quoscunque, per Baroniam de Domino Rege tenentes, pertineat in
Parlamentis Regis quibuscunque, ut Pares Regni praedicti, personaliter
interesse, ibidemque de Regni Negotiis, and aliis ibidem tractari consuetis,
cum caeteris dicti Regni Paribus, and aliis ibidem jus interessendi habentibus,
consulere, tractare, ordinare, statuere, and diffinire, ac caetera facere quae
Parlamenti tempore ibidem imminent facienda; in quibus omnibus and singulis,
Nos Willielmus Cantuar. Archiepiscopus, totius Angliae Primas, and Apostolicae
sedis Legatus, pro nobis, nostrisque Suffraganeis, Coepiscopis, and
Confratribus, bus, nec non Abbatibus, Prioribus, ac Praelatis omnibus
supradictis, protestamur, and eorum quilibet protestatur, qui per se, vel per
Procuratorem hic fuerit modo praesens, public and express, quod intendimus,
and intendit, volumus, ac vult quilibet eorum, in hoc praesenti Parlamento, and
aliis, ut Pares Regni praedicti, more solito interesse, consulere, tractare,
ordinare, statuere, and diffinire, accaetera exercere, cum caeteris jus
interessendi habentibus in eisdem, statu and ordine nostris and eorum
cujuslibet in omnibus semper salvis. Verum quia in praesenti Parlamento agitur
de nonnullis materiis in quibus non licet nobis, aut alicui eorum, juxta
Sacrorum Canonum instituta quomodolibet personaliter interesse, ea propter pro
nobis and eorum quolibet protestamur, and eorum quilibet hic praesens etiam
protestatur, quod non intendimus, nec volumus, sicuti de jure non possumus, nec
debemus, intendit, nec vult aliquis eorundem, in praesenti Parlamento, dum de
hujusmodi materiis agitur, vel agetur, quomodolibet interesse; sed nos, and
eorum quemlibet, in ea part penitus absentare, jure Paritatis and cujuslibet
eorundem interessendi in dicto Parlamento, quoad omnia and singula mihi
exercenda, nostris and eorum cujuslibet statu and ordine congruentia, in
omnibus semper salvo. Ad haec insuper protestamur, and eorum quilibet
protestatur, quod propter hujusmodi absentiam, non intendimus, nec volumus, nec
eorum aliquis intendit vel vult, quod processus habiti and habendi in praesenti
Parlamento super materiis antedictis, in quibus non possumus, nec debemus, ut
premittitur, interesse, quantum ad nos and eorum quemlibet attinet, futuris
temporibus quomodolibet impugnentur, infirmentur, seu etiam infringentur.

This Protestation, setting aside the legal Formalities of it, consists of 3
parts. 1. A Declaration of their undoubted Right as Peers of the Realm, by
virtue of their Baronies, to Sit and Vote in all Debates of Parliament. 2. Of
their intention to withdraw this Parliament, because several matters were to be
handled, at which it was not lawful for them, according to the Canons, to be
present. 3. That by this absenting themselves they did not intend, as far as
concerned them, to null the proceedings of that Parliament.

Here now arise three main Points to be discussed.

1. Upon what Grounds the Prelates declared, it was not lawful for them to be
present in Parliament, at such matters?

2. How far the Parlament's receiving that Protestation makes it a Law?

3. Whether on supposition it were a part of Canon Law then in force, it
continues so still since the Reformation?

1. Upon what Grounds they declared it unlawful for them to be present in
Parliament, at such matters? One would think the very reading the Protestation
were sufficient to convince any man; for the Bishops declare as plainly as men
could do, that it was out of regard to the Canons of the Church, and not from
any Law of the Land. For how was it possible that the same men should declare,
that by reason of their Baronies they had full Right to be personally present
in all Debates of Parliament, if there were some Law in force which made it
unlawful for them to be personally present? The greater force there is in the
Protestation's being received in Parliament, the greater strength there is in
this Argument. For if the Protestation's being allowed by King, Lords and
Commons, make it (as the Author of the Letter affirms) a perfect and complete
Law, then their Right to be present in all Debates of Parliament is a Law; and
so much the more considerable, because it is no enacting Law, making that to be
so, which was not before, but declarative of what was confessed to be their
undoubted Right by King, Lords and Commons. And therefore I do not wonder, that
the Author of the Letter, so conveniently to his purpose, left out all the
beginning of the Protestation, which so fully clears the sense of the rest. For
the very same thing which afterward the Bishops say they are forbid to do by
the Canons, that is, personaliter interesse, to give their personal attendance,
they say at first, by Right of their Peerage, as Barons by tenure, did belong
to them; for there the words are personaliter interesse too. Therefore that
personal attendance in such matters which they said was unlawful to them by
the Canons, they challenge to themselves as their just Right by virtue of their
Baronies. But is it possible to imagine, if they had been precluded from
sitting by any antecedent Law, that ever such a public avowing their Right
would have passed the King and both Houses? So unsuccessfull has the Author
of the Letter been in his Statute-Laws, that there can be no stronger evidence
of the Bishops Right to sit in such Cases, then those which he produces
against them.

But he goes about to prove this Prohibition cannot be understood only of the
Canon Law: Let. p. 21, 22.
for the Canon Law, says he, was to them above all Laws; and what was
forbidden by that Law, they could not have a thought, that it could in any sort
be lawful for them to challenge as their Right, upon any account. I confess I
can see no force in this Reasoning: For when a thing is forbidden to men merely
by a positive Law of the Church, and the penalty of it is bare Irregularity by
the Canons; why may not such men challenge their own Right notwithstanding
those Canons, because the Irregularity might be dispensed with, when the Pope
saw convenient? And by the Constitutions of O^hobon, Constable. Othob. c. Ne
Clerici.
which were made in the time of H. III. we find, that if an Inferior
Clergyman transgressed this Canon, it was in the power of the Diocesan to
absolve him from his Irregularity. And this Canon was received and enforced
most here in England on the inferior Clergy, as appears by the Canons of
Stephen Langton in the Council of Oxford, Spelman. Conc. To. 2. p. 183. p. 451.
and other Synodall Constitutions here. Lyndwood ad tit. de Loc. and cond. c.
vendentes. Si quis Clericus.
For it is a Rule in Lyndwood, Clericus ex vi verbi non comprehendit Episcopum,
sed cum adjuncto, sic in quantum illud adjunctum potest concernere Episcopum.
That by Clerici we are not to understand Bishops, unless there be some adjunct
that implies it. Decretal. l. 3. tit. 50. c. 5.
And among the Decretals there is one from Alexander III. to the Archbishop of
Canterbury, under the Title Ne Clerici, to the same purpose. Where the Gloss,
I grant, comprehends Prelates; therefore I will not deny, but they were to be
irregular by the Canon Law, as well as others. But then, we are to consider,
how far the Legatine Power vested in the Archbishop of Canterbury might extend
in such a Case; and that there was the same severity in the Canons against
Clergymen's taking upon them any Secular Office: and yet in this very
Parliament, Thomas Arundell Bishop of Ely was Lord Chancellor, and after him
William of Wickham Bishop of Winchester, and before them R. Baybroke Bishop of
London; and the Bishops of Durham and Exceter were Lords Treasurers under R.
II. and in H. III's time we find 3 Clergymen Lords Chief Justices, Pateshull,
Lovell and Mansell, notwithstanding these Canons; and in Edward III's time
almost all the great Offices of the Court were executed by Clergymen. By which
we see they did not think themselves so strictly bound to observe those Canons;
or it was so easy to be dispensed with, that they had great Reason to insist
upon the challenge of their own Right, notwithstanding the Canon Law.

The truth is, the Canon Law, as it was managed in those days, was one of the
most mysterious pieces of Ecclesiastical Policy: it was an Engine, which the
artificial Churchmen could screw up or let down as they pleased. If it were in
a matter likely to be prejudicial to their interest, (as it was most apparently
the case in 11 R. II. when matters grew so high between R. II. and the
powerful Lords, and so many Favorites were to be impeached, and among them
Alexander Archbishop of York,) then it was a time to quote the Canons, and to
enter a Protestation, and to withdraw: If the Times were calmer and more
settled, or some great Reason moved them, then they could stick to their Right
of Peerage, and make use of it, either in Person, or by Proxy, as they thought
convenient. Nor was it so easy a matter to resolve what was Canon Law in
England, but they might with some color make use of either of these Pleas.
Rot. Parlam. 11 R. 2. p. 1. n. 26.
For in this very Parliament 11 R. II. the Commons desire that those may be
reputed Traitors who brought in the Pope's Bulls of Volumus and Imponimus:
which shows that they did not think all Canon Law that passed for such at Rome.
And 15 R. II. Sir Will. Brian was sent to the Tower, for bringing a Bull from
Rome which was judged prejudicial to the King, and derogatory to his Laws. And
in 16 R. II. Will. Courtney, Archbishop of Canterbury, (the same who entered
the Protestation before mentioned,) makes another of a different kind, owning
the Rights of the Crown in opposition to the Pope's Encroachments. Now, by the
same Reason, no Canon made at Rome, no Legatine or Synodal Constitutions, could
have any force against the King's Authority. But the King himself being under a
force at that time, as he always declared afterward, and that being, Knighton
p. 2701.
as Knighton says it was called, Parlamentum sine Misericordia, the King
having tied himself up, not to pardon any without consent of the Lords; he
might be willing to let the Bishops excuse themselves; because that might give
some color to call in question the Proceedings then, as it did 21 R. II. when
all the Acts of this Parliament were nulled: and the Lords and Commons might be
very willing to let the Bishops withdraw, that their business might proceed
with less difficulty against all the King's Ministers. So that here was a
concurrence of many circumstances, which made the Bishops think fit not to
appear in the House, this Parliament; and the King, Lords and Commons to be
willing to receive their Protestation. But in the Anti-Parlament to this, that
I mean 21 R. II. the Commons pray the King, that since diverse Judgments were
undone heretofore, for that the Clergy were not present, they might appoint
some Common Proctor with sufficient Authority to that purpose. This is a
Passage which deserves consideration, and tends very much to clear the whole
matter.

For the House of Commons declare, that diverse Judgments had been undone for
want of the Presence of the Clergy. Therefore their Concurrence, in the
judgment of the House of Commons, was thought necessary to make a Judgment
valid. A very late Author finds himself so perplexed with this, that he knows
not how to get off from it. A Discourse of the Peerage and Jurisdiction of the
Lords Spiritual, p. 26.
He cannot deny this to be in the Rolls of Parliament, and to be the first
Petition of the Commons: but then he blames them for rashness and error, and
want of due Examination of Precedents. As though it were possible for any man
now, to understand the Law and Practice better then the whole House of Commons
then did. He says, they were mistaken palpably de facto, in saying that diverse
Judgments have been heretofore undone; and yet presently confesses, that the
two Judgments against the two Spencers were reversed for this Cause; but he
says, there are no more to be found. Where does he mean? in his Study? or not
now extant in the Parlament-Rolls? But have we all the Rolls of Parliament that
were then in being? or must men so boldly charge the House of Commons with
Ignorance, Error, breaking the Laws, because they speak against their fancies?
But this Gentleman very peremptorily concludes the House of Commons then guilty
of a very strange and unaccountable Oversight. It is great pity, a certain
Gentleman had not been there to have searched Records for them, and to have
informed them better. But we think a Judgment of the whole House of Commons in
such a Case, declared in so solemn a manner, without the least contradiction
from the King or the Lords, might deserve a little more respect; and it had
certainly had it, if it had made for the other side. But we see the House of
Commons it self is reverenced, or not, as the Judgment of it serves men's
purposes. And yet this was more then the bare Judgment of the House of Commons:
for a Petition was made upon it, and that Petition granted; and consequently a
Common Proctor appointed, and that Proctor allowed by King, Lords and Commons.
So that this was a Judgment ratified by consent of the King and the whole
Parliament. For, if a Petition were made on a false ground, what had been more
proper, then for the Lords to have opened this to the Commons, and to have told
them how unadvised and false their Judgment was? whereas the Lords consented,
and the Proctor was admitted, and gave his Vote in the name of the Clergy. But
there is something more to confirm this Judgment of the Commons, and that is,
the Parliament 11 R. II. making Petition to the King, that all Judgments then
given might be approved, affirmed and stablished, as a thing duly made for the
Weal and Profit of the King our Sovereign Lord, notwithstanding that the Lords
Spiritual and their Procurators were absent at the time of the said Judgments
given. What means this Petition, if there had been no doubt at that time, that
these Judgments might be reversed, as not duly made, by reason of the absence
of the Prelates? The only answer in my mind is, that it was Error Temporis,
they were of that mind then, but some are resolved to be of another now.

But from hence we plainly see, that even in R. II's time the Concurrence of
the Bishops was thought so necessary, that one Parliament declared Judgments had
been reversed for want of it; and that very Parliament wherein they absented
themselves, got a Clause inserted on purpose to prevent the nulling of those
Judgments: which signified nothing to the Parliament 21 R. II. which reversed
them all.

There is something more considerable to our purpose in this Parliament; viz.
that the same Author produces the Testimony of a MS. Chronicle, Discourse of
the Peerage, etc. p. 20.
which largely handles the Affairs of that Parliament, wherein it is confessed,
that the Bishops, by concurring with the Lords in the Revocation of the Earl of
Arundel's Pardon, did give Vote in a Case Capital: for so the words are there
cited, Dederunt ergo locum Praelati judicio Sanguinis in hoc facto. Which shows
that the Bishops did then give their Votes about the validity of the Pardon:
which the Author of that Chronicle indeed condemns them for, and tells us some
thought they incurred Irregularity by it. From whence it follows, that all the
Penalty supposed to be incurred was only Canonical; but he never charges them
with going against the Law or Custom of Parliament therein.

But the Author of the Letter says, Let. p. 30.
Whatever was done this Parliament signifies nothing, because the whole
Parliament stands repealed by 1 H. IV. and all done in it delcared null and
void. Yet, to our comfort, p. 79.
the same Author tells us, the three Henry's were Usurpers; and therefore I
desire to be satisfied, whether an Usurper, by a Parliament of his calling, can
null and repeal what was done by a King and his Parliament. If he may, then the
King lost his Title to the Crown by the late Usurpers; if not, then the
Parliament 21 R. II. could not be repealed by that 1 H. IV. If the Author of
the Letter had considered this, he is a Person of too great Judgment and
Loyalty, to have mentioned, more then once, the Repeal of that Parliament, Let.
p. 8^. page 115.
by the subsequent Parliament 1 H. IV.

From all this we see, that by the Judgment of the whole Parliament, both 11 R.
II. and 21 R II. the Bishops had a right to sit, so far that Judgments were
reversed where they were not present; and therefore all the pretense they could
have for withdrawing must be from the Canon Law: which although not sufficient
to bind them, if the matter had been contested, yet it served them for a very
colorable pretense of absenting themselves in such dangerous times, as those
of 11 R. II.

Here the Author of the Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords Spiritual thinks
he brings seasonable relief to the Cause, page 19.
when he undertakes to prove, that the Bishops withdrawing was not merely on
the account of the Canon Law. This, I confess, is home to the business, If he
can make it out. (1.) He says, there was an Act of Parliament before, that did
expressly prohibit them to exercise Jurisdiction in those Cases. This we
utterly deny. And the Constitution of Clarendon, to which he refers, proves the
contrary. (2.) The Bishops made bold with the Canons when they thought fit, p
20.
as 21 R. II. But how could they do that, unless they had a Parlamentary Right
to be present? He says, the Constituting a Proxy was as great a violation of
the Canons, as being personally present: and what then? therefore the Parliament
would not have suffered them to do that, if there had been a Law to exclude
them. How does this prove that the Bishops did not withdraw on the account of
the Canons II R. II. because they made a Proxy 21 R. II? But why did they not
appear personally, if they had no regard to the Canons; when the receiving
their Proxy showed they had a legal Right to appear? But he grievously
mistakes the meaning of the Canon of Stephen Langton in Lyndwood, when he
interprets Literas pro poena sanquinis instigenda scribere vel dictare, against
making of Proxies; which is only meant of giving or writing the Sentence for
Execution. p. 21.
(3.) He says, they were excluded by ancient Custom; which, by a very subtle
way of reasoning, he proves to have been part of the Fundamental Contract of
the Nation, as he speaks. Seeing then, says he, it is without doubt that there
was such a Custom, that the Prelates should not exercise Jurisdiction in Capital
Cases; (not so altogether without doubt, unless it were better proved then we
have yet seen it;) and there is no Record that does mention when it did begin,
nor any time when it could be said there never was such an Usage; (yes, before
the Council of Toledo being published in Spain, and received here;) it must of
necessity be supposed, that it is as ancient as the Government it self, and
part of the Fundamental Contract of the Nation. Which looks so like a
Iesuitical Argument, that one would have thought he had been proving
Transubstantiation by it. For just thus the Argument runs at this day among
that Party; There was a time when it was reciev'd, and no time can be instanced
in wherein it was not, therefore it was a part of the Fundamental Religion of
Jesus Christ. the plain Answer in both cases is the same: If we can produce
unquestionable Authority to which a Doctrine or Practice is repugnant, we are
not obliged to assign any punctual time in which it must first come in. But in
this case, we do assign the very time and occasion of the Bishops absenting
themselves in Capital Judgments, and that was from the receiving the Canon of
the Council of Toledo here: For no such practice can ever be proved before. And
therefore this can never be proved to be any part of the ancient Common Law of
England. And that this came in by way of imitation of other Countries, appears
by the citing the Council of Toledo both by Lanfranc and Richard in the Council
of Winchester. page 23.
(4.) He says, the Practice is ancienter then any of the Canons of the Church.
But how does that appear? The eldest Canon he can find is that of Stephen
Langton in Lyndwood, which was made above 50 years after the Parliament at
Clarendon. But we have made it evident, there was a Canon received here in
Lanfranc's time, long before the Constitution of Clarendon. And so a full
Answer is given to these Objections.

But we are told, by the Author of the Letter, that the Bishops Protestation
being received and entered in the Roll, or Iournal-Book, makes it to pass for a
Law, it being agreed to by the King and two Houses; so as whatever was the Law
before, if it were only the Canon Law, it is now come to be the Law and Rule
of Parliament, and the Law of the Land.

2. This is therefore the second Point to be examined, Whether the receiving
this Protestation amounts to a Law of Exclusion? which it can by no means do
for these two Reasons: 1. from the nature of Protestations in general, 2. from
the particular nature of this Protestation.

1. From the nature of Protestations in general. For a Protestation is only a
Declaration of their minds that make it, and not of theirs who receive it, or
suffer it to be entered in the Acts or Records of the Court; unless it be
received in such a manner, as implies their consent. For, the very next
Parliament after this, 13 R. II. the two Archbishops, in the name of the whole
Clergy, enter a Protestation, That they gave no assent to any Law or Statute
made in restraint of the Pope's Authority; and it is said in the Rolls of
Parliament, that at their requests these Protestations were enrolled. Will any
man hence infer, that these Protestations were made Acts of Parliament? If the
Cause would have born any better, a Person of so much skill in proceedings of
Parliament would never have used such an Argument as this. Besides, it is a Rule
in Protestations, Sum. l. 1. de Constit. n 18. page 24.
Si Protestatio in Iudicio fiat, semper per contrarium actum tollitur, says
Hostiensis; A Protestation, although allowed in Court, is taken off by a
subsequent Act contrary to it. Which shows, that a Protestation can never have
the force of a Law; because it may be destroyed by the Act of the Parties
themselves. If therefore the Bishops did afterward act contrary to this
Protestation, they took away all the force of it.

2. The particular nature of this Protestation is such, as does most evidently
preserve their Right to be personally present on the account of their Peerage
and Baronies; and the great design of a Protestation is, to preserve a Right
notwithstanding some Act which seems to destroy it; as their absenting
themselves on the account of the Canons might seem to do. But of this already.

3. We are now to consider the third Point, Whether, on supposition that on the
account of the Canon Law, the Bishops had always withdrawn in the time of
Popery, that had continued in force still since the Reformation? I think not,
upon these Reasons.

1. Because the Canon Law was founded upon a Superstitious fancy, viz. that if
Clergymen be present in Causes of Blood, they contract Irregularity ex defectu
perfectae Lenitatis, Man^al. c. 27.
as the excellent Canonist, Navarr, says, because it argues a want of perfect
Lenity. But if we consider the cases they allow, which do not incur
Irregularity, and those they do not allow, which do incur it, we shall find
all this stir in the Canon Law about this matter to be only a Superstitious
kind of Hypocrisy.

1. If a man in Orders gives another man Weapons, without which he could not
defend himself, and by those weapons he maims him that assaulted him; this does
not make him irregular: but if he kills him, it does: and yet the Canons make
the case of Dismembring and Death the same.

2. It makes a man act against the Law or Nature to prevent Irregularity. For
they say, if it be for the defense of Father or Mother, or preventing the ruin
of his Country, although the Cause be never so just, a Clergyman that
dismembers, or takes away another's life, is irregular.

3. If a Clergyman discovers Treason, or accuses another for Treason, without
a Protestation, that he does not do it with a design to have him punished; he
is irregular: but if he makes that Protestation, although death follows, he is
not.

4. If a Clergyman be in an Army, and persuades the Soldiers to fight
manfully, and kill as many as they can; this does not make him irregular; ny,
although he beats them, if they will not fight: but if he happens to kill an
enemy himself, then he is.

5. If he gives a Soldier a Sword or a Gun, by which he dispatches his
enemies, if he did it with a particular intention that he should slay or maim
them, he is irregular; if only with a general intention, that he should
overcome, he is not. This being somewhat a nice Case, the Canonists take more
then usual pains to prove it. And from hence they defend their Priests and
Jesuits in the Indies, who carry the Cross before their Armies into the Field,
and encourage them to kill all they can: and yet Navarr says, they are so far
from being irregular, that they are regularissimi, as his word is.

6. If a man, to gain an Indulgence, carries a faggot to burn an Heretic, if
it be with a design to take away his life, he is irregular: but if he be hanged
first, or dead before it be thrown into the fire, then he is not.

7. If a man in Orders helps a Surgeon in cutting off a man's Leg, he is not
irregular: but if a man be justly condemned to have his Leg cut off, if he then
gives any assistence, he is irregular: because the one is moved out of Mercy,
and the other out of Justice.

8. If the Bishops sit and condemn a man for Heresy, and deliver him over to
the Secular Power for Execution; yet they free this from Irregularity, or else
the practice of the Inquisition were lost. This seems a very difficult Case:
but the Canonists salve this, Covarruv. ad Clem. fi surios. p. 2. 5. n. 6.
by saying that the Inquisitours, when they deliver them over to the Secular
Power, do pray that they may not be hurt either Wind or Lim; as it appears by
the Forms used in the Directorium Inquisitorum. And if this be not the height
of Hypocrisy, let the World judge. And therefore this part of the Canon Law is
not consistent with the Sincerity of the Reformation.

2. This part of Canon Law is inconsistent with the King's Power over
Ecclesiastical Persons. For it supposes them liable to the penalty of a Law,
which he has no cognizance of, and derives no force or authority from him:
which tends to the diminution of the King's Prerogative Royal, and therefore it
is nulled by the Stat. 25* H. VIII. c. 19. I do very much question whether this
ever were any part of the Canon Law of England, notwithstanding the Pope's
Decretals; i. e. whether these Canons ever received confirmation by the Royal
Authority, either in Synodal Constitutions, or elsewhere. And it would be a
very hard case, if our Kings had not the same Privileges which are allowed in
Popish Countries; viz. that nothing passes for Canon Law within their
Territories, till it pass the examination of the King's Council, and
approbation by his Authority. Thence in France nothing passes without the
King's Pareatis; nor in Spain or Flanders, without the King of Spain's Placet;
no nor in the Kingdom of Naples, without the Royal Exequatur. It is well known,
that the 6. Book of Decretals was not allowed in France, because of the quarrel
between the King and Boniface VIII. and that even the Council of Trent it self
was not allowed by Philip II. till it had been strictly examined by the King's
Council, that nothing might be allowed which tended to the diminution of his
Prerogative. How then will men justify the making that a part of the Canon Law
of England, which was repugnant to the Rights of the Crown, and deprives the
King of the Power of taking advice of those of his Subjects, whom he has
summoned for that end?

3. The Sanction of this Law is ceased, which was Irregularity: And some of our
most Learned Judges have declared, that is taken away by the Reformation. But
in case any be of another opinion, I shall urge them with this inconveniency;
viz. that the great Instrument of discovering the Plot falls under Irregularity
by it. For it is most certain, by the Canon Law, that a man in Orders accusing
others of Treason, without making his due Protestation in Court, is Irregular.
But if this be now thought unreasonable, as it is, in the person of an Accuser,
why should it not be so in the case of Judges? And if the Irregularity be taken
away, then the Sanction is gone: and if the Sanction be taken off in a mere
positive Law, the force of the Law is gone too. And therefore this Canon Law,
which forbids Clergymen being present in Capital Cases, and giving Votes
therein, is wholly taken away by the Reformation. And we do not find any
mention of it for 80 years and more after the Reformation; till about the time
of the Earl of Strafford's Trial, a Book being printed about the Privilege of
Peers, wherein this Protestation was mentioned, hold was presently taken of it,
by Men who thought they could not compass their ends without removing the
Bishops out of the House: and when the Bishops insisted on their Right, and
could not be heard, but at last were willing to salve their Right by Proxies;
the Lords of the Cabal prevailed with their friends, to declare they would use
no Proxies themselves, and so by that artifice shut the Bishops out of Doors.

4. The practice has been so contrary, since the Reformation, that I find no
manner of regard has been showed to it. For the Archbishop of Canterbury was
the first nominated in the Commission for the Trial of the Queen of Scots; as
appears by the Commission it self in Camden; Camden. Annal. A. D. 1586.
which is directly contrary to the Canon Law. Some distinguish the Bishops
acting by Commission, from their being Judges in Parliament. For which there is
no manner of Reason with respect to the Canon Law, which is rather more express
against any kind of Commissions in Cases of Blood; as appears by the Council of
Toledo, the Synodal Constitution, and the Pope's Decretals. And there has
never been any scruple about Divines sitting on the Crown-side as Justices of
the Peace, Vid. Lyndwood in Constit. Othob. c. Ne Clerici. v. In eisdem.
when Sentence of death is pronounced; nor in the Ordinary's declaring Legit,
or Non legit, when a man's life depends upon it. But, which is yet more to our
present purpose, in the Parliament 22. May 1626. upon the Impeachment of the
Earl of Bristol of high Treason, 10 Bishops, 10 Earls, 10 Barons, were
appointed to examine the Evidence; and upon their Report he was sent to the
Tower by the whole House. All which shows, that there has been no regard had
to the force of the Canon Law in this matter since the Reformation: That being
a Spirit laid long since by the Principles of our Church; and it would be
strange, if some men's zeal against Popery should raise it again.

CHAP. III.
The Precedents on both sides laid down: those against the Bishops examined and
answered.
II. I Now come to examine the Precedents, and shall proceed therein according
to due Order of Time.

And so the first is taken from the Saxon times; Let. p. 57.
viz. from Brompton's Relation about Edward the Confessour's appealing to the
Earls and Barons about Earl Godwin's murdering of his Brother Alfred. page 59.
Here we see, says the Author of the Letter, it was only ad Comites and
Barons that he appealed, and they were only to judge of it, and not Bishops
or Prelates.

I have 2 things to answer to this Precedent. 1. That we have great reason to
suspect the truth of it. 2. That if it were true, we have no reason to suspect
the Bishops to be excluded.

1. For the truth of the Story. That there is great reason to suspect it,
appears, in that it is the single relation of Brompton, against the consent of
the other Historians, (and some of them much ancienter, and nearer to that
time,) who mention K. Edward's charging Earl Godwin with the Death of his
Brother, not in Parliament, but as they were at Table together at Winchester,
upon the occasion of a saying of Earl Godwin's, upon the King's Cup-bearer's
stumbling with one foot, and recovering with another; See, says he, how one
Brother helps another. Upon which Matt. Westminster, Knighton, and others say,
that the King charged him about the Death of his Brother Alfred. Whatever the
occasion was, our best Historians of that time, Malmsbury and Ingulphus, say,
it was at an Entertainment at Winchester, and that Earl Godwin died upon the
place; being choked, as they say, with a Morsel of Bread he took with a great
Execration upon himself if he were not innocent. Knighton says, he was
questioned for the Death of his Brother by Hardecnute, and that he cleared
himself, by saying he did nothing but by the King's command. But suppose Edward
to be never so weak a Prince, is it likely this should be done by an Appeal in
Parliament by the King himself; and that afterward, by the Judgment of his
Earls and Barons, he and his Sons and 12 Kinsmen should make the King amends,
by as much Gold and Silver as they could carry between their Arms? Besides,
Brompton says, this was done by Godwin when he returned to England, after King
Edward's coming to the Throne; whereas Malmsbury shows, that it was through
Earl Godwin's interest, that ever he came to it; and so the marrying his
Daughter would make any one believe.

2. But suppose it true. What reason is there to conclude the Bishops not
present, who were never absent through all the Saxon times, after Ethelbert's
Conversion, in any public Councils of the Nation? They had no Canon then to be
afraid of; for that of the Council of Toledo was brought in by Lanfranc. And it
was not against the practice of those Times. For if we believe as true a Story
as this of Brompton, the Archbishop of Canterbury himself condemned King
Edward's Mother Emma to a Trial by hot Irons, which was present death without a
Miracle: and this it is said was done by the consent of the King and the
Bishops; which is as good a Precedent against Temporal Lords, as the other is
against the Bishops. However, this is certain, that the Bishops then sat in
the County Court at all Judgments. And whereas the Author of the Letter would
avoid this, by saying that no Capital Crimes were tried there; Let. p. 110.
the contrary is most certainly true. For the Laws of King Edward, as they were
set forth by H. I. c. 31. mention the Capitalia Placita that were there held.
And the Author of the MS. Life of S. Cuthbert says, that when one of Earl
Godwin's Sons was Earl of Northumberland, and one Hamel, a very bad man, was
imprisoned by him, his Friends interceded earnestly with him, ne capite
plecteretur, that he should not lose his head. By which it appears, that Cases
Capital were heard and determined in those Courts, the Bishop and Earl sitting
together in Judgment. And here the Point is plainly gained, because the Author
of the Letter grants that the Bishops sat in all Judgments in the
County-Courts, and then puts the matter upon this Issue, whether Capital Crimes
were there tried or not; which I have clearly proved that they were. But I
shall make another advantage of this against the Author of the Peerage, etc.
for it plainly overthrows that confident Assertion of his, Let. p. 21.
That without doubt there was a Negative Custom, that the Prelates should not
exercise Jurisdiction in Capital Cases, so ancient as to be part of the
Fundamental Contract of the Nation. It were a thousand pities that such
well-sounding words, so handsomely put together, should signify nothing. I
dare not be so positive as he is, but am of opinion, that if he could be
persuaded to produce this Fundamental Contract of the Nation, which I perceive
he has lying by him, it would not amount to so much as a blind Manuscript. If
it be said, that Brompton only mentions Earls and Barons, and Bishops were not
then made Barons; I answer, that Baronies were brought into England by the
Conqueror, and therefore Brompton must speak improperly, and consequently,
taking it only for a Title of Honor, he means no more then those who were the
Great men of that time, and so may take in the Bishops too: of which more
afterward. But there is one thing more in the Laws of H. I. (which were only
a restoring K. Edward's Laws) that implies that Bishops had then a Power of
Judging in Cases Capital; which is c. 58. Qui occiderit Episcopum sit in
arbitrio Principis and Episcoporum, He that killed a Bishop was to be left to
the Will of the King and the Bishops. Which shows that they were to hear and
examine the whole Evidence, and to give Judgment according to it.

After the Saxon times, Let. p. 55.
the first Precedent produced is of the 33 Edw. I. concerning Nicolas Segrave,
who was summoned to appear in Parliament, and after his Offenses were opened,
the King advises only with the Temporal Lords, who declared, such a man
deserved to lose his Life. But is he sure the Bishops were not present? No: he
says, that does not appear by the Record; but it appears clearly they were not
to meddle with it. How so? The King declares, that he would have the Advice
Comitum, Baronum, Magnatum, and aliorum de Consilio suo. But is he sure they
are not comprehended under Magnates, and that there were no Clergymen at that
time of the King's Counsel? What thinks he is William de Hamilton, Dean of
York* who was made Lord Chancellor Ian. 16. 33 Edw. I. and this Parliament was
held the next Sunday after S. Matthias, which was the latter end of February?
And in the 35. year, Ralph de Baldock, Bishop of London, was made Lord
Chancellor: and scarce any other but Churchmen had that Office all his days.
The Bishop of Bath and Wells was Chancellor near twenty years of his Reign;
after him the Bishop of Ely; after him the Dean of Chichester; and then comes
the Dean of York. And among the Lords Treasurers of his time; were the
Archdeacon of Dorset, the Abbot of Westminster, two Bishops of Bath and Wells,
whereof one was Treasurer at this time. These two, I hope, we may suppose to be
of the King's Counsel in this business; who we are certain were both
Churchmen. And if they adjudged Nic. de Segrave worthy of death, who so likely
to deliver that Judgment as the Chancellor? But suppose these were not there,
whom does he mean by the Magnates then distinct from Earls and Barons, who were
of the House of Peers? Mr. Seldom will inform him, if he needs it, that there
were no Dukes till the II. of Edw. III. nor the Title of Marquess till R. II.
nor of Vicount till H. VI. And yet here were Magnates in Parliament, who were
neither Earls nor Barons: and therefore we must in all reason understand the
great Churchmen, who were not so nice of meddling with Criminal Causes in
Parliament of the highest nature in the time of Edw. I. As appears by the great
Cause so much agitated in Parliament 20 Edw. I. concerning the Earls of Hereford
and Gloucester; where this latter is charged with raising Arms without
Commission, and committing Murders and horrible Devastations in the Lands
belonging to the other; and the King in Parliament appoints the Bishop of Ely
with others to be a Committee for examination of this matter. And when they had
both submitted to the King's Pleasure, we have these remarkable words in the
Placita Parlamentaria. Per Consilium Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Comitum,
Baronum, ceterorumque de Consilio suo existentium, facere volens in premissis,
and ut voluntas sua justa sit and rationabilis, prout decet, eorumque assensum
in premissis petiit, and Consilium. Propter quod, habito tractatu diligenti
coram ipso Domino Rege and Consilio suo super predictis, tam ipsi Domino Regi
quam ceteris Prelatis and Magnatibus, and singulis de Consilio suo, videtur
quoad Commit. Gloucestr. and then follows the Sentence; which I confess did not
extend to Life, but to a Forfeiture of his Estate to the King. However, we see
hereby that the Bishops were present at all the praeliminary Debates, and the
King asked their Advice; so that they had their Votes in the Sentence, whether
it should extend to Life or not.

In the Reign of Edw. II. we meet with a remarkable Precedent in behalf of the
Bishops Right, which is of a Judgment reversed made by the Lords without the
Prelates, viz. the Judgment against the two Spencers 15 E. II. which Judgment is
said to be passed at Oxford that year, but in the Parliament at York, Claus. 15
Ed. 2. n. 23, 24. and dors. 13. 32.
the same year, it was nulled and made void before the King, Lords and Commons;
and one of the Reasons given for it is, because the Lords Spiritual, who were
Peers, assented not to it. This Precedent had been cited and allowed by Mr.
Pryn, in his Plea for the Lords; Plea for the Lords, p. 193.
and therefore it is to be wondered the Author of the Letter takes no notice
of it. But the later Author of the Discourse about the Bishops Peerage and
Jurisdiction, Discourse of the Bishops Peerage, page 20.
owns the truth of the thing, saying, that the two Judgments aganst the two
Spencers were reversed 15 Edw. II. for this Cause, through the great favor and
interest they then had at Court. But then he thinks he has taken off the force
of this Precedent, by saying that 1 Edw. III. c. 1. this Judgment is declared
good, and therefore the said Reversal null and void; and the two Spencers upon
this affirmance of the Judgment were executed. This last Assertion every one
knows to be a grievous mistake, that has but looked into our History: for the
Spencers were executed before Edw. III. came to the Crown; the elder in October
19 Edw. II. the other the latter end of November 20 Edw. II. And whereas he
insists upon the Affirmance of the Judgment 1 Edw. III. he had done well to
have looked a little farther, and then he would have found that Act also
repealed 21 R. II. So that if the Act of 1 Ed. III. which affirms the first
Judgment, may seem to take off the force of this Precedent, the repealing of
that Act in the 21 R. II. restores it again, and leaves it in its full force.
Especially if it be considered, that the Act of 1 Ed. III. was not barely
repealed, but declared in Parliament to be unlawful, because Ed. II. was
living, Rot. 64. 21 R. 2.
and true King, and imprisoned by his Subjects at the time of that very
Parliament of 1 Ed. III.

Thus far this Precedent is good. But I will conceal nothing that may with any
color be objected against it. And I cannot deny but what the Author of the
Letter objects, against the Bishops constituting a Proctor to represent them in
Capital Causes, seems to be of equal force against this Precedent, viz. That
this Parliament of the 21 R. II. and all that was done in it, was repealed in
the 1 H. IV. And if that be so, (and those Acts of State which then passed had
not again been repealed 1 Ed. IV.) then the Repealing of that of 1. Ed. III.
signifies nothing, and consequently the Affirmance of the first Judgment
against the two Spencers is good notwithstanding that Repeal. And therefore
that we may examine this matter to the bottom, I shall set down the very words
of the Author of the Letter concerning it. Speaking of the Declaration made by
the Lawyers in the 10 Ed. IV. concerning the Bishops making a Procurator in
Capital Causes, he has these words: page 79.
It is true, here is mention made of their making a Proctor, which was Error
temporis, the Error of those times, grounded upon what was so lately done, (as
they looked upon it) though irregularly done, in the last Parliament of R. II.
whom they considered as their lawful King; and in truth he was so, the three
Henry's that came between being but Usurpers. And again, speaking of the same
business of a Proctor in the 21 R. II. he has this remarkable passage: page
115.
I have already showed, that this whole Parliament was repealed for the
extravagant things that were done in it, of which this was one. And therefore
nothing that was then done can signify any thing to a leading case any ways to
be followed; and this as little as any: except it could be made appear, which I
am confident it cannot, that some Judgment had been reversed upon that account,
because the Prelates were not present, and had not given their assent to it.

Now if I can make out these two things, 1. That the Parliament of R. II. was
not legally repealed; 2. That the Judgment against the two Spencers was
reversed, and that the Repeal of that Reversal in 1 Ed. III. was revoked in 21
R. II. upon this very account, because the Prelates were not present, and had
not given their assent to it; I hope the Author of the Letter will be
satisfied, that both this Precedent, and the Case of a Proctor, are very
significant in this Cause; and that there is a great difference between being
confident, and certain of any thing.

1. That the Parliament of 21 R. II. was not legally repealed. And for this I
take the Author's own acknowledgment, that R. II. was in truth lawful King,
and that H. IV. was but an Usurper: Nay, I add farther, that R. II. was alive
and in prison when H. IV. repealed the Parliament of 21 R. II. For so it is said
in the very Act of Repeal, that R. II. late King of England was pursued, taken,
put in ward, and yet remains in ward. And now I leave it to the Author of
the Letter, whether a Parliament called by a lawful King, and the Acts of it,
ought to be deemed legally repealed by a Parliament that was called by an
Usurper, and held whilst the lawful King was alive, and detained in prison.

2. That the Judgment against the two Spencers was reversed, and the Repeal of
the Reversal of it in 1 Ed. III. revoked in 21 R. II. and that upon this very
account, because the Prelates were not present, and had not given their assent
to it; which the Author of the Letter is confident cannot be made appear. page
115.
That this Judgment was reversed for this Reason I have already shown, viz. in
the Parliament at York 15 Ed. II. And I shall now show, that the Repeal of that
Reversal in 1 Edw. III. was revoked in 21 R. II. and that upon the account
mentioned. For in this Parliament Tho. le Despenser, Earl of Gloucester,
exhibited two Bills, in which he prays that the Revocation of the Exile of
the two Spencers in 15 Ed. II. might be brought before the King and confirmed,
and that the Repeal of the same made in the 1 Ed. III. might be revoked. Of
which Act of Repeal these Errors are assigned, among others: Kot. 55, 56. 21
R. 2.
because the Prelates, who are Peers of the Realm, did not assent to the
Judgment; and because it was made only by the Earls and Barons, Peers of the
Realm, etc. and because it was made against the form of the Great Charter of
England, in which it is contained, that no man shall be exiled, or otherwise
destroyed, but by the lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land.
So that it seems it was looked upon as a breach of the Great Charter, for the
Temporal Lords to condemn a Peer without the Assent of the Bishops, and that
such a Judgment was not esteemed a lawful Judgment by his Peers. And those
Errors of the first Judgment assigned in the Revocation of it in 15 Ed. II.
are allowed in this Parliament of 21 R. II. and that Revocation confirmed, and
the Repeal of it in 1 Ed. III. revoked upon the same account. I shall only
observe, R. 2. 21.
that in this Parliament (as before in 15 Ed. II.) the Bishops are declared to
be Peers; Peers of the Realm, Rot. 55. Peers in Parliament, Rot. 56. and 61; but
most fully and distinctly in the Roll last cited, Peers of the Realm in
Parliament. Of which farther use may be made in the last Chapter concerning the
Peerage of the Bishops.

And now to sum up the force of this Precedent for the Jurisdiction of the
Bishops in Cases of Treason. Here is a Reversal of a Judgment, because made
without the Assent of the Prelates, by the Parliament at York in 15 Ed. II. And
whereas it is said this Reversal was repealed, and the first Judgment affirmed
in 1 Ed. III. I have showed, that this was no legal Repeal, because Ed. II. was
alive, and lawful King, (or else Ed. III. could never have been so) in the
time of that first Parliament of Ed. III. and consequently Ed. III. at that time
was an Usurper, and the Proceedings of that Parliament null and void. So that
the Reversal in 15 Ed. II. stands good, notwithstanding the Repeal in 1 Ed.
III. Besides that this Repeal (whatever it was) is solemnly revoked in 21 R.
II. And H. IV. who reversed all the Proceedings of the Parliament of 21 R. II.
during the life of R. II. is acknowledged by the Author of the Letter to have
been an Usurper, and R. II. to have been a lawful King. And now I think that
this Precedent has all the advantage that can be, and that the Jurisdiction of
the Bishops in Cases of Treason could not have been asserted in a higher
manner, then to have a Judgment in Case of Treason solemnly reversed in two
Parlaments for this very cause, because the Bishops, who are Peers, assented
not to it: And this Precedent owned by the House of Commons, in their Petition
to have a Common Proctor appointed by the Clergy, in this very Parliament of 21
R. II. as is acknowledged by the Author of the Letter. page 115.


To conclude this matter; whether the Acts of Parliament which contain this
declaration of the Peerage of Bishops, and their Jurisdiction in Cases of
Treason, were sufficiently repealed or not; this solemn Assertion of it in two
several Parlaments, together with the Petition of the Commons mentioned before,
are a most clear evidence, that in the general Opinion of the King, Lords, and
Commons, this Jurisdiction did of right belong to the Bishops. And I am sure
they are a Demonstration against the Author of the Peerage his Assertion, of a
Negative Custom, ancient as the Constitution of the Nation, that Prelates
should not exercise Jurisdiction in Capital Cases. For had this been a clear
and undoubted Custom from the first original of this Nation, it is morally
impossible it could have entered into the minds of two Parlaments, solemnly to
have raised this doubt, whether a Judgment given in a case of Treason by the
Temporal Lords without the Assent of the Bishops were valid, and to have
determined that it was not; when yet there was no manner of reason to imagine
that the Bishops ever had any Jurisdiction in such Cases, nay, when there was
an immemorial Custom and Usage to the contrary, namely, that the Temporal
Lords had in all times exercised this Jurisdiction alone, and the Bishops had
been excluded from any share in it.

And in the Apology of Adam D'Orleton, Bishop of Hereford, and after of
Winchester, for his imprisoning R. de Baldock, a great Confident of Hugh
Despencer's, he declares, that the reason why he was carried to Newgate was
through the violence of the People; although, says he, the Parliament then
sitting, there was no cause of fear but Justice would be done. His words are,
Domino Rege, Praelatis, Comitibus, ac aliis terrae Optimatibus Lundoniae tunc
congregatis and praesentibus, pro Iustitia ibidem in Parlamento convocatis
omnibus exhibenda. Which shows that the Prelates then did sit in matters of
Justice in the House of Lords, and in Cases Capital; for this R. de Baldock was
arraigned at Hereford for the same Crimes that Hugh Despencer was.

But the main strength of the Cause is supposed to lie in the Precedents
produced out of the Rolls of Parliament from the 4 Edw. III. to the 38 H. VI.
The force of these Precedents will be better understood, if we consider these
things.

I. That many of them are mere Negative Testimonies. So 4 Edw. III. at the
Trial of Roger Mortimer, Let. p. 6.
it is said, the Earls, Barons and Peers of the Realm were present, therefore
the Bishops were not* 5 Edw. III. only the Great ones returned, page 8, 9.
therefore the Bishops did not. So in the Case of Sir John Gray. From whence he
inferrs, that the Bishops were not to Judge so much as of a Battery. page 10.
25 Edw. III. in Sir William Thorp's Case, the Grantz de Parliament were asked
their advice, therefore not the Bishops. page 13.
1 R. II. in the Case of Weston and Gomenitz, the Bishops not mentioned; but
other Lords, Barons and Bannerets. page 16.
Sir Ralph de Ferrer's Case 4 R. II. the Bishops not present, because not
comprised under les Seigneurs de Parliament. The like in Sir John Oldcastle' s
Case 5 H. V. page 37.
The Question, he says, is, whether Bishops be comprehended under les
Seigneurs de cest present Parliament. In the Earl of Devonshire' s Case 31 H.
VI. the strength lies in this, page 51.
that the Peers are only mentioned; and he supposes no man will say, the
Bishops were his Peers or Lords of the Realm. So that here are Eight
Precedents, that are no more then Negative Testimonies: concerning which in
general, Jurisdiction of the House of Peers asserted, p. 91.
the Author of the Jurisdiction of the House of Peers asserted has a good
observation; viz. That one, or two, or twenty Precedents in the Negative, nay,
I say more, were the number equal as many in the Negative as in the
Affirmative, yet it could not disprove their Jurisdiction: it would only show,
their Lordships were free Agents, to do it, or not to do it, as they saw
Cause; but their Jurisdiction remained entire still, to do it whenever they
would. So I say here; supposing that the Spiritual Lords were not present in
these Cases, it only shows, that they were free Agents, and might withdraw at
some times, and be present at others: which cannot overthrow their Right, for
these Reasons.

(1.) Several of his Negative Precedents, if they prove any thing, prove the
Bishops were not there, when he confesses they might have been there. As,

1. In Cases of Misdemeanors. At the Trial of Sir John de Lee, Let. page 11.
42 Ed. III. being charged with several Misdemeanors, the Record says, the
Prelates were present. 50 Edw. III. p. 12.
Several persons were accused by the Commons for Misdemeanors, and the Bishops
he confesses were present; as Rich, Lions, John Lord Latimer, William Ellis,
John Peecher, Lord John Nevil: at all these Trials the Bishops, says he, were
present; and no body says but they might. So in the Case of Alice Perrers, page
14.
50 Edw. III. the Record says, the Prelates were present, and gave Judgment as
to Banishment, and Forfeiture of her Estate. page 18.
10 R. II. Mich. de la Pool, Lord Chancellor, was accused by the Commons for
several Misdemeanors before the King, Prelates, and the Lords. Here he yields
the Prelates were Judges of Misdemeanors together with other Lords. And yet if
several of his Negative Precedents do prove any thing, they prove too much,
viz. that the Bishops ought not to be present at the Trial of Misdemeanors:
For, he says, the Bishops were not present at the Trial of Weston and
Gomenitz, 1 R. II. nor at the Trial of the Bishop of Norwich 7 R. II. nor at
such Judgments as that of Sir William de Thorp 25 Edw. III. Let. p. 10.
who was condemned for Bribery: and yet he yields they were at the Trial of
Mich. de la Pool 10 R. II. But if they ought not to be present at those of 25
Ed. III. and 1 R. II. and 7 R. II. neither ought they to have been present at
the Trial of Mich. de la Pool. Either therefore his argument does not prove
they were not present at the former, being only from general words; or they
ought not to have been present at the latter, which he confesses they were.
This will best appear by comparing the Cases together. 1 R. II. the Commons
deliver in a Schedule to the Lords of their Demands, before they would proceed
to a Subsidy; among which one was, That all such who without cause had lost or
given up any Castle, or Town, or Fortress, to the dishonor of the King, or
damage of the People, may be put to their Answer before the Lords and Commons
that Parliament. Here was no particular Impeachment of these Persons; but upon
this the Lords sent for these two Persons who were Prisoners in the Tower upon
this account; and the Charge against them was, delivering two Towns in Flanders
without Commission. Weston made a long and plausible Defense, to which no
Answer was given; yet both were condemned to die. page 17.
The Bishop of Norwich was charged with several Miscarriages and Misdemeanors,
says he: why might not the Bishops be present at this Trial? To that he says,
he was charged with one Capital Crime, viz. betraying Graveling to the French:
but he confesses, he cleared himself of this, before they came to Judgment:
and yet he would have the Bishops excluded at this Judgment; and that of Sir
William Elmham, Sir Thomas Trivet, and others; but confesses they were present
at the Trial and Judgment of Mich. de la Pool. Let us then see, what kind of
Trial this was. He was impeached in the name of the Commons of England, and 6
Articles were exhibited against him. The main were, concerning defrauding the
King, and misimploying the Aids granted to the King last Parliament, whereby
much mischief happened to the Kingdom: as may appear by the Rolls, and the
Articles printed in Knighton. Knighton de Event. p. 2684.
Upon these Articles, the Record says that the Commons prayed that Judgment of
Death might pass upon him, as it did upon Sir William de Thorp for receiving 20
li. by way of Bribery. And yet this Judgment of Sir William de Thorp is one of
the Precedents against the Bishops being present; when he allows that they were
present at the whole Trial of this Mich. de la Pool, when a great Minister of
State was so hotly charged by the Commons, for offenses of so great a nature,
and which in their Judgment deserved no less then Death. From whence it
follows, by his own confession, that the Bishops may be present, when the
Ministers of State are impeached by the Commons of such Crimes which in their
Judgment deserve no less then Death.

2. In Acts of Attainder, when the Houses proceed in a Legislative way, he
grants the Bishops may be present; and yet if some of his Precedents signify
any thing, they prove they ought not to be present at the passing of them. As,

1. In the Case of Roger Mortimer and others accused and tried in Parliament 4
Ed. III. He confesses the Roll cannot be read, Let. page 6.
and therefore referrs to 28 Ed. III. where Roger of Wigmore desires that the
Attainder may be examined: which was reversed by Act of Parliament, and
therefore we may justly suppose the Judgment given against him was ratified in
Parliament. Cestrens. l. 7. c. 44. Knighton, p. 2558.
And some of our Historians say, he was condemned judicio Parlamenti. And in
the Petition of Roger Wigmore, he prays that the said Statute and Judgment may
be reversed and annulled. If therefore the Prelates could not be present here,
then they are not to be present in the Legislative way: If they were present in
Acts of Attainder, then this general Negative way of arguing proves nothing;
for then the Bishops were comprehended under the name of Peers: which, without
any Reason, he says, the Bishops cannot pretend to be; when it is notorious
that they challenged it in Parliament 11 R. II. and it was then allowed, as well
as their Protestation.

2. In the case of the Murder of John Imperial, page 15.
3 R. II. an Act of Parliament passed to make it Treason: and he proves the
Bishops had no Vote in it, nor were present at the preparing it. And yet he
confesses, page 3. 118.
that the Bishops have a right to sit in all Acts of Attainder, because they
sit then in their Legislative capacity. Therefore these Negative Precedents
prove nothing.

(2.) The insufficiency of these Negative Precedents appears by this, that we
can make it appear by good Testimonies, that the Bishops have been often
comprehended under the general Titles of Grantz, Peers, and Lords of Parliament,
without any express mention made of them.

And because the great force of many of his Testimonies lies wholly in this,
that the Bishops are not comprehended under the names of Grantz, Seigneurs, and
Peers, I shall endeavor to make it clear beyond exception, that if the
Precedents must be determined by the general words, all the advantage lies on
the Bishops side.

It is certain that in elder times the Baronagium Anglie did take in all the
Lords of Parliament, both Spiritual and Temporal. But I betake my self to the
expressions used in the Records; and because the matter of the debate is
confined within the times of Ed. II. and IV. I shall take notice of the
language of Parliament within that time; reserving that of their Peerage to the
proper place for it.

I begin, as the Author of the Letter does, with 4 Edw. III. and in that year
n. 6. the Record runs thus; Et est assentu and accord per nostre Seigneur le
Roi, and tout le Grantz en plcyn Parliament: where a Law was passed concerning
Trial by Peers; and in the passing of a Law our Author allows the Bishops to
be present. But it is more plain n. 12. Accord per nostre Seigneur le Roi, and
les Grantz de mesinme le Parliament; It is agreed by the King, and the Great
ones in Parliament. But that the Bishops are comprehended under theseGrantzis
evident; for it is there said, that the Petitions of Edmund Earl of Kent and
Margaret Countess of Kent, to which that Agreement referrs, were read before
the King, the Prelates, the Counts, the Barons, and other Grantz of the
Parliament. In the same year, n. 14. we meet with les Preres des Prielatz and
autres Grantz, the Petition of the Bishops and other Great men: and then it
follows, Nostre Seigneur le Roi en pleyn Parliament, per assent, accord, prieres
and conseal des ditz Prelatz and autres Grantz; Our Lord the King in full
Parliament, by the assent, accord, petition and advice of the said Prelates and
other Grantz. Which shows that they are some of the Grantz of Parliament.

5 Ed. III. n. 3. Touz les Prelatz and autres Grantz: n. 13. Grantz in general
is used in the Debate between the Abbot of Crowland and Sir Thomas Wake: and n.
15. le Roi and as autres Grantz en pleyn Parliament: n. 16. Item fu accord per
le Roi and touz le Grantz en mesme le Parliament, auxibien per Prelatz come per
autres;It was agreed by the King and the Great men of the Parliament, as well by
the Prelates as others. Nothing can be plainer then that here the Bishops are
called Grantz, as well as the other Lords of Parliament.

6 Ed. III. n. 1. Devant nostre Seigneur le Roi, and touz le Prelatz, and
autres Grantz: The Articles were read before the King, the Prelates, and other
Great men. If the Bishops had not been comprehended under Grantz, the Record
would have only used Grantz, and not autres Grantz. But the same expression is
again used n. 5. In the second part of the Rolls of that year, n. 1. we find
three several ways of expressing the Persons then present: the first, les
Prelatz, Countes, Baronns, and autres Grantz du Parliament; the next is, queux
Prelatz, and autres Grantz; the third is, touz le Grantz en mesme le Parliament:
and all these are used to express the same Persons. And again n. 3. touz les
Grantz du dit Parliament; which are there opposed to Chivalers des Countez; and
are more distinctly mentioned before in these words, les ditz Prelatz, Countes,
Barouns, and autres Grantz, and les Chivalers des Countes, and tote la
Conumune. Sometimes the Grantz are taken in general, for all of the House of
Peers; and the Commons for the Lower House. So 21 Ed. III. n. 63. il assentuz
per lui, les Grantz, and la dit Comunalte a son Parliament: and again, ditz
Grantz and de tote la Com^e susditz: and, le Roi per assent des Grantz commanda
a la ditz Com^e. From these examples, and many more which might, if it were
needful, be produced, it evidently appears that the Bishops were Grantz in
Parliament, according to the language of that Time: and therefore the Precedents
produced wherein only the Grantz are mentioned, are of no force at all against
the Presence of the Bishops. And that Assertion of the Author of the Peerage,
page 15*
etc. appears to be without any ground, viz. that the Bishops are never spoken
of in any Record but by the name of Bishops or Prelates, or some such name, to
distinguish them from the Laiety. These general Negatives are very bold and
dangerous things; and one Affirmative overthrows them. But I have produced many
Instances to the contrary, and might do many more. Such men who dare venture
upon such bold Sayings, must be presumed to have read over all the Records
themselves; and must presume that none else ever so much as looked into them.
But that Author discovers too much his Second-hand Learning in these matters;
and we might have wanted several of his Precedents, had it not been for Mr.
Selden's Baronage.

As to the Title of Seigneurs du Parliament, Rights of the Bishops, p. 56, 57,
etc.
being common to the Bishops, I am prevented by another hand.

I shall only add two Precedents more, not taken notice of by others. The one
7 R. II. The Answer of Mich. de la Pole is said to becoram Magnatibus and
Communitate in Parlamento;where the Author of the Letter confesses the
Bishops were present, and therefore comprehended under theMagnates. The other
15 H. VI. One Philipps complained against the Bishop of London to the House of
Commons: they sent the Complaint up to the Lords: the Bishop asks the Advice of
the House; who gave this Answer, Non consentancum fuit aliquem Procerum alicui
in eo loco responsurum. Which had signified nothing, if the Bishops had not
been allowed to be Proceres Regni. So much for his Negative Precedents.

II. Some of his Precedents were condemned in Parliament to be irregular and
erroneous in other respects; and therefore it is no wonder if they should be so
in this.

1. The Judgment upon Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, 4 Ed. III. was reversed in
Parliament 28 Ed. III as defective and erroneous in all points; being without
any Proof or Witnesses, or bringing the Person to answer for himself. And
therefore it was an Honor for the Bishops not to be present.

2. The Judgment upon Haxey, Let. p. 24.
20 R. II. is confessed by the Author to be most unjust, and would not only
have shaken, but wholly destroyed the very foundation of Parliament; and
reversed 1 H. IV. as against Right and Course of Parlaments. And he confesses
the Bishops were present at condemning it, but not at passing it. Which also
makes much for their Honor.

III. Some of his Precedents prove that when the Bishops did withdraw, they did
it voluntarily, and took care to preserve their Right, either by Protestation,
or appointing a Proxy.

[1.] That they withdrew voluntarily. So 5 Ed. III. it is said, Let. p. 8.
that the Bishops did withdraw at that time, being of opinion that it did not
properly belong to them to give Counsel about keeping the Peace, and punishing
of Malefactors: and so, says he, they went away by themselves, and returned
no more. But although this proves nothing but a voluntary Act of the Bishops in
withdrawing; yet the representation made of this matter is so partial, and
different from the Record, that I cannot but take a little more notice of it.

1. He says, that the Prelates being of opinion that it belonged not properly
to them to give Counsel about keeping the Peace, or punishing such evils, they
went away by themselves, and returned no more. Thereby insinuating, that they
looked on this matter as wholly unfit for them to meddle in, and thereupon left
the House. Whereas the words of the Record are, Si alerent mesmes les Prelatz
and les Procurators de la Clergy per eux mesmes a conseiler de chooses
susdites, and les ditz Countes, Barons and autres Grantz per eux mesmes: So the
Prelates and Proctors of the Clergy went by themselves toconsult about the
aforesaid matters, and the Earls, Barons and other Great men by themselves. So
that this withdrawing was but into several Committees, as was usual at that
time, by which the sense of the 3 Estates was best understood; and then they
met together, and agreed upon what was fit to be made a Law. This appears by 6
Edw. III A quen jour de Ioedi eu ont trete and deliberation, cest assavoir les
ditz Prelates per eux mesmes, and les ditz Countes, Barons, and autres Grantz,
per eux mesmes; and auxint les Chivalers des Countes per eux mesmes: Upon which
Thursday they entered upon debate, (concerning the News from Scotland) the
Prelates by themselves, the Lords and other Great men by themselves; and so the
Knights of Counties by themselves. The Houses being then not wholly separate,
nor always together; but dividing into Committees, and not into Houses, as
occasion required; and then joining together to express their common Sense. So
40 Ed. III. when the occasion of their meeting was delivered, which was an
extraordinary message from Rome, the Pope sending for Tribute and Homage, it is
said, the Bishops went by themselves, and the other Lords by themselves, and
the Commons by themselves; and then met together, and declared their unanimous
resolution to oppose to the uttermost any such Demand. Such a withdrawing of
the Bishops it was in this case. For they and the Proctors of the Clergy
(whether by them we understand the Procuratores Cleri, who, according to the
Modus tenendi Parlamentum, made a part of the Parliament; or the Proxies of the
absent Bishops, who were allowed to supply their places, as appears by 35 Ed.
I. and the Case of the Bishops of Durham and Carlisle in the Parliament at
Westminster Ed. II. and 17 R. II. and many other instances afterward) thought
fit to consider in this matter what was most proper for them. And accordingly
we find Ecclesiastical Censures added to the Civil Sanctions, and brought in by
the Prelates at that time, which are still extant in the Record.

2. Whereas he says, the Bishops returned no more, the Record says the
contrary. For it expressly says, that the Orders for keeping of the Peace
agreed on by the Committee of Lords were read before the King, the Bishops, the
Knights of Counties, and the Commons, and did please them all; and per nostre
Seigneur le Roi, Prelatz, Countes, Baronns, and autres Grantz, and auxint per
les Chivalers de Countez and gentz de Commun, furent pleynment assentuz and
accordez. And the same is immediately said of the Censures brought in by the
Bishops. Which made me extremely wonder at his saying that the Bishops returned
no more; whereas it is very plain, they did not only return, but the Orders
were read before them, and they did give their assent to the Passing of them.

In the Parliament 11 R. II. that it was only a voluntary withdrawing, I prove
from the concessions of the Author of the Letter; viz. that they might be
present in all Acts of Attainder. For it is evident from the printed Statutes,
that they proceeded by way of Attainder against the Ministers of State; and
therefore they might have been present, if they pleased, upon the Author's own
grounds. How is it then possible for him to understand de Iure non possumus, in
their Protestation 11 R. II. of the Law of the Land, when he grants that in all
Acts of Attainder, they may de jure be present and give their Votes?

[2.] When they did solemnly withdraw, they took care to preserve their Right
two ways; (1.) by Protestation, (2.) by Proxy.

1. By Protestation, saving their Right; which was received by the House, and
entered: page 24.
of which before. The late Author of the Peerage and Jurisdiction of the Lords
Spiritual will not allow the Protestation to be an argument of any Right;
neither, says he, does the permission or allowance of any Protestation yield
the Right which the Protester is desirous to save, but only saves the Right
which he had before, if he had any. Whereas the Author of the Letter makes it
as good as a Law, Let. p. 23.
being entered in the Iournal-Book, that such a thing was agreed by the King and
the two Houses. I will not deny that the former Author speaks more reasonably
in this matter, when he says, that the utmost a Protestation can do is, to
anticipate a Conclusion, or Estoppell; i.e. to provide that the doing of any
such Act as is contained in the Protestation, shall not be construed to the
prejudice of the Party, so as to bar or conclude him from claiming afterward
that which in truth is his Right. It is true, this Protestation passed with
greater solemnity then usually; for it was with the consent of the King and
both Houses: but however it retained the nature of a Protestation. And there
was no distinction at that time between a Iournal-Book and the Rolls of
Parliament. For a good Author assures us, Selden's Bar. page 6.
the Iournals of the Upper House began 1 H. VIII. and therefore the Author of
the Peerage, Rights of the Bishops, page 76.
etc. deserved no such severe reproof on that account. But this is all I plead
for, viz. that this Protestation was a Salvo to their Right; which meeting with
no contest or opposition in the Houses, but passing with unanimous consent, is
a certain argument the Houses did not think there was any Law to exclude them.
And therefore the Author of the Judicature very well says, That had it not
been for the Canon Law, (for which he referrs to the Synodal Constitutions at
Westminster 21 H. II. which is only reviving the Council of Toledo's Canon,)
they might have been present both by Common Law, and by the Law of God.

2. By Proxy, or one common Procurator to appear in Parliament for them, and to
vote in the name of the whole Body. This was received and allowed 21 R. II.
upon the Petition of the House of Commons, because Judgments had been reversed
without their concurrence. Against this the Author of the Letter objects many
things which are easily answered.

1. That hence it appears they could not be personally present. Let. p. 28.
On the contrary, from hence it follows they had a Parlamentary Right to be
present; although they said by Canon Law they could not.

2. That it was never practiced but in this one Parliament. That is strange,
when himself confesses, that it passed for good Law 10 Ed. IV. Term. Pasch. n.
35. and the same is cited by Stamford Placit. Cor. l. 3. f. 153. page 78.
To which judgment of the Lawyers, and the greatest of their time, (for
Littleton was then Judge 10 Ed. IV.) we have a very extraordinary Answer called
Error Temporis; page 79.
which will equally make void the Law or Judgment of any Age. But is it
possible, that should pass for Law 10 Ed. IV. which was never practiced but
once 21 R. II. and the contrary practice had been only allowed all the
intermediate times? Thus a short answer may be given to the Constitution of
Clarendon, it was Error Temporis; to the allowing the Protestation 11 R. II. it
was Error Temporis; and so on to the end of the Chapter. If there were any
Error Temporis in this matter, it lay in this, that they took this Precedent 21
R. II. for a sufficient Ground, that the Bishops should only appear by Proxy
in such Cases; whereas the Canon Law being taken away since the Reformation as
to these matters, their Right of Personal appearing does return to them of
course.

3. That this Parliament was repealed 1 H. IV. Let. p. 79.
But this I have answered already from his own words, wherein he acknowledges
him to be an Usurper, and consequently the Repeal not made by a legal
Parliament. And this Repeal was again taken off 1 Ed. IV.

4. That it is not at all Parlamentary, for one or two men to represent a whole
Body. The consequence then is, that they ought to enjoy their own Personal
Right. All that we urge from hence is, that the Bishops kept up their Right
still by their Proxies, when they thought the Canons would not allow voting in
their own Persons.

IV. Some of his Precedents do prove, that after the Protestations and Proxies,
they did assert their own Personal Right, and were present both at
Examinations, and at the whole Proceedings.

1. At Examinations. As in the Case of Sir William Rickill 1 H. IV. who was
brought to Parliament before the King and the two Houses, Let. p. 31.
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons then assembled together. And
he grants the Bishops were present at his Examination.

2. At the whole Proceedings, page 41. to page 48.
28 H. VI. where he confesses the Bishops were not only personally present,
but did act and bear a principal part in aIudicialproceeding in Parliament, in a
Case that was in it self Capital, viz. of William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk.
Which is very fully related by the Author, and needs no repetition. All that
he has to say to this, is, that the whole Proceedings were irregular, and not
to be drawn into Precedent. Whereas a great Lawyer in his time, Sir E. C. made
use of this as a sufficient Precedent in a Case of great moment, about
Commitment upon a general Accusation. But there is not any Irregularity
expressed or intimated in the Bishops appearing, and judging as other Lords
did; and the Judgment was not reversed because of their being there, as we have
showed others have been for their being absent.

V. None of all his Precedents do prove that the Bishops were ever excluded
from sitting, by any Vote of the House of Lords or Commons. That they might
voluntarily withdraw, we deny not; or not be present at giving of Judgment out
of regard to the Canons: which is all that is proved by the Precedent of John
Hall 1 H. IV. of the Earls of Kent, page 32.
Huntington, page 34.
etc. 2 H. IV. of Sir John Oldcastle 5 H. V. and of Sir John Mortimer 2 H. VI.
page 37.
And this we have made appear was done by them out of regard to the Canon Law;
page 39.
the force of which being taken away by the Reformation, the Bishops are
thereby restored to their just Parlamentary Right. Neither can any Disusage be
a bar to that Right, since the ground of that Disusage was something then
supposed to be in force, which is now removed by the Reformation. And I fear,
if this kind of arguing be sufficient to overthrow the Bishops Right, much
stronger of the same kind may be used to overthrow the King's Supremacy in
mattters of Religion. So great care ought men to have, lest under the color of
a mighty zeal against Popery, they do overthrow the very Principles of our
Reformation.

VI. There are Precedents upon Record in the Rolls of Parliament, which are not
mentioned by the Author of the Letter, which do prove that the Bishops were
present at the Examination of Treason and Capital Offenses in Parliament. And
that within the time, page 5. 51.
wherein he pretends to give an account of all the Trials recorded in the
Rolls. Which shows how easily men pass by those things they have no mind to see.

I begin with 4 Ed. III. and I must do him that right, as to say, that he does
not only mention the Trial of Roger Mortimer, page 6.
but of Sir Simon Bereford and others who were accused and tried in Parliament.
But pretending, that the Roll of that Parliament is so defaced that it cannot be
read, he runs to that of 28 Ed. III. and so gently passes over all the other
Trials which are in the Record, and are more plain and express as to this
matter. Among the Articles against Roger Mortimer, Ed. l of March, one is, that
after he knew certainly the death of Edw. II. he made use of Instruments to
persuade Edward Earl of Kent, that King's Brother, that he was still living,
and so drew him into a design for his Rescue; for which he was attainted at
Winchester, and there suffered death for it. Among these Instruments the chief
was one Mautravers, who for that Reason was attainted this Parliament: and the
words of the Record are, Rot. Parl. 4 Ed. 3. n. 3.
Trestouz les Pieres, Counts and Barons assemblez a cest Parliament a West. si
ont examine estraitement, and sur ce sont assentuz and accordez, que John
Mautravers si est culpable de la mort Esmon Count de Kent, etc. All the Peers,
Counts and Barons assembled in this present Parliament, upon strict examination
do assent and agree, that John Mautravers is guilty of the death of Edmund Earl
of Kent. Here we have the strict Examination of a Capital Case in Parliament,
and all the Peers are said to be present at it. It is used as an argument by
the Author of the Letter, that in the case of Roger Mortimer, page 7.
the Bishops could not be comprised under the general name of Peers, since the
Barons are first in rank. But here the Peers are mentioned before Counts and
Barons; and it will be impossible for him to assign any other Peers at that
time, that were named before them, but the Prelates; who frequently are so put
in the Records of that time: as in the same Parliament n. 12. Prelatz, Countes,
Barons;n. 13. Et per assent des ditz Prelatz, Countes, Barons; so again n. 14.
15. 17. 24. 25. But the Author of the Letter says, page 7.
they cannot pretend to be Peers of the Realm. Let him name then other Peers of
the Realm at that time, who were neither Counts nor Barons, and were before
them. But if we are to judge who are Peers of the Realm by the Records of
Parliament, I do not question but I shall make it evident, that the Bishops were
so esteemed; and that some persons, who pretend to great skill in Records,
either have not searched so diligently, or have not observed so carefully about
this matter as they might have done. But of this afterward.

In the same Parliament Judgment was passed upon Boges de Boyons, John Deveril,
Thomas Gurnay, William Ocle; but being by way of Attainder, and not upon
particular examination, which is mentioned in the case of Mautravers, I pass
them over.

In the Pleas of the Crown held before the King in this Parliament, we find
another Case which relates to our present debate; viz. of Thomas Lord Berkely
and Knight, who was arraigned for the death of King Ed. II. who came before the
King in pleno Parlamento, in full Parliament, and there pleaded Not guilty; and
declared he was ready to clear himself as the King's Court should advise. Then
they proceeded to particular examination of him, how he could acquitt himself,
being Lord of the Castle where the King was murdered, he being committed to
his Custody and John Matravers. He pleaded for himself, that he was then sick
at Bradley, and knew nothing of it. They charged him, that the Keepers of the
Castle were of his own appointing; and therefore he was bound to answer for
them. He answered, that they with Matravers having received the King into their
custody, he was not to be blamed for what they did: and for this he put himself
upon his Country. At the day appointed for his Trial, he appears again coram
Domino Rege in pleno Parlamento; and the Jury returned him Not guilty. But
because he appointed Gurney and Ocle to keep his Castle of Berkely, by whom the
King was murdered, the King appoints him a day the next Parliament to hear his
Sentence; and in the mean time he was committed to the custody of Ralph Nevil
Steward of the King's House. In the next Parliament 5 Edw. III. n. 18. The
Prelates, Earls and Barons petition the King, that he might be discharged of his
mainprisors: the which was granted, and a farther day given him to appear next
Parliament. But we read no more of him, till the Summons he had 14 Ed. III. as
one of the Lords in Parliament. The great force of this Precedent lies in
understanding what is meant by appearing before the King in full Parliament. If
under this the Bishops be comprehended, then this will be an uncontrollable
Precedent of the presence of the Bishops in the Examination of a Case Capital.

What the importance of this phrase of full Parliament is, will best appear by
the use of it in the Records of that time. 4 Ed. III. n. 6. Et est assentu and
accord per nostre Seigneur le Roi, and touz les Grantz en pleyn Parliament.
Where it was agreed, that the procedings at that time by the Lords against
those who were not Peers should not be drawn into consequence; and that the
Peers should be charged only to try Peers. Which has all the formality of an
Act of Parliament: and therefore all the Estates were present, n. 8. Accord est
per nostre Seigneur le Roi and son Conseil en pleyn Parliament. Which was an Act
of Pardon concerning those who followed the Earl of Lancaster.

5 Ed. III. n. 10. we have the particular mention of the Bishops, as some of
those who do make a full Parliament. Accord est per nostre Seigneur le Roi,
Prelatz, Countes, Barons, and autres Grantz du Roialm en pleyn Parliament: and
n. 17. En pleyn Parliament si prierent les Prelatz, Countes, Barons, and autres
Grantz de mesme le Parliament, a nostre Seigneur le Roi, etc.

6 Ed. III. n. 5. the Archbishop of Canterbury made his Oration en pleyn
Parliament, which is explained by en la presence nostre Seigneur le Roi, and de
touz les Prelatz, and autres Grantz. n. 9. Si est accord and assentu per touz
en pleyn Parliament: who those were, we are told before in the same number, viz.
les Prelatz, Countes, Baronns, and touz les autres somons a mesme le Parliament.
Which is the clearest explication of full Parliament, in the presence of all
those who were summoned to Parliament. From whence it follows, that where a full
Parliament was mentioned at that time, the Bishops were certainly present; and
consequently did assist at the Trial of Thomas Lord Berkely, who appeared
before the King in full Parliament: as Nich. de Segrave did 33 Ed. I. and there
the Bishops are expressly mentioned as present; as appears by what has been
said before concerning his Case.

5 H. IV. Henry Hotspur, Son to the Earl of Northumberland, was declared a
Traitor by the King and Lords in full Parliament; and the same day, the Father
was, upon examination, acquitted of Treason by the Peers. It is not said that
this was done in full Parliament, as the other was: but there are several
circumstances which make it very probable the Bishops were then present. (1.)
When the Earl of Northumberland took his Oath of Fidelity to the King, he did
it, says the Record, upon the Cross of the Archbishop; which was to be carried
before him, if he went out of the House. (2.) The Archbishop of Canterbury
prayed the King, that forasmuch as himself and other Bishops were suspected to
be in Piercie's Conspiracy, that the Earl might upon his Oath declare the
truth: who thereupon did clear them all. Which shows that the Archbishop was
then present in the House. And for the same reason that he was present, we may
justly suppose the other Bishops to have been so too. (3.) The Earl of
Northumberland beseeched the Lords and Earls and Commoners, that if he brake
this Oath, they would intercede no more with the King for him. Now the better
to understand this, we are to consider, that H. IV. takes notice in his
declaration upon the Rebellion of Sir Henry Piercy, Walsingh* hist. Angl. page
366.
that the Earl of Northumberland and his Son gave out, that they could have no
access to the King, but by the Mediation of the Bishops and Earls, and
therefore did beseech them to intercede with the King for them. It is not then
probable, that those should be now left out, when the words are large enough to
comprehend them, and no one circumstance is brought to exclude them. For that
general one, of their not being Peers, will be fully refuted afterward.

But that which puts this out of dispute is, (4.) that the Record says, n. 17.
the Commons not only gave the King thanks for the pardon of the Earl of
Northumberland, but the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in these remarkable
words; Et au^i mesmes les Co^es remercierment les Seigneurs Espirituelx and
Temporelx de lour bon and droiturell judgment quils avoient fait come Piers du
Parliament: And likewise the Commons gave thanks to the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal for the good and right Judgment which they had given in this case as
Peers of Parliament. Which is a clear Precedent of the Bishops judging in a
Capital Case, and that as Peers.

2 H. VI. n. 9. John Lord Talbott had accused James Boteler, Earl of Ormond, of
sundry Treasons before the King and his great Council; and after, before John
Duke of Bedford, Constable of England. The King takes advice of his Parliament
about it; and then it is expressly said in the Record, De avisamento and
assensit Dominorum Spiritualium and Temporalium ac Communitatis Regni Anglie,
in eodem Parlamento existent', facta fuit quedam abolitio delationis,
nuntiationis, and detectionis predict, etc. Here the King advises with the
Lords Spiritual in an accusation of Treason; and therefore they must be present
in the debates concerning it.

I leave now any considerate person to judge impartially on which side the
Right lies. For on the one side,

1. There is the Constitution of Clarendon interpreted by H. II. and the
Bishops at Northampton.

2. A Protestation of their Right entered, and allowed by King, Lords and
Commons, 11 R. II.

3. A Reversing of Judgments owned by Parliament for want of their presence, 21
R. II.

4. A Preserving of their Right by Proxy, when they thought their Personal
attendance contrary to the Canons.

5. A Bar to a total discontinuance of their personal Right, by an allowed
Precedent 28 H. VI.

6. A Restoring them to their former Right, by removing of the force of the
Canon Law upon the Reformation.

7. No one Law or Precedent produced for excluding them, even in those Times,
when they thought the Canons did forbid their presence.

8. Several Precedents upon Record, wherein they were present at Examinations
and Debates about Cases Capital.

On the other side,

1. The Precedents are General, and Negative.

2. Or relating to such Cases wherein they are allowed to be present.

3. Or of Judgments condemned as erroneous by Parliament.

4. Or of voluntary Withdrawing, with Protestation of their Right, and making
of Proxies.

5. Or of not being present at the passing of Judgment out of regard to the
Canon Law.

And now on which side the Right lies, let the Author of the Letter himself
judge.

CHAP. IV.
The Peerage of the Bishops cleared; how far they make a third Estate in
Parliament. Objections against it answered.
THERE remain Two things to be considered, which are put in by way of
Postscript by the Author of the Letter: the one concerns the Peerage of the
Bishops, the other their Being a Third Estate in Parliament.

1. Concerning their Peerage. To prove this two Statutes had been alleged, 25
Ed. III. c. 6. and 4 H. V. c. 6. and the opinion of Judges and Lawyers out of
the Year-Books. But although these had been very significant, if they had been
against them; they have the hard fortune to signify nothing, when they are for
them. A mere Protestation becomes good Law, very substantial Law, if it be
supposed to make against the Bishops; and yet in that very Protestation the
Right of Peerage is expressly challenged, (as well as it is asserted and taken
for granted in the Statutes mentioned.) Is that part of the Protestation
invalid? and must nothing pass for Law but what is against them? Is it credible
that a Right of Peerage should be owned and received in Acts of Parliament, in
Protestations, in Year-Books, time after time; and no opposition made against
it by the Temporal Lords all that time, in case they believed the Bishops had
challenged that which by no means did belong to them? Did not the Temporal
Lords understand their own Privileges? or were they willing to suffer the
Bishops to assume their Titles to themselves without the least check or
contradiction, and let their Protestations be entered in the Rolls of Parliament
without any contrary Protestation? I do not question but the Author of the
Letter did read the Bishops Protestation at large in the Parlament-Rolls 11 R.
II. And can any thing be plainer, then that therein they challenge a Right of
Peerage to themselves, ut Pares Regni -- cum caeteris Regni Paribus, etc.? And
this Protestation, he says, was entered by consent of the King, Lords
Temporal, and Commons; as is expressed in the Rolls. Were the Temporal Lords
awake? or were they mean and low-spirited men? No; they were never higher then
at this time, when the King himself durst not withstand them. What could it be
then, but mere conviction of their just Right of Peerage, which made them
suffer such a Protestation as that to pass, after so solemn and unusual a
manner, and to be enrolled par Commandment du Roy, and assent des Seigneurs
Temporels and Communs; as it is in the Rolls? Was all this only a Complement
to the Potent Clergy at that time? But who can imagine that King, Lords and
Commons should complement at that rate, as to suffer the Bishops to challenge a
Peerage to themselves in Parliament, if they had not an undoubted Right to it?
This one argument is sufficient to convince any reasonable man. Especially when
we consider, that in the same Parliament, before the Protestation was brought
in, a motion was made n. 7. by all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, which they
claimed come leur libertez and franchise, as their Liberty and Privilege, that
all weighty matters moved in this Parliament, or to be moved in any to come,
touchant Pieres de la Terre, concerning the Peers of the Realm, should be
determined, adjudged and discussed by the course of Parliament; and not by the
Civil, nor by the Common Law of the Land, used in inferior Courts of the
Realm. The which Claim, Liberty and Franchise, the King most willingly allowed
and granted in full Parliament. From whence it is evident, that the King and
Parliament did allow the Right of Peerage in the Lords Spiritual; for it is said
expressly in the Record, that all the Spiritual as well as Temporal Lords joined
in this Claim: which being allowed them in full Parliament, is an evidence
beyond contradiction of their Right of Peerage.

But against this no less is pretended then Magna Charta, viz. that every man
who is tried at the King's Suit must be tried by his Peers. Let. page 85.
Now if a Bishop be tried for any Capital offense, he is tried by the
Commoners, and that is the Common Law of England; it has ever been so, never
otherwise: then must Commoners be his Peers, and he and Commoners must be Pares.

To this Argument, how strong soever it appears, these two things may be justly
answered.

1. That the matter of Fact cannot be made out, that a Bishop has always been
tried by Commoners.

2. That if it could, it does not overthrow their Peerage in Parliament.

(1.) That the matter of Fact cannot be made out, viz. that if a Bishop be
tried for a Capital Offense, he is tried by the Commoners; that it has ever
been so, never otherwise. Antiq. Brit. page 223.
For in 15 Ed. III. John Stratford, Archbishop of Canterbury, was at the King's
Suit accused of Capital Crimes, viz. of no less then Treason, and Conspiracy
with the French King. He put himself upon his Trial in Parliament. A Parliament
was called; and he at first refused admission into the House; which he
challenged tanquam major Par Regni post Regem, and Uocem primam in Parlamento
habere debens, as the First Peer of the Realm after the King, and having the
first Uote in Parliament. Upon which, and the intercession of his Friends, he is
admitted into the House; and there he put himself upon the Trial of his Peers.
At which time a great Debate arose in the House, which continued a whole Week;
and it was resolved, that the Peers should be tried only by Peers in
Parliament. Whereupon the Archbishop had 12 Peers appointed to examine the
Articles against him: 4 Bishops, viz. London, Hereford, Bath, and Exceter; 4
Earls, Arundel, Salisbury, Huntingdon, and Suffolk; and 4 Barons, Percy, Wake,
Basset, and Nevil. Here we have all that can be desired in the case. Here is a
Bishop tried at the King's Suit, and for a Capital Crime; and yet not tried by
Commoners, but by his Peers, and that after long debate in the House concerning
it. If it be said, that he was tried by the Lords as Judges in Parliament, and
not as his Peers; it is answered, 1. Then Bishops are Judges in Parliament in
Cases Capital: for so this was, and 4 Bishops appointed to examine it. 2. The
Debate in the House was about Trial of Peers by their Peers; and upon that it
was resolved, that the Archbishop should be tried by the House. For the King
designed to have him tried in the Exchequer for the matters objected against
him, and the Steward of the King's House and Lord Chamberlain would not suffer
him to enter into the House of Lords, till he had put in his Answer in the
Exchequer. Upon which the great Debate arose; and therefore the Resolution of
the House is as full a Precedent in this Case as can be desired.

I do not deny, that the Rolls of Parliament of that year seem to represent the
12 Peers, as Birchington calls them, not as appointed to examine the particular
Case of Stratford; but to draw up in form the desire of the Peers as to a Trial
by their Peers, in Parliament: the which is extant in the Record 15 Ed. III. n.
7. However, this Argument does not lose its force as to the Peerage of the
Bishops; but it is rather confirmed by it. For there they pray the King, by the
Assent of the Prelates, Counts and Barons, that the Peers of the Realm may not
be judged but in Parliament, and per lour Piers, and by their Peers: and after
it follows, that they may not lose their Temporalties, Lands, Goods and
Chattels, etc. Who were capable of losing their Temporalties, but the Prelates?
Therefore this Law must respect them as well as others. As farther appears not
only by the Occasion, but by the Consequent of it. For it follows, n. 8. that
the Archbishop of Canterbury was admitted into the King's Presence, and to
answer for himself in Parlamentdevant les Piers, before his Peers: which the
King granted. So that the Rolls of Parliament put this matter beyond
contradiction.

In 21 R. II. Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury, was impeached of High
Treason before the King and Lords in Parliament. The King' s answer was, That
forasmuch as this Impeachment did concern so high a Person, and Pier de son
Roialm, ( it is in the Record, but left out in the Abridgment) and a Peer of
the Realm, the King would be advised. But soon after he was condemned for
Treason by the House, theProxie of the Bishops, Sir Tho. Percy, giving his
Vote. The force of this does not lie barely in his being impeached before the
House of Peers in time of Parliament; but that the King called him in his Answer
a Peer of the Realm.

And because two Laws were already passed, the one, that Peers were to try none
but Peers, 4 Ed. III. n. 6. the other, that Peers were to be tried only by
their Peers, 15 Ed. III. n. 7. the former of these, page 192.
the Author of the Jurisdiction of the House of Peers asserted (one well known
to the Author of the Letter) would have only looked on as a Temporary Order
of the House. Coke 2. Inst. c. 29. p. 50. Sir J. M. Arg. concerning the
Jurisdiction of the Peers, in Skinners Case.
But our greatest Lawyers are of another opinion. And an eminent Lawyer still
living urged this as an Act of Parliament, because it is said, that the King in
full Parliament assented to it: and he added, that the words are both
Affirmative and Negative; they shall not be bound, or charged to try any other
then Peers, but be thereof discharged; and that therein they declare it to be
against Law for them to exercise Jurisdiction on those who were not their
Peers. From whence it follows, that since Stratford and Arundel, Archbishops of
Canterbury, were allowed to be tried by the House of Peers, (without
Impeachment from the Commons) they were looked on as Peers by the whole House.

The latter Act, the same Author cannot deny to be a binding Law; but he has
a strange fetch to avoid the force of it; page 193.
viz. that this Law was made with respect to the Case of Roger Mortimer 4 Ed.
III. and not to the Case of Stratford then in Agitation: which is without all
color of Reason. For the Case then was of a different nature, viz. about the
Peers trying those who were not Peers, as Sir Simon Bereford, etc: but here the
case was, whether Peers should be tried by any others then their Peers; and the
King granted they should not. Now upon this Stratford was allowed to be tried
by his Peers in Parliament; and therefore this Trial upon these Acts is an
invincible Argument of the Peerage of the Bishops.

In 28 H. VI. when William de la Pole, Duke of Suffolk, waved being tried by
his Peers, and submitted to the King's Mercy; page 47.
the Record says, (as the Author of the Letter himself confesses) that
Viscount Beaumont, on the behalf of the LordsSpiritualand Temporal, and by
their advice, assent and desire, moved the King, that a Protestation might be
entered in the Parlament-Roll, that this should not be, nor turn in prejudice
nor derogation of them, their Heirs, ne of their Successors in time coming;
but that they may have and enjoy their Liberties and Freedoms as largely as
ever their Ancestors and Predecessors had or enjoyed them before this time.
Which Sir R. Cotton more briefly expresses, n. 52. that neither they nor their
Heirs should by this example be barred of their Peerage. The Author of the
Letter more fully puts in Successors, as well as Heirs; for this Protestation
was made in behalf of the Lords Spiritual as well as Temporal. But very
unfairly leaves out the most material words in the Record, viz. [after
Freedoms,] in case of their Peerage. And I appeal to the Author himself,
whether these words be not in the Record; and with what ingenuity they are left
out, I cannot understand. I do not charge the Author of the Letter himself
with this; but whosoever searched the Records for him, has dealt very
unfaithfully with him. And I suppose, if he had seen this passage himself, he
would never have so peremptorily denied the Peerage of the Bishops; nor
asserted with so much assurance, that they are only to be tried by Commoners,
and that it was always so, and never otherwise.

(2.) Suppose the Bishops have been tried by Commoners out of Parliament, this
does not take away their Right of Peerage in Parliament. For all our dispute is
concerning the Right of their Peerage in Parliament; and if that be allowed, we
are not to dispute concerning the difference that in some respects may arise by
Custom, or practice of Common Law, between Peers by Descent, and Peers by
Tenure in Right of their Baronies. And therefore the Author of the Peerage of
the Lords Spiritual might have spared all the needless pains he takes about
this: page 3, 4, etc.
for we do not contend that they have an Inheritable Peerage, but that they are
Peers in Parliament, having a Right to sit and judge there by virtue of their
Baronies.

But from hence he undertakes to prove, that by Magna Charta they cannot be
Judges of such who are ennobled in Blood. This comes home to our present
business, and therefore must be considered.

1. He says, page 4.
that he who has only a Praedial or Feudal, and not Personal, Peerage, can
have no Jurisdiction but such as is suitable to the nature of his Peerage; and
therefore can only extend to matters of property and possession, and not to
matters of Blood. But that this is a very trifling and ill-consider'd argument
appears by this, that he grants a Lord Keeper, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Treasurer,
to be Peers by their Offices; for, as he speaks, after Regradation their
Peerage is ended: and he will not deny that these may sit as Judges in Capital
Cases, although they be Peers only by their Offices. Those that are Peers in
Parliament have Right to judge in all Cases that belong to the Judicature of
Parliament.

2. He says, that the Reason of Magna Charta is, page 5.
that the Judges and Prisoner may be under the same Circumstances. But this
kind of arguing as well excludes a Lord Keeper, who is no Baron, as a Bishop;
and supposes that men's capacity for Judgment depends upon perfect equality of
Circumstances: whereas Knowledge and Integrity go farther toward constituting
one that is a Peer but in one respect, a just Judge, then bare Inheritance of
Honor can do. But to give a full Answer to this Argument, on which that
Author lays so much weight, and challenges any Person, to give a rational
account wherein the advantage of a man's being tried by his Peers does consist;
I shall (1) show that this was not the Reason of Trial by Peers; (2) give a
brief account of the true and original Reason of it.

[1.] That this was not the Reason.

1. Not in the Judgment of the Peers themselves, as that Author has himself
sufficiently proved, when he takes so much pains to prove p. 3. that a Writ of
Summons to Parliament does not ennoble the Blood; and consequently, does not put
persons into equality of Circumstances with those whose Blood is ennobled: and
yet he grants, that those who sat in the House of Peers by virtue of their
Summons did judge as Peers; as is manifest from his own Precedents p. 15. from
the 4 Edw. 3. From whence it follows, that this was not thought to be the
Reason by the Peers themselves in Parliament.

2. That this was not the Reason in the Judgment of our greatest Lawyers;
because they tell us, that where this Reason holds, yet it does not make men
Judges. As for instance, those who are ennobled by Blood, if they be not Lords
of Parliament, are not to be Judges in the case of one ennobled by Blood. Only
a Lord of the Parliament of England, says Coke, 2 Instit. p. 48.
shall be tried by his Peers being Lords of Parliament; and neither Noblemen of
any other Country, nor others that are called Lords, and are no Lords of
Parliament, are accounted Pares Peers within this Statute. Therefore the Parity
is not of Blood, but of Privilege in Parliament.

3. The Practice it self shows that this was not the Reason. For this Reason
would equally hold whether the Trial be at the King's Suit, or the Suit of the
party: but in the latter case, as in an appeal for Murder, a man whose blood
is ennobled must be tried by those whose blood is not ennobled; Coke 2 Instit.
p. 49. Selden's Titles of Honor, 4to. page 347.
even by an Ordinary Jury of 12 men. And I desire our Author to consider what
becomes of the inheritable quality of Blood in this case, when Life and Fortune
lies at the mercy of 12 substantial Freeholders? who, it is likely, do not set
such a value upon Nobility as Noblemen themselves do: and yet our Law, which
surely is not against Magna Charta, allows an Ordinary Jury at the Suit of the
party to sit in Judgment upon the greatest Noblemen. Therefore this Reason can
signify nothing against the Bishops, who are Lords in Parliament, as I have
already proved.

[2.] I shall give a brief account of the true and original Reason of this
Trial by Peers; without which, that Author it seems is resolved to conclude,
that the Jurisdiction of the Bishops in Capital Cases is an abuse of Magna
Charta, and a Violation offered to the Liberties of English Subjects.

As to the general Reason of the Trial by Peers, it is easy to conceive it to
have risen from the care that was taken, to prevent any unfair proceedings in
what did concern the Lives and Fortunes of men. From hence Tacitus observes of
the old Germans, De Morib. Germ. c. 12.
that their Princes, who were chosen in their great Councils to do justice in
the several Provinces, had some of the People joined with them, both for Advice
and Authority. These were Assessours to the Judges; that men's lives and
fortunes might not depend on the pleasure of one man: and they were chosen out
of the chief of the People, none but those who were born free being capable of
this honor. In the latter times of the German State, before the subduing it by
Charlemagn, H. Mei^om. de I^mensula. ^. 4.
some learned men say, their Judges were chosen out of the Colleges of Priests,
especially among the Saxons. After their being conquered by him, there were 2
Courts of Judicature established among them, as in other parts of the German
Empire.

1. One ordinary and Popular, viz. by the Comites, or great Officers sent by
the Emperor into the several Districts; and the Scabini, who were Assistants
to the other, and were generally chosen by the People. The number of these at
first was uncertain; but in the Capitulars they are required to be seven, who
were always to assist the Comes in passing Judgments. But Ludovicus Pius, in
his second Capitular, A. D. 819. c. 2. enlarged their number to 12. And if they
did not come along with him, they were to be chosen out of the most substantial
Freeholders of the County: for the words are, De melioribus illius Comitatus
suppleat numerum duodenarium. This I take to be the true Original of our
Juries. For our Saxon Laws were taken very much from the Laws of the Christian
Emperors of the Caroline Race, as I could at large prove, if it were not
impertinent to our business; and thence discover a great mistake of our
Lawyers, who make our ancient Laws and Customs peculiar to our selves. As in
this very case of Trial by Peers, which was the common practice of these parts
of the World. Therefore Otto Frisingensis takes notice of it as an unusual
thing in Hungary; Otto Frising. de gestis Fred. l. 1. c. 31.
Nulla sententia a Principe, sicut apud nos moris est, per pares suos
exposcitur -- sola sed Principis voluntas apud omnes pro ratione habetur: that
they were not judged by their Peers, but by the Will of their Prince. Which
shows, that this way of Trial was looked on as the practice of the Empire, and
as preventing the inconveniences of arbitrary Government. And it was
established in the Laws of the Lombards, Leg. Longobard. l. 3. tit. 8. 4.
Constit. Sicil. l. 1. tit. 44.
and the Constitutions of Sicily. In the one it is said to be Iudicium Parium;
in the other, proborum virorum. In the Saxon Laws of King Ethelred at Wanting,
c. 4. 12 Freemen are appointed to be sworn to do Justice among their
neighbors in every Hundred. Alfred. vit. l. 2. p. 72.
Those in the Laws of Alfred are rather 12 Compurgators then Judges; however
some make him the Author of the Trial by Peers in England. But by whomsoever
it was brought into request here, it was no other way of Trial, then what was
ordinary in other parts of Europe; and was a great instance of the moderation
of the Government of the Northern Kingdoms.

2. There was an extraordinary or Royal Court of Judicature: and that either by
way of Appeal, which was allowed from inferior Courts; or in the Causes of
Great men, which were reserved to this Supreme Court. In which either the King
himself was present, or the Comes Palatii, who was Lord High Steward; and all
the Great persons were Assessours to him. In such a Court Brunichildis was
condemned in France; Aimoin. l. 4. c. 1.
and Tassilo Duke of Bavaria in the Empire; and Ernestus, and other Great men,
Rhegin. l. 2.
A. D. 861; and Erchingerus and Bartoldus under Conradus, the last of the
French Race. And among the Causes expressly reserved for this Supreme Court,
were those which concerned the Prelates as well as the Nobles. Capit. l. 3. c.
77.
Vt Episcopi, Abbates, Comites, and potentiores quique, si causam inter se
habuerint, ac se pacificare noluerint, ad nostram jubeantur venire praesentiam:
neque illorum contentio aliubi judicetur. But in this Court they challenged
that as their privilege to be tried by their Peers; who were called Pares
Curiae. Sigism. Orat. A. D. 1434.
So the Emperor Sigismund, in his Protestation before the States of the
Empire; Cum secundum juris communis dispositionem, nec non usum, morem, stylum
and consuetudinem sacri Romani Imperii, feudalis contentio per Dominum feudi,
ac Pares Curiae terminanda sit, etc. And again, nisi Parium nostrae Curiae
arbitrio. Tilius de rebus Gal^icis.
So likewise in France, as Tilius says, Haec judiciorum ratio, ut de causis
feudalibus judicent Feudales Pares, Fulbert. ep. 96.
in Gallia est perantiqua. So in Fulbertus one Count sends word to another,
that their Cause should not be determined, nisi in Conventu Parium suorum. And
many other examples might be produced: but these are sufficient to make us
understand the true Original of this Right of Peerage; which was from the
Feodal Laws; and all those who held of the same Lord, and by the same Tenure,
were said to be Pares Peers. And therefore since the Bishops in England were
Barons by Tenure ever since William I. by consequence they were Peers to other
Barons; and had the same original Right of Trial by other Barons as their
Peers, holding by the same Tenure, and sitting in the same Court. And thus I
hope I have given (what that Author so impatiently desired, viz.) a rational
account of the Trial by Peers; and have thereby showed, that this is so far
from being any disadvantage to the Bishops Cause, that it adds very much to the
Justice of it.

And that this is so far from being a violation of Magna Charta, that it is
within the intention and meaning of it, I thus prove. In the 14. chapter of Magna
Charta we read, Comites and Barons non amercientur nisi per Pares suos: but by
the Common Law the Amerciament of a Bishop is the same with that of a
Lay-Baron; and therefore in the sense of the Law, they are looked on as Peers.
And all the Parlamentary Barons, whether Bishops or Abbots, were amerced as
Barons. Thence 15 Edw. 2. a Writ was directed to the Justices of the Common
Pleas, Claus. 15 E. ^. m. 12.
that they should not amerce the Abbot of Crowland tanquam Baro, because he did
not hold per Baroniam aut partem Baroniae. And it is confessed by the most
learned Lawyers, that the Lords Spiritual do enjoy the same legal Privileges,
Seldom of Baron. p. 152.
in other respects, which the Temporal Barons do; as in real Actions to have a
Knight returned in their Jury; Titles of Hon. 4 to. p. 347.
as to a day of Grace; hunting in the King's Forests; Scandalum Magnatum, etc.
Now since the Law of England allows only a double Parity, viz. as to Lords of
Parliament, and Commons, whether Knights, Esquires, Gentlemen, or Yeomen,
without any consideration of the great inequality of circumstances among them;
(Yeomen having as little sense of Gentility, as Commons can have of the
privileges of Nobles;) it is apparent that this Trial by Peers was not founded
upon equality of circumstances; and that in all reason, those who do enjoy the
legal Privileges of Peers, are to be looked on as such by Magna Charta.

But the great Objection is, that the Lawyers are of another opinion, as to
this Trial by Peers; and not only the common sort, who take all upon Trust
which they find in the modern Law Books, but those who have searched most into
Antiquity, such as Mr. Seldom and Sir Edw. Coke.

To this therefore I answer.

1. The Author of the Peerage, page 6.
etc. proves the Bishops are not Peers, because not to be tried by Peers.
Privil. of Baronage, page 143.
This consequence Mr. Seldom utterly denies; for he says, it is true and plain
that the Bishops have been Peers. For which he quotes the Bishop of
Winchester's Case, who was questioned in the King's Bench for leaving the
Parliament at Salisbury in the beginning of Ed. III. and he pleaded to the
declaration, quod ipse est unus e Paribus Regni, that he was one of the Peers
of the Realm: which, he says, was allowed in Court. And from other Book-cases
and Parlament-Rolls he there evidently proves, that the Bishops were Peers:
which he not only asserts in that confused Rhapsodie, which went abroad under
his name; but in his elaborate Work of the last Edition of his Titles of
Honor, Titles of Honor, Sec. Part. chapter 5. 32. in Marg.
in which he corrected and left out the false or doubtful passages of his
first Edition. And among the rest, that passage wherein this Author triumphs,
A Bishop shall not be tried by Peers in Capital Crimes. The same thing I
confess is said in the Privileges of the Baronage; which he there calls a point
of Common Law as it is distinguished from Acts of Parliament; i. e. the custom
and practice has been so. And the only evasion he has for Magna Charta is
this; page 153.
that it is now to be interpreted according to the current practice, and not by
the literal interpretation of the Words. Which is an admirable answer, if one
well considers it, and justifies all violations of Magna Charta, if once they
obtain and grow into Custom. For then, no matter for the express words of Magna
Charta, if the contrary practice has been received and allowed in legal
proceedings. This is to do by Magna Charta, as the Papists do by the
Scriptures, viz. make it a mere Nose of Wax, and say it is to be interpreted
according to the Practice of the Church.

2. Some things are affirmed about this matter with as great assurance as this
is, which have not been the constant practice. 3. Instit. page 30.
Coke is positive, that Bishops are not to be tried by their Peers; but so he
is in the same page, that a Nobleman cannot wave his Trial by his Peers, and
put himself upon the Trial of the Country: Whereas it is said in the Record 4
Ed. III. that Thomas Lord Berkely, ponit se super Patriam, put himself upon his
Country, and was tried by a Jury of 12 Knights. And 28 H. VI. the Duke of
Suffolk declined the Trial of his Peers, and submitted to the King's mercy. By
which it appears, that this was a Privilege which was not to be denied them, if
they challenged it; but, at least before 15 Ed. III. they might wave it if they
pleased; and after that too, if they were tried out of Parliament. For this
Trial by Peers was intended for a security against arbitrary Power in taking
away men's Lives; and therefore it was allowed at the King's Suit, but not at
the Suit of the Party. But if Bishops were tried out of Parliament, and did
voluntarily decline the challenge of this Privilege, this is no argument at all
against their Right of Peerage: and so I find some say it was in the Case of
Fisher, Godwin. vit. Rich. Scroop Archiep. Eborac.
Bishop of Rochester, in H. VIII's time; which is the great Precedent in the
Law Books.

3. The method of Proceeding as to the Trial of Bishops by Common Iuries, while
the Pope's Power continued in England, is not so clear, that any forcible
Argument can be drawn from thence. Because the Bishops then looked on
themselves as having no Peers, out of Parliament, in point of Judgment, but
Bishops. As in the famous Case of Adam Bishop of Hereford, under Edw. II. who
was rescued from the King's Bench by his Brethren the Bishops, because they
looked on his appearing there as a Violation of the Liberties of the Church. I
do not go about to defend these Proceedings; but I am sure the Author of the
Peerage, etc. very much misrepresents this business: for he makes it as if the
Bishop were legally convicted in Court by a common Jury, page 7.
and that after conviction he was delivered to the Archbishop, to the intent,
as he supposes, that he should be degraded. Whereas, in truth, the Bishops
carried him out of the Court, without his giving any Answer to the Endictment;
and when he was absent, the King commanded the Jury to bring in their Verdict;
and without ever being heard to make any Defense for himself, Walsingh. page
119.
they found him guilty in all the Articles laid to his Charge. That Author
very freely bestows the terms of Impudence on the Bishops of that time, and
Ignorance on those who go about to defend them: page 7. 14.
but I desire to know whether of these two makes a man thus misrepresent a
matter of fact? For it was so far from being true, that upon Conviction he was
delivered to the Archbishop to be degraded; that he never appeared in Court
after, but continued under the Archbishop's care, till, after a while, he fully
reconciled him to the King; notwithstanding the Jury found him guilty of
Treason. I desire to be informed, whether we are to understand Magna Charta by
such a Trial as this? Whether he were judged by his Peers, I know not; but I am
sure he was not by the Law of the Land; Antiq. Cantuar. in Walt. Raynolds page
215. ed. Han.
which I think is as good a part of Magna Charta as the other. And this, our
Historians tell us, is the First Instance of any Trial of this kind, of any
Bishop in England: which has too much of force and violence in it, to be a
good Interpreter of Magna Charta.

The Second Precedent is verbatim out of Mr. Seldom concerning John de Isle,
and the Bishop of Ely his Brother; which concerns such matters, wherein himself
confesses the Privilegium Clericale was allowed; and the Record says, the
Archbishop entering his plea, that he was to be delivered to him as a member of
his Church, he was accordingly delivered, after the Jury had given in their
Verdict. Which shows, indeed, the good will that was then used, to take away
even the allowed Privileges of the Clergy by common Juries. And this is another
stout Interpreter of Magna Charta; when Bracton, Briton, Fleta, Stat. West. 1.
Articuli Cleri c. 15. are confessed, 2. Instit. ^. 633, etc.
even by Sir Edw. Coke, to be so clear in the Clergie's behalf in these matters.

The Third Precedent, which is likewise out of the same Author, is of Thomas
Merks, Bishop of Carlisle; who, for his fidelity to R. II. and the true Heirs
of the Crown, against the Usurpation of H. IV. was found guilty of Treason by a
common Jury. But Mr. Seldom is so ingenuous as to take notice, that the Writ
directed to the Justices had in it a Non obstante to a Statute lately made at
Westminster; Licet in Stat. apud Westminster. nuper edito inter caetera continetur,
quod nullus Archiep. nec Episcopus coram Iusticiariis nostris occasion
alicujus criminis impetatur, absque speciali praecepto nostro, quousque, etc.
Which was read in Court: but the Judges urging, that the Liberties of the
Church did not extend to high Treason, then it is said, he did ponere se super
Patriam; just as Thomas Lord Berkely did 4 Ed. III. This is the only Precedent
that proves that a Bishop, before the time of H. VIII. did put himself upon a
common Jury: and yet we find as good a Precedent of this sort, concerning an
allowed Peer of the Realm. And whether this single Precedent be sufficient to
interpret Magna Charta, against the plain sense of the words, and to make a
constant practice, I leave any rational man to judge.

But if this were yielded in Cases of high Treason, wherein the Privilege of
Clergy holds not; (especially since the Statutes 25 Ed. III. c. 4. and 4 H. IV.
c. 2, 3.) Mr. Seldom tells them, that there is no consequence from hence,
because they are not to be tried by Peers, therefore they are not Peers: since
the Common Law may limit this Privilege of Peers in one particular case, which
may hold in all others. As it is no diminution to the Peerage of the Temporal
Lords, to be tried by a common Jury at the Suit of the Party. I conclude the
Answer to this Argument, Camden. Brit. page 123.
as Mr. Camden does his Discourse about this subject; who having proved that
the Bishops do enjoy all other Privileges of Peers, except this of being tried
by them, (which he seems to attribute to a kind of Revenge upon them, for
pleading such exemptions by the Canon Law) after all, he leaves it to the
Lawyers to determine, whether this be juris explorati. The meaning of which I
am sure is not, as the Author of the Letter expresses it, that it was always
so, and never otherwise.

But the great difficulty to some is, that a Praedial or Feudal Barony does not
ennoble the Blood; and therefore can give no Right of Peerage. Whereas it is
well known, that all the Baronies of England were such from the Conquerour's
time, till after the Barons Wars, when, for Reason of State, it was thought
necessary to make the Nobility more dependant on the Crown. And all that were
Barons were Pares, i. e. Peers. So du Fresn quotes an old Poem of the Common
Laws of England,

Barons nous appellons les Piers del Realm. Glossar. v. Pares.


In France, from whence our Baronies first came, Ecclesiastical Persons with
praedial Baronies are thought as capable of Peerage as any. For, there at first
all the Barons Regni (who both in France and England were the same with the
Barons Regis, however some of late have distinguished them) sat in the great
Council, and all public Affairs passed through them; and they were judged by
their own Order: and these were called Pares Regni, among whom the Bishops were
comprehended. At last Lewis VII. A. D. 1179. (as most Authors agree) chose
Twelve out of the great number of the Peers of France; of which half the number
were Bishops who held feudal Baronies of the King; and the Archbishop of Rheims
is the First of the whole Number. And because these enjoyed greater Privileges
then other Peers, their number was increased by particular Favor; but the
ancient Right of Peerage remained to all the Barons of the Realm. In Scotland,
when they appointed Twelve Peers for the King's Council, Walsingh. ad A. D.
1296. Mat. Westminster. A. 1295.
they were 4 Bishops, 4 Earls, 4 Barons. So that in the neighbor Nations
Feodal Baronies were never thought inconsistent with Peerage: and we have as
little Reason to think them so with us; since to this day, the Bishops do enjoy
not only the great Right of Peerage, of sitting and voting in the House of
Peers, but have some personal Privileges of Peers allowed them by the Common
Law, as is already showed.

II. The last thing to be considered is, the Capacity in which they sit in the
House, whether as a Third Estate or not? The Author of the Letter not only
denies it, but opposes it with great vehehemency, and offers many Authorities
and Reasons against it. All which must be weighed with the same calmness and
impartiality, which has been hitherto used in this Discourse. And there are
Three things to be distinctly handled for the clearing of this Matter: 1. His
Foundation; 2. His Authorities; 3. His Reasons.

(1.) His Foundation whereupon he builds; page 93.
which is, that the Bishops sit in the House only in the capacity of Temporal
Barons; William the Conqueror having brought the Temporalties of Bishops under
the condition of Baronies. That they do sit there in the Right of their
Baronies, was yielded at first; but whether they sit there only in that
capacity, is the thing in Question.

And here I crave leave to make use of this Author's distinction, and to apply
it to this purpose; viz. of the Bishops sitting in the House in a Judicial way,
and in the Legislative way. When they sit in the Judicial way, as Members of
the Supreme Court of Judicature, I grant that they sit only in the capacity of
Temporal Barons; as appears by the Constitution of Clarendon, where the King
requires their attendance in Judicature as his Barons: But that in the
Legislative way they have a farther Capacity, as representing a Third Estate in
Parliament, I prove by these Arguments.

[1.] During the Vacancy of Bishoprics, Writs were sent to the Guardians of
the Spiritualties, to attend the Parliament. Which Mr. Seldom, Titles of Honor,
p. 2. chapter 5. n. 17. 23.
who cannot be suspected for partiality in this matter, says, is obvious in
the Rolls of Parliament; and which he cannot deny to be an evidence of the
Bishops sitting in Parliament as Bishops, and as Spiritual only, as they did in
the Saxon times, in the Wittena gemot. So likewise, the Vicars-general had
Writs when the Bishops were beyond Sea. But neither of these could sit in
Parliament as Temporal Barons.

But because so much depends on the proof of this, and no man has yet
undertaken it, I shall bring clear Testimonies of the constant practice of it,
from the Records of the Tower.

24 Edw. I. Writs were directed Custodi Archiepiscopatus Eborum, sede vacant;
and Electo Menevensi, vel ejus vices gerenti, ipso agente in partibus
transmarinis.

27 Ed. I. Custodibus Episcop. Lincoln. sede vacant; and Capitulo Eccles. B.
P. Eborum, Custodibus Spiritual. ejusdem Dioces. sede vacant.

5 Ed. II. Vicario generali Archiep. Eborum, ipso Archiepiescopo in remotis
agente.

6. Ed. II. Custodi Archiepiscopatus Cantuar. sede vacant.

7 Ed. II. To the same, and Custodi Episcop. London. sede vacant.

1 Ed. III. Custodi Spiritualitatis Archiep. Cantuar. sede vacant: and twice
the same 2 Ed. III.

7 Ed. III. Rex dilecto sibi in Christo Priori Eccles. Christi Cantuar. Custodi
Spiritualit. Archiep. Cantuar. sede vacant.

10 Ed. III. Custodi Spirit. Episcop. Norwic. sede vacant.

11 Ed. III. Custodi Spirit. Episcop. Cicestr. sede vacant; and H. Episcopo
Lincoln. vel ejus Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo in remotis agente.

12 Ed. III. A more general Writ to the Archbish. etc. vel Vicariis vestris
generalibus, vobis in partibus transmarinis agentibus.

14 Ed. III. T. Episcop. Hereford. vel ejus Vicario generali, ipso Episcopo in
remotis agente.

20 Ed. III. Custodi Spiritualit. Episcop. Assaphensis, etc.

The like we find 20 E. (3.) 34. 36. 38. 44. 5 R. (2.) 6. 7. 9. 10. 12. 13. 18.
20. 7 H. (4.) 8. 2 H. (5.) 3. 4. 5. 7. 8. 9. 2 H. (6.) 4. 5. 9. 10. 11. 15. 18.
20. 25. 29. 12 Edw. 4. In all these years, there are Writs directed, either to
the Guardians of the Spiritualties in the Vacancies of the Sees, or to the
Vicars-general or Chancellours in their absence beyond the Seas. Which are
sufficient to prove this to have been the constant practice of Parlaments in
those times.

[2.] Some Churchmen were summoned to Parliament who could have no pretense to
sit there as Temporal Barons. For 49 H. III. the Deans of York, Exceter, Wells,
Salisbury and Lincoln were summoned with the like Writ as the rest. And Mr.
Seldom observes, Ib. n. 22.
that in the times of Edw. I. Edw. II. Edw. III. where the Clause Praemunientes
is omitted in the Writ to the Bishops, there particular and several Writs were
sent to some Deans and Priors of Cathedral Churches, to appear in Parliament.

But to prove more fully the interest the Clergy had then in Parlaments, it is
worth our observing, that in the ancient Records there are 4 several sorts of
Writs wherein the Clergy were concerned.

1. In the common Writs of Summons to Parliament sent to the Archbishops and
Bishops, with the Clause of Praemunientes, which runs thus; Premunientes
Priorem and Capitulum, or Decan. and Capit. Ecclesie vestre, Archidiaconos,
totumque Clerum vestre Dioces. facientes, quod iidem Prior and Archidiaconi in
propriis personis suis, ac dictum Capitulum per unum, idemque Cierus per duos
Procuratores idoneos, plenam and sufficientem potestatem ab ipsis Capitulo and
Clero habentes, predictis die and loco intersint, ad consentiendum hiis que
tunc ibidem de communi consilio ipsius Regni nostri, divina favente Clementia,
contigerint ordinari. Titles of Honor, p. 595.
So Mr. Seldom represents it from the 50 Ed. III. membr. 6. And with him Sir
Edw. 4 Instit. p. 4.
Coke agrees; who says, by this Clause in the Writ of Summons to the Bishops,
they are required to summon these persons to appear personally at the
Parlalament: but he proves they had no Voices there, because they are required
only ad consentiendum, etc. Which is a very weak argument. For, (1.) His own
great Authority, Modus tenendi Parlamentum, says expressly, they were called ad
tractand. and deliberand. and that their names were called over in the
beginning of Parliament; and that they had a Voice there, and did make up part
of the Commons of England. Not that the Procuratores Cleri did sit together
with them, after they had a Speaker of their own* of which I find no Precedent:
but they sat by themselves, having a Prolocutor of their own: which is the
very same name used in the Rolls for the Speaker of the House of Commons. (2.)
These words do not exclude them from being part of the commune Concilium Regni,
but only show, that their Consent was required, according to the Custom of
that time. And 23 Ed. I. the Clause is more full, ad tract and. ordinand. and
faciend. the like 24 Ed. I. But in 27 Ed. I. the words are, ad faciend. and
consentiend. (3.) The same argument would exclude the Commons from any Voices:
for in 23 Ed. I. the Writ for choosing Knights and Burgesses ran after the same
manner; ita quod dicti milites plenam and sufficientem potestatem pro se and
Commun' Comit' predict' and dicti Cives and Burgenses pro se and Communit
Civit' and Burg' tunc ibidem habeant, ad faciend' tunc quod de communi Consilio
ordinabitur in premissis. Would any man be so unreasonable to infer from hence,
that the House of Commons have no Votes? The same form is used 26 Ed. I. -- 30
of the same. In 5 Ed. II. it is, ad consentiendum, etc. 6 Ed. II. it is, ad
faciend. quod de communi Consilio contigerit ordinari. 7 Ed. II. ad faciendum
and consentiend. and so it continued to the 26 Ed. III. when first came in, ad
tract and. consulend. faciend. but 44 Ed. I. it was only, ad consulend. and
consentiend. 46 Ed. III. it was, ad faciendum and consentiendum his quae tunc
de communi Concilio Regni contigerit ordinari: so 47 Edw. III. Which has been
the general form, ever since observed, and would exclude the House of Commons
from any Votes in Parliament, as well as the Clergy.

2. There were other Writs of Summons to Parliament wherein the Clause
Praemunientes was left out; and then particular Writs were sent to such Deans
and dignified Clergymen as the King thought fit. So it was not only 49 H.
III. but there were two Summons 23 Ed. I. and in one of them the Clause
Praemunientes was inserted, in the other not. It was left out 25 Ed. I. and in
one 27 Ed. I. and put in another, and left out again 28. and 30. of Ed. I.
Inserted 1 Ed. II. in one Writ, and omitted in others; and so in the 3
following years: but afterward generally inserted, except 6 Ed. II. 13. 16.
18. In 5 Ed. III. it was omitted, and so in 6. and some few years afterward:
but then it generally obtained, that the Clause Praemunientes was put into the
Writs of the Bishops Summons to the Parliament.

3. There were Writs of Summons to great Councils, which were no Assemblies of
the Estates; and then only some great Bishops and Lords, or other Great men
were summoned, without any Writs to others, or any notice taken of them. In
such a Summons 2 Ed. II. only 4 Bishops are named; 18 Ed. II. only 6; 19
only 5; 2 Ed. III. only 2. and the Guardian of the Spiritualties of the Sea
of Canterbury: and so 4 Ed. III. and in another the same year, 3 besides the
Archbishop of Canterbury. 5 Ed. III. Summons were sent to the Archbishop of
York, and 19 Bishops more. 11 Ed. III. the Writ was directed to the Archbishop
of York, and such Bishops, Earls, and Great men as were of the King's Council:
and two more were summoned the same year. The form of the Writ differs little
from that to the Parliament, only the Clause Praemunientes is always left out,
and only some particular Bishops and Nobles are called, and no Writs for
elections of Knights or Burgesses. In the 16 Ed. III. the Writ is sent to the
Archbishop and 7 Bishops more; but none to Abbots, Priors, Sheriffs, etc. Which
shows that this was Magnum Concilium, as it is sometimes called, but no
Parliament.

4. There were Writs to summon a Convocation distinct from the Writ of Summons
to the Parliament with the Clause Praemunientes. This will appear by the first
Writ of Summons to a Convocation, which I have seen; which bears date at
Lincoln 17. Feb. 9 Ed. II. but the Parliament was summoned 16. of October
before, to meet at Lincoln in quindena S. Hilarii; with the Clause
Praemunientes in the Writ to the Bishops. In which Summons to Convocation it is
expressed, that those Bishops and others of the Clergy, who were summoned to
Parliament, did, as far as they were concerned, unanimously yield to a Subsidy;
but so, that others of the Clergy who were not summoned to Parliament should
meet in Convocation, and consent thereto. Therefore the King sends his Writ to
the Archbishop to summon all the Prelates, whether Religious or others, and
others of the Clergy of his Province, to meet at London post 15. Pasch. ad
tractand. and consentiend. etc. Here we have the plain difference between the
Writs to Parliament, and to Convocation. The Writs to the Parliament were sent to
the Archbishops and all the Bishops, with the clause Praemunientes, etc.
summoning those of the Clergy who were then thought necessary to the Assembly
of the Three Estates in Parliament: but when a Convocation was called, then the
Writs were only directed to the Two Archbishops, who were to summon the rest
of the Clergy, and not only those who held by Baronies, but others of the
dignified Clergy, tam exemptos quam non exemptos, with the Proctors of the
Chapters and Clergy of the Diocese, ad tractand' and consulend' super premissis
una vobiscum and aliis per Nos tunc mittendis. So it is expressed in the Writ
for Convocation 11 Ed. III. 29 Ed. III. 31 Ed. III. 7 R. II. 28 H. VI. 23 Ed.
IV. only these two last have this difference, ad tractand', consentiend',
conclud' super premissis, and aliis que sibi clarius exponentur tunc ibidem ex
part nostra.

These things I have laid together, not barely to clear this intricate matter,
(as it has been made) of the interest the Clergy then had in Parlaments as
well as Convocations; but chiefly to prove from hence, that all the interest
they had in Parlaments was not merely on the account of the Temporal Baronies
which the Bishops and many of the Abbots then had. Which is the great, but
common mistake of the Author of the Letter.

[3.] After the Bishoprics were made Baronies, the distinction even in
Parliament is kept up between the several Estates of the Clergy and Laiety. For
although Baronagium does often take in all; yet sometimes they are so
remarkably distinguished, that we may see they were looked on as two distinct
Estates in Parliament. So Eadmerus, (speaking of what passed in the Parliament 3
H. I) says, it was done utriusque Ordinis concordi cura and solicitudine,
Eadmer. l. page 67.
by the consent of both Estates. So Matt. Paris, speaking of the Summons to
appear in the beginning of H. I. comprehends all under those 2 Estates, Matt.
Paris page 55.
Clerus Angliae, and Pop. universus: and again, Respondente Clero, and
Magnatibus cunctis. Speaking of a Parliament under H. II. he says, page 143.
Convocato Clero Regni, ac Populo. In 39 H. III. describing a Parliament, he
calls those assembled Nobiles Angliae, tam viri Ecclesiastici quam Seculares.
And in the Writs of Summons the distinction has been always preserved between
the Praelati and the Magnates: for in those to the Bishops it is, cum caeteris
Praelatis, Magnatibus, etc. in those to the Temporal Lords, cum Praelatis,
Magnatibus, etc. In those to the Bishops they were commanded, in Fide and
Dilectione quibus nobis tenemini: in those to the Temporal Lords, in Fide and
Homagio; or, since Ed. III. in Fide and Ligeancia. Which shows that they were
not summoned merely as Temporal Barons.

[4.] The Author of the Letter confesses the Clergy to be one of the three
Estates of the Kingdom; page 86.
but denies them to be one of the three Estates in Parliament. From whence I
argue thus. Either the Clergy must be represented in Parliament, or one of the
Estates of the Kingdom is not at all represented there. And if one of the
Estates of the Kingdom be not there represented, how can it be a perfect
Representative? So that this distinction of the Three Estates of the Kingdom,
and the Three Estates in Parliament, unavoidably overthrows the Parlament's
being a complete Representative. But in 23 H. VIII. n. 33. as Mr. Petyt
observes, there is this passage in the Parlament-Rolls. It is considered and
declared by the whole Body of this Realm, The ancient Right of the Commons,
page 61.
now represented by all the Estates of the same assembled in this present
Parliament. Therefore all the Estates of the Kingdom must be represented in
Parliament. And 1 Eliz. c. 3. The Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons
are said to represent in Parliament the Three Estates of the Realm. From whence
it follows, that, according to the sense of the Parliament, if the Clergy be an
Estate of the Kingdom, as he says they are, they must be represented in
Parliament, or the whole Body of the Realm cannot be there represented.

(2.) We now come to consider the weight of Authority in this matter. For which
I shall premise two things.

1. That the whole Parliament assembled are the best Judges, which are the Three
Estates in Parliament; and their Authority is more to be valued, then that of
any particular Persons, whether Lawyers, or others.

2. That no Parlaments can give better Testimony in this matter, then those
which have assumed most to themselves. For if there be Three Estates in
Parliament, and the Bishops be none, then the King must be one of the Three; as
the Author of the Letter insinuates, throughout this discourse: and the
natural consequence from hence seems to be a coordination; or that two joining
together may overruled the third. Therefore in all Reason, if any Parlaments
would have made the King one of the Three Estates, it would have been either
the Parliament 1 H. IV. which deposed one King, and set up another; or that 1 R.
III. which disinherited the Children of Ed. IV. and set up their Uncle.

I shall therefore first from the Rolls of these two Parlaments show, which are
the Three Estates in Parliament; and from them, evidently prove that the King is
none, but the Bishops are the Third Estate.

I begin with the Parliament 1 H. IV. By the Rolls it appears, (1.) That R. II.
appointed two Procurators to declare his Resignation of the Crown, coram
omnibus Statibus Regni, before all the States of the Kingdom. From whence it
unavoidably follows, 1. that the King was none of them; 2. that the Estates of
the Kingdom and the Estates in Parliament are the same thing. (2.) Among the
Articles against R. II. one is concerning the Impeachment of Tho. Archbishop of
Canterbury coram Rege and omnibus Statibus Regni, before the King and all the
Estates of the Realm. The King then was none of the Estates. (3.) The
Commissioners for the sentence of Deposition are said to be appointed per Pares
and Proceres Regni Anglie Spirituales and Temporales, and ejusdem Regni
Communitates, omnes Status ejusdem Regni representantes; by the Peers and Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons of the Kingdom, representing all the
States of the Kingdom. Where observe, 1. The Bishops are called Peers, as well
as the Temporal Lords. 2. The Estates of the Parliament are to represent all the
Estates of the Kingdom. 3. The Three Estates in Parliament are the Lords
Spiritual, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons of the Realm; and Fabian
expressly calls them the Three Estates of this present Parliament, Fabian. 7.
par. R. 2. s^l. 158.
representing the whole Body of the Realm.

In the Rolls of Parliament 1 R. III. it is recorded, that before his
Coronation, certain Articles were delivered unto him in the name of the Three
Estates of the Realm of England, that is to say, of the Lords Spiritual and
Temporal and of the Commons by name, etc. Now forasmuch as neither the said
Three Estates, neither the said Persons which in their name presented and
delivered (as it is before said) the said Roll unto our said Sovereign Lord the
King, were assembled in form of Parliament, diverse Doubts have been moved, etc.
Now by the said Three Estates assembled in this present Parliament, and by
Authority of the same, be ratified, and enrolled, etc. Upon which Mr. Pryn
himself makes this Marginal Note, Abridgment of Records, pa. 710. 714.
The Three Estates must concur to make a Parliament; no one or two of them
being a full or real Parliament, but all conjoined.

But lest I should seem to take advantage only of these two Parlaments, I
shall now show this to have been the constant sense of the Parlaments; as will
appear by these following Records.

In 1 H. VI. n. 12. All the Estates of the Realm are said to be assembled in
Parliament. 3 H. VI. n. 19. the Three Estates assembled in this present
Parliament.

6 H. VI. n. 24. the Duke of Gloucester desired an explanation of his Power as
Protector: in the Answer, drawn up by the Lords appointed for that purpose, it
is alleged that H. V. could not by his last Will, nor otherwise, alter,
change, or abroge, without the Assent of the Three Estates; nor commit or
grant, to any Person, Governance or Rule of this Land, longer then he lived.
Nevertheless they add, It was advised and appointed by the Authority of the
King, assenting the Three Estates of this Realm. Which shows how far the King
was from being thought one of the Three Estates in Parliament at that time.

10 H. VI. n. 17. Ralph Lord Cromwell put in a Petition to the Parliament, that
he was discharged the Office of King's Chamberlain in a way contrary to the
Articles for the Council sworn 8 H. VI. coram tribus Regni Statibus, before the
Three Estates of the Realm, as they were assembled in Parliament: which appears
by the Record 8 H. VI. n. 27.

11 H. VI. n. 10. The Duke of Bedford appeared in Parliament, and declared the
Reasons of his coming coram Domino Rege and tribus Regni Statibus, before the
King and the Three Estates of the Realm; as it is in the Record, but not
mentioned in the Abridgment.

n. 11. Domino Rege and tribus Regni Statibus in presenti Parlamento
existentibus, the King and the Three Estates of the Realm being present in
Parliament. Nothing can be plainer, then that the King is none; and that the
Three Estates of the Kingdom are the Three Estates in Parliament.

11 H. VI. n. 24. Lord Cromwell Treasurer exhibits a Petition in Parliament,
wherein he says, the estate and necessity of the King and of the Realm have
been notified to the Three Estates of the Land assembled in Parliament.

In an Appendix annexed to the Rolls of Parliament that year, the Duke of
Bedford says, in his Petition to the King, how that in your last Parliament yet
liked your Highness, by yadvis of Three Estates of his Land, to will me, etc.

23 H. VI. n. 11. Present Domino Rege, and tribus Regni Statibvs in presenti
Parlamento existentibus, etc.

28 H. VI. n. 9. Domino Rege and tribus Regni Statibus in pleno Parlamento
comparentibus, etc.

After these I shall insist upon the Precedents cited by the Author of the
Letter himself; page 86.
viz. the Ratification of the Peace with France by the Three Estates 9 H. V.
and 11 H. VII. which he alleges as an extraordinary thing, that the Three
Estates joined in these Transactions: whereas in truth it was nothing but a
Ratification of the Peace in Parliament; and consequently, those Three Estates
of the Kingdom, are the Three Estates of Parliament. Bacon H. 7. page 144.
For the Parliament was then sitting at both these Ratifications; and no other
Assembly of the Three Estates was ever known in England. Hist. Angl. page 404.
Walsingham says, that H. V. called aParlament, which was sitting at that
time: for the King kept S. George's Feast at Windsor that year, from thence he
went to the Parliament at London, which ended within a Month; and the
Ratification of the Peace bears date May 2. Judge then, whether these were not
the Three Estates in Parliament? But to prove this more fully. It seems by 23 H.
VI. n. 24. that a Statute was made in the time of H. V. that no Peace should be
made with France without the consent of the Three Estates of both Realms; which
was then repealed. But whom they meant by the Three Estates here in the time of
H. VI. appears by 28 H. VI. n. 9. when the Chancellor, in the presence of the
King, gave thanks to the Three Estates, and prorogued the Parliament: where it
is plain, the Three Estates in Parliament were meant, and that the King could be
none of them. In 38 H. VI. n. 38.. the Chancellor again, in the presence of
the King and of the Three Estates, having given thanks to all the Estates,
dissolved the Parliament. But that which puts this matter out of doubt is, that
in the Parliament 1 H. VI. the Queen Dowager in her Petition mentions the
Ratification made in Parliament 9 H. V. and says, it was not only sworn by the
King, but by the Three Estates of the Kingdom of England: Cest assavoir, les
Prelatz, Nobles, and Grands, and per les Comuns de mesm le Roialm
Dengleterre;that is to say, by the Prelates, Nobles, and other Grandees, and by
the Commons of the Realm of England: as appears more fully, says that
Petition, by the Records and Acts of the said Parliament. And the King there
declares in four several Instruments, that the said Articles of Peace were
approved and ratified by Authority of Parliament, in these words; Qui quidem
Pax, Tractatus, conclusio and concordia, omnesque Articuli contenti in eisdem,
in Parlamento dicti Patris nostri apud Westminster. 20 die Maii A. R. 9. tento,
Auctoritate ejusdem Parlamenti approbati, laudati, auctorizati and acceptati.
Nothing can be plainer from hence, then that the Three Estates of the Kingdom
were no other then the Three Estates in Parliament. And the same appears by
another Petition of the same Queen, 2 H. VI. n. 19.

For latter Times I shall instance only in the Parliament 1 Eliz. c. 3. wherein
the Lords Spiritual and Temporal and Commons declare, that they do represent in
Parliament the Three Estates of the Realm. From whence it follows, 1. That the
Three Estates of the Kingdom must be represented in Parliament. 2. That the
Lords Spiritual and Temporal and the Commons do represent those Three Estates
of the Kingdom, and therefore are the Three Estates in Parliament. 3. That the
King can be none of the Estates in Parliament, because he does not represent any
of the Estates of the Kingdom.

And it is a wonder to me, that any man, who considers the Constitution of the
Government of Europe, and how agreeable it was in all the Kingdoms of it, as to
the Assemblies of the Three Estates, could ever take the King to be one of the
Three Estates in Parliament. For the Question would seem ridiculous to persons
of any other Nation, if we should ask them whether the King was reckoned among
the tres Ordines Regni? For by the Three Estates they all mean the Three Ranks
of men, the Clergy, Nobility, and Commonalty. page 88.
But the Author of the Letter could not deny that these were the Three Estates
of the Kingdom; but he says, the Three Estates of Parliament are clean another
thing: which I may reasonably suppose, is sufficiently disproved by the
foregoing Discourse.

But he quotes several Authorities for what he says, which must now be
examined, and will appear to be of no weight, if compared with the evidence
already given on the other side.

The first Authority is of King James, page 98.
in his Speech at the Prorogation of the Parliament 1605. wherein he says, the
Parliament consists of a Head, and a Body; the King is the Head, the Body are
the Members of the Parliament. This Body is subdivided into two parts, the
Upper, and the Lower House. The Upper consists of the Nobility and the Bishops;
the Lower of Knights and Burgesses. The force of the Argument lies in King
James his making the Bishops but a Part of the Upper House: but that this does
not exclude their being a Third Fstate, I prove by a Parallel Instance. In 5 H.
IV. the Bishop of London, being Chancellor, compared the Parliament to a Body,
as King James did; but he made the Church the Right Hand, the Temporal Lords
the Left Hand, and the Commonaltie the other Members; yet presently after, he
calls these, the several Estates which the King had called to Parliament. But
that the Bishops sitting in the same House with the Temporal Lords does not
hinder their being a distinct Estate, will appear, when we come to answer his
Reasons. And for King James his sense as to this matter, we may fully
understand it by this passage in his Advice to his Son. Basilic. Dor. l. 2. p.
159. of his Works.
As the whole Subjects of our Country (by the ancient and fundamental Policy
of our Kingdom) are divided into Three Estates, etc. These words are spoken of
the Kingdom of Scotland; but the ancient and fundamental Policy of that is the
same with England; and he that believed the Subjects made the Three Estates
there, could never believe the King to be one of them here.

The next Authority is of King Charles I. page 100.
in his Answer to the 19 Propositions June 2. 1642. wherein he tells the two
Houses, that neither one Estate should transact what is proper for two, nor two
what is proper for three. To which I answer, that the Penner of that Answer was
so intent upon the main business, viz. that the two Houses could do nothing
without the King, that he did not go about to dispute this matter with them,
whether the King were one of the Three Estates or not; but taking their
supposition for granted, he shows that they could have no Authority to act
without the King's concurrence. But the unwary Concessions in that Answer were
found of dangerous consequence afterward, when the King's enemies framed the
Political Catechism out of them; which is lately reprinted, no doubt, for the
good of the People.

In 2 H. IV. n. 32. page 101.
he makes the House of Commons to declare to the King and Lords, that the Three
Estates of the Parliament are the King, the Lords Spiritual, and Temporal.
Whereas the truth of that matter is this: A difference had happened in the
House of Lords, between the Earl of Rutland and Lord Fitz-Walter; whereupon the
House of Commons go up to the King and the Lords, and having, it seems, an
Eloquent Speaker, who ventured upon dangerous Metaphors, he makes bold with the
Similitude of the Trinity; because that would help him to persuade them to
Unity: but if he had left the King out, he might have been suspected to have
set up an Independent Power in the Three Estates: therefore lest he should lose
his Similitude, (which goes a great way with an eloquent man) he strains
another point, and draws the King into his Trinity. And is such an expression
to be mentioned in comparison with the express Declaration but the year before,
1 H. IV. of both Houses concerning the Three Estates in Parliament?

Next to this Similitude, that of Stephen Gardener ought to be mentioned; who
compared Faith, Hope, and Charity, concurring to Justification, to the
concurrence of the Three Estates in Parliament, i.e. the King and two Houses, to
the making of Laws. But I wonder the Author of the Letter, who expresses so
much dislike of his Divinity, would take his Judgment in Politics. But this
notion of making the King one of the Three Estates, how valuable soever it be
to some men, is, it seems, only to be met with in some grave ancient
Similitudes. But of what Authority these are, against the constant sense of
Parlaments so fully declared, I leave any man of understanding to judge.

For the judgment of eminent Lawyers, page 103.
he quotes but one in King James his time, viz. Finch in his Book of Law, l. 2.
chapter 1. who does indeed, in the words quoted by him, make the King, Lords and
Commons to be the Three Estates. But I can hardly imagine how a learned Lawyer
could fall into such a gross mistake, unless the Modus tenendi Parlamentum
should give the occasion to it; which was accounted no blind MS. in those days,
but a very great Treasure, as appears by Sir E. Coke, who cites it on all
occasions. And very few Lawyers had the judgment in Antiquity which Mr. Seldom
had, who first discovered the just Age and Value of that MS. This Author
indeed, toward the conclusion of his Treatise, makes the King the first of the
Estates: but then he makes Six Estates in Parliament, or Degrees, as he calls
them; and delivers this for good doctrine at the very end of his Treatise, that
if any one of all these be summoned, and do not appear, yet, with him, it is
notwithstanding a full Parliament: nay, he expressly says, the King may hold a
Parliament without a House of Lords. But there are so many other such Positions
discovered by others in that Treatise, that I need to say no more of it. And as
to this point of the King's being one of the Estates in Parliament, Sir Ed.
Coke, who otherwise too much admired that Treatise, declares against it, in the
very beginning of his Treatise of the Parliament. This Court, says he,
consists of the King's Majesty, sitting there as in his Royal Politic
capacity; and of the Three Estates of the Realm; viz. of the Lords Spiritual,
Archbishops and Bishops, the Lords Temporal, and the Commons of the Realm. And
however the Author of the Letter may slight Mr. Selden's Judgment in this
matter; page 86.
yet these two may be sufficient to weigh down the Scales against any one
Lawyer's Authority to the contrary; especially, since they were never
suspected, I dare say, for any partiality toward the Clergy.

(3.) But the Author of the Letter thinks to carry this point by mere strength
of Reason. We must therefore diligently consider the force of his Arguments.

1. If Bishops were one of the Estates in Parliament, page 89.
Reason would they should vote by themselves separately from other Lords, which
would make another Estate: But they do not only not vote apart by themselves,
the whole Body of them together; but that Body is divided and separated within
it self, one part from another. If both Houses ever sat together, as some
imagine, (and as they do in a neighbor Kingdom,) this way of Reasoning will
make but one Estate in Parliament all that time. But to give a clear answer to
this objection; I distinguish two things in the Bishops, their Spiritual
Capacity, by which they represent; and their Civil Capacity as Barons, in which
they vote, according to the Rules of the House. For, the manner of giving their
Votes is a thing under the Regulation of the House, and depends upon Custom;
but their Spiritual Capacity as Bishops, in which they represent, does not. And
the Reason of their sitting together with other Lords, is upon the account of
their Writs of Summons; which, as Mr. Seldom confesses, ever since the latter
end of Edw. III. has been, for the Bishops cum ceteris Prelatis, Magnatibus
and Proceribus, colloquium habere and tractatum: and therefore they are bound
to sit together in the same place with the Temporal Lords, or else they cannot
advise and confer together. And I leave the Author of the Letter to consider,
whether his Reason, or the King's Writ, ought to take place.

2. If the Bishops were a Third Estate, page 89.
they must have a Negative voice to all that passes there: But the Bishops are
intermingled with the Temporal Lords in making up the Majority, as a part of
it. Since I have evidently proved the Clergy to be one of the Three Estates in
Parliament, if he be sure that every Estate ought to have a Negative voice, then
I am sure that this Objection lies more upon him to answer, then upon the
Bishops. But to prevent any new disputes, I shall return this Answer to it.
Since it is agreed on both sides, that the Bishops do sit in the House as
Temporal Barons, and in that respect do make up the Majority of Votes in the
House of Lords; it could not but seem unreasonable, that they who voted as
Barons in the House should have a Negative voice in another capacity: and by
this means they lost their distinct Negative voice, because by the King's Writs
they were to sit and vote with the Temporal Lords. Just as it is in the Diets
of Germany: Since the distribution of that Assembly of the Estates of the
Empire into the several Chambers, the Prelates vote according to their Ranks:
the Three Electors in the Electoral College; the other Bishops, that are
Princes of the Empire, in the Chamber of Princes; and those who are not
Princes, with the Counts and Barons. So that here the Votes of the Bishops are
mingled with the rest, without a distinct Negative voice; and yet no one
questions but the Bishops do represent a distinct Estate of the Empire.

3. This is a disparagement to the House of Lords, page 90.
that another Estate must be joined with them to make up their Negative. No
more, then to the Princes of the Empire, to have the Bishops joined with them,
when the Imperial Cities vote by themselves. But what disparagement is this,
for those to make up the Majority of the Votes of the Baronage, who sit there
as Barons by Tenure, by a Right as ancient as Will. the Conqueror, by the
Author's own confession?

4. If the Bishops make a Third Estate, page 91.
then a Parliament could not be held without them: But a Parliament has sat
excluso Clero, as that of Ed. I; and that it may do so in point of Law, appears
by the Resolution of the Judges in Keilway's Reports, because the Bishops sit
in Parliament by reason of their Baronies. This is the great Objection, to which
I shall give a full Answer.

[1.] It is dangerous arguing from extraordinary Cases to the excluding any one
of the Estates of the Kingdom from being represented in Parliament: because no
one can tell where this way of arguing will stop. If a Parliament may be good
without one Estate, why not without another? And we have seen an House of Lords
excluded as unnecessary, upon such kind of arguments; because they sit in their
own Persons, and represent none but themselves. If we once depart from the
ancient and legal Constitution of Parlaments, there will be no end of
Alterations. Every new Modeller of Government has something to offer that
looks like Reason, at least to those whose interest it is to carry it on. And
if no Precedents can be found, then they appeal to a certain invisible thing
called the Fundamental Contract of the Nation: which being a thing no where to
be found, may signify what any one pleases. Suppose one extraordinary case
happens through the disorder of Times, that the Clergy have been left out in a
Parliament; what does this signify toward altering the legal Constitution and
constant Course of Parlaments, which from the beginning of Parlaments in this
Nation, have had the Estate of the Clergy represented in them? as sufficiently
appears by Mr. Petyt's learned Preface to his late Discourse of the ancient
Right of the Commons. page 7, etc.
The first after King Ethelbert's Conversion was, Commune Concilium tam Cleri
quam Populi. That under Ina was, omnium Episcoporum, and Principum, Procerum
Comitum, and omnium Sapientum Seniorum and Populorum totius Regni. That under
Edmund the Elder was, Concilium magnum Episcoporum, Abbatum, Fidelium Procerum
and Populorum. I might add many more: as that at Becanceld under King Withred
A. D. 694. Council. Brit. p. 182. 189. 318. 327. 336. 340. 344. 428. 534.
Episcopis, etc. Ducibus and Satrapis in unum glomeratis. At Clovesho under
Kenulphus of Mercia; at Calecyth, at London, at Kingston. Nay, not one can be
found by me in the Saxon times, wherein the Bishops are not expressly mentioned.
So that if there be such a thing to be found as the Fundamental Contract of the
Nation about the Constitution of Parlaments, I do not question but they have
their share in it. Insomuch that Sir H. Spelman makes it his description of the
Wittena-Gemot, that in it, as Mr. Petyt observes, Convenere Regni Principes,
tam Episcopi quam Magistratus, liberique homines; i.e. it was an Assembly of
the Three Estates. So that before there were any such things as Baronies, they
were an essential part of the English Parliament. And must all this clear and
undoubted evidence from the first mention of Parlaments be rejected, because
once upon a time, a certain King called a certain Parliament, wherein, upon some
Distaste between the King and the Clergy, the other Estates continued sitting
without them?

[2.] This single Instance about the Parliament under Ed. I. is much
misunderstood, as will appear by these considerations.

1. That the Clergy excluded themselves, and were not shut out by the Act of
the King and the other Estates. For upon the Bull of Pope Boniface VIII.
forbidding the Clergy giving any more Subsidies, (which was procured by
Archbishop Winchelsee, as our Historians relate) a Parliament being called by
Ed. I. at Saint Edmondsbury on purpose for Subsidies, the Clergy refuse, upon
the Pope's prohibition, till they had consulted the Court of Rome; and go away
every one to their own homes: notwithstanding which, the King proceeds with the
other two Estates, and gets Subsidies from the Laiety. So that the exclusion of
the Clergy came from their own voluntary Act; when the King desired no such
thing, nor the other two Estates, but were all extremely provoked at this
withdrawing of the Clergy. That this Parliament was called purposely for the
Subsidy, appears by the Writ still upon Record; wherein the Archbishop is
summoned to appear, Claus. 24 Ed. 1. M. 7. dorso.
ad ordinandum de quantitate and modo subsidii memorati.

2. Whereas it is insinuated, that great matters were done, and good Laws
passed, when the Clergy were excluded; I find no such thing. It is true, the
confirmation of Magna Charta by Ed. I. (which was a great thing indeed) is
said, in the Statute-Books, to be done the same year, viz. 25 Ed. I. But that
it could not be done in that Parliament, I thus prove. That Parliament was called
crast. Walsingh. page 18. Thorn. ad A. 1296. Knighton, p. 2491. Matt. West.
page 428.
Animarum; the King appoints another at London crast. Hilarii: where the
difference still continuing, he appoints a new Parliament on the day of S. Peter
ad Vincula, or Lammasday, wherein he was reconciled to the Archbishop and
Clergy. Then Fealty is sworn to his Son, before his going into Flanders; and
the King excused himself as to the great Taxes and Subsidies, on the account of
his Wars. While he was about Winchelsea, a Remonstrance is sent to him of the
Grievances of the Nation, in the name of the Archbishops, Bishops, Earls,
Barons, and the whole Commons of England, wherein they complain of illegal
Taxes, and the breach of Magna Charta. The King gives a dilatory answer, and
passes over into Flanders. In his absence the People refuse to pay the Taxes,
and the Lords combine together, and all things tend to an open Rebellion. His
Son Ed. II. calls a Parliament at London, and promises a Confirmation of the
Charter, and that no Taxes should hereafter be raised, either on Clergy or
Laiety, without their consent. Which being sent over, Edw. I. confirmed it with
his own Seal: which was all done within the compass of this year. But he again
ratified it in the Parliament 27 Ed. I. So that nothing was done in that
Parliament at S. Edmondsbury, but granting a 12th of the Laiety to the King. And
when the great Laws were passed, the King and Clergy were reconciled, and they
sat in Parliament. And the Archbishop of Canterbury fell into the King's
displeasure afterward, for being so active a promoter of them. The sum then
of this mighty argument is, that the Lords and Commons once granted their own
Subsidies, without the concurrence of the Clergy; therefore the Clergy are no
essential part of the parliament.

3. The Reason assigned in Keilway's Reports, why the King may hold a Parliament
without the Bishops, is very insufficient: page 92.
viz. because they have no place in Parliament by reason of their Spiritualty,
but by reason of their Temporal possessions. The insufficiency of which Reason
will appear by two things.

1. That it is not true: as appears by this, that the Clergy are one of the
Estates of the Kingdom; and all the Estates of the Kingdom must be represented
in Parliament.

2. Were it true, it is no good Reason. For why may they be excluded because
they sit on the account of their Baronies? Where lies the force of this Reason?
Is it because there will be Number enough without them? That was the Rump's
Argument against the Secluded Members. And I hope the Author of the Letter
will not justify their Cause. Or is it because they hold their Baronies by
Tenure? So did all the ancient Barons of England: and why may the King hold his
Parliament with the other Barons, without the Bishops; and not as well with the
Bishops, without the other Barons? Which I do not see how it can be answered
upon those grounds. Suppose the Question had been thus put, Since all the
ancient Lords of Parliament were Barons by Tenure, and Parlaments were held for
many Ages without any Barons by Patent or by Writ, why may not the King hold
his Parliament after the ancient way, only with Barons by Tenure? I do not see,
but as good a Reason may be given for this, as that in Keilway's Reports. All
that I plead for is, that our good ancient and legal Constitution of Parliament
may not be changed for the sake of any single Precedents, and rare Cases, and
obscure Reports built upon weak and insufficient Reasons. page 68.
For, as the Author of the Letter very well says, Consuetudo Parlamenti est
Lex Parlamenti, The constant Practice of Parlaments (and not one single
Instance) is the Law of Parlaments. And suppose that Precedent of 25 Ed. I. as
full as could be wished in this case; yet I return the answer of the Author of
the Letter in a like case, page 49.
This is but one single Precedent, (of a Parliament without Bishops,) against
multitudes wherein they were present: it was once so, and never but once. And
can that be thought sufficient to alter and change the constant course and
practice of Parlaments, which has been otherwise?

Nothing now remains, but a severe reflection on the Popish Bishops for opposing
the Statute of Provisors, page 96.
and the several good Acts for the Reformation. But what this makes against the
Votes of Protestant Bishops is hard to understand. If he thinks those could not
make a good Third Estate in Parliament, who took Oaths to the Pope contrary to
their Allegiance, and the interest of the Nation, so do we. If he have a great
zeal for the Reformation, so have all true Members of the Church of England,
who, we doubt not, will heartily maintain the Cause of our Church against the
Usurpations of Rome, though the heat of others should abate. For did not our
Protestant Bishops seal the Reformation with their Blood, and defend it by
their admirable Writings? What Champions has the Protestant Religion ever had
to be compared in all respects with our Cranmer, ^idley, Jewel, Bilson, Morton,
Hall, Davenant, and many other Bishops of the Church of England? And
notwithstanding the hard fortune Archbishop Laud had in other respects, not to
be well understood in the Age he lived in; yet his enemies cannot deny his Book
to be written with as much strength and judgment against the Church of Rome, as
any other whatsoever. I shall conclude with saying, that the Clergy of the
Church of England have done incomparably more Service against Popery, from the
Reformatition to this day, then all the other Parties among us put together:
And that the Papists at this time wish for nothing more, then to see men, under
a pretense of Zeal against Popery, to destroy our Church; and while they cry up
Magna Charta, to invade the legal Rights thereof, and thereby break the first
Chapter of it; and from disputing the Bishops presence in Cases Capital, to
proceed to others; and so by degrees to alter the ancient Constitution of our
Parlaments, which will unavoidably bring Anarchy and Confusion upon us: from
which, as well as Popery, Good Lord, deliver us.

THE END.

