A DISCOURSE OF THE NATURE and OBLIGATION OF OATHS: WHEREIN, Satisfaction is
tendered touching the Non-obligation and Unlawfulness of the OATH called, The
SOLEMN LEAGue and COVENANT.

The Acknowledgment whereof, is required of us by a late ACT of PARLIAMENT,
Entitled, An ACT for UNIFORMITY.

Published as an APPENDIX to the Peace Offering.

By the same AVTHOR.

Thou shall swear the Lord lives in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness, Jer.
4.2. Juramentum Pietatis, non debet esse vinculum Iniquitatis.

LONDON, Printed by E. M. for Thomas Pierrepont, at the Sun in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1662.

A Discourse TOUCHING THE NATURE, and OBLIGATION of OATHS: TOGETHER WITH THE
NON-OBLIGATION and UNLAWFULNESS Of the OATH, called, The Solemn League and
Covenant.
THE earnest desire of my Soul for the advancement of Piety and Peace, Sect. 1.
engaged me to send forth my PEACE OFFERING into the World, to invite to Peace,
and persuade to Obedience, and a just Conformity to the Laws under which we
live; wherein it was my endeavor to satisfy the principal Doubts, and remove
the most material Scruples which might hinder that Peace and Obedience: But
there is now risen another, which I then could not foresee; viz. This
Acknowledgment or Declaration, which we are commanded by the Act of Parliament,
Entitled, An Act for Uniformity, etc. to make and subscribe, viz.

I A B. Do Declare, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to take
Arms against the King, and that I do abhor that Traiterous Position, of taking
Arms by His Authority against His Person, or against those that are
Commissionated by Him; And that I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of
England, as it is now established: And I do Declare, That I do hold there lies
no Obligation upon me, or on any other person, from the Oath commonly called,
The Solemn League and Covenant, to endeavor any change or alteration of
Government either in Church or State; and that the same was in it self an
unlawful Oath, and imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, against the known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom.

I know it will be deemed by many a matter of extreme severity, Sect. 2.
for the Parliament thus to oblige men to renounce, what, with hands lifted up
to the most High God, they have so solemnly sworn; and this, by no less penalty
than the Forfeiture of their Places, Livings, Promotions, and consequently
Livelihoods, and means of Subsistence for them and their Families. But it may
be remembered that there was as great severity. (yea, more bitter, because
illegal) used against thousands of persons, every way as conscientious as any
now can pretend to be, both Ministers and others, by those who imposed the
Covenant, to make them swear it, though because of the Obligation of their
former Oaths they durst not submit to such a perjury. I could tell sad Stories,
to which the World is no stranger, of men brought before Committees, Holy,
Learned, Pious, Painful Preachers, unblameable in their Lives, That when
nothing could be objected against them for Life or Doctrine, then presently the
Cry was, Try him with the Covenant: And the refusal of that, though so contrary
to the known Laws, and their former Obligations, was the exposing of them and
their Families to Beggary and Misery. Let us reflect upon that unjust severity
then, and not think it cruel now, that we are by a lawful Authority required to
renounce that which was made an Engine to ruin and destroy so many.

But not to dispute the rigor or severity of the Law, let us consider the
matter enjoined, Sect. 3.
and see whether there be any thing in this Declaration, which a considering
conscientious Christian may not readily Subscribe unto. There are but these
three things to be declared and acknowledged.

1. The Unlawfulness of Rebellion, or bearing Arms against the King. 2. A
readiness to conform to the Liturgy. 3. The Non-Obligation and Unlawfulness of
that Oath, called the Solemn League and Covenant.
1. For the first, No Sober Christian, Sect. 4.
or Loyal Subject can make Scruple at it, That it is unlawful upon any pretense
whatsoever, to take or bear Arms against the King, is a Truth so manifest and
express in the Scriptures, which command Mat. 22.21
to render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's; and Romans 13 1. -- 8. 1 Pet.
2.13, 14
Custom, Tribute, Fear, Honor, Subjection and Obedience to our Kings (yea,
though they should be as the Roman Emperors, Enemies to, and Persecutors of
the Church; that he must forfeit his reason, conscience, yea, his Christianity,
that shall question it. And I hope, yea, can be almost confident, That even
those who yet scruple the Obligation of the Covenant, and are therefore afraid
to Subscribe that part of this Acknowledgment, do abhor, and I presume are
ready to declare, That they abhor that Traiterous Position of taking Arms by
His Authority against His Person. etc. which was but a distinction invented to
draw in many well-meaning people into that quarrel; who being afraid to break
their Allegiance to the King, were abused by dividing His Natural and Politic
Capacity; and persuaded that they fought for the King, when what they did,
tended to destroy Him. 2. For, the Conformity to the Liturgy; Sect. 5.
that we may both lawfully conform, and consequently promise it, I refer the
Reader to the Discourse about this Subject in my Peace Offering. 3. But it is
the matter of the Covenant, Sect. 6.
and the obligation thereof, which is mainly now (if not only) the matter of
Scruple, and Stumbling Block in the way of many. That they (and very many they
were) who by the Command of the Lords and Commons in Parliament, and upon the
serious exhortation of an Assembly of Grave Divines, with hands lifted up to
the most High God, have Solemnly Sworn it, and engaged themselves to endeavor
in their places with all sincerity, reallity and constancy, without respect of
persons to perform the Contents of it; and to stand by all that entered into it
against all opposers, and that no fear, terror or persuasion whatsoever should
draw them from a zealous prosecuting of the ends of it; that these should now
acknowledge and declare, that neither themselves, nor any else are obliged by
it, and that it was an unlawful Oaeth, etc. this sticks.
Some, Sect. 7.
perhaps, that have been over eager and zealous in contending for, and by all
imaginable Arguments urging and pressing this Oath, or, Covenant, laboring by
all ways to draw the people into this League and Combination, may think their
reputation now so to lie at stake; that should they now retract or condemn
that, which they have not only sworn themselves, but have been so zealous and
instrumental to make others also swear; that high esteem, which they now have
with the people for zeal and Godliness, would be utterly lost; when this very
Acknowledgement would make people think, that either they did heretofore go
against Law, Conscience, and Piety, to promote a wicked design; or, now as
weakly, to please men, and to save their worldly estates, are ready to do any
thing, and perjuriously to break the bonds which they were by so Solemn an Oath
obliged in. And the truth is, while men have their eye thus upon the empty
blast of a vain reputation, there can be no hopes to persuade such to retract
an error, much less to condemn, what themselves have so violently promoted.
But, methinks, men of knowledge and parts, and (above all) that profess
themselves to be Christians, should know, that the esteem and applause, or
censures of men, is too sandy a foundation to build upon; and the worst rule to
guide our actions by: and be able to teach themselves and others, that as
sometimes to fall, and be overtaken in a sin, was the weakness of flesh; so to
persist in an error is the wickedness of a man; but to glory in, and labor to
justify an evil action, is the property rather of the Devil, than Man: and
that our best repute, and highest credit with God and all good men, is, that we
are more ready to repent, than we were to sin; that we our selves are ready to
cast the first stone, and condemn our selves for what we have done amiss; that
though sin have sometimes overtaken us as we are men, yet upon conviction we
rise again by repentance, and through grace overtake mercy. What an happiness
would it be to the Church? What a real honor would it be to the persons
themselves, if they would be as forward in returning, and as zealous in
informing the people of their errors, and reducing them to obedience and peace;
as they have sometimes been to stir them up against the ways of both?

But I am not so uncharitable as to think that all, or the nost, Sect. 8.
who scruple this Acknowledgement, are such men, or only guided by such rules.
Many that took this Covenant, and many Ministers that pressed it (I verily
believe) thought that they must and ought to do so (though, I fear, upon no
better grounds, than St. Paul before his conversion had to persuade him that he
Acts 26.9.
ought to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus: or than those had, who
persecuted the Disciples, and Joh. 16.2.
thought they did God good service. Howsoever) many in the sincerity of their
hearts did swear, many through fear entered the same obligation: some think they
are still obliged, though they may be convinced that they rashly or unlawfully
took that Covenant. The satisfaction of these doubring souls, is the design of
this Paper.

We shall therefore examine the matter required by this Act, Sect. 9.
which is a Law of undoubted Authority now upon us; and conside, whether any
men are, or can be obliged by the Covenant mentioned, so far, as that they may
not subscribe this Declaration, or, Acknowledgement. There are but these two
things required to be acknowledged and declared. 1. That there lies no
obligation upon any person by this Oath, to endeavor the Alteration of
Government in Church or State. 2. That it was an unlawful Oath, and imposed
contrary to the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. Both which I judge
unquestionably true, and shall give my reasons, that I may do my part to remove
this stone of stumbling, and Conscience being satisfied in this case, we all
may obey the Law in a just consormity, and continue with cheerfulness and peace
to serve God, and his Church in our generations.

An Oath beyond all peradventure is most Sacred, Sect. 10.
and has the greatest tie upon the soul; being, A Religious attestation of
God, with an imprecation of his wrath upon us, if we break it, or abuse his
Name in it. Here we call in God for a Witness of the truth and sincerity of our
hearts, and imprecate his vengeance upon us if we either lie, or mean not to
perform what we so promise in things lawful, and in our power. Thus it is a
Solemn invocation of God the searcher of all hearts, that he would bear witness
to the truth, and be our Surety for what we promise, and punish him that swears
deceitfully. So that an Oath thus solemnly sworn, and religioufly taken, must
have the strongest obligation upon Conscience, upon this threefold account.

1. In regard of the Name invoked, Sect. 11.
and by which it is made. It calls in God as the Searcher of hearts Romans 1.9. 2
Cor. 1.23. and 11.31. Gal. 1.20. Isa. 65.16.
to attest it; that is, the eternal and immutable verity to confirm it: and to
falsify here, is to make the God of Truth the Author or Patron of a Lie. 2. In
regard of the Imprecation, Sect. 12.
and consequently the vengeance to be inflicted; man devoting himself to a
Curse, for a punishment of his Perjury; to be an Anathema, if he swear falsely,
or willingly perform not, what by solemn Oath he is bound to do. For this was
the form of, and the usual imprecation in the Ancient Oaths, Ruth 1.17. 1 Kings
2.23. and 19.2. 1 Samuel 25.22.
God do so to me, and more also, if, etc. not expressing; but by an Aposiopesis
suppressing the evil wished; as committing it wholly to the judgment of God:
q.d. The Lord thus and thus punish me, yea multiply his plagues and judgments
upon me, as himself pleases, if I intend otherwise than I say or profess. This
was a thing which even Nature taught the very Heathens. Corn. Nep. in vita
Agesil.
When Agesilaus a King of Sparta, and Tissaphernes General of the Persians had
made and sworn a three months truce; The Spartan thought himself obliged to
keep faith with his enemy, and to attempt no hostility. But the Persian
regarded it not, studied War still. Yet the Spartan persisted to keep his oath,
expecting by this means advantage enough against the Persian, as being
confident that his Perjury would alienate the minds of men, both from him, and
his designs; and moreover provoke the gods also against him, by whom he had
sworn. 3. In regard of the end for which the Oath was taken, Sect. 13.
Viz. To make faith, and beget belief, to be a perfect Heb. 6.16.
Confirmation of a thing in doubt, and the best assurance, that what is
promised shall be performed. The God of Truth is called in to witness; and his
anger imprecated, that men may have reason to believe and trust us; and not
doubt of the truth of our words, or sincerity of our intentions. Words are made
to be the interpreters of our mind, by which we can only know the intentions
one of another; it is therefore as unnatural as unlawful to falsify ones word,
or Lev. 19.11. Ephesians. 4.25.
tell a Lie; to use mental reservations, Amphibologies, or Equivocations, which
would make all Leagues and Contracts of no assurance. Truth and Falsehood are
parts of justice and injustice, which have relation to our Neighbor ad extra,
and are therefore not to be estimated according to what lies hid within, in
the mind; but according to what flows from the tongue in known and
intelligible words. The end of words is to testify the hidden truth of the
heart. But when an Oath shall be added to these words, and the Eternal Verity
called in to witness that our tongues do faithfully declare our minds, this is
added to beget a firmer belief, and to falsify here is a greater sin: a Truth
which all men, even the Heathen have received as Sacred. Vid. Sims. Chron.
Cath. in Perfic. p 115.
When Lacrates the Theban Captain besieged Pelusium in the behalf of the
Persians; at last it yielded upon terms; and Oath was given that the Greeks
yielding the Castle, should go out safe with all their goods, and be conveyed
to their Countries. Upon confidence of this faith given by Oath, they yield,
but the Persian Soldiers under Bagoas, the Kings Lieutenant coming in,
contrary to the Oath fall to Pillaging the poor Greeks, they now can do nothing
but bewail their misery, complain of the Perjury, calling on the gods to punish
it. But Lacrates, who had made the terms, and given his Oath, in zeal to his
Oath, falls upon the Persians for whom he fought; and protects the Greeks, to
whom he had sworn. The Persians accuse Lacrates as taking part with the Greeks
against them, but the King (who was then Ochus, even the same who was Ahasuerus
the husband of Hester) hearing the cause, justified Lacrates, condemned his own
Lieutenant, B^g^as; determined that those Persians were justly served; and
ordered further punishment should be taken upon them, who ^o brake the Oath and
pillaged the Greeks. So Sacred a thing did that Barbarous King esteem an Oath
to be.
There is no doubt then, Sect. 14.
but there is an high obligation by an Oath upon the soul. But yet not such an
obligation in every Oath, as to bind the Sweater to an actual performance of
it. For it is no difficult matter to give instances of some Oaths that have
been wickedly entered into, and more wickedly kept. And therefore we must
consider as the nature, so the several qualities of Oaths, that we may better
be able to judge when and how far they bind.

As to an Oath then, Sect. 15.
that we may neither sin in the taking, nor in the keeping of it, God has
given us this express command, Exodus 20.7.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, etc. And for the
preserving this Name of God from all profanation, which is much profaned by
rash, inconsiderate, irreligious Oaths; by Perjury, and by not performing our
Oaths to the Lord; yea, and by doing, upon pretense of an Oath, what we ought
neither to swear, nor do: The Prophet has set this threefold boundary about
all our Oaths. Jer. 4.2.
Thou shall swear -- in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness: (i. e.) Truly,
considerately, and justly. So that to every lawful Oath, there are these three
things prerequisite.

1. Truth. Sect. 16.
That God be not invoked to a lie. Here the Law is, Lev. 19.12
Thou shall not swear by my Name falsely, a crime Isa. 48.1. Jer 5 2.
charged upon Israel as their sin. For this is to make the Eternal Truth
witness to a Lie, and lay an impuration upon God, to be (as Joh. 8.44.
the Devil) the Father and Factor of Lies. Here then we are obliged, to sweat
to nothing, but what is True, viz. to assert nothing but Truth: and our hearts
and words going together, that we really endeavor to make good what we have
sworn. 2. Judgment. Sect. 17.
That we swear not rashly or inconsiderately, but seriously consider what we
swear, and whose Name we invoke: that an Oath may be taken with the greatest
care, discretion, and deliberation. Lest the Sacred Name of God be profaned by
idle, light, and customary Oaths; or our selves irreparably snared by our
inconsiderateness, as Joshua and Israel were Josh. 9.15. -- 25.
by swearing to the Gibeonites. 3. Justice and Righteousness. Sect. 18.
To do nothing but what is just and honest, lest we make God the countenancer
of wickedness, and call in the most Holy to patronize impiety or injustice.
Such an unjust Oath was that of 1 Samuel 14.39.44.45.
Saul, whereby he would have killed his son: 1 Samuel 25.22. --
of David, to destroy Nabals house: of the Acts 23.12
fews to murder Paul. The cause, ground and matter of the Oath must be just,
honest, laewful, possible, and consonant to the revealed will of God.
These three conditions must have place in all sorts of Oaths, which are fully
comprised under these two general heads.

1. An Assertory Oath, which is nothing else but a Deposition: Sect. 19.
that, of which the Apostle speaks, when he says, that Heb. 6.16.
an Oath for confirmation is the end of strifes. Which must be allowed, as
without which many controversies, questions, and suits of Law were
indeterminable. The use of this Oath is, when we are called, to witness and
declare what we know of a thing past or present, the truth whereof we are bound
then by Oath to declare, so far as we know. In this the three forementioned
conditions have place, thus. 1. Truth, that we affirm or deny nothing, but what
we know infallibly, evidently, and certainly: or, if the thing be doubtful,
that we affirm or deny it, but as such, and venture no farther than a
probability, viz. that there be perfect truth in our words. 2. Judgment, viz.
1. That we remember it is the Oath of God, an holy thing, and not to be made
profane or common; nor taken, but when by a lawful authority we are called unto
it. 2. In great, and serious, and weighty causes, or matters of moment, to
which only it is fit to call down (as by Oath we do) the great God from heaven
to be a Witness and Judge. Nec Deus intersit, nisi dignus vindice nodus
inciderit -- 3. Not out of any levity, love, hatred, or any passion or
perturbation of mind; but a just and lawful necessity: when no other way
remains to prove the truth, or put an end to controversies. 3. Justice and
Righteousness. When we are justly called to take it, and when we swear, we
swear from an honest heart. Here Justice and Truth is much what the same. These
Oaths refering only to the time past or present, the Truth in them is but
single; relating only to the time present, or the Act of swearing, viz. that
this is Truth, which we now depose. The difficulties about these Oaths
therefore are not many, nor very implicate, because thus their whole truths are
immediately fulfilled in the present act, and a farther obligation these have
not. But the most difficulty is concerning another sort of Oaths, viz. 2.
Promissory Oaths. Sect. 20.
Which have respect to the time to come, and lay an obligation for the future.
For by these we engage our selves to do something hereafter. Such was that 1
Kings 1.17.
Oath of David, that Solomon should reign after him. This, when made to God, is
called a Vow; when to man, an Oath. The Obligation in both is the same, because
made in the name of God. Psalm. 76 11
Vow and pay to the Lord, says one text, and Mat. 5.23.
Thou shall perform to the Lord thine Oaths, says another. This also must have
the same conditions, of, 1. Truth, Sect. 21.
that we promise only, what we sincerely mean to perform; and that we do really
perform, or at least endeavor our best and utmost to perform what we have so
promised. So that the Truth, which in the Assertory Oath is only single,
relating to the present, and Act of swearing, is in this promissory Oath
double. 1. In regard of the present, that our mind and words go congruously
together; that, as we promise, so there be a real sincere intention to perform,
and here lies on the soul an immediate obligation, that in the very act of
swearing, our words be according to our intentions. 2. In reference to the
effect, and time to come, that we will have our Actions go along with our
words; and that by our utmost endeavors in all honest ways we will labor to
make our words good. 2. Judgment. Sect. 22.
That (as in the former so in this) we 1. With reverence remember by whom we
swear, the name of the great God, so as we enter not this Oath upon light and
trivial causes, or, not lawfully called to it. 2. That upon mature deliberation
we so promise, what we promise by oath, considering well the matter and
circumstances to which we are engaged; lest by our inconsiderateness we should
oblige our selves to a mischief or inconvenience. 3. That, what we promise be
possible, and in our power; lest otherwise by our rashness we become engaged,
where by reason of the impossibility of performance we cannot but break our
Oaths. That we be not drawn either by affection, passion, fear or terror to
promise that, which in out unbiassed thoughts we would not, or might nor do. 3.
Justice, and Righteousness, that what we promise be just, Sect. 23.
honest, lawful and agreeable to the Word of God; not contrary to any moral
precept, nor our former lawful Oaths, and not yet rescinded obligations. So
that, as 1. They sin against this, who having sworn, and being obliged to the
duty of any moral precept, yet for gain, interest, vain reputation, etc.
absolve themselves at pleasure, and perform not their Oaths: So 2. Do they sin
also, who enter into Oaths and Obligations to do, what they are obliged not to
do, as to lie, kill, steal, etc. Such was the Oath of the Acts 23.12
Jews to kill Paul; of Mat. 14 8. -- 12.
Herod to He^odias, both rash, and against judgment in the Act, swearing to
give her any request, not considering how unjust, or unequal a thing she might
ask; and unjust and wicked in the execution, the Murder of an innocent Man, and
an holy Prophet of God.

These Promissory Oaths only are the matter of our present consideration, Sect.
24.
as those only which have an obligation upon us for the future. And because the
Matter of this Oath, which is in the future to be fulfilled, is naturally
subject to change whether we will or no, the Obligation therefore must needs be
mutable, and separable from the Oath. It is in our power to make the first
truth good, viz. That our minds and intentions shall go along with our words;
but the second is not always in our power, viz. That our Deeds and Actions
shall exactly answer either our words or intentions. He is forsworn, who
intends not what by Oath he promises; but he is not always forsworn, who
effects not what he has so sworn.

Let us therefore consider the Cases, Sect. 25.
how far these Oaths oblige; and when, or where the Obligation cease; for I
doubt not, but there is an unquestionable Truth in both these Propositions.

1. That though a lawful Oath generally obliges, yet there are some Cases and
Times where it obliges not: And, 2. That there is some kind of unlawful Oath
that still obliges; so that on the one side, Sometimes an Oath may be lawfully
sworn, yet afterward unlawfully kept; on the other side, it may be unlawfully
sworn, yet may be lawfully kept, and would be unlawfully broken.
Therefore as to the lawfulness, Sect. 26.
or unlawfulness of Oaths, I must premise this distinction, which is but
necessary for the better understanding, wherein they are lawful or unlawful,
and we may be able to give a clearer judgment of the Obligation. Oaths may be
said lawful or unlawful.

1. In regard of the Imposers or Exacters of them. They are lawful, when we are
called to swear by a just and lawful Authority; unlawfully imposed, when by an
usurping and unlawful Authority. 2. In regard of the Act, Manner, and Motive of
swearing. It is lawful, when upon a lawful cell, from an honest heart, upon
mature judgment: But not so, when rash, or inconsiderate, drawn by Affection,
hurried by Possion, driven by Fear, or extorted by Force. 3. In regard of the
Matter sworn to; whether just and honest, or evil and unlawful to be done. In
the first Notion, an unlawful Oath may oblige; sometimes in the second; but
never in the last. These things will help us to judge what Oath is lawfully or
unlawfully taken; and when the Obligation of a lawful Oath cease, and where
it continues: And where an unlawful Oath obliges, or obliges not. I shall
give you my thoughts in these Conclusions.
1. It is beyond all question that all Oaths, Sect. 27.
lawfully required, to which we are called by a just Authority, the matter
whereof is just, honest, and in our power to perform, do indispensibly oblige
the conscience, so long, and so far, as those who required the Oath, will that
they should. This I take as so clear and unquestionable, that it needs no proof
nor explication 2. All Oaths, Sect. 28.
where the matter is just, or they oblige not to any dishonest thing, though
they are rashly sworn or upon surprise, though imposed by unjust Powers,
extorted by force, and cannot be kept but to our own inconvenience, and so
consequently unlawful Oaths, perhaps, snfully sworn, as being contrary to that
condition of swearing, in judgment; yet may lawfully be kept, yea, sometimes,
and in some cases do oblige, and may not be broken. Such was the case of
Pomponius the Raman Tribun. Cic. de Offic. l. 3. ad fin. cap. de Fortitud,
He had summoned L. Manlius to appear in court to an accusation against him
concerning his too severe usage of his son. The son T. Manlius hearing of it,
went into the Chamber of the Tribune, and with his drawn sword threatened his
life, if he presently swore not to him to withdraw the Action against his
Father. Pomponius through this terror took such an Oath; and when the day came,
declared the matter to the people, and according to his Oath, withdrew the
Action. So Religious a tie was an Oath esteemed in those days, though it were
extorted by terror. The like may be said of Oaths in case of surprisal: such
was the case of Alexander M. The story is this, Pausan. Eliac. 2. Valor. Max.
l. 7. c. 3.
The Citizens of Lampsacum had joined with Darius the Persian against the
Greeks: Alexander who had the command of all the Grecian forces, marches with
fury, threatening utter destruction to these Lampsacenians; they affrighted,
send one of their chiefest Citizens, one Anaximenes to beg favor: Alexander to
prevent him and his suit, swears that he will not grant that which Anaximenes
should ask: Anaximenes takes advantage, and surpriseth him upon his Oath,
Petitions that he would destroy the City, demolish their Temples, captivate and
sell the inhabitants; thus was Alexander wittily circumvented, and the City
saved, Alexander thinking himself bound by his Oath not to destroy it, because
Anaximenes had so petitioned, whom he had sworn to deny. Here was an Oath
rashly taken, the swearer surprised, who yet accounted himself obliged. Shall I
add another? a case which the Scripture records, it is that oath of Josh.
9.4-20.
Joshua and Israel to the Gibeonites: they by craft obtain a League, which they
should not have obtained, had they been known inhabitants of the Land, whom
Israel had commission to destroy, but they pretending a long journey, an
Embassy from a far Country, Joshua and the Elders of Israel are furprized, the
League is made, and sworn to, to let these Gibeonites live. The people, when
they hear the fraud, murmr against the Princes, but they answer, We have
sworn to them by the Lord God of Israel, therefore we may not touch them. They
knew they were (though rashly sworn) yet now obliged, and God did afterward
severely 2 Samuel 21.1-10.
punish the breach of this Oath upon the house of Saul, who sought to slay the
^^^b^onites contrary to this League, though it was in his zeal to the Children
of Israel and Judah. Such Oaths then, though extorted, or unjustly imposed, or
rashly taken, yet when their matter is not dishonest or unjust, do bind, though
it may be to our own damage or inconvenience. He that has so sworn may have
reason to repent of his rashness, but must perform his Oaths, when he has
sworn, though Psalm 15.4.
to his own hurt, he must not change. 3. But there are some cases wherein both
a lawful oath cease to oblige; Sect. 29.
and an unlawful oath never did, nor can oblige to the actual performance of
it. The matter of a Promise, and consequently of a Promissory oath, is
something future: now what is supposed future may yet be 1. Necessary. 2. Imp
ssible. 3. Possible. The first is necessary to be performed, and must be done;
the second cannot be expected, nor can there be an obligation to do, what (not
only may not but) cannot be done: The last may. But this depending so much upon
our own or others wills; and there being also many contingencies, which cannot
be determined by our wills; our state and condition here being in continual
motion and change: this is that which makes the Difficulty, and is the matter
of perplexing oaths, and promises. It must therefore be most evident, that
there is no promise or oath, which, in these things whose futurition is subject
to, and depends upon so many contingencies; can be so positive and absolute;
but must be supposed to have some tacit but necessary conditions annexed to
them: by reason whereof a man may sometimes not keep, and yet not be guilty of
the bleach of his oath: yea, sometimes may be obliged not to keep it, for all
our engagements and actions lie open to the controlments that may be made by a
Law, Justice, the power of our Superiors, and the Rights of another third
person. So that, 1. There may be, Sect. 30.
and often is (as the Law and C^suists term it) Solutio vinculi per cessationem
materiae, and mutationem factam circa causam juramenti principalem. When the
matter of the Oath is taken away, or some notable and material change made in
that which was the principal cause of the Oath, the bond is loosed, and he that
was obliged, is now free. For this must be supposed as the tacit condition,
^ebus sic stantibus, That things stand and continue as they do, or that there
still be the same occasion of doing the thing now, as there was of doing, of
swearing to do it, when the Oath was taken. And thus 1. The Matter of the Oath
cease, Sect. 31.
when the state of things is so changed between the time of swearing and
falfilling, that had they been so then as they are now, or had we foreseen this
change and state of things, the Oath would not have been required, yea ought
not to have been taken at all. For instance, 1 Kings 1.52.
Solomon forgave Adonijah his offense in Usurping the Crown, on condition that
wickedness should not afterward be found in him. After this comes in 1 Kings
2.20.
B^th^^eba with a Petition for him, and King Solomon gives her an absolute
promise that be will not deny her. Upon this absolute grant she goes on to ask
Ver. 21.
Abishag one of David's Concubines, a wife for Adonijah: upon this Solomon
notwithstanding his former peremptory engagement to his Mother, not to deny
her, not only does not make that good; but moreover also takes a Solemn Oath,
Ver. 22, 23, 24.
Adonijah should die. Here is an evident contradiction to his former peremptory
Promise, and yet he cannot be said to break promise, nor had he sworn to the
promise, could he for this be accused of dealing salsly; because in the
Positive grant by the Promise, there must be understood this tacit condition,
that Adonijah (according as his former pardon went) should attempt nothing
unlawful, which he now did, it being Treason for any, to attempt the Concubines
of the deceased King, besides the Successor; for 2 Samuel 12.8 and 16.21.
his only they were. Here was a notable alteration in the matter. The Promise
made and sworn to Adonijah, was, as to faithful and loyal, the case is altered
when he turns Traitor. Thus, those who have subscribed and sworn to the use
of the Liturgy of the Church of England, did subscribe and swear to that
Particular Liturgy which was established, and as it was established in 1o
Elizab. but now several alterations being made in the Book, and established by
a Law of undoubted Authority, this is such an alteration in the Matter, as
frees those from that obligation as to that Book, when the time comes that this
new one takes place, and is in force. And to this I refer this also, 2. A
Freedom from the bond or obligation, Sect. 32.
when the same Authority, that required the Oath, gives a Relaxation, or
cancels and annuls that Oath. Thus he, that fulfils not his promise to him,
that will not have it fulfilled, breaks not his word: The reason is, because no
man is Master of another right; neither have we a right of making others keep,
what is their own property, longer than they will themselves. To Pay a debt is
always the duty of the Debtour, so long as the Creditour will have it so: but
it is not always a duty in the Creditour to receive it from the Debtour:
Acceptance here is equivalent to Payment. If I promise another, and swear to
pay him 100 l. I am bound if he will accept it; but if he will refuse the Debt,
I am free from the Obligation. So in this case, if a Servant swear to a Master
to serve him such a Term of years, He is obliged, if the Master still require
it, but if the Master will discharge him sooner, he is free, notwithstanding
his former Oath. The like reason there is (I conceive) in Pablick Oaths,
suppose them enacted by a lawful Authority; we swear lawfully, and are bound so
long as that Authority will have that in force to which we swore. But if the
same Authority annul the Law, and revoke the matter, we are also free. As
suppose I were called to swear, that I would constantly use the Liturgy now
established, and no other, I were bound by my Oath, as well as by the Act that
enjoynes it: but should this be taken away hereafter by a Law, and the same
Authority (i.e.) an Act of Parliament take away this, and require another Form,
I should be free of that Obligation: for the Oath supposes the Authority still
requiring it. In such a notable alteration we lawfully may not do, yea must not
do (unless our Oath can oblige us to resist a Law, which God has bound us to
obey) what we lawfully did by Oath promise to do.
2. Those Oaths whereby we bound our selves to Impossibilities, Sect. 33.
were Rashly, and inconsiderately taken; and may not only lawfully be broken,
but indeed cannot be kept: and the very Impossibility of Performance makes a
nullity in the Obligation. Whether the things sworn to, are, 1. Impossible in
Nature. As if I by Oath should engage my self to number the Stats, or the sands
on the Sea shore, or hold the Ocean in the hollow of my hand: I should be
sinfully involved in the guilt of a rash Oath; yet could not be obliged to
that, which God and Nature have made impossible. Or. 2. Whether they be
Morally, and in equity Impossible. What we swear, must be in our Power: for
this also is supposed a tacit condition, that we have power to do that, which
we swear to do. This, I conceive, was that which by the Law of the most
Righteous God, Number. 30.8, 12, 14.
freed a Wife, or a Child from the obligation of their Oath or Vow, when the
Husband or Father denied, and disallowed it: because neither a Wife being under
Covert bond, nor a Child, being under tuition, are sui juris. They have not
power over their own selves. The Wife has not power over her self, but the
Husband: so nor has the Child, but the Father: and consequently neither have
they power over their own Actions and engagements; but he, under whose power
themselves are. We know a Bond of a wife, or child under age signifies nothing,
nor can they be sued, they have no obligation in the Courts of men. There is
proportionably the same reason of Public Oaths, which are the Bonds of People
who are under Government, or Tuition of their Prince. If People enter into an
Oath, and bind themselves to an Action; and the King, under whose charge they
are, who is Pater Patriae, and whom they are bound to obey, shall disallow
those Oaths, and forbid those Actions; they may have reason to ask God
forgiveness for their Rash engagements, but are not obliged to do that which
they have sworn: the things being not legally in their power, because of a
Superior Authority, that disallows them, to which they Romans 13.5
must be subject. 3. Those oaths, Sect. 34.
which in the matter of them are against that most necessary condition of all
oaths, Justice and Righteousness, never did, nor can oblige, (i.e.) if the
thing sworn to, or Promised by Oath, be dishonest, unjust, impious; against
the Law of God, Moral equity, the right of a third Person, etc. it may at no
hand be done. There can be no justice, and consequently no obligation to
worship an Idol, to Kill, Steal, Ribell, etc. justice requires that all lawful
and possible engagements be performed, but sinful and unjust obligations
retracted. That Advice is certainly sound, which a Reverend Author gives. In
malis promissis rescinde fidem; in turpi voto muta decretum; quod incaute
vovisti n^ f^cias; impia enim promissio, quae scelere ad impl. tur. Glouc. on
Catech. out of Isidor.
In wicked Promises, rescind thy faith; in a dishonest Vow change the aecree;
do not that which thou have vowed unwarily; it is an impi^^ oath which cannot
be made good but by wickedness. It is a most sure rule, Juramentum pietatis non
debet esse vinculum ixiquitatis, for otherwise Scolus esset sides. Such was the
oath of Matthew. 14.7-12.
Herod to Herodias, an oath sinfully taken, and wickedly kept. Such was that
oath of David, He swore, 1 Samuel 25.21, 22, 34.
with an imprecation of a Curse upon himself to Destroy Nabal and all his
house, which yet upon the petition of Abigail he piously broke, but should
sinfully have performed. Such was the Rash Oath of Saul, 1 Samuel 14.24, 44, 45.
which would have engaged him to murder Jonathan; but the People prevented,
what he should sinfully have done. Such was the Act. 23.12, 21.
Oath of those forty Jews to kill Paul, which they wickedly swore, and should
more wickedly have committed. In this case, it matters not how, when, or by
what means, we were brought to swear, so much, as what we have sworn. Oaths
engaging to unlawful, and unjust Actions, (though through ignorance, error,
weakness, misprision, surreption, fear, or malice entered into) are not to be
kept, nor have any obligation upon the Conscience: They engage the Swearer to
repent of, and retract his Oaths, but not at all to perform them.

The truth is, Sect. 35.
to keep such an Oath is a double sin. A sin it was to swear; and another sin,
to perform the oath; Quod male juratur pejus servatur. For, what God has
forbidden, he will nor have done at any hand. He has forbidden us to swear or
promise them, but much more to do them, and to keep such Oaths, is but to add
sin to sin. Were the Oath extorted by fear; it is our sin to he affrighted into
sin, who should rather choose to die, than sin. We must beg pardon for our base
fears, but at no hand add another sin in performance: and the same must we
conclude of Surprise, or Passion, when the matter is unjust or sinful.
Memorable is the Story which Munster Munst. de Germ. l. 3. c. 499.
records of Jutha the Daughter of the Emperor Otho. 2. She was by the
Emperor, her Father, put into a Nunnery; but by force taken thence by Vdalric,
or Ulderick the Son of the King or Duke of Bohemia, and married to him. The
Emperor, urged by the indignity of the fact, swears to revenge himself upon
Vlderick; and to lead an Army into Bohemia. He does so, His and Uldericks
Armies meet. Jutha the Daughter of the one, and Wife of the other, astonished,
and affrighted, hastily runs to her Father, begs to speak with him before the
Armies join, or he lets his fury rage in blood. She obtains this liberty, and
sues for Peace and Reconcilement. The Emperor urges his oath, whereby he had
bound himself: She answers, Vana est religio quae sceleri locum facit; vim
criminibus Sacramenta non addunt. Munst, ibid.
That Religion is vain, which makes way to wickedness; nor can any oath give
force, power or license, to a crime, or sin. Thus she satisfies her fathers
scruple, and obtains her suit.

So that No Oath can oblige us either 1. Against Piety, Sect. 36.
the duties of the first Table. Or, 2. Against Justice and Charity, the duties
of the second. For these are the matters of the Jam. 2.8.
Royal Law of God, and indispensible duties upon man: And in vain should the
Lord of heaven give us such a Law, if we might at pleasure swear, and then upon
pretense of such an Oath be at liberty to break such a Law, the least
Commandments Mat. 5.17, 18, 19.
whereof God at no hand will have to be broken. But particularly, so far as
refers to our present purpose.

1. No Oath can oblige us against equity, Sect. 37.
against the right of a third person, or to the direct injury of our Neighbor.
For, though having sworn to our own inconvenience, we must not change, because
we are Masters of our own rights, and may, if we please, give them away: yet of
another rights we are not. God has bound us by his Law to preserve them, and
we may not swear to destroy them; nor may we destroy them, though we have
sworn so. 2. No Oath can oblige us against the Duty, Sect. 38.
that we owe to our Governors or Superiors, or the Laws that we do and must
live under. God has bound us to Obedience, and no oath can oblige to
Rebellion, Sedition, Schism, or Disobedience: no more than the Mat. 15.5. Mark
7.11, 12.
Corban, or pretense of a vow and a dedication of all to God, could free the
Jews from yielding that honor, obedience, and maintenance, which God had
obliged them to yield to their Parents. He that well understands the Fifth
Commandment, Honor thy Father, and Mother, knows that no Oath can oblige a man
to rise up against them, and turn his Father out of doors, yea or deny the duty
which he owes to them: and as little can it oblige us to endeavor to Subvert
the Government, or overthrow those Governors in Church or State, to whom, by
virtue of the same Precept, we are obliged to be Romans 13.1-5. 1 Pet 2.13, 14.
Sect. 39.
subject, not only for wrath, but for conscience sake. 3. Nor can any oath
oblige us against the former just obligations upon us; nor against those lawful
Oaths, which we had formerly taken, and are not yet free from. Prior obligatio
postoriori praejudicat. A former obligation does prejudge, and prevent the
latter. For every lawful Oath having an unquestionable tie upon the conscience,
it must be both unlawful to swear any thing contrary to it, and though we
swear, we cannot be obliged. For we cannot be bound to forswear; yea, we are
infallibly bound, Exodus 20.7. Mat. 5.33.
not to forswear our selves. A latter Oath cannot oblige, when the very taking
of it, is an act of perjury, and the keeping of it would be a persisting in the
perjury, in the breach of our former Oaths. This had the Vid. Sims. Chron.
Cath. Part. 1. am. 3480.
Phaenician Navi learned, who in the service of Cambyses were commanded by him
to sail against Carthage; though they were under his pay, and probably bound by
the Soldiers Oath, the Sacramentum Militia (and the Soldier is bound to obey,
not dispute his Generals commands) yet they thought themselves not obliged in
this, but denied obedience, because they were by a former Oath obliged to the
Carthaginians: and they therefore thought, that their latter Obligation to
Cambyies could not oblige them to destroy those, whom by a former Oath they
were bound to protect and assist. An Oath, that is unlawfully entered into,
because Rashly, may yet bind, when the matter is honest, and in our power: but
No Oath, unlawful in the matter of it, can either be lawfully taken, or when
taken, can lay any obligation; for No Oath can oblig^ us to sin.
We have now seen the general cases concerning the Nature, Sect. 40.
Qualities, Obligation, and Non-obligation of an Oath. It will not now be
difficult to show, by applying these general things to the particular case of
the Covenant, the Non-obligation, and Unlawfulness of that Oath. I have been
very serious in examining and considering this case, not, Whether the Penalty
in this Act of Parliament be too severe (for into that we have no call to
inquire) but, whether We may lawfully do as that Act requires, and make that
Acknowledgement which this Law enjoins us. Viz. Whether this Covenant were
lawfully taken, or may lawfully be kept: and whether yet it so obliges, that
we may not renounce it, and declare as much. And upon these premised principles
I judge we may be fully convinced of its Illegality, and Non-obligation, and
consequently may lawfully acknowledge and subscribe so.

1. It will not be denied, for it is unquestionable, Sect. 41.
that This Covenant was a Public Oath; and then according to the former rule,
it may also be annulled, revoked, and abrogated by a Public Authority, Suppose
the Authority were Supreme that required it; suppose, that we in obedience to
that Authority did lawfully swear it: yet without dispute, the Authority, that
is infallibly Supreme with us, does now Revoke, and has disannulled it. And
here is evidently then Cessatio materiae, and such a Notable Alteration of the
state of things referring to the Principal matter, which had it then been, this
Oath would neither have been imposed nor sworn; and we may justly conclude,
that, if it ever did oblige, yet now it does not: unless we can be obliged to
maintain a Law, which an Act of Parliament has repealed. But this is not all,
for this supposes it established by a Law. But 2. It was an Oath Imposed by
those, Sect. 42.
who had no authority to impose an Oaeth. It was a Covenant entered into by
Subjects; and disallowed by the King, who then ruled over us: and now again, by
His present Majesty, with the full consent of all the estates of the Kingdom in
Parliament, abrogated: and therefore cannot have an obligation, in analogy to,
and by virtue of that Law of God before mentioned, Numb. 30. for in this case
there is the same reason of Subjects under Government, as of Children under
tuition, or a Wife under Covertbond. We had no power to enter into such an Oath
or Combination; nor, it being denied, and disallowed by our Sovereign, can we
be obliged by it: for this must be still supposed a tacit condition, That our
Governors, and the Laws that we are under, will allow and permit it. But more,
3. Sect. 43.
It was an Oath Unlawfully sworn, and cannot but be unlawfully kept. And the
unlawfulness will appear in these particulars.
1. It was Unlawful in the Imposition: as being imposed by no lawful Authority.
The Laws of this Kingdom acknowledge nothing to have the force and power of a
Law, but from the stamp of the Royal Authority, the Kings Fiat: which that
Ordinance, which imposed this Covenant, never had. It must therefore be
concluded to be imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm, contrary to the Known
Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom: a thing, even the same, which those two
Houses of P. which imposed this Oath, declared; when they took away and
annulled the late Canons, and that Oath, which was so Decried for the, etc.
viz. Exact. Coll. p. 859, 860.
That A New Oath cannot be imposed without an Act of Parliament; which this was
never established by. 2. Sect. 44.
Unlawful in the Ends of it. Which (whatsoever, and how specious soever the
Pretenses were) have appeared sufficiently to the world to have been indeed
Seditious, and Rebellious. The charge may seem high, and too uncharitable: but
let it be remembered, (and it is too evident then to be denied) This very
Covenant was made the main Engine of a design, the saddest, the bitterest, that
England ever saw before, to engage a people against the Church and State: and
to Bring in the Scots to assist them in a dismal War against the King; which
they would not be brought to do, till this Kingdom did Covenant to throw out
her Bishops, and extirpate the established Episcopacy, Root and Branch. So that
the great ends aimed at in the contriving and exacting this Covenant to be
sworn, was, 1. Not to Reform some abuses, or, to take away some needless
Officers, or, prevent some irregular proceedings in the Courts: but utterly to
abolish the established Government in the Church. And then, 2. By the
Assistance of the Scots to maintain a War against the King, and to reduce Him
to such Terms as the Two Houses should think fit to put upon Him: That they
might be able to Give Laws to the King, from whom they were bound to Receive
them. 3. Unlawful also it was in the Matter of it, Sect. 45.
as binding men 1. To Impossibilities, if not in nature, yet certainly in
equit, Viz. binding men to do that, which they had no power, no authority to
do. What Power or authority had Subjects to enter into such an Oath, not only
without, but contrary to the mind, consent, and express Command and Will of
their Soverargn? What Authority, P. e, or Call had they, to endeavor the
Overthrowing of that Government, as Antichristian, under which the Christian
Church had been happy, and flourished so many hundred years; and which they
were by the positive Laws of our Land bound not to oppose, but to obey and
submit unto? Id solum possumus, quod jure possumus, Properly, we only can do
that, which we lawfully may do. In this sense then, the Covenant should bind to
impossibilities; which argues a Nullity: unless Subjects can pretend to a power
to overthrow any thing which the Law establishes, whenever they like it not.
Farther, 2. Unlawful it was, as binding to Unjust, Sect. 46.
and Dishonest things also.

1. Infallibly, No Oath can bind to Sedition, or, the overthrow of those Laws
that we are bound to obey: and that Oath obliges to injustice and impiety,
which obliges to Perjury, and the breach of former, not yet cancelled,
obligations. Now the Laws had established Episcopacy; Ministers had Sworn
Obedience to the Bishop. There can therefore be no obligation, because so much
Impiety in that Oath, which if it should oblige, would oblige to Perjury.

That, those who have Sworn obedience to the Laws of the Land, are not thereby
prohibited to endeavor by all lawful means the abolition of those Laws, when
they prove inconvenient or mischievous.

But, 1. Solut. 1.
The Utmost of that Obedience, which was sworn to the Bishops, was but in
Licitis and Honestis, in lawful and honest things. And how a lawful and honest
obedience should be culpable; or the Laws that required it, should be
mischievous, or, inconvenient, I confess I yet never could have eyes to see;
nor (I think) any man else.

2. Sol. 2.
Had the Laws, which established Episcopacy, been such: yet it will seem very
strange to a considering, and intelligent man, that, presently to enter into
such a Covenant and Combination; and by force and power to break through those
Laws, and overthrow the established Government, whether the King will or no,
should ever be accounted a lawful means. Again,

3. Sol. 3.
Suppose it inconvenient, yet Subjects have no power to Make a Law, or Alter a
Law for themselves. If any mischief, or inconvenience had been in that Law; or
the Government established; we might lawfully have showed the Grievances, and
Petitioned for a redress to those, to whom only it belonged to reform them: but
to Swear to extirpate a Government, to overthrow a Law, against the Lawgivers
consent; this is somewhat else than a peaceable petition, or an honest
endeavor. Though we might by humble petition in such a case beg a Reformation,
yet without all controversy we were bound by our Allegiance, Duty, and former
oaths, to obey that which was established, until the Supreme power should see
it just or fit to alter it.

2. Sect. 47.
That Oath which binds men to the injury of another, whom we are bound to
love as we love our selves, and to do to them, as we would have others do to
us, is unjust in the matter of it, and consequently unlawful, and binds not:
But this Covenant binds to such an injury; an injury, not of one, or two, but
an whole Order of Bishops who were once a Third Estate (and by the good
Providence of God are so now again) to the depriving of them both of their
Places, and Power in the Church; and of their Lands, Estates and Livelihoods,
that if they lived, they must live upon Alms; as many in the late Confusions
were even forced to do.

3. It was infallibly unjust, and dishonest, and wicked, to endeavor and
conspire the destruction of innocent, faithful, loyal subjects; to swear the
death, confiscation of goods of all those, that conscientiously thought
themselves bound, (as indeed they were) by their Allegiance to serve and assist
the King, and to preserve him from that fatal end, to which this Covenant
(though, I verily believe, many of those, who sometimes were zealous in
imposing it, and thousands that took it, never intended such a thing) did make
and prepare too sad a way. Yet this do they swear, viz. to discover all such,
as have been, or shall be Malignants -- and to bring them to public trial,
that they may receive condign punishment. And who these Malignants were, what
the condign punishment was, is sufficiently declared by those who imposed the
Covenant, and therefore by their avowed sense and public Declaration, it is
manifest whom men were by this Covenant bound to persecute and destroy. See,
Exact. Coll. p. 260, 576, 509.
All persons, who, upon any pretense whatsoever did assist His Majesty with
Horse, Arms, Plate or Money in that war, these were declared Traitors,
unparalled Traitors, and who ought to suffer as Traitors (and what the
punishment of such is, we need not be told) and to these was vowed speedy, and
exemplary punishment.

Many other particulars might be produced to prove the Non-obligation, and the
unlawfulness of that Covenant, Sect. 48.
but these are enough to engage us to acknowledge, and to justify us in such
an acknowledgment as the present Law, the Act for Uniformity requires. Some,
perhaps, may not be convinced of the truth of all these particulars here
asserted: yet, me thinks, we may easily see enough to satisfy our souls, as to
all that this Act requires of us. And really, the Act in this particular
seems to be penned with such Caution, Prudence, and Tenderness, that no
conscientious Christian may be ensnared by such a subscription, nor have any
occasion justly to scruple such an Acknowledgment. For,

1. As to the Obligation, it requires us only to acknowledge its present
non-obligation. Not, that it never did, but that it does not now oblige. Many
perhaps may think that they were obliged, while that power stood, when yet they
may now see they are not. But whatsoever was the Obligation, whether ever it
did, or did not bind, all that we now are to declare, is, That there now lies
to Obligation on us or any other by this oath to endeavor the alteration of
Government in Church or State. Let me seriously put the question to those that
yet make scruple, and are afraid to subscribe: Yea, let all loyal and pious
hearted Christians put the question to their own souls, and as in the presence
of the eternal, All-seeing, and most righteous God, give answer to themselves.

1. Sect. 50.
Can any Oath, that we have rashly taken, oblige any subject to resist, or
endeavor to root out a Government, which the Law has established, and does
still maintain, and require obedience to? then, certainly, disobedience and
rebellion could be no sin; nor any Government be firm, or Governors secure,
when men that like it not shall by Oath bind themselves not to obey, but
abolish it. Prelacy is restored, and by an unquestionable Law established, do
ye really think in your consciences that ye are now bound to extirpate it? not
only some of the subordinate officers (as some, who in the sincerity of their
hearts were drawn in to swear this Covenant, did think they only were obliged
against the whole frame, as so compounded together, and if any alteration were
made, though but in some of the lowest Officers, were it but the removal of
some Officials, Comissaries, etc. they had sufficiently answered their
obligation,) But even the Bishops themselves, (for whatsoever some might think
when they took the Covenant, the Imposers of it, by their actions showed, that
they meant not the laying aside only some Officers not so necessary, nor of
Divine institution, but the whole Episcopacy, and the very Bishops as a plant
not of Gods planting.) Yea, if occasion and opportunity should be offered, may
not some upon the same pretense rise up against the whole Ministry, and from
the same Covenant plead the extirpation of all the Ministers also, because they
are made so by Episcopal Ordination, as such who are, and must be included
under the title of Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that Hierarchy, which
in the Covenant men with the Hierarchy bind themselves to exterpate? 2. Do ye
really think, that, Sect. 51.
notwithstanding it is enacted by a Law that to raise and bear arms against
the King (though by order or ordinance of both or either house of Parliament)
is Treason, yet that you are bound still to maintain Armies against His
Majesty, if he will not consent to the matters sworn to in the Covenant: and to
assist each other, and never by any terror, fear, or persuasion be drawn from
such a combination? for so runs the Covenant, and if such be men's principles,
that it still obliges, how can our peace, or Laws, or Government ever be
secure? 3. Do ye really think, Sect. 52.
that you are still obliged to bring all that did adhere to, and assist His
Majesty in the late war, to punishment; to suffer as Malignants, Traitors,
unparalled Traitors, (as they were then called, and the Covenant meant)? If
the Covenant have any obligation, it must oblige to these things, for so is it
there in terminis expressly sworn. Let me beseech all, soberly to lay their
hands upon their hearts, and answer these questions to their own souls, and if
they are not obliged in these (as beyond all doubt they are not, yea beyond all
controversy they are tied by all obligations to the contrary) then must we
conclude that it is truth, which by this Act of Parliament we are obliged to
declare, and we may lawfully (and consequently, being so legally commanded, we
are in conscience bound to) acknowledge and subscribe, that whether ever there
were or were not any obligation by the Covenant, yet now, There lies no
obligation upon us, or any other person by his Oath, to endeavor any change or
alteration of Government either in Church or State.
These considerations are sufficient to satisfy us then as to the first part
or proposition to be acknowledged concerning the Covenant, viz. its present
non-obligation. Which is no more, Sect. 53.
than that, 1. What ever it did heretofore, yet now it does not oblige, being
taken away by a Law of a Public and just authority. And, 2. However, man may
yet be obliged to some other things therein mentioned, as to endeavor in our
places and callings, the extirpation of Heresy, Schism and Profaneness, and
whatsoever is contrary to sound Doctrine, and the power of Godliness: to
maintain and defend the Kings Majesty's person and authority (without that
Restriction there annexed, our Allegiance being due to Him, not as He is a
Christian or Godly, but as He is our King;) and to amend our lives, and go
before each other in the example of a real reformation, etc. Though, I say, we
may be, and are still obliged to all these things (yet, I think, not from this
Covenant, but from other grounds and principles of more unquestionable
authority) yet we may make that acknowledgement as the Act requires, which is
not, that there lies no obligation by the Covenant to endeavor these things:
but only No obligation to endeavor the alteration of the Government in Church
or State: (i.e.) No obligation to Sedition, Rebellion, or, Opposition of the
Laws which God has commanded us to live under.

2. Sect. 54.
As to the latter part to be declared, viz. the Unlawfulness of that Covenant,
it is only, that it was an Unlawful Oath, and though there may be many things
to prove it so, yet we are there required to acknowledge but this one, The
imposition of it contrary to the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom,
which must be acknowledged by those, who themselves have declared, that No new
Oath can be imposed but by Act of Parliament, which this never had, as before
was shown. Is it not undoubtedly true, that there can be no Act of Parliament,
no Law, without the Royal assent? and was not this imposed without, yea
contrary to the Consent of His late Majesty then Reigning? Disallowed still,
condemned and revoked now by His present Majesty? yea condemned and disannulled
by a Law of England, an Act of Parliament? So that it is most certain, that, It
was an Unlawful Oath, so far at least as concerns the manner of the imposition,
and the authority of the Imposers, as, Imposed upon the Subjects of this Realm
against the known Laws and Liberties of this Kingdom. And this is all that we
are here required to acknowledge.

Let me but add the determination of the Assembly of Divines then called
together by the two Houses of Parl. and sitting at Westminster, Sect. 55.
in their Exhortation an next to that Covenant. In answer to that Plea of the
Clergy, who might object, [ They were sworn to obey the Bishops in Licitis and
Honestis, and therefore could not take this Oath to extirpate them -- ] They
conclude thus -- If there should be yet any Oath found into which any Ministers
or others have entered, not warranted by the Laws of God and the Land, in this
case they must tell themselves and others, that such Oaths call for Repentance,
and not Pertinacy in them. Now, are there not many things in this Oath against
the Laws of God? is it not wholly against the Laws of the Land? Where do the
Laws of God or the Land warrant Subjects to extirpate an established Order and
Government, without the consent, yea against the mind of their Sovereign? Where
do the Laws of God or the Land warrant any to prosecute those who according to
their duty and Allegiance, serve, and labor to defend the Life, the Person,
the Authority of the King, and act by His Commission, as Malignants, and evil
Instruments, and to punish them as Traitors? Sure I am, it was an Oath, much
more against the Laws of God and the Land, than any of those Oaths, wherein the
Subjects of this Realm were before engaged, whether the Oaths of Supremacy and
Allegiance; or, the Oath of Canonical obedience to the Bishops, (which are
warranted by both;) can with any shadow of reason be pretended to be. This Oath
therefore, even according to their determination, calls for Repentance, and not
Pertinacy in it.

And, really, Repentance, earnest, Sest. 56.
unfeigned Repentance it does call for. We may too justly lament, and take up
the words of the Prophet, Because of Swearing, the Land mourns. The Land has
mourned, under the Scourges of God, and we have yet cause to fear, lest God
again make us feel the smart of his Rods; Sure I am we have yet reason to
mourn, in sorrrow and compunction of heart, for the sins of our Oaths, (besides
those customary, profane, Tavern, and street-oaths of ungodly men,) for our
neglect and breach of those Sacred ties of Allegiance and Supremacy, which we
had sworn, and violated; for those many unlawful Oaths and Engagements, which
were too rashly entered into, and more sinfully kept. O let us with tears in our
eyes, and contrition in our hearts, earnestly beg pardon of our God, whose name
in these we have so often taken in vain; and testify the sincerity of our
Repentance by a Conscientious returning to our duty, in the careful practice of
the strictest Piety to God; unstained and constant Faith and Allegiance to the
King our Sovereign; and a cheerful and ready obedience to the Laws upon us both
in Church and State.

Thou have now (Reader) my thoughts concerning this acknowledgement that we are
to make of the Non-obligation, Sect. 57.
and Unlawfulness of the Covenant. A I my design is Peace and Obedience, and to
offer what I am able, to remove those doubts and stumbling blocks that lie in
the way, and hinder both. For those sober, humble, and conscientious men, who
yet dare not renounce that Covenant, which though unadvisedly sworn, they yet
think to oblige, and are therefore afraid to subscribe this Declaration
prescribed, I shall presume to hope, they may find something in these papers,
that may satisfy their doubts, remove their fears, and convince them of their
real duty, that by their groundless scruples they may not make themselves
incapable of serving Christ and his Church in the Public exercise of their
Functions and Ministeries. Read, Ponder, and Consider the matters before thee,
lay aside all passion and prejudice, and the by-thoughts of a vain reputation:
let not men that have erred, be ashamed to confess it, but be more ashamed to
persist in it. Repentance is the next Door to innocence. Quem paenitet peccasse
paene est innocens. We have suffered a sad shipwreck by our Follies and Sins,
Repentance is Secunda tabula, post naufragium, a Planck left, by means whereof,
through Gods mercy, we may yet get safe to shore, and be happy again.

-- Si quid novisti rectius istis,
Candidus imparti: si non, his utere mecum.
FINIS.

