MODERN POLICIES, Taken from Machiavel, Borgia, and other choice Authors, by an
eye- witness.

Hom. (...)

Salust. Fragm. Libidinem dominandi, causam belli habent, and maximam gloriam
in maximo imperio putant.

Plautus in Captivis. Nam doli, non doli sunt, ni si Astu colas,

Sed malum maximum, si id palam pervenit.

Trinummus. Ambitio jam more sancta'st, Libera'st a Legibus,

Petere honorem pro flagitio, more sit:

Mores, Leges perduxerunt jam in potestatem suam.

The fourth Edition.

LONDON, Printed for Tho: Dring, at the sign of the George in Fleet Street
near Cliffords Inn. 1653.

To my very good Lord My Lord R. B. E.
My Lord,
I Was never so proud, as to think I could write any thing that might abide the
test of your judicious eye; what I now send, appeals to your Candor,
entreating you to lay aside the person of a Judge, for that of a Friend. It is
at best but a Pamphlet, whether you consider its bulk, or worth. The result of
a few pensive hours spent in recollecting what the memory had registered from
public observance, or private reading, in a Theme so sadly copious as this is.
If it be not impertinent to tell you what hinted to this trifle, it was this;
Having had opportunity to look abroad into the world, I took some notice of
the Contrastos of the Italian Princes; I remarked the Spaniards griping
Portugal; his grounds for the challenge of that Kingdom, and his way of
managing those grounds; I looked upon his method of propagating Christianity in
the West: (where one says the Indian is bound to be religious and poor upon
pain of death.) Moreover, I observed with what Artifice the Pope moderated in
the European quarrels, and with what devices he twisted the Gops^ll, and the
Advantage of the Chair toge^hir; and in all the struglings and disputes, that
have of late years befalne this corner of the: World, I found that although the
p^letence was, five and spiritual, yet the ultimate end, and ^^^^sedpe, was
gold, and greatness, and secular glory.

But (my Lord) to come nearer, when I saw Kingdoms tottering, one Nation
beeding against another, yea, one piece of a Nation justling the other, and
split into so many parties, and petty enmities: and each of these quoting Bible
to palliate his mad, and exorbitant opinions; I sighed, and it grieved me to
see popular easiness, and well-meaning abused by Ambitious self-seeking men;
for there is a Generation that is born to be the plague, and disquiet, and
scourge of the Age it lives in; that gladly sacrifice the public peace to
private interest; and when they see all fired, with joy warm their hands at
those unhappy flames, which themselves kindle, tuning their merry Harps; when
others are weeping over a kingdoms funeral.

But above all, it pierced my heart to see the Clergy in such an high degree
accessory to the civil distempers, and contentions that have every where
shak'd the Foundations of Church and State; so that (as a Catholic noted)
there has been no flood of misery, but did spring from, or at least was much
swelled by their Holy Water. I searched Evangelicall Records, and there was
nothing but mild and soft Doctrines, I inquired into the breathings of the
Spirit, and they were pacificatory; I wondered from what Precedents and
Scripture encouragements these men deduced their practices; and at last was
forced to conclude, that they were only pretended Chaplains to the Prince of
Peace; Those Torches that should have been for saving Light, were degenerated
into firebrands; Those Trumpets that should have sounded retreats to popular
furies, knew no other music but Martial All-armes.

I have endeavored in the sequel to represent to you the Arts of Ambition by
giving you the picture of a person over covetous of glory, the piece is course,
but yet like; drawn only in water colors, which some of greater Leisure and
Abilities may possibly hereafter lay in oil.

You know that the desires of man are vast as his thoughts, boundless as the
Ocean, (...), A bored tub is not more insatiate. It Is pity that greatness
should at any time be out of the Rode of goodness; and I would sometimes, if I
durst, with Socrates, curse him that first separated profitable and honest* ^

It does to me a little relish of Paradox, that where ever I come, Machiavell
is verbally cursed and damned, and yet practically embraced and asserted; for
there is no Kingdom but has a Race of men that are ingenious at the peril of
the public; so that as one said of Galba in respect of his crooked body:
Ingenium Galbae male habitat; so may I say of these in regard of their crooked
use; That wit could not have chosen a worse mansion, then where it is viriated,
and made a Pander to wickedness.

If you ask me what I mean to trouble the world, that is already under such a
glut of Books? You may easily perceive that I consulted not at all with
advantaging my name, or wooing public esteem by what I now write; I knew
there was much of naked truth in it, and though it might possibly be of some
caution to prevent the insinuation of pious frauds, and Religious fallacies
into my native Country: If any plaine-hearted, honest man shall cast away an
hour in perusing it, he may perhaps find something in it resembling his own
thoughts, and not altogether strange to his own experience. It is not the
least of our misfortunes, that sins and vices are cost times endeared to us by
false Titles and Complements: being couzened with a specious name, though much
incoherent to the thing we ascribe it: or el^e, omi^^ing the vice which is the
maine, it intimates only the ^e^i^e which is the By ^ As for example, we call
an ambitious man (...), a person of notable aim and high enterprise whereas in
truth, signifies, an indirect affectour of Grandeur: And I find that by
incautelous intertainment of these Phrases, our judgments are often bribed to
misapprehensions, and we seduced to bad actions. I have endeavored in the
ensuing discourse to wipe off the paint and fucu^: that so things may appear
in their true complex^o^, unadulterated with the slights and subtilties of
Deluders.

My Lord, That your Lordship may be one of those which the dark Poet calls
(...), that the youth of your Honors may be renewed to you, that your happiness
may be acquainted with no other season but a spring, is the earnest vote

Of your bounden SERVANT.

THe name of Prince, which I often use, must be understood, as convertible with
any person, or persons, whom God has entrusted with a just supremacy; all the
dialects of Government being concerned in the Abuse; I have made the chief,
and most familar, to represent the rest.

I am not ignorant that the Quotations may justly seem more numerous than
method, and the Rule of Art will conveniently allow; I have this to say, to
vindicate me from affecttednesse; that I have been little studious of Elegance,
and curiosity in the composure; esteeming nakedness to be the best dress of
truth: and if I mistake not, those attendants I have here procured for her, may
afford some material, though little ornamentall advantage.

A Praemonition.
It is far from the design of this Treatise, to derogate from the honor of
the calling, or worth of the person of any sober Statesman; It Is a knowledge
that no man observes with more due respects then my self; Because, I know it
is no mean degree essential to the peace, and flourishing condition of a
Kingdom or Commonwealth. It Is a jewel to be locked up in some few rare
Cabinets, and not to be made cheap, and exposed to irreverence, by being
bared, and prostituted to every vulgar eye. The Pseudo-Policy here mentioned is
contradistinct to that science, which is ever built upon piety and prudence;
for upon these solid Bases, your wise Architect delights to raises he glorious
superstructure of government in a Prince, and subjection in a people: so
knitting the Interest of both with reciprocal mixture, that the welfare of the
one may be involved in the good of the other: the Majesty may be preserved in
its just splendour, and ye^ the Liberty of the Subject remain inviolate: He is
the Atlas of the falling State, cures it when sick, sets it when dis-joynted,
meets it in its several pressures with suitable reliefs. Such was Philip de
Commines, of whom one said, it was a measuring cast, whether Lewis were the
wiser King, or Philip the wiser Counselor: such was Burleigh to our late
Queen Elizabeth, whose advise had very eminent influence into the prosperity
of her Reign, which was such, as I believe few ages can parallel, and future
times will read her happy Annals, as written like Xenophon's Cyrus, Non ad
historiae fidem, sed ad exemplum justi imperij; So that if we love Peace, or
Plenty, or Liberty, we are bound in way of acknowledgment to own that in
Plutarch, Cato Mayor.
(...) pav.

But as the corruption of the best things makes them worst, so this noble
knowledge has been abused to loose and ambitious ends, Ophyogenes, and Pfylli.
by some men who seem to have sucked the venom out of all politics,
misapplying what was good, and creating new according to the urgency of their
own occasions, like the Laws that were made in Causinus his Babel, to beru'd
by manners, Furialibus commentariis illustraut.
and not manners by Laws. They vex true Policy by misinterpreting, and false
glossing; framing in their hearts Diana's of hypocrisy and subtilty, and
worshipping them in their actions.

The Rules following there are few so silly as to believe, though too many so
wicked as to practice; and not only so, but by a bold imposture to persuade
that such actions as are deduced from these principles, are justifiable, and if
fortunate, commendable.

That all may see these Rocks, and shun them, and detest knavery though never
so specious, and nauseate sin, though robed in successes and triumphs, is my
daily prayer.

First Principle. The Politician must have the shadow of Religion, but the
substance hurts.
THere is no superstition in Politics more odious, then to stand too much
uponniceties and scruples: and therefore Machiavel cut the hair, when he
advised, not absolutely to disavow conscience, but to manage it with such a
prudent neglect, as is scarce discernable from a tenderness: not permitting it
to be techy and relucting, nor yet prostituting it, unless upon solemn and
insuperable occasion: He notes it from Papirius in Livy, who slighted the
Pullarii handsomely, and was rewarded; whereas Appius Pulcher did it grossly, and
was punished.

But because the Politician is best able to tell his own documents, you may
please to conceive you found these broken discourses in his study: to each of
which I shall add an Antidote.

External holiness invites awful regards; There is no mask that becomes
Rebellion and Innovation so well as Religion; Nothing that so much conceals
deformity, and pretends beauty. It Is an excellent thing so to dissimulate
piety, that when we act strongly against it, in that very article of wickedness
the people Saint us: Herod would feign worship, when he means to worry. -- Ipso
sceleris Molimine Tereus
Creditur esse pius:


This is that which leads the World in a string, that hallowes the most
hellish enterprises: for the common people (which are the (...)) never see
behind the curtain, a handson e gloss is with them as good as the Text: I
believe the great Naturalist was in the right, when h^ called a^ Deity a jolly
inven^ion, Irridendum, Plin. l. 2.6.7.
agere curam rerum humanarum quicquid est summum, sed credi ex usu vitae est,
Let me enjoy the temporal advantages of Religion, and let others take the
eternal; Let me use it for a cloak or a Crutch, and let others expect from it
a Crown.

The River in Athenaeus is my emblem, 43 Fons in Mileto, cuius proflue^s aqua
dulcissima, guae vero in imo falsa.
whose upper waters were sweet and grateful, but toward the bottom brackish.
Let me be a superficial, let others be fundamental Christians: I like the
humor of the Samseans in Epiphanius, that were neither Iewer, nor Gentiles, nor
Christians, but preserving a commodious Correspondence with all* whatsoever I
act in reference to Heaven is merely theatricall; and done in subordination to
some other interest. Lycurgus could never have ingratiated his Laws so
effectually, if he had not pretended a Dialogue with his Goddess. It Is to me
indifferent, whether the Religion I personate be true or false, so it be but
popular: and if the people I mean to juggle with err fundamentally, I can by
no means court them more, then by embracing their delusion; It buckles them
very close to me in moral observance, to assist them in their spiritual
soundnes, and mix with their distemper; and therefore I commonly lead the Van
in the Faction, and call it Iure Divino, though I never found it but in Hells
black Canons. How comfortably the Pope and Cardinal conferred notes, --
Quantum nobis lucri peperit illa fabula de Christo! O the rich income and
glorious result of hypocrisy! This, this must be diligently studied and
practiced. -- Da justum sanctumque videri,
Noctem peccatis, and fraudibus objice nubem.


Privacy for a sin, and cleanly conveyance for a cheat, make it to common
eyes seem as white as innocence it self: the strictness of that Thief was
very notable, who always before he went about the Work of his Calling (for
so he called stealing) went to prayers that God would bless and prosper him:
So I say grace to the Design, be it never so wicked, and give thanks for the
success, be it never so bloody.

But further in subserviency to a loose interest, there must be no such puling
thing as conscience; Hell, and Heaven, and Scripture, and what else the
Christian esteems most sacred, must all truckle under the plot, but not be
observed when they come to oppose it: Had Alexander boggled at invading other
men's Kingdoms, he had never wept for the scarcity of Worlds. There is noe
greater obstacle to generous Actions, then a coy and squemish conscience; It Is
pretty that some tell us that it strikes Surdo verbere, and then how can it be
heard in the noise and bustle of a clamorous World? Had your mighty
Conquerours, and your valiant Captains, and your thriving Popes, listened to
this inward Charmer, their names had never swelled, and looked bigg in the
Rolls of Fame.

Colasterion.
BUt let all sober Christians know, that this shell of Religion, though it may
be of external conducement, yet there is nothing that Gods pure and undeluded
eye looks on with more abhorrency: We may possibly deceive men, but it is in
vain to put Ironies upon God. A counterfeit Religion shall find a real Hell,
and it is pity that such a Sacred thing should be violenced, and made to
obstetricate to rebellious irregular designs.

As for such who have conspired with the wrath of God in the stupefaction of
their consciences, though they may for a time struggle with those inward
checks, yet there will be a day (if not in this life) when that witness, that
Judge, that Jury will not be bribed. God has fixed it in the soul as an
eternal Register, Origin.
as an impartial Diary as the Censor of the affections, and Paedagogue of the
passions. It does not only illustrate divine justice in an Autocat^crisy, but
was meant by God for a bridle and restriction: And he that has by an
inveterate wickedness conquered the opposition which God seated in his heart to
sin, may possibly consult well with his present advantage and greatness, but
not at all with his future comfort; for besides the loss of that intimate
pleasure which writes upon innocence; Vinum i^ pectore.
He ^eels sometimes those bosom quarrels that verberate and wound his Soul,
-- for (...).


Principle II. The Politician must by all means make the most insinuating
applications to the people that he can; and lock up his own design, in
pretense for Religion, Liberty, Restitution of Laws, Reformation of Gabels, etc.
THE prosperity of Innovation depends in a high measure upon the right knack of
kindling and fomenting jealousies and dislikes in the people; and then weilding
those grudges to the favor and advantage of private ends; for the people are
to the Politician like tools to the Mechanic, he can perform nothing without
them, they are his wings, his wheels, his Implements, the properties that he
acts with.

That this may be done effectually, there must be an excellency in these
following slights.

First, To assign such a cause of grievances, and such a course for redress, as
may open a way to the alteration he ayms at: as if he means to alter the
Government', or to ingross the Supremacy, he must artificially convince of a
necessity to arm, 1. Defensively, and if that succeeds, 2. Offensiv^ly; This
he may do by false Alarmes of danger, inventing horrid News, and plying the
people with such fictitious perils, as may make them believe, Religion and
Liberty, and All is at stake, and that they are the Geese that must save the
Capitol.

Secondly, when he sees opportunity to reveal his own design, (...)
he must do it gradually, and by peece-meale; for that which at one view would
be a Mormo to fright them, give it them in small parts, and they will digest
it well enough.

Thirdly, He must compose his very garb and gesture: it is a great matter to
tell a lie with a grace; as, if Religion be the Mode, he must in his tales
knock his breast, attest God, and invoke imprecations upon himself, if he
does not do that, which he never intends.

Fourthly, He gives them good words, and bad Actions, like those the Historian
brands with a Crudelitatem damnatis, crudelitatem initis, ravishes them with
apprehensions of Liberty, under the highest strain of oppression: for it is
most certain if, you please them with the name, they will embrace it for name
and thing. Something like this had been imposed upon Rome, when the Orator
writ to his Friend Atticus, Ingeniosi muse pulatores.
-- Nominu rerum perdidimus, and licentia. militaris libertas vocatur, that
they were cheated in names, for military License was miscal'd Liberty; This is
well described by Plautus in Truculentu. In melle sunt lingu^ sitae vestrae,
atque orationes,
Lacteque: corda fell sunt sita, atque acerbo aceto.
Elinguis dicta dulcia datis, at cord amare facitis.


Fifthly, (...).
He observes that they receive probabilities wisely propounded, more greedily
then naked truths: and therefore he is very studious to glase and polish his
Impostures, (...).
that so they may to a loose eye dissemble truth, according to that of Pindar,
-- (...) --
(...),
(...)
(...):


Or that of Menander: (...)
(...)
(...).


Sixthly, when he has by the assistance of the people got the sword into his
own hands, he awes them with it, and frights them into future compliance. He
tha^ courted them before with all the adulator^ terms, that ambition could
invent, or they receive; as if he had bee^ vowed their Martyr, and ready to
sacrifice his dearest enjoyments upon the Altar of public liberty and
freedom; as if his veins knew no other blood, but such as he would be proud
to spend in their service, having now served himself of them, he forgets the
bosom that warmed him, they hear from him now in a Palinode, he curles up his
smooth complements into short Laconicks, and exchanges his Court-ship for
command.

Colasterion.
FIrst, We may be assured that there is no greater Index of ambition, then an
affectation of popularity: which appears in meek addresses to the people,
wooing and familiar condescentions, bemoaning their sufferings, commending a
more vigorous sense o^ them; that of the Comit^ is no bad rule, Non temerarium
est ubi dives ble^ de appellat pauperem,
Aitera manu fert Lapicadem, pa^^ ostentat altera:
Nemini creed, qui long blandu'st (...) ves pauperi.


Or that which Livy notes of a Crandee, Credebant hand gratuitam in tanta
superbid comitatem fore, the extreme kindness or fawning of great persons, is
always suspicious, because often fraudulent: remember the Sileni, that use to
kill with huggs, and embraces.

Secondly, Know it is very usual for men to personate goodness, till they have
accomplished their ends; it is observed of Appius, when he had his wish, Finem
fecit gerendae alienae personae; it is an old note, Maxima pars morem hunc
homines habent, quod fibi votunt,

Dumid imperiant* honi sunt, se^^ ubi iam penes sese habent,

Ex bonis pessimi, and fraudulentiss^^ sunt.



Athon^^s tells a pretty story, of one Atheni^^ born obscurely, who (...) long
as he was priva^^ and poor, excelled in (...) soft and tractable disposition,
but when by jug^ling he had obtained the Athenian Governmen^ there was none
more ^dious for a cruel, covetous, and barbarick tyranny: as it is reported
(...) Caligula, there was nev^^ a better Servant, and a worse Master.

Thirdly, We know that a good aim, much ^ess a good pretense cannot justify a
bad action, and therefore we ought to be as Solicitous about the lawfulness of
the means, as about the goodness of the end. It ^s a Maxim in Morality, that
bonum oritur ex inte^^^s, and in Christianity, that we must not do ^vil that
good may come ^f it; and we may possibly ^escue our selves from ^uture
cousenage, if we ^xamine the lawfulness ^f every circumstance leading to the
end propounded, before we are tickled and transported with the beauty of the
pretense.

Principle. III. If the Supremacy be invaded, the Lapses of the former
Magistrate must be inculcated with the greatest advantage, and what is wanting
in reality, must be supplied in Calumny.
IT cannot easily be imagined of what singular importance the aspersing and
blotting of a Prince is, to boil up popular discontent to that height which is
requisite for a rebellion; and here it must diligently be enquired if there
have not beeene indeed such lapses, as have gal'd the people; and though they
be old sores and skinned, yet they must be searched and refreshed, and
exasperated with all the urging circumstances, that come within the invention
of scandal; It must be remembered, if any persons of public note have suffered
under the Sword of Justice, whose crimes can by Art or eloquence be extenuated,
whose hard measure must be mentioned with tears, that so old Traitors may be
propounded for new Martyrs. This has been the ordinary Method of Ambition, as
you may find it noted by a great Scholar in these words, Barclay contra
Monarch* 30.
-- Fuit haec omnibus saeculis, and adhuc est ad occupandum tyrannidem
expeditissima via, dum summo se amore; ac pietate in patriam esse simulant,
principum vitia, and populi miseriam, apud suos primum, deinde palam queribunda
voce lamentantur, non quo plebem, cuius solius commodis inservire ^ideri
volunt, ab illo servitutis jugo asserant in libertatem; sed quo populari aura
subnixi, aditum ^ibi and janua^ ad eam ipsa^ dignitatem, nequiora aliquando
ausuri patefaciant. And therefore if the Prince be severe, he gives him Nero's
brand, a man kneaded up of dirt and blood: if he be of parts and contrivance,
he calls it pernicious ingenuity: If he be mild and favorable to tender
consciences, he declaims against his toleration: If he urge uniformity, and
decency in Divine service, he railes at his Superstition. And because there is
no such aequilibrious virtue, but has some flexure to one of the extremes he is
very careful to publish the extreme alone, and to silence the virtue.

But if the Prince has by carriage of extraordinary innocence, Candida vita.
vindicated himself from obloquy (which shall scarce be, if small faults be
rightly improved) then Machiavels advice must be followed, to calumniate
stoutly, till the people have entertained something to his prejudice: It Is a
Figure in Politics to make every infirmity a fault, and every faull a crime:
and if the people be disposed to alteration, these must be first urged against
a Monarch to depose him, or if need be to murder him; which is commendable, if
you can dress him up like a Tyrant, as you may find it justified by an honest
Scot, Buchanan.
who complains that there are not some glorious rewards appointed for
Tyrannicides: and by the best of Orators, Pro Mil^ne.
-- Graecos Deorum honores tribuisse iis, qui Tyrannos necaverunt: and by the
Tragedian, Hercules furens.
Victima baud ulla amplion potest.



Magisve optma mactari Iovi,

Quam Rex iniquus.

And secondly, these personal faults must be artificially devolved upon
Monarchy it self.

There remains to disperse the commendations of that Government which is
intended for a Successor: if Arstocracy, the long-lived prosperity of Sparta
and Venice, is a very plausible evidence of its goodness: If Democracy, the
happiness of the Romans under their Tribunes is very memorable; to which may be
added this out of Machlavel: upon Livi p. 22.
that they are the most suitable guardians of any thing, who are least desirous
to usurp it: and without doubt considering the designs of the Nobility and the
people, we must confess, that the first are very ambitious of rule, the last
desire only not to be oppressed.

Colasterion.
I Presume that person is very rare, that can boast of such an absolute
Saint-ship whilst he is amongst mortals, but that there will now and then some
actions fall from him, which confess humanity, and require Candor: some leaves
in the volume of the fairest life, that are Legenda cuno venia: If this be a
common frailty, why do we six such rigid censures upon the miscarriages of
Princes or why do we deny them the same mildness which we use, when we
commiserate the infirmities of other Men? It Is yet much more disingenious to
revive and pore upon a few bad actions, which it may be have been long ago
expiated with many good: Take this from no mean Statist. -- Iniqua in omni re
accusanda, praetermissis bonis, malarum enumeratio, vitiorumque selectio; namne
ullus quidem isto modo magistratus vituperabilis no^erit.

As greatness gives a gloss to the virtues of a Prince, so it mitigates his
vices; for if we look upon him as circled with honor, and all outward
enjoyment; we see withal that variety of temptations he has to struggle with
above others, having no other Guard, no other weapon then his mere virtue;
sometimes we are defended from a sin by our very impotency, it may be above our
sphere, or out of our reach; we do not, because we cannot; how often are our
wills offenders, when our hands are innocent? we are checked from without, he
commonly from within, having nothing to dispute with his immoderate desires but
himself. This is that which inhances the goodness of a Prince, as that
excellent Poet leads his Temperate Knight through all the delicacies and charms
of pleasure, Spencer.
and delivers him a Conqueror.

But suppose a Magistrate really tyrannical; it is no contemptible question,
Whether the evils of the redress may not be equivalent to the mischief. I
remember Livie's, Nec morbum far possumus, nec remedum: and Plutarchs, (...)
(...): and Tacitus, Ferendae Regum ingenia, neque usui esse crebras mutationes:
vitia erunt, donec homines, sed neque haec continua, and meliorum interventu
pensantur; and Seneca, Infaeliciter aegrotat, cui plus periculi a medico quam a
morbo. Poise the miseries of a civil War with the grievances of an unjust
Magistrate, and the Politician must take many granes of allowance from fallacy
to make the scales even. For though the fury of incensed tyranny may fall heavy
upon many particulars, (...), Arist. Pol. 7.
yet the bloody consequences of an intestine Sword, are more epidemicall, and
more permanent.

As to the charging the faults of a Governor upon the Government its self,
Isocrates.
I see nothing in it but delusion, nor can there be a more gross abuse, then
(...).

For King-killing, because I know it a techy subject, I shall wholly omit all
discouse of it; only I find it damned by an able English Divine Jesuiticall;
Io. Goodwin, in his Anticavalerism.
and Tacitus commends to subjects rather scutum then gladium, the shield of
patience and toleration, rather then the Sword.

Principle IV. The Politician must nourish some mercenary Jesuits, or other
Divines, to cry up his aims in their Churches, that so the poison may
insinuate more generally into all the parts.
HE that peruses History, will find that there has been no Innovation so
gross, no Rebellion so hideous, but has had some Ecclesiastical Fomentors:
for such as want worth enough of their own to reach preferment in a regular
way, are most apt to envy the just honors of better men; and despairing to
obtain their end by learning and piety, they aspire to it by the crooked means
of faction and schism; nor are these despicable instruments to the Politician;
for the sharpest sword in his Army cannot vye services with a subtle quill: You
may see his business in the Comic, Aristoph.
(...).

The Jesuit reckons it in the number of his merits, Concutiunt populos, vexant
regna, solicitant bella, diruunt Ecclesias.
if he may by any sinister ways ruffle and disorder Heretical kingdoms (so he
calls them) encourage weak and unstable minds to slight Magistracy', irritate
divisions, tumults, rebellions, absolve from oaths, and al sacred ties; so that
it is hard to find any tragical Scene, or bloody Theater, into which the
Jesuit has not intruded, and been as busy as Davus in the Comedy,
contributing in a very high measure to every fanatic insolence, Justifying the
old Lemma of Loiola's Picture, Cavete vobis Principes: These are the firebrands
of Europe, the forge and Bellows of sedition, Infernal Emissaries, the Pests
of the Age, men that live as if huge sins would merit Heaven by an
Antiperistasis.

2. Nor is any Nation without some turbulent spirits of its own, the dishonor
of the Gown and Pulpit, the shame, Classica canere.
and sometimes the ruin of their Country; you would think they had their
Text from a Gazet, because you hear so much of a Curranto in the Application^:
That these may be fit implements for the Politician, there are th^se requisite
qualifications.

1. There must be a principal gift of wresting the Scripture, vexing and
urging the holy Text, constraining it to patronize the design; the great
Apostle expresses this in three very emphaticall terms; 1. Cogging the Dye,
making the Word speak what they list; 2. Crafty applications, and expositions
of it; 3. All the Methods and Arts of consenage, (...) (...), (...).
gilding and varnishing rotten doctrines, and this must be done.

1. In public, vomiting out flames and Sulphur from that Sacred Pegma, where
he should deliver none but mild and soft, that is, Evangelicall Embassages.

2. In private, (...).
at Parlour Sermons, Evangelioptho. ri.
and meeting houses, where he is listened to as an Oracle, and here commonly he
is more Euthsiuast then Scripturist, and his Auditors believe his dreams to be
as Canonical as the Revelation; like those Melancthon speaks of, Quicquid
somniant, volunt esse spiritum sanctum, or those that the Father chides, when
he tells them that every whimsey is not Prophecy (...).

3. He ought to be of some abilities in disputing, and what he wants in
Logic, he must supply in Garrulity: for whatsoever he affirms, the interest
he has in his seduced hearers improves into a Syllogism; Populi. (...)
if you ask after his Topics; ^l^. St. H^erom
Ex officina carnificum argumenta petit: if after his weapons, Armat se ad
latrocinium per Christi nomen, Strada.
and the woun^^ he makes is Faction; those consciences which will not
surrender to his parley, his Master takes by storm: And thus he abuses Christ,
by pretending his Favor to unwarrantable Actions; he abuses his Prince, by
alienating the affection and allegiance of his subjects; he abuses the Church,
by shattring it into rents and schisms; wounding it with a feather from its own
wing, snatching a Coal from the Altar, Ecclesiae nomine armamini and contra
Ecclesiam dimicatis. Aug.
to fire both Church and State; and lastly he abuses himself, for when the
Politician has made his best use of his seditious spirit, he leaves him to
his own wild distempers, having directed his own thoughts to another Goal.

Colasterion.
ALthough we have caution enough against these in sad and frequent experiences,
these latter Ages groaning under the effects of an exorbitant Clergy; yet such
is the easiness and credulity of the Vulgar, such the subtlety and dissembled
sanctity of the Impostor, that he meets with as great a pronenesse in the
people to be couse^d, as he brings willingness to delude; for it is a true
Observation, that these Clancular Sermocinators bear as great sway in popular
minds, and make as deep impression upon their consciences, as the Loyolists
do, when they impose upon their blind Laity.

I dare only subjoyne these few advises.

First, I should suspect ^ Clericall Statu^, I mean such a one as in the
dispensation of Sacred Oracles, tampers with secular affairs, unless it be in
case of high concernment to his Auditors souls.

Secondly, I should believe him a Jugler, that sprinkles his Sermons with
murmurs against the lawful Magistrate, Ecclesiastical, or Civil, unless he
has some better ground for his dislike, then a th warting his humor, in
things Controversiall and Adiaphorous.

Thirdly, I should more then doubt his knavery, that should suborn Scripture,
to attest, or incite to Illegal Actions, as a kin to that, which Salvian calls
Religiosum scelus.

4ly. (...)
All news in Religion, whether in Doctrine or Discipline, is (...) common
skreene of private design; Let (...) tell it, Apud. Dion. Cass.
(...) Which is noted by the great Causabon in his Epistle before his Baronian
exercitations, thus; Cupiditas novandi haec secum mala semper trahit, Christ^
inconsutilem tunicam lacerat, sectas novas parit, and statim multiplicat,
Ecclesiam and populum concutit etc.

It Is sad to see Vra^ti^ divine Urania enrolled i^ blood, the Stars and
Luminaries of the Church, to shed such black and malignant influences; in lieu
of pious documents, to hear none but furious incentives; Ite a^acres,
tantaeque precor confidite Causae; Papirius.
The Cause they serve, is the doctrine and the use, the egg, the apple, the
head and foot of all their discourses; if you like to confer notes, you may
find a piece of their Sermon in Barclay to this effect, Con. Monarc. p. 32.
Se Evangelij libertatem praedicare, ^ill^m Christianis animis vim infer,
suam cuique conscientiam liberam relinquere, verbo ducere, non vi quemquam
adigere; ea^ esse Evangelij doctrinam, u^ omnes conscientiae fruantu^
liberate: sibique ut id liceat, votis omnibus postulare.

Principle. V. If success waits upon his Enterprises, he urges it to
authenticate his Cause.
THere is no Argument more popular then succes, because the bulk of men is not
able to distinguish the permission of God, from his approbation: And although
it be in its self fallacious and feeble, yet the misery of the conquered
denies them the opportunity to dispute it; for the opposition of the Sword will
never be confuted by the bare fist of Logic. Nor does the Victor commonly
permit any ventilation of his dictates; for when the body is a slave, why
should the reason be free? (...), In Pompeio.
(...); as the soldiers in Plutarch wondered any would be so importunate to
preach Laws, and Moral reasons to men with Swords by their sides; (...): And
if Arms knew not how to descend to rational inquiries, but were enough
justified by an odd kind of necessity of their own creating; like those in
Livy, In armis jus far, and omnia fortium virorum esse.

I have often considered with my self, what should move Tyrants to Print
Justifications of themselves, and assertions of their proceedings, which I
suppose never made an understanding man a Convert, nor met with a cordial
reception in any; unless the abuse of a few, poor, shallow Beleivers, be
thought a triumph worth their pains. I have sometimes thought they do by these
papers please themselves in their abilities to delude, and so gratify their
tyranny over the noblest part of m^n, by denying the Liberty of the thought,
and subduing the powers of the Soul to an implicit coherence with their own
magisteriall opinions.

But our Politician, by quoting the success of his undertakings, besides the
plausibleness* and insinuating nature of the Proposition its self, has the
advantage of power to make us believe him.

Nor* is this bait contemptible, many of parts and prudence, yea and of
Religion, have been staggered by it; some question whether Diagoras deserved
the brand of Atheism, considering the wild conceits they then had of their
Gods; or differed from the common Creed, crying out, O how the Gods favor
sacrilege! when he had a merry gale, after a sacrilegious atempt. The best of
the Roman Historians calls the Victory, the just Arbitresse of the Cause,
eventus belli velut aequus Iudex, unde jus stat, ei victoriam dabit: So hard it
is to persuade mere reason, that virtue may b^ unfortunate, and vi^ happy.

He was no small Po^^ that argued himself o^^ of his Gods, by seei^^
wickedness honored, (...) worth slighted: whi^^ he expresses thus; Memtor to
Li^^us tu mulo iacti^ at Cato parv^,
Pompeiusnullo, guis putet esse De^


In English. Licinus does in Marble sleep,
A common Urne does Cato keep
Pompeys ashes may catch cold,
That there are Gods, let Dou^ (...)


Hipp.
There may be so^^ use made of that in Se^^ca, Honesta quaedam scelera successus
facit, prosperous mischiefs are Cardinal virtues in the Worlds Ethics; and
therefore the Tragedian repeates it, Prosperum ac faelix scelus, Her. Eur.
virtus vocatur. The unwarrantablenesse is hid and concealed in the glory of
the success: we often praise the Macedonian Conquest, but seldom mention
their boundless and unjust ambition.

On the contrary, if an undertaking really good miscarry, we censure it: so
that according to the vogue of the World, it is the event that gives the color
to the action, and denominates it good o^ bad. Old.
To (...).

Colasterion.
THere is some of this Leaven in the judgments of most, notwitstanding those
brighter discoveries, in the Noone of Christianity we live under. A Bible
thoroughly observed, would expound to us much of the riddle, and dark passages
of providence: we are so shortsighted, that we cannot see beyond time, we va^ue
things, and men, by their temporal prosperities, and transient glories;
whereas if we put Eternity into the other seal, it would much outpoise that
worldly Lusstre, that so much abuses our eye, and cousens our understandings.

I find not in holy writ that God has in separably annexed goodness and
greatness, justice and victory: He has secured his servants of the felicities
of a better life, but not of this. Ch^ists Kingdom was not, our happiness is
not of this World.

Nor does my Bible show me any warrant for appeal to heaven for th^^ decision
of this, or that ^ntricacy, by bestowing success upon this party, or that
cause, according to its righteousness, and due merit. There is a vast
difference betwixt (...) and (...), even in Scripture construction.

The great Turk may justly exult, and prune himself in discourses of this
nature, if they be once admitted, and owned by Christians: And I shall
forbear any longer to think Mahomet an Impostor, and must receive the Alcoran
for Gospel; ^f I shall be convinced that temporal happiness and triumph, are
a true Index of divine Favor* Our Religion has something more to invite our
closure with it; it proposes a convenience on Earth, but the Crowne^ and
Garlands are reserved for Heaven.

The Mony-God in Aristophanes pretends a command from Jupiter to distribute as
great a Largess to the wicked, (...).
as to the good; because if virtue should once impropriate riches, that fair
Goddess would be more wooed for her Dowry* than for her native beauty: So if
Religion were attended with those outward Allurements that most take the
senses; we should be apt to follow Christ for the loaves, and overlook the
spiritual charms, and more noble ends of Christianity.

The Heathen could say, Foelix praedo mundo exemplum inutile, Happy Pyracy is a
thing of unhappy presidency; Fortunate sins may prove dangerous temptations;
But to say that God does signally at test the actions of such a person, or the
justice of such a cause, by permitting it to prosper, and taper up in the
world, is such a deceit, as deserves our serious abhorrency -- I leave it with
Ovids wish, -- Careat successibus opto, Quisquis ab eventu facta not anda
putant.



Principle VI. The Politician must change with the times.
THAT Alterations and Revolutions in Kingdoms are the rods with which God
scourges miscarrying Princes, Comin. 170
is resolved by my Lord of Argenton: to which may be added out of Aristotle in
the fifth of his Politics -- Per fraudem and dolum regna evertuntur, That the
ruins of a Kingdom are often derived from fraud and subtleties: I shall omit
inquiry into other Causes, as foreign to my present purpose.

The Politician knows best how to improve these popular Gusts, because he
caused them* such a storm is his seed time. It Is the boast of a Dutch man,
that he can sail with all winds; the aspiring man observes the quarter whence
the fairest gales of preferment blow, and spreads the sails of his Ambition to
entertain them; nor can the compass breath more varieties, then his dextrous
soul has changes and garbs, and suitable compliances.

What the Orator calls his top and perfection, to make happy application to the
several humors and genius of all sorts of men, qualifying his address with
what he knows will most charm the person he treats; that the Politician does
not only with his lip, but life you may find all those Figures and Tropes
digested into his actions, and made practical, that are in the other only
vocal.

He remembers that of an English Marquess ^awlet of Winchester) who having
succesfully served four Princes, and still in the same room of favor, Nantons
Reg alia.
unshaken with the vicissitudes he had run through, being asked by one, by what
means he preserved his fortune, he replies, that he was made, ex salice, non
ex quercu, of the pliant willow, not stubborn Oak, always of the prevailing
Religion, and a zealous professor. This easmesse and bending is of absolute
necessity; for, if the same temper, which insinuated in violent times, were
retained in a composed and settled government, it would be altogether
distasteful; and so on the contrary.

Therefore if Religion be fashionable, you can scarce distinguish him from a
Saint: He does not only reverence the holy Ministers, but if need be, he can
preach himself: If cunctation prevails, he acts Fabius: If the buckler must
be changed for a sword, he personates Marcellus: If mildness be useful,
Soderini of Venice was not more a lamb then he: If severities are requisite,
Nero's butcheries are sanctities, compared with his: As Alcibiades in Plutarch,
shifted disposition as he altered place (being voluptuous and jovial in Ionia,
frugal and retired in Lacedaemon) so he proportions himself to time, place,
person, Religion, with such aplausiblenesse, as if he had been born only to
serve that opinion, which he harbored but as a guest whilst it continued in
sway: having a room in his heart, if occasion be, to lodge the contrary, and to
cry it up with as much ardour; as he once used to extol the former. And thus
like a subtle Proteus, he assumes that shape that is most in grace, and of most
profitable conducement to his ends, In eo stant confilia, quod sibi conducere
putat.

He abounds in that which Varo calls, ver^atile ingenium, a voluble wit, like
the changling derided by Plautus, as more turning then a Potters wheel. Rota
figulari versatilior.


He has this advantage of the Camelion, that he can assume white ness; for I
find him often wearing the vest of innocence, to conceal the ugliness and
blackness of his attempts.

Finally, he is the Heliotrope to the Sun of Honor, and has long since
abjured his God, Religion, Conscience, and all that shall interpose, and skreen
him from those beams, that may ripen his wishes and aims into enjoyments.

Colasterion.
BUt the true Statesman is inviolably constant to his Principles of virtue, and
religious prudence; his ends are noble, and the means he uses, innocent: he
has a singl eye on the public good; and if the ship of the State miscarry, he
had rather perish in the wrack, than preserve himself upon the plank of an
in-glorious subterfuge. His worth has led him to the Helm, the Rudder he
uses, is an honest and vigorous wisdom the Star he looks to for direction is
in Heaven; and the port he aims at, is the joint welfare of Prince and people.

This constancy is that solid Rock upon which the wise Venetian has built its
long-lived Republic: So that it is not improbable the MaidenQueene borrowed
her Motto of Semper eadem, from this Maiden Common wealth.

It Is true, something is to be conceded to the place, and time, and person; and
I grant that there are many innocent compliances; Virgils Obliquare sinus is
observable, there may be a bending without a crookedness: We may circumire,
and yet not aberrare; Paul became a Jew, that he might gain the Jews, but he
did not become a sinner, that he might gain sinners; He was made all things to
all men, but he was not made sin to any: that is, his condescensions were such,
as did we^ consist with his Christian integrity.

Greatness, and Honors, and Riches, and Scepters, those glorious temptations,
that so much inamour the doting world, are too poor shrines for such a
sacrifice as conscience, which the Politician has so much abused by an
inveterate neglect, that it is become menstruous, and Ephemerall.

Principle VII. If the Politician find reason to impose oaths, Let them be of
such ambiguity as may furnish with a sense obliging to the design, and yet so
soft as the people may not feel the snare.
IT appears by sad experience, that in propounding of oaths, requiring
promises, and other solemn Ties; there have been multitudes induced to bind
themselves upon some secret Loose, and men tall reservation; w^ch they have
framed to themselves as a salvo in case of breach: so apt we are in affairs of
greatest importance, to advise more with corrupt* wit than sound conscience.

In the Catalogue of self-delusions, you may possibly find these;

1. We are ready to interpret the words too kindly, especially if they be
ambiguous; and it is hard to find terms so positive, but that they may be eluded
indeed, or seem to us to be so, if we be disposed. 2. Some are invited to
illicite promises qu^ illicit, because they know them to be invalid. 3. Some
are frighted into these bonds by threats, and losses, and temporal
concernments, and then they please themselves that they swear by Duress, and
so are disingaged. 4. Some are oathproofe; I mean there are such sear-soul'd
men, as will swear Pro and Con. 5. Some have learned from the Civilians, Grot.
de iur. belli, 245.
that though we swear to a thing not materially unlawful, yet if it impedes
a greater moral good, it becomes void.
Some take Liberty to swear, because they judge the person to whom they swear
incapable of an oath: as Cic^ro defends the breach of oath to a Theife, from
perjury, and Brutus to a Tyrant: as it is in Appian, (...).

The first sort of these falls most properly under the notice, and practice of
our Politician; though he may also use the last, but at different times.

It is not difficult for him to cast his desire into such soft glib expression
as will down with most* Yea, with many that would absolutely disavow the same
thing in rough Language. If he be unskil'd in this black art, I commend him to
the Paedagogy of the Delphick Devil.

Now it is most certain, there is no other tie of such security, and
establishment, to a person that has ravished greatness, and acquired it by
violence. Usurpation has only these two pillars, its own Arms, and Militia,
and public oath and acknowledgement; and it is scarce worth Quaerie, whether,
when the Gross of a Nation is thus bound, the Oath be not as valid, and the
conscience as much concerned, as if it had been sworn to a lawful Prince. It
is reasonable that a^ usurping power cannot upon any prudent persuasion have
the same confidence in the love of the people that a Just has: Nor is the
following government enticing, as Tacitu^ notes, Nec qu^squam imperium malis
artibus quaesitum been administravit. The same with Guazz^, De civil converse.
l. 2. p. 132.
where one objecting the vices of Princes, receives this answer, Perch non
erano Prencip^ per natura, ma per violenza, and erano piu temuti che amati: And
therefore if the Politician can by the blessed means forementioned gain a
superiority, there is no trusting to those ingenuous Guards, his own goodness,
and the love of others: His best defense is awe, and fear, and Scaffold, and
Gibbet, and the like. For he that has noe voluntary room in the hearts of his
people, must use all means to gain a coercive.

For his own promises he puts them into the same bottomless bag, which the
Poets say Jupiter made for lovers asseverations: His word is as good as his
oath, for they are both trifles, as it is in Plautus. -- Pactum non pactum est,
Aulular.
un pactum pactum est, cum illis Lubet.



'Twas he that first invented that useful distinction of a Lip-oath, and a
heart-Oath; you may find him in Euripides. Iurata lingua est, mente iuravi nihil


He makes good use of that in Plutarch, Apoph.
(...) that children are to be cousn'd with rattls, and men with oaths.

It Is an huge advantage that man has in a credulous world, that can easily say
and swear to any thing; and yet withal so palliate his falsifications and
perjuries, as to hide them from the conusance of most. The Politician mast be
furnished with handsome refuges, that may seemingly heal miscarriages this way.
He need not spend much time in inquiry after such helps; these declining ages
will abundantly furnish his invention.

Colasterion.
AN Oath is in its self a religious affirmation, a promise with Gods seal; And
therefore it concerns Christians to be cautelous before swearing, to swear
Liquidly, and to observe conscionably. It Is pity such slender Evasions should
satisfy us, as have bin scorned by heathens. We are bound (says one of them)
to the sense of the imposer, or else we do (...), we are bound to the
performance of what we have thus sworn, or else we do (...): It Is much, that a
moral conscience should more check them, than a clearer light can awe us: As
if they more honored the Genius of a Caesar, than we revere the presence of a
God: or else we should never engage in new protestations, that do interfere,
yea, and sometimes positively quarrel with old. They had their (...), their
perjury revenging Gods; to whose vindictive powers they referred their
offenders: they punished such as swore falsely by their Prince with
fustigation; But such as abused their Gods, were left to the dispose of their
injured Deities, as if they were at a loss how to find a punishment equal to
the sin. Hear how soberly Plato mentions it (out of the noble Commentator
upon Philostratus) En toutes manieres sa este un fort belle ordinance and
institutition, de n' user point du nom des Dieux Legerement, de peur de Les
contaminer; ca^ la Majeste des Dieux ne se doit imployer, qu' en un saint and
venerabile purete. See what real honor they gave to their counterfeit Gods:
Let us have a care that we ascribe not counterfeit honor to the true God.

Our God hates every false Oath: Causabon exercitat. 202.
It appears in his severity to Zedekiah, for breaking Covenant with the
Babylonian Monarch, though a Tyrant of the first magnitude.

Were all Subjects duly solicitous about the weight of this bound, we should be
less prone to take, and more studious ^^ observe it; I remember the Scholiast
upon Aristoyha^es, p. 848.
derives (...) (...), It hedges in and shuts up a man, and ties his hands
behind him; I know not how some Conquerours may cut this knot with the Sword;
or how some Sampsons may shake off these cords; or what gaps the Licentious may
make in this hedge; But such as value God, or heaven, or Prince, or Peace, can
discover it no way better than in a sincere use of so divine an Ordinance.

There can be no certain rule given, when to believe, and when not, what such
as are, or would be great, please to inculcate to us: I find more wracks upon
the rock of credulity: and ^tis no heresy to affirm, that many have been
saved by their infidelity; I commend that of Epichar^^^^ (...)


Principle VIII. Necessity of St^te, is a very competent Apology for the worst
of Actions.
IT has been observed, that in all Innovations and Rebellions (which ordinarily
have their rif^^ from pretenses of Religion, or Reformation, or both) the
breach and neglect of Laws has been authorized by that great Patroness of
Illegal Actions -- Necessity. (...) ^eva ne^essitas


Now the Politician is never without such an Advocate as this; For he cares not
to distinguish whether the necessity be of his own creating, or no, as for the
most part it is* being indeed an Appendix to the wrong he undertakes: and
signifies no more, then that he is compelled to cover wrong with wrong, as if
the commission of a second ^in were enough to justify the first.

He changes that old charitable advise -- Benefact a benefactis al^js per^egito
ne perpluant; into vitia vitijs alijs pertegito ne perpluant: that so heapi^g
one crime upon another, the later may defend the former from the stroke of
Justice.

He adores that Maxim in Livy, Iustum ^^t bellum quibus necessarium, and pia
arma quibus in armis spes est: It were very incongruous to desire that man to
leave his crutch, that cannot walk without; it is no less unnatural to invite
him to quit his sword, whose life and fortune leans entirely upon it.

If he can insinuate the scope of the War to be Legal, a little dawbing will
serve to Legalize the circumstances: that of the Civilians must be remember --
Licere in bello quae ad finem sunt necessaria, Victor. de Iure Belli, nu. 18.39.
the Oracles of the Gown are too tender for Swordmen; and it may be he had
wit in his anger, who affirmed, that martial Law was as great a Solecisme, as
Martial peace.

If the people be once possessed that his aim and intention is fair, they will
never expect that the Media for attainment of his end should be retrenched by
the strict Boundaries of Law: He manages that Rule very practically, Rem
alienam, ex qua certum mihi peri^ulum eminet, citra culpae alienae
considerationem invadere possum; Now he can very plausibly make this periculum,
certum, or incertum, as shall best suit with his affairs.

De iure Belli, l. 424.
It Is a broad Liberty that Grotius concedes, Quare si vitam aliter fervare non
possum, licet mihi vi qualicunque arcere eum qui eam impetit, licet peccato
vacet; and hoc ex jure quod mihi pro me natura concedit. Match. on Livy, 627
When Life, and Liberty, and safety come in question, there ought no
confideration to be had of just or unjust, pitiful or cruel, honorable or
dishonorable: Now when the people have according to his desire got over the
great obstacle, and digested the plot for pious; it is easy to set all future
proceedings upon the score of Liberty, Safety, Religion: And if he be
constrained to use means grossly unlawful, it is but to make them seem holy in
the application, and all is well; For it is the humor and genius of the vulgar,
when they have once rushed into a party implicitly, to prosecute it as
desperately, as if they were under demonstrative convictions of its Justice.

Finally, He must make a virtue of Necessity, because there is no other virtue
will so easily be induced to serve his proceedings as this; she may well smile
upon Licentiousness, who has her self no Law.

Colasterion.
LEt that great Rule be received, that no man can be necessitated to sin: Our
Divines generally damn an officious Lie; and the equity binds from any
officious sin.

It would soon cut the nerves of the eighth Commandment, If Necessities and
Urgencies, though real, were pronounced a sufficient excuse for stealing. But
that which our Politician calls Necessity, is no more than necessity of
convenience, nor so much, except we interpret that convenience, which may
favor his own ends, and so is convenient for his design. He uses Necessity, as
the old Philosophers did an occult quality, though to a different purpose; that
was their refuge for ignorance, this is his sanctuary for sin.

^ess. l. 11, 12. ^ub. 12. (...) 70.
Those Civilians that are most charitable to Necessity, make it no plea at all
except it be absolute and insuperable; as by the Platonic Laws only those
persons are allowed to drink at their Neighbors Well, that had in vain sought
a Spring, by digging fifty cubits deep in their own ground. We allow the
disburdening of a Shipp in imminent peril of wrack; But this will not excuse
those, who upon a fond or feigned prevision of a State-tempest, shall
immediately cast Law and conscience overboard; Discard, and quit Hudder and
steerage, and so assist the danger, they pretend to fear.

Pausanias tells of a Chapel in Acrocorinth, Caelius Rhodig. 1025.
dedicated to Necessity and violence; those TwinGoddesses may be fit objects
for the worship of Heathens; but it is pity they should be so much adored by
Christians.

If I mistake not, the fundamental deceit lies in a greedy entertaining those
first pretenses, and seemingly candid Propositions are made to us, before they
have passed those scrutinies, and severe inquiries, they deserve; or been
examined by the test of Gods word, and National Laws: All the rest are but
ugly consequences of that absurdity we first granted, according to the ancient
Philosophic Maxim, (...).

Principle IX. The Politician must wave all Relations, both Sacred and Civil,
and swim to his design, though in a Sea of blood.
SUch as study to be great by any means, must by all means forget to be good;
and they that will usurp Dominion over others, must first become slaves to the
worst of Tyrants, a lust after greatness.

Crescit interea Roma Albae ruinis, begins one of the Decads, that the walls of
Rome were cemented with blood, Upon Livy l. 2. c. 3^ Thebe maritum, T^moleon
fratrem, Cassius filium hoe jure interfecore.
is known and commended by Machiavel; Although the superstructure was brave,
yet if we search the foundation, we shall find it laid in the rod ruins of
her wasted neighbors; That the first Founder became a fratricide upon reason
of State, to guard his new Conquest, by freedom from a Competitor; is not only
vindicated from cruelty, but asserted to be a piece of meritorious policy. Nor
did this happen to the City in its structure alone, but after in its
reparation; when the Sons of Brutus were sacrificed to the design of their
Father: So that Rome was not only nursed with blood, but after grouth and
ripeness, she sustained her self; Iived and thrived upon Magna and
sanguinolenta latrocinia; so that our Politician can scarce want examples in
the applauded actions of this City, to patronize the most crimson and skarlet
sin, that ambition can prompt.

He admires the generosity of Neroe's Mother, who is reported to have said of
her son, A (...), Let my Son be my murderer, so he may be a Monarch;
According to the advice of an high-spirited fury, Pro Regno velim patriam,
penates, conjugem flammis dare, Imperia pretio quolibet constant been; An
Empire cannot be purchased too dear, though it cost the blood of Millions.

He is much taken with the Gallantry of the Mammalukes, who abused the
easiness of the Egyptian Sultan, and wore the Supremacy three hundred years,
upon the length and keenness of an usurping Sword.

And rather than want a bongrace, he commends the Ottoman wisdom; for the great
Turk rivets himself to the Imperial Chair, with the bones of his murdered
Brethren. Aspiring desires are not only insatiate, but admit of any sin; that
will promote their ends: See Bass^anus murdering his Brother Geta in his
Mothers arms; Andronicus strangling his Cousin Alexius, lest he should have a
part in the Empire that had right to all: See Caesar slighting the Oaths by
which he had obliged his obedience to the Roman Senate.

Finally, Ambition knows no confinement, nothing so sacred but it violates. The
Gods must bow and yield to it, In Apologer.
as Tertullian, Id negotium sine Deorum injuria non est, eadem strages manium
and Templorum, tot sacrilegia Romanorum, quot trophaea; tot de Diis quot de
Gentibus Triumphi.

Colasterion.
THe Italian Politician seems to intimate a scruple, when he says, -- Si jus
violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est, His (If) dictates an uncertainty;
and if we appeal to the bar of Nature, or Divinity (though possibly the entire
assertion may have something of truth) yet we shall find that wicked (^f)
absolutely banished.

It Is true, we may more justly pity him, that swallows a bait fair and
glistring, than a person that tempts temptations to deceive him; or catches at
Flies, and trifling allurements because in the first case a greater reluctance
is requisite, and the dart may possibly be so sharp, as to pierce through the
Armor of a sober Resolution; But all this will little succor ^im, who knows
it to be a bait, and has beforehand designed its beauty, and fairness, to
apologize for the foulness of the sin: for here the greatness of the
Temptation will not at all extenuate ^^e grossness of the ^rime: No more than
he mitigates his Robbery, who shall plead, that he stole nothing but Gold and
Jewels.

The World is much mistaken in the value of a Scepter or Crown; we gaze upon
its brightness, and forget its brittleness, we look upon its glory, and
forget its frailty; we respect its color, and take no notice of its weight.
But if all those gay things which we fondly fancy to our selves were really to
be found in Greatness, yet still he pays too dear, that pawn^^ his Heaven
for it^ he that thus buys a shor^ bliss, gives not twenty, or an hundred years
purchase, but (if mercy prevent not) Eternity.

It will be little advantage here, to introduce the example of a Roman, or
Turk, or Christian, if unlawful; such presidents may perchance baffle the
Vulgar (in whose Creed you may insert what you please) but will be very cold
answers, when we appear before a severe Tribunal: It concerns us rather to
observe how ambition claims kindred with every other vice, stoops, and takes
up every sin lies in its way; and, if upon enquiry we find it to be indeed
such a complicated mischief, it will become us studiously to shun it our
selves, and seriously to detest it in others.

Principle X. A general Innovation contributes much to the growth and security
of Usurpation.
WE may receive this as a Tradition, handed to us from the great Patriarchs of
Policy, attested by the practice of the subtilest times; I presume it may be
grounded upon these, or the like Persuasions.

1. Because such an Innovation raises the dust, and begets a cloud for the main
design; for when the waters are troubled, it is hard to see the bait.

2. Because the Parenthesis betwixt an old and new government, flatters the
hopes of all parties, soothing those desirs that are for a relapse into the
old, and yet encouraging those that wish for the establishment of a new.

3. Because when all things are reduced into a Chaos and rude heap, when all
the lines and Lineaments of the former Government are blotted out, that which
is new written will be more legible, and the old sooner forgotten: for suppose
a Kingdom made a Lump, without shape and void, and it is like materia prima,
prone to embrace any form; when an Instrument is distun'd, you may set it to
what key you please; and he that cannot sometimes lo^s^n the strings, will
never make good Music upon Synesius his Harp.

4. Because by n^w moulding of Jurisdictions, and offices of State, there may
be a fair opportunity offered, of gratifying those that have served us; and for
others its very familiar to see some stubborn and rigid opiniators, who have
continued long unshaken either by threat or argument, at length to surrender
their Principles, and bow the knee before the Dagon of Honor and Riches; such
is the flexanimous power of golden Eloquence, as it is in the Adage, (...)


Besides, we can find no better way to breed an absolute dependence, and make
others adhere to our fortunes, then by winding the concernments of other men
upon the same bottom with our Interest; we may observe this from the practice
of great Favorites, who always delight in these Props, and are careful to
set their whole Tribes in the sunshine of favor.

5. Because such a general Deordination gives a taste and Relish to the
succeeding Government, though in its self not so delectable; 3 Po^,
for Aristotle notes, that Democracy is better than Anarchy.

There are many other advantages to be made by a due improvement of these
turbid intervals; as the occasion of subdividing, and parcelling out your great
end; for by this means they which refused to close with it in gross, will
receive it in retaile: and having entertained some portions of it, the grudge
they bore to the whole will be by degrees quieted and appeased.

Besides, when all things are ruffled and confused, it is then the Devils
Holy Day, and therefore our work-day: The noise is so loud, that it drowns the
voice of the Law; and there may be some truth in his waggery, who said, That
such as mean to commit a Rape upon the Body politic, must put out the Laws;
as others upon a like occasion use to put out the Lights.

Finally, If we ever hope to sin with Impunity, to usurp prosperously or to
govern Arbitrarily; we must take out that Lesson in Plantus:

Idem facere, quod plurimi alij, quibus Res timida aut Turbida est; Pergunt
turbare usque, ut ne quid possit conquiscere.

Colasterion.
It Is most certain, that sinister ends are promoted by Innovations; but it lies
in our bosoms to promote or quench the Innovations themselves, which we can no
way better do, than by a strict adherence to the Laws; for as long as we
maintain them, they will maintain us: If we observe these, it will rescue us
from the hands of State-Novellists; for we are not fit for their turns, till we
are cross-byassed with faction.

As a caution against changes in Government, give me leave to repeat, what was
long since told us by an ingenious Lord, -- That all great mutations are
dangerous; Faulkla^
even where what is introduced by that mutation, is such as would have been
very profitable upon a primary foundation: and it is none of the least dangers
of change, that all the perils and inconveniences which it brings, cannot be
foreseen; and therefore such as make title to wisdom, will not undergo great
dangers, but for great necessities.

But further, let me appeal to general experience, yea, let me ask thee
(Reader) if thou have never before heard, or read of a Nation, that was once
the gaze and envy of its Neighbors; and yet being insensible of its happiness,
or possessed with fond hopes of bettering its condition, has closed with
pretended friends, and real enemies, and gladly contributed to its own ruin.

So apt men are to catch at the shadow, though they hazard the substance: we
may guess at the Moral of the Frogs in the Fable, who could find no
satisfaction in a still Prince, and were after forced to abide the severities
of a Tyrant they prayed for.

But if there be such distempers in a State, as shall necessarily require
amendment; Let it be done with the Pruninghook of the Law, and not with the
Sword of violence: For I never read, that Illegal, or Tumultuous, or
Rebellious, were fit Epithets for Reformation. And it is fit Christians should
forbear the use of such surly Physic, till they have levied a Fine in the
Court of Heaven, and cut off the Intail of the seventh Beatitude.

This may suffice to reveal in some measure, Arcanum Ambitionis, (...). I
could add much more, but that I judge it a fitter task for our Nephews, when
Pens shall be infranchised.

And now (Reader) let us mix our prayers, that God would for ever banish this
cursed Policy out of Europe, and the whole Christian World; and damn it down
to Hell, from whence originally it came, and let such as delight to abuse
others, think of that selfcousenage, with which in the interim they abuse
themselves; God permitting the Devil to revenge the Imposture. And whilst we
are busy with politic stratagems, and tortious Arms to invade the rights of
others; Let us all consider that this is not the violence which takes Heaven.

Let it be a piece of our daily Oraisons, that God would guard our Pulpits from
such Boutefeus, as like A^tna and Vesuvius, belched out nothing but flames, and
fiery discourses; using the Scripture as preposterously and impertinently, as
some Pontificians, who transported with the vehemence of Hildebrandian zeal,
think the temporal Monarchy of Popes sufficiently Scripturall, from the saying
of Christ to Peter -- Pasce oves. Far be it from us to entitle the Spirit of
God to exorbitant doctrines, it is easy to distinguish the Vulture from the
Dove. The miscarriages of the Clergy have a deeper stain from the sacredness of
their function, as probably he that invenomed the Eucharist has the more to
answer for his Triple Crown.

It is manifest, that we are fallen into the dregs of Time; we live in the
rust of the Iron Age, and must accordingly expect to feel, V'tima se^escentis
mundi deliria, the dotages of a decrepit World: What is become of truth,
sincerity, charity, humility, those Antiqui mores, whither are they gone? Did
they attend Astraea into Heaven? And have left such degenerous successors, as
cruelty, pride, fraud, envy, oppression, etc. Such qualities as abundantly
justify the worst of Heathens, and dishonor the name of Christians: I think
it may safely be affirmed, That if a new Europae speculum were sincerely
written, it might be contracted into this short Summary;

Novi ego h^c seculum quibus moribus sit; Malus bonum, malum esse vult, ut sit
sui similis; turbant, miscent, Trinummus.
mores mali; Rapax, Avarus, Invidus, sacrum prophanum, publicum privatum
habebit;

Hiulca Gens, etc.

THat eternal Majesty, which raised so brave a Fabric, out of such indisposed
materials; that weilds the world with his finger, ever since it was made; that
controules the wave, and checks the tumult of the people: that sits above, and
laughs at the malignant counsels, and devices of wicked men: Let his mercy be
implored for the speedy succor of his distressed Church; That the Rod of Aaron
may blossom; That the Tabernacle of David may be raised; That the subtle may
be caught in their own snares; And that the Result of all afflictions, may be
the greatning his glory, and exalting of his Scepter.

FINIS.

