E Typographia prodeat opus istud cui Titulus, A Rational Account of the
Grounds of Protestant Religion, being a Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury's Relation of a Conference, etc. from the Pretended Answer by T. C.

Humfr. London.
2. November. 1664.
A Rational Account OF THE GROUNDS OF Protestant Religion: BEING A VINDICATION
OF THE Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's RELATION Of a CONFERENCE, etc.

From the pretended ANSWER by T. C.

Wherein the true GROUNDS of FAITH are cleared, and the False discovered; the
CHURCH of ENGLAND Vindicated from the imputation of Schism; and the most
important particular Controversies between Us and Those of the Church of ROME
thoroughly examined.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET B. D.

LONDON, Printed by Rob. White for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix in
St. Paul's Churchyard near the little North-door. 1665.

TO HIS MOST Sacred Majesty CHARLES II. By the Grace of God King of Great
Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most Gracious Sovereign,
SInce that great Miracle of Divine Providence in your Majesty's most happy
restoration, we have seen those who before triumphed over the Church of
England as dead, as much expressing their envy at her resurrection. Neither
could it otherwise be expected, but that so sudden a recovery of her former
luster, would open the mouths of her weak but contentious Adversaries, who see
her shine in a Firmament so much above them. But it is a part of her present
Felicity, that they are ashamed of that insulting Question, What is become of
your Church now? and are driven back to their old impertinency, Where was your
Church before Luther? They might as well alter the date of it, and ask Where
she was before your Majesty's restoration? For as she only suffered an Eclipse
in the late confusions; no more did she, though of a longer stay, in the times
before the Reformation. And it was her great Honor, that she was not awakened
out of it (as of old they fancied) by the beating of drums, or the rude
clamours of the people; but as she Gradually regained her light, so it was with
the Influence of Supreme Authority. Which has caused so close an union and
combination of Interests between them, that the Church of England, and the
Royal Family, have like Hippocrates his Twins both wept and rejoiced together.
And nothing does more argue the excellent constitution of our Church, than that
therein the purity of Christian Doctrine is joined with the most hearty
Acknowledgment of your Majesty's Power and Supremacy. So that the Loyalty of
the members of it, can neither be suspected of private Interest, or of
depending on the pleasure of a Foreign Bishop, but is inlaid in the very
Foundations of our Reformation. Which stands on those two Grand Principles of
Religion and Government; The giving to God the things that are God's, and to
Caesar the things that are Caesar's. And as long as these two remain unshaken,
we need not fear the continuance and flourishing of the Reformed Church of
England, and your Majesty's Interest in the members of it. Which it is hard to
conceive those can have any zeal for, who are the busy Factours among us for
promoting so opposite an Interess as that of the Church of Rome. For what a
contradiction is it, to suppose it consistent with your Majesty's Honor and
Interess, to rob your Imperial Crown of one of the richest Jewels of it, to
expose Your Royal Scepter to the mercy of a Foreign Prelat, to have another
Supreme Head acknowledged within Your Dominions, and thereby to cut off the
dependence of a considerable part of the Nation wholly from Your Self, and to
exhaust the Nation of an Infinite Mass of Treasure merely to support the
Grandeur of the Sea of Rome? They who can make men believe that these things
tend to Your Majesty's Service, think they have gained thereby a considerable
step to their Religion, which is by baffling men's reason, and persuading them
to believe contradictions. But if, notwithstanding the received principles of
their Church, any have continued Faithful in their Loyalty to Your Majesty, we
have much more cause to attribute it to their Love to their King and Country,
than to their Religion. We deny not, but there may be such rare tempers which
may conquer the malignity of poison, but it would be a dangerous Inference from
thence, that it ought not to be accounted hurtful to humane nature. If any such
have been truly Loyal, may they continue so, and their number increase: and
since therein they so much come off from themselves, we hope they may yet come
nearer to us, whose Religion tends as much to the settling the only sure
Foundations of Loyalty, as theirs does to the weakening of them. And were this
the only Controversy between us, there need not many Books be written to
persuade men of the Truth of it.

But if these men may be believed, we can as little please God on the
principles of our Church, as they Your Majesty on the principles of theirs. A
strange Assertion! and impossible to be entertained by any, but those who think
there is no such way to please God, as to renounce the judgment of Sense and
Reason. And then indeed we freely confess, there are none so likely to do it,
as themselves. With whom men are equally bound to believe the greatest
repugnancies to sense and reason, with the most Fundamental Verities of
Christian Faith. As though no Faith could carry men to Heaven, but that which
can, not only remove, but swallow Mountains. Yet these are the persons who
pretend to make our Faith Infallible, while they undermine the Foundations of
it, as they advance Charity by denying Salvation to all but themselves, and
promote true Piety by their gross Superstitions. By all which they have been
guilty of debauching Christianity in so high a measure, that it cannot but
heartily grieve those who honor it as the most excellent Religion in the
World, to see its beauty so much clouded by the Errors and Superstitions of
the Roman Church.

That these are great as well as sad truths, is the design of the ensuing Book
to discover. Which I humbly present to Your Majesty's hands, both as it is a
Defense of that Cause wherein Your Majesty's Interess is so highly concerned,
and of that Book which Your Royal Father of most Glorious Memory so highly
honored, not only by his own perusal and approbation, but by the commendation
of it to his Dearest Children. On which account, I am more encouraged to hope
for your Majesty's acceptance of this, because it appears under the Shadow, as
well as for the Defense, of so great a Name. And since God has blessed Your
Majesty with so happy and rare a mixture, of Power, and Sweetness of Temper,
May they be still employed in the Love and Defense of our Reformed Church;
which is the hearty prayer of

Your Majesty's most Loyal and Obedient Subject, E. STILLINGFLEET.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT is now about a twelvemonth, since there appeared to the world a Book, under
the Title of Dr. Lawd's Labyrinth; but, with the usual sincerity of those
persons, pretended to be Printed some years before. It is not the business of
this Preface to enquire, Why if Printed then, it remained so long unpublished,
but to acquaint the Reader with the scope and design of that Book, and of this
which comes forth as a Reply to it. There are three things mainly in dispute
between us, and those of the Church of Rome, viz. Whether they, or we, give the
more satisfactory account of the Grounds of Faith? Whether their Church, or
ours, be guilty of the charge of Schism? And, Whether their Church be justly
accused by us of introducing many Errors and Superstitions? In the handling of
these, all our present Debate consists; and therefore, for the greater
Advantage of the Reader, I have distributed the whole into three distinct
parts: which I thought more commodious, than carrying it on in one continued
discourse. And, lest our Adversaries should complain, that we still proceed in
a destructive way, I have not only endeavored to lay open the palpable
weakness of their Cause, but to give a rational account of our own Doctrine in
opposition to theirs. Which I have especially done in the great Controversy of
the Resolution of Faith, as being the most difficult and important of any
other. I hope the Reader will have no cause to blame me for false or
impertinent Allegations of the Fathers, since it has been so much my business
to discover the fraud of our Adversaries in that particular: which I have
chiefly done from the scope and design of those very Books, out of which their
testimonies are produced. In many of the particular Differences, I have made
use of several of their late Writers against themselves; both to let them see,
how much Popery begins to grow weary of it self; and, how unjustly they condemn
us for denying those things, which the moderate and rational men of their own
side disown, and dispute against as well as we; and chiefly to undeceive the
world, as to their great pretense of Unity among themselves. Since their
Divisions are grown to so great a height both at home, and in foreign parts,
that the dissenting parties mutually charge each other with Heresy, and that
about their great Foundation of Faith, viz. the Popes Infallibility; The
Jansenists in France, and a growing party in England, charging the Jesuits with
Heresy in asserting it, as they do them with the same for denying it. As to my
self, I only declare, that I have with freedom and impartiality enquired into
the Reasons on both sides, and no interest has kept me from letting that side
of the balance fall, where I saw the greater weight of reason. In which
respect, I have been so far from dissembling the force of any of our
Adversaries Arguments, that if I could add greater weight to them, I have done
it; being as unwilling to abuse my self as the world. And therefore I have not
only consulted their greatest Authors, especially the three famous Cardinals,
Baronius, Bellarmin, and Perron; but the chiefest of those, who, under the name
of Conciliators, have put the fairest Varnish on the Doctrine of that Church.
However, I have kept close to my Adversary, and followed him through all his
windings, from which I return with this satisfaction to my self, that I have
vindicated his Lordship and Truth together. As to the style and way of writing
I use, all that I have to say, is, that my design has been to join clearness
of Expression, with evidence of Reason. What success I have had in it, must be
left to the Readers judgment; I only desire him to lay aside prejudice as much
in judging, as I have done in writing; otherwise I despair of his doing me
right, and of my doing him good. For, though reason be tractable and ingenuous,
yet prejudice and interest are invincible things.

Having done thus much by way of Preface, I shall not detain thee longer, by a
particular Answer to the impertinencies of our Authors Preface, since there is
nothing contained therein, but what is abundantly answered in a more proper
place. And I cannot think it reasonable to abuse so much the Readers Appetite,
as to give him a tedious Preface to cloy his stomach. If any, after perusal of
the whole, shall think fit to return an Answer, if they do it fairly and
rationally, they shall receive the same civility; if with clamor and
impertinency, I only let them know, I have not leisure enough to kill Flies,
though they make a troublesome noise. If any service be done to God, or the
Church, by this present work, next to that Divine Assistance, through which I
have done it, thou owe it to those great Pillars of our Church, by whose
command and encouragement I undertook it. Who the Author was of the Book I
answer, I have been the less solicitous to enquire, because I would not betray
the weakness of my cause, by mixing personal matters in debates of so great
importance. And, whether he be now living, or dead, I suppose our Adversaries
cannot think it at all material, unless they judge that their Cause does live
and dye with him.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. Of the Grounds of Faith.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of the Conference, and Defense of the Greek Church.
T.Cs. Title examined and retorted. The Labyrinth found in his Book and
Doctrine. The occasion of the Conference about the Churches Infallibility. The
rise of the dispute about the Greek Church, and the consequences from it. The
Charge of Heresy against the Greek Church examined, and she found, Not-guilty,
by the concurrent testimony of Fathers, General Councils, and Popes* Of the
Council of Florence and the proceedings there; That Council neither General nor
Free. The distinction of Ancient and Modern Greeks, disproved. The debate of
the Filioque being inserted into the Creed. The time when and the right by
which it was done, discussed. The rise of the Schism between the Eastern and
Western Churches, mainly occasioned by the Church of Rome. Page 1.
CHAP. II. Of Fundamentals in General.
The Popish Tenet concerning Fundamentals, a mere step to the Roman Greatness.
The Question about Fundamentals stated. An enquiry into the nature of them.
What are Fundamentals, in order to particular persons; and what to be owned as
such, in order to Ecclesiastical Communion. The Prudence and Moderation of the
Church of England, in defining Articles of Faith. What judged Fundamental by
the Catholic Church. No new Articles of Faith can become necessary. The
Churches power in propounding matters of Faith, examined. What is a sufficient
Proposition. Of the Athanasian Creed, and its being owned by the Church of
England. In what sense the Articles of it are necessary to Salvation. Of the
distinction of the material and formal object of Faith, as to Fundamentals. His
Lordship's integrity, and T. C. his forgery, in the testimony of Scotus. Of
Heresy, and how far the Church may declare matters of Faith. The testimony of
St. Augustine vindicated. Page 44.
CHAP. III. The Absurdities of the Romanists Doctrine of Fundamentals.
The Churches Authority must be Divine, if whatever she defines be Fundamental.
His Lordship, and not the Testimony of S. Augustine, shamefully abused, three
several ways. Bellarmin not mis-cited; the Pelagian Heresy condemned by the
General Council at Ephesus. The Popes Authority not employed in that of
Councils. The gross Absurdities of the distinction of the Church teaching and
representative, from the Church taught and diffusive, in the Question of
Fundamentals. The Churches Authority and Testimony in matters of Faith,
distinguished. The Testimony of Vincentius Lirinensis explained, and showed to
be directly contrary to the Roman Doctrine of Fundamentals. Stapleton and
Bellarmin, not reconciled by the vain endeavors used to that end. Page 79.
CHAP. IV. The Protestant Doctrine of Fundamentals, vindicated.
The unreasonableness of demanding a Catalogue of Fundamentals. The Creed
contains the Fundamentals of Christian Communion. The belief of Scripture
supposed by it. The Dispute concerning the Sense of Christ's Descent into Hell,
and Mr. Rogers his Book, confessed by T. C. impertinent: With others of the
same nature. T. C. his fraud, in citing his Lordships words. Of Papists and
Protestants Unity. The Moderation of the Church of England, compared with that
of Rome. Her grounds of Faith justified. Infant Baptism how far proved out of
Scripture alone. Page 98.
CHAP. V. The Romanists way of Resolving Faith.
The ill consequences of the resolution of Faith by the Churches Infallibility.
The grand Absurdities of it, manifested by its great unreasonableness in many
particulars. The certain Foundations of Faith unsettled by it, as is largely
proved. The Circle unavoidable by their new attempts. The impossibility of
proving the Church Infallible by the way that Moses, Christ, and his Apostles
were proved to be so. Of the Motives of Credibility, and how far they belong to
the Church. The difference between Science and Faith considered, and the new
art of men's believing with their wills. The Churches Testimony must be,
according to their principles, the formal object of Faith. Of their esteem of
Fathers, Scripture, and Councils. The rare distinctions concerning the Churches
Infallibility discussed. How the Church can be Infallible by the assistance of
the Holy Ghost, yet not divinely Infallible, but in a manner and after a sort.
T.C. applauded for his excellent faculty in contradicting himself. Page 109.
CHAP. VI. Of the Infallibility of Tradition.
Of the unwritten Word, and the necessary Ingredients of it. The Instances for
it particularly examined and disproved. The Fathers Rule for examining
Traditions. No unwritten Word the Foundation of Divine Faith. In what sense
Faith may be said to be Divine. Of Tradition being known by its own light, and
the Canon of the Scripture. The ^estimony of the Spirit, how far pertinent to
this Controversy. Of the use of Reason in the resolution of Faith. T. C's.
Dialogue answered, with another between himself and a Sceptick. A twofold
resolution of Faith into the Doctrine, and into the Books. Several Objections
answered from the Supposition made of a Child brought up without sight of
Scripture. Christ no Ignoramus nor Impostor, though the Church be not
Infallible. T. C's. Blasphemy in saying otherwise. The Testimonies of Irenaeus
and S. Augustine examined and retorted. Of the nature of Infallible Certainty,
as to the Canon of Scripture; and whereon it is grounded. The Testimonies
produced by his Lordship, vindicated. p. 161.
CHAP. VII. The Protestant Way of resolving Faith.
Several Principles premised in order to it. The distinct Questions set down,
and their several Resolutions given. The Truth of matters of fact, the Divinity
of the Doctrine, and of the Books of Scripture, distinctly resolved into their
proper grounds. Moral Certainty a sufficient Foundation for Faith, and yet
Christian Religion proved to be infallibly true. How Apostolical Tradition made
by his Lordship a Foundation of Faith. Of the Certainty we have of the Copies
of Scripture, and the Authority of them. S. Augustine's Testimony concerning
Church Authority largely discussed and vindicated. Of the private Spirit, and
the necessity, of Grace. His Lordship's Way of resolving Faith vindicated. How
far Scripture may be said to be known by its own Light. The several Testimonies
of Bellarmine, Brierly, and Hooker, cleared. p. 202.
CHAP. VIII. The Churches Infallibility not proved from Scripture.
Some general Considerations from the design of proving the Churches
Infallibility from Scripture. No Infallibility in the High Priest and his
Clergy under the Law; if there had been, no necessity there should be under the
Gospel. Of S. Basil's Testimony concerning Traditions. Scripture less liable to
corruptions than Traditions. The great uncertainty of judging Traditions, when
Apostolical, when not. The Churches perpetuity being promised in Scripture,
proves not its Infallibility. His Lordship does not falsify A. C's. words, but
T. C. does his meaning. Producing the Jesuits words no traducing their Order.
T. C's. miserable. Apology for them. The particular Texts produced for the
Churches Infallibility, examined. No such Infallibility necessary in the
Apostles Successors, as in Themselves. The Similitude of Scripture and
Tradition to an Ambassador and his Credentials, rightly stated p. 235.
CHAP. IX. The Sense of the Fathers in this Controversy.
The Judgment of Antiquity enquired into, especially of the three first
Centuries; and the reasons for it, The several Testimonies of Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, Tatianus, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and all the Fathers who
writ in vindication of Christian Religion, manifested to concur fully with our
way of resolving Faith. T. C's. Answers to Vincentius Lyrinensis, a Gandavo,
and the Fathers produced by his Lordship, pitifully weak. The particulars of
his 9th. Chapter examined. S. Augustine's Testimony vindicated. T. C's.
nauseous Repetitions sent as Vagrants to their several homes. His Lordships
Considerations found too heavy for T. C's. Answers. In what sense the Scripture
may be called a Praecognitum. What way the Jews resolved their Faith. This
Controversy, and the first part, concluded. p. 261
PART II. Of Schism.
CHAP. I. Of the Universal Church.
THe Question of Schism explained. The nature of it enquired into. Several
general Principles laid down for clearing the present Controversy. Three
grounds of the charge of Schism on Protestant Churches by our Author. The
first, of the Roman Churches being the Catholic Church, entered upon. How far
the Roman Church may be said to be a true Church. The distinction of a Church
morally, and metaphysically true, justified. The grounds of the Unity of the
Catholic Church, as to Doctrine and Government. Cardinal Perron's distinction
of the formal, causal, and participative Catholic Church examined. The true
sense of the Catholic Church in Antiquity manifested from S. Cyprian, and
several cases happening in his time: as, the Schism of Novatianus at Rome; the
case of Felicissimus and Fortunatus. Several other Instances out of Antiquity
to the same purpose, by all which it is manifest, that the Unity of the
Catholic Church had no dependence on the Church of Rome. The several
Testimonies to the contrary, of S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, John Patriarch of
Constantiople, S. Augustine, Optatus, etc. particularly examined; and all found
short of proving that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church. The several
Answers of his Lordship to the Testimonies of S. Cyprian, S. Hierom, S. Greg.
Nazianzen, S. Cyril, and Ruffinus, about the Infallibility of the Church of
Rome, justified. From all which it appears, that the making the Roman Church to
be the Catholic, is a great Novelty, and perfect Jesuitism. p. 289.
CHAP. II. Protestants no Schismatics.
Schism a culpable Separation; therefore the Question of Schism must be
determined by enquiring into the causes of it. The plea from the Church of
Rome's being once a right Church, considered. No necessity of assigning the
punctual time when errors crept into her. An account why the originals of
errors seem obscure. By Stapletons Confession, the Roman and Catholic Church
were not the same. The falsi^y of that assertion manifested, that there could
be no pure Church since the Apostles times, if the Roman Church were corrupt.
No one particular Church free from corruptions; yet no separation from the
Catholic Church. How far the Catholic Church may be said to err. Men may
have distinct communion from any o^e particular Church, yet not separate from
the Catholic Church. The Testimony of Petrus de Alliaco vindicated. Bellarmin
not mis cited. Almain full to his Lordships purpose. The Romanists guilty of
the present Schism, and not Protestants. In what sense there can be no just
cause of Schism; and how far that concerns our case. Protestants did not depart
from the Church of Rome, but were thrust out of it. The Vindication of the
Church of Rome from Schism, at last depends upon the two false Principles, of
her Infallibility, and being the Catholic Church. The Testimonies of S.
Bernard, and S Austin not to the purpose. The Catalogue of Fundamentals, the
Churches not erring, etc. referred back to their proper places. p. 324.
CHAP. III. Of keeping Faith with Heretics.
The occasion of this Dispute. The reason why this Doctrine is not commonly
defended: Yet all own such Principles from whence it necessar^ly follows. The
matter of fact as to the Council of Constance, and John Hus, opened. Of the
nature of the safe conduct granted him by the Emperor, that it was not a
general one, salva justitia, but particular, jure speciali; which is largely
proved. The particulars concerning Hierom of Prague. Of the safe conduct
granted by the Council of Trent. Of the distinction of Secular and
Ecclesiastical Power, and that from thence it follows, that Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics. Simancha, and several others fully assert this Doctrine.
Of the Invitation to the Council of Trent, and the good Instructions there; and
of Public Disputation. p. 343.
CHAP. IV. The Reform^tion of the Church of England justified.
The Church of Rome guilty of Schism, by unjustly casting Protestants out of
Communion. The Communion of the Cathol^ck and particular Churches,
distinguished. No separation of Protestants from the Catholic Church. The
Devotions of the Church of England and Rome compared. Particular Churches Power
to reform themselves in case of general Corruption, proved. The Instance from
the Church of Judah vindicated. The Church of Rome paralleld with the ten
Tribes. General Corruptions make Reformation the more necessary. Whether those
things we condemn as errors, were Catholic Tenets at the time of the
Reformation. The contrary showed, and the d^fference of the Church of Rome
before and since the Reformation. When things may be said to be received as
Catholic Doctrines. How far particular Churches Power to reform themselves
extends. His Lordships Instances for the Power of Provincial Councils in
matters of Reformation vindicated. The particular case of the Church of England
discussed. The proceedings in our Reformation defended. The Church of England a
true Church. The National Synod 1562. a lawful Synod. The Bishops no intruders
in Queen Elizabeth's time. The justice and mod^ration of the Church of England
in her Reformation. The Popes Power here, a forcible and fraudulent Usurpation.
p. 356.
CHAP. V. Of the Roman Churches Authority.
The Question concerning the Church of Rome's Authority entered upon. How far
our Church, in reforming her self, condemns the Church of Rome. The Pope's
equality with other Patriarchs, asserted. The Arabic Canons of the Nicene
Council proved to be supposititious. The Polity of the Ancient Church
discovered from the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice. The Rights of Primats
and Metropolitans settled by it. The suitableness of the Ecclesiastical, to the
Civil Government. That the Bishop of Rome had then a limited Jurisdiction
within the suburbicary Churches; as Primate of the Roman Diocese. Of the
Cyprian Privilege; that it was not peculiar, but common to all Primats of
Dioceses. Of the Pope's Primacy according to the Canons, how far pertinent to
our dispute. How far the Pope's Confirmation requisite to new elected
Patriarchs. Of the Synodical and Communicatory Letters. The testimonies of
Petrus de Marca concerning the Pope's Power of confirming and deposing Bishops.
The Instances brought for it, considered. The case of Athanasius being restored
by Julius, truly stated. The proceedings of Constantine in the case of the
Donatists cleared, and the evidence thence against the Pope's Supremacy. Of the
Appeals of Bishops to Rome, how far allowed by the Canons of the Church. The
great case of Appeals between the Roman and African Bishops discussed. That the
Appeals of Bishops were prohibited, as well as those of the inferior Clergy.
T. C's. fraud in citing the Epistle of the African Bishops, for acknowledging
Appeals to Rome. The contrary manifested from the same Epistle to Boniface, and
the other to Coelestine. The exemption of the Ancient Britannick Church from
any subjection to the Sea of Rome, asserted. The case of Wilfrids Appeal
answered. The Primacy of England not derived from Gregory's Grant to Augustine
the Monk. The Ancient Primacy of the Britannick Church not lost upon the Saxon
Conversion. Of the state of the African Churches, after their denying Appeals
to Rome. The rise of the Pope's Greatness under Christian Emperors. Of the
Decree of the Sardican Synod, in case of Appeals, whether ever received by the
Church: No evidence thence of the Pope's Supremacy. Zosimus his forgery in
sending the Sardican Canons instead of the Nicene. The weakness of the Pleas
for it, manifested. p. 382.
CHAP. VI. Of the Title of Universal Bishop.
In what sense the Title of Universal Bishop was taken in Antiquity. A
threefold acceptance of it; as importing 1. A general care over the Christian
Churches, which is attributed to other Catholic Bishops by Antiquity, besides
the Bishop of Rome, as is largely proved. 2. A peculiar dignity over the
Churches within the Roman Empire. This accounted then Ecumenical, thence the
Bishops of the seat of the Empire called Ecumenical Bishops: and sometimes of
other Patriarchal Churches. 3. Noting Universal Jurisdiction over the whole
Church as Head of it, so never given in Antiquity to the Bishop of Rome. The
ground of the Contest about this Title between the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople. Of the proceedings of the Council of Chalcedon, about the Popes
Supremacy. Of the Grammatical and Metaphorical sense of this Title. Many
arguments to prove it impossible that S. Gregory should understand it in the
Grammatical sense. The great absurdities consequent upon it. S. Gregory's
Reasons proved to hold against that sense of it, which is admitted in the
Church of Rome. Of Irenaeus his opposition to Victor. Victor's excommunicating
the Asian Bishops, argues no authority he had over them. What the more powerful
principality in Irenaeus is. Ruffinus his Interpretation of the 6. Nicene Canon
vindicated. The Suburbicary Churches cannot be understood of all the Churches
in the Roman Empire. The Pope no Infallible Successor of S. Peter, nor so
acknowledged to be by Epiphanius. S. Peter had no Supremacy of Power over the
Apostles. p. 422.
CHAP. VII. The Popes Authority not proved from Scripture, or Reason.
The insufficiency of the proofs from Scripture, acknowledged by Romanists
themselves. The impertinency of Luke 22.32. to that purpose. No proofs offered
for it, but the suspected testimonies of Popes in their own cause. That no
Infallibility can thence come to the Pope, as S. Peter's Successor, confessed,
and proved by Vigorius, and Mr. White. The weakness of the evasion of the Popes
erring as a private Doctor, but not as Pope, acknowledged by them. Joh. 21.15.
proves nothing toward the Popes Supremacy. How far the Popes Authority is
owned by the Romanists over Kings. T. C's. beggings of the Question, and
tedious repetitions, past over. The Argument from the necessity of a living
Judge, considered. The Government of the Church not Monarchical, but
Aristocratical. The inconveniences of Monarchical Government in the Church,
manifested from reason. No evidence that Christ intended to institute such
Government in his Church, but much against it. The Communicatory letters in the
primitive Church, argued an Aristocracy. Gersons testimony from his Book de
Auferibilitate Papae, explained and vindicated. S. Hieroms testimony full
against a Monarchy in the Church. The inconsistency of the Popes Monarchy with
that of temporal Princes. The Supremacy of Princes in Ecclesiastical matters,
asserted by the Scripture and Antiquity, as well as the Church of England. p.
451.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Council of Trent.
The Illegality of it manifested, first from the insufficiency of the Rule it
proceeded by, different from that of the first General Councils, and from the
Popes Presidency in it. The matter of Right concerning it, discussed. In what
cases Superiors may be excepted against as Barties. The Pope justly excepted
against as a Party, and therefore ought not to be Judge. The Necessity of a
Reformation in the Court of Rome, acknowledged by Roman Catholics. The matter
of fact enquired into, as to the Popes Presidency in General Councils. Hosius
did not preside in the Nicene Council as the Popes Legate. The Pope had nothing
to do in the second General Council. Two Councils held at Constantinople,
within two years; these strangely confounded. The mistake made evident. S.
Cyril not President in the third General Council as the Popes Legate. No
sufficient evidence of the Popes Presidency in following Councils. The justness
of the Exception against the place, manifested; and against the freedom of the
Council from the Oath taken by the Bishops to the Pope. The form of that Oath
in the time of the Council of Trent. Protestants not condemned by General
Councils. The Greeks and others unjustly excluded as Schismatics. The
Exception from the small number of Bishops cleared and vindicated. A General
Council in Antiqui^y not so called from the Popes General Summons. In what
sense a General Council represents the whole Church. The vast difference
between the proceedings in the Council of Nice, and that at Trent. The
Exception from the number of Italian Bishops, justified. How far the Greek
Church and the Patriarch Hieremias may be said to condemn Protestants; with an
account of the proceedings between them. p. 475.
PART. III. Of Particular Controversies.
CHAP. I. Of the Infallibility of General Councils.
HOw far this tends to the ending Controversies. Two distinct Questions
concerning the Infallibility and Authority of General Councils. The first
entered upon, with the state of the Question. That there can be no certainty of
faith, that General Councils are Infallible; nor, that the particular decrees
of any of them are so: which are largely proved. Pighius his Arguments against
the Divine Institution of General Councils. The places of Scripture considered,
which are brought for the Churches Infallibility, and that these cannot prove
that General Councils are so: Matthew. 18.20. Act. 15.28. particularly answered.
The sense of the Fathers in their high expressions of the Decrees of Councils.
No consent of the Church as to their Infallibility. The place of St. Austin
about the amendment of former General Councils by latter, at large vindicated.
No other place in St. Austin prove them Infallible, but many to the contrary.
General Councils cannot be Infallible in the conclusion, if not in the use of
the means. No such Infallibility without as immediate a Revelation as the
Prophets and Apostles had: taking Infallibility not for an absolute unerring
Power, but such as comes by a promise of Divine Assistance preserving from
error. No obligation to internal assent, but from immediate Divine Authority.
Of the consistency of Faith and Reason in things propounded to be believed. The
suitableness of the contrary Doctrine to the Romanists principles. p. 505.
CHAP. II. Of the Use and Authority of General Councils.
The denying the Infallibility of General Councils takes not away their Use and
Authority. Of the submission due to them by all particular persons. How far
external obedience is required in case they err. No violent opposition to he
made against them. Rare Inconveniences hinder not the effect of a just power.
It cannot rationally be supposed, that such General Councils as are here meant
should often or dangerously err. The true notion of a General Council
explained. The Freedom requisite in the proceedings of it. The Rule it must
judge by Great Difference between external obedience, and internal assent to
the Decrees of Councils. This latter unites men in error, not the former. As
great uncertainties supposing General Councils Infallible as not. Not so great
certainty requisite for submission as Faith. Whether the Romanists Doctrine of
the Infallibility of Councils, or ours, tend more to the Churches peace? St.
Austin explained. The Keys according to him given to the Church. No
unremediable inconvenience supposing a General Council err. But errors in
Faith are so, supposing them Infallible when they are not. The Church has
power to reverse the Decrees of General Councils. The power of Councils not by
Divine Institution. The unreasonableness of making the Infallibility of
Councils depend on the Popes Confirmation. No consent among the Romanists about
the subject of Infallibility, whether in Pope or Councils. No evidence from
Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity, for the Popes personal Infallibility. p. 533.
CHAP. III. Of the errors of pretended General Councils.
The erroneous Doctrine of the Church of Rome in making the Priests intention
necessary to the essence of Sacraments. That Principle destructive to all
certainty of Faith, upon our Authors grounds. The absurdity of asserting, That
Councils define themselves to be Infallible. Sacramental actions sufficiently
distinguished from others without the Priests Intention. Of the moral assurance
of the Priests Intention, and the insufficiency of a mere virtual Intention.
The Popes confirmation of Councils supposes personal Infallibility.
Transubstantiation an error decreed by Pope and Council. The repugnancy of it
to the grounds of Faith. The Testimonies brought for it out of Antiquity
examined at large, and showed to be far from proving Transubstantiation.
Communion in one kind a violation of Christ's Institution. The Decree of the
Council of Constance implies a non obstante to it. The unalterable nature of
Christ's Institution cleared. The several Evasions considered and answered. No
public Communion in one kind for a thousand years after Christ. The
indispensableness of Christ's Institution owned by the Primitive Church. Of
Invocation of Saints, and the Rhetorical expressions of the Fathers which gave
occasion to it. No footsteps of the Invocation of Saints in the three first
Centuries; nor precept or example in Scripture, as our Adversaries confess.
Evidences against Invocation of Saints from the Christians Answers to the
Heathens. The worship of Spirits and Heroes among the Heathens, justifiable on
the same grounds that Invocation of Saints is in the Church of Rome.
Commemoration of the Saints without Invocation, in S. Austins time. Invocation
of Saints as practiced in the Church of Rome, a derogation to the merits of
Christ. Of the worship of Images and the near approach to Pagan Idolatry
therein. No Use or Veneration of Images in the Primitive Church. The Church of
Rome justly chargeable with the abuses committed in the worship of Images. Page
554.
CHAP. IV. Of the possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church.
Protestants Concessions ought not to be any ground to prefer the Communion of
the Church of Rome. How far those Concessions extend. The uncharitableness of
Romanists, if they yield not the same to us. The weakness of the Arguments to
prove the Roman Church the safer way to Salvation on Protestant principles. The
dangerous Doctrines of Romanists about the easiness of salvation, by the
Sacrament of Penance. The case paralleled between the Donatists and Romanists,
in denying salvation to all but themselves; and the advantages equal from their
adversaries Concessions. The advantage of the Protestants, if that be the
safest way which both parties are agreed in, manifested and vindicated in
several particulars. The Principle it self at large showed to be a mere
contingent Proposition, and such as may lead to Heresy and Infidelity. The
case of the Leaders in the Roman Church, and others, distinguished. The Errors
and Superstitions of the Roman Church, make its communion very dangerous in
order to Salvation. Page 611.
CHAP. V. The Safety of the Protestant Faith.
The sufficiency of the Protestant Faith to Salvation, manifested by disproving
the Cavils against it. T. C's tedious Rep^titions passed over. The Argument
from Possession at large considered. No Prescription allowable, where the Law
has antecedently determined the right. Of the Infallibility of Oral Tradition.
That, contrary to the received Doctrine of the Roman Church; and in it self
unreasonable. The Grounds of it examined. The ridiculousness of the Plea of
bare Possession, discovered. General Answers returned to the remaining
Chapters, consisting wholly of things already discussed. The place of S.
Cyprian to Cornelius particularly vindicated. The proof of Succession of
Doctrine lies on the Romanists by their own principles. Page 625.
CHAP. VI. The Sense of the Fathers concerning Purgatory.
The Advantage which comes to the Church of Rome, by the Doctrine of Purgatory,
thence the boldness of our Adversaries in contending for it. The Sense of the
Roman Church concerning Purgatory, explained. The Controversy between the
Greek and Latin Church concerning it. The Difference in the Church of Rome
about Purgatory. Some general Considerations about the Sense of the Fathers, as
to its being an Article of Faith. The Doubtfulness and Uncertainty of the
Fathers Judgments in this particular, manifested by S. Austin the first who
seemed to assert a Purgation before the day of Judgment. Prayer for the Dead
used in the Ancient Church, does not infer Purgatory. The Primate of Armagh
vindicated from our Adversaries Calumnies. The general Intention of the Church
distinguished from the private Opinions of particular persons. The Prayers of
the Church respected the day of Judgment. The Testimonies of the Fathers in
behalf of Purgatory, examined; particularly of the pretended Dionysius,
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Origin, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Basil, Nazianzen,
Lactantius, Hilary, Gregory Nyssen, etc. And not one of them asserts the
Purgatory of the Church of Rome. S. Austin does not contradict himself about
it. The Doctrine of Purgatory no elder than Gregory 1. and built on Credulity
and Superstition. The Churches Infallibility made at last the Foundation of the
belief of Purgatory. The Falsity of that Principle: and the whole concluded.
Page 636.
Errata sic corrige.
PAge 21 l 12 for which r them p 37 marg. for Baron an. 405. r 447. p 48 l 38
for uniformally r uniformly p 64 l 29 for That r What. p 68 l 1 for Sceptiscism
r Skepticism. p 73 l 46 for dissents r assents. p 101 l 3 between you and say
insert to p 103 l 14 after men insert were. p 116 l 34 blot out not before a
good. p 125 l 37 for Montallo r Montalto. p 12^ l 16 for Valentius r Valentia.
p 128 l 39 r Infallibility. p 159 l 26 r Assistance. p 178 l 14 blot out b^t
before probabl^ false p 184 l penult. for it r Christ. p 210 l 42 before any
insert for. p 211 l 39 for of the r of this. p 215 l 8 after Sixtine insert
and. p 218 l 30 for it r them. p 219 marg. l penult. r vet^stiores. p 230 l 15
r generality. p 235 l 43 blot out but before setting. p 243 l 21 r (...) p 263
l 25 blot out where. l 41 blot out and p 267 l 17 r (...). p 274 l 26 r (...)
marg. (...). p 297 l 21, 22 r communication of peace, title of Brotherhood, and
common mark of Hospitality p 304 marg. l 10 r Mastrucam p 308 l 30 for from r
of. p 312 l 5 r Sardican. p 315 l 38 for contracts r contrasts. p 326 l 46 for
interrupted r uninterrupted. p 340 l 33 for now r not. p 344 l 34 for reply r
rely. l 45 r Ecclesiastical. p 378 l 12 r And in the first of her reign, of,
etc. p 389 l 47 for Protestants r Patriarchs. p 390 l 44 for G^icenus r
Cyzicenus. p 403 l 12 r Anulinus. p 408 l 48 before done blot out not. p 416 l
44 for context r contest. p 422 l 4 for satisfied r falsified. l 38 r Pelagius
2 and Gregory 1. p 433 marg. l 8 for ^essime r piissime. p 440 l 36 for most r
not. p 442 l 8 r (...). p 447 l 13 r Alexandria. l 24 r elegantissime. p 448 l
19 for him r them. p 450 l 19 r unless S. Peter had p 469 l 35 after which
insert is. p 470 l 6 r Fundavit l 50 for first r fifth. p 474 l 13 r conclude.
p 477 marg. r Cusanus. p 495 l 16 for conveying r convening p 497 l 42 for used
r abused. p 503 l 8 for your r their. p 506 l 30 blot out are. p 507 l 37 for
an easy r any. p 509 l 33 for it r out. p 510 l 48 for he r it. p 540 l 30 r
denies. l 32 before shall insert there. l 39 after is r no. p 550 l 29 r
Spirit. l 43 for and r yet. p 551 l 19 for he r they. l 35 place the comma
after then. l 43 after know insert not. p 5^6 l 25 for yet r that. p 561 l 43
for w^ll as r that. p 571 marg. l ult r (...) p 574 l 48 for m^ke r made. l 50
for co^pus r corporis p 582 l 29 r indispens^ble. p 589 l 15 r (...) p 595 l 4
r defensi^le. l 5 r Invocation. p 597 l 19 blot out or no* p 598 l 5 for
appropriation r approbation p 622 l 32 for it r is.

PART I. Of the Grounds of Faith.
CHAP. I. The Occasion of the Conference, and Defense of the Greek Church.
T. Cs. Title examined and retorted. The Labyrinth found in his Book and
Doctrine. The occasion of the Conference about the Churches infallibility. The
rise of the dispute about the Greek Church, and the consequences from it. The
charge of Heresy against the Greek Church examined, and she found, Not-guilty,
by the concurrent testimony of Fathers, General Councils, and Popes. Of the
Council of Florence and the proceedings there; That Council neither General nor
Free. The distinction of Ancient and Modern Greeks disproved. The debate of the
Filioque being inserted into the Creed. The time when and the right by which it
was done, discussed. The rise of the Schism between the Eastern and Western
Churches, mainly occasioned by the Church of Rome.

THat which is the common subtilty of Male-factors,. 1.
to derive, if possible, the imputation of that fault on the persons of their
Accusers, which they are most liable to be charged with themselves, is the
great Artifice made use of by you in the Title and Design of your Book. For
there being nothing which your Party is more justly accused for, than involving
and perplexing the grounds of Christian Faith under a pretext of Infallibility
in your Church, you thought you could not better avoid the odium of it, then by
a confident recrimination: And from hence it is that you call his Lordships
Book a Labyrinth, and pretend to discover his abstruse turnings, ambiguous
windings, and intricate Meanders, as you are pleased to style them. But those
who will take the pains to search your Book for the discoveries made in it,
will find themselves little satisfied but only in these, that no cause can be
so bad, but interessed persons will plead for it; and no writing so clear and
exact, but a perplexed mind will imagine nothing but Meanders in it. And if
dark passages and intricate windings, if obscure sense and perplexed
consequences, if uncertain wanderings and frequent self-contradictions may make
a writing be called a Labyrinth, I know no Modern Artist who comes so near the
skill of the Cretan Artificer as your self. Neither is this merely your own
fault; but, the nature of the cause whose defense you have espoused, is such,
as will not admit of being handled in any other manner. For you might as soon
hope to persuade a Traveller that his nearest and safest way was through such a
Labyrinth as that of Creet, as convince us that the best and surest Resolution
of our Faith is into your Churches Infallibility. And while you give out, that
all other grounds of Christian Faith are uncertain, and yet are put to such
miserable shifts in defense of your own, instead of establishing the Faith of
Christians, you expose Christianity it self to the scorn and contempt of
Atheists; who need nothing more to confirm them in their Infidelity, then such
a senseless and unreasonable way of proceeding as you make use of, for laying
the Foundations of Christian Faith. Your great Principle being, that no Faith
can be Divine, but what is Infallible; and none Infallible, but what is built
on a Divine and Infallible Testimony; and that this Testimony is only that of
the present Catholic Church; and that Church none but yours: and yet after all
this you dare not say the Testimony of your Church is Divine, but only in a
sort and after a manner. You pretend that our Faith is vain and uncertain,
because built only on Moral certainty and Rational evidence; and yet you have
no other proof for your Churches Infallibility, but the motives of credibility.
You offer to prove the Churches Infallibility independently on Scripture; and
yet challenge no other Infallibility but what comes by the promise and
assistance of the Holy Ghost, which depends wholly on the Truth of the
Scripture. You seek to disparage Scripture on purpose to advance your Churches
Authority, and yet bring your greatest evidences of the Churches Authority from
it. By which Authority of the Church you often tell us that Christian Religion
can only be proved to be Infallibly true, when if but one error be found in
your Church, her Infallible Testimony is gone, and what becomes then of
Christian Religion? And all this is managed with a peculiar regard to the
Interest of your Church, as the only Catholic Church, which you can never
attempt to prove but upon supposition of the Truth of Christianity, the belief
of which yet you say depends upon your Churches being the True and Catholic
Church. These, and many other such as these, will be found the rare and
coherent Principles of your Faith and Doctrine, which I have here only given
this taste of, that the Reader may see with what honor to your self and
advantage to your Cause, you have bestowed the Title of Labyrinth on his
Lordships Book.

But yet you might be pardonable, if rather through the weakness of your Cause
than your ill management of it, you had brought us into these amazing
Labyrinths; if you had left us any thing whereby we might hope to be safely
directed in our passage through them: Whereas you not only endeavor to put men
out of the True way, but use your greatest industry to keep them from a
possibility of returning into it: by not only suggesting false Principles to
them, but decrying the use of those things which should discover their falsity.
For although the judgment of sense were that which the Apostles did appeal to
(that which we have seen and heard -- declare we unto you); 1 John 1.1, 3.
although that were the greatest and surest evidence to them of the
Resurrection of Christ; although Christ himself condemned them for their
unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16.14.
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen; yet
according to your Principles men must have a care of relying on the judgment
of sense in matters of Faith, lest perchance they should not believe that great
Affront to humane Nature, the Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Neither are men
only deprived of the judgment of sense, but of the concurrent use of Scripture
and Reason; for these are pretended to be uncertain, fallible, nay, dangerous
without the Churches Infallibility: So that the short of your grounds of
establishing Faith, is, If we will find our way, we must renounce the judgment
of sense and reason, submit our selves and Scripture to an Infallible Guide,
and then you tell us we cannot miss of our way; when it is impossible for us to
know our Guide, without the use of those things which we are bid to renounce.
These things laid together make us admire more at your confidence than
invention in making the current title of your Book to be Dr. Lawd's Labyrinth,
in which it is hard to say, whether your immodesty or blindness be the greater.

But as though you were the only Heroes for asserting the Christian Cause, and
all others but more subtle betrayers of it,. 2.
you begin your Book with a most ingenious comparison of the learned labors of
those of your Church to the stately Temple of Solomon; and the artificial but
pestiferous works of all Heretical Authors (i. e. all but your selves) to
Labyrinths and intricate Dungeons. In which only your discretion is to be
commended, P. 1.
in placing this at the entrance of your Book; for whosoever looks but further
into it, and compares it with that you pretend to answer, will not condemn the
choice of your Similitudes, but your forgetfulness in misapplying them. But it
matters not what titles you give to the books of our Authors, unless you were
better able to confute them: and if no other book of any late Protestant Writer
has been any more discovered to be of this intangling nature, than this of his
Lordship (whom you call our grand Author) is by you, you may very justly say of
them as you do in the next words, they are very liable to the same Reproach: P.
2.
In which we commend your ingenuity, that when you had so lately disparaged our
Authors and Writings, you so suddenly wipe off those Aspersions again by giving
them the deserved name of Reproaches. When you say his Lordships Book is most
artificially composed, we have reason to believe so fair a Testimony from a
professed Adversary; but when notwithstanding this you call it a Labyrinth, we
can interpret it only as a fair plea for your not being able to answer it. And
who can blame you for calling that a Labyrinth in which you have so miserably
lost your self? but, in pity to you, and justice to the cause I have
undertaken, I shall endeavor with all kindness and fairness to reduce you out
of your strange entanglements into the plain and easy paths of Truth; which I
doubt not to effect by your own Clew of Scripture and Tradition, by which you
may soon discover what a Labyrinth you were in your self, when you had thought
to have made directive Marks (as you call them) for others to avoid it.

To omit therefore any further preface,. 3.
I shall wait upon you to particulars; the first of which is, the Occasion of
the Conference, P. 2.
which (you say) was for the satisfaction of an honorable Lady, who having
heard it granted in a former Conference, that there must be a continual visible
company ever since Christ teaching unchanged doctrine, in all points necessary
to salvation; and finding (it seems) in her own reason that such a company or
Church must not be fallible in its teaching, was in quest of a Continual,
Visible, Infallible Church, as not thinking it fit for unlearned persons to
judge of particular doctrinals, but to depend on the judgment of the true
Church. The Question then was not concerning a Continual and Visible Church,
which you acknowledge was granted, but concerning such a Church as must be
infallible in all she teaches, (and, if she be infallible, according to your
doctrine of Fundamentals, whatever she teaches is necessary to salvation) which
that Lady thought necessary to be first determined, because, says Mr. Fisher,
It was not for her, or any other unlearned persons, to take upon them to judge
of particulars, without depending upon the judgment of the true Church; which
seeming to allow of some use of our own judgment, supposing the Churches
Authority, you pervert into these words, Not thinking it fit to judge, etc. but
to depend, etc. But let them be as they will, unless you gave greater reason
for them, it is not material which way they pass. For his Lordship had returned
a sufficient Answer to that pretense (which you are content to take no notice
of) in saying That it is very fit the people should look to the judgment of
the Church before they be too busy with particulars. P. 2. sect. 2.
But yet neither Scripture, nor any good Authority denies them some moderate
use of their own understanding and judgment, especially in things familiar and
evident, which even ordinary capacities may as easily understand as read. And
therefore some particulars a Christian may judge without depending. To which
you, having nothing to say, run post to the business of Infallibility: for when
it was said, The Lady desired to rely on an Infallible Church, therein, his
Lordship says, neither the Jesuit nor the Lady her self spoke very advisedly:
P. 3. sect. 3. n. 2.
For an Infallible Church denotes a particular Church, in that it is set in
opposition to some other particular Church that is not infallible. Here now you
begin your discoveries: for you tell us, he makes this his first crook in his
projected Labyrinth; which is apparent to any man that has eyes, even without
the help of a Perspective. As seldom as Perspectives are used to discern the
turns of Labyrinths, nothing is so apparent, as that your eyes or your
judgment were not very good when you used this expression. For I pray, what
crook or turn is there in that, when a Lady demanded an Infallible Church to
her guide, to say, that by that question she supposes some particular Church
as distinct from, and opposite to others, to be infallible. No, say you, she
sought not any one particular Church infallible, in opposition to another
Church not infallible; but some Church, such as might without danger of error
direct her in all doctrinal points of Faith. Rarely well distinguished! Not any
particular Church, but some particular Church. For if she enquired after some
Church, which, without danger of error, might direct her in all doctrinal
points of Faith, does she not thereby imply, that some other Church might bring
her into danger of error under pretense of directing her in matters of Faith?
and if this be some particular fallible Church, the other must be some
particular infallible Church? And is it possible to conceive some Church that
may err in directing, and some other that may not err, without some
particular Church being taken in opposition to some other Church? But you would
fain persuade us that the force of his Lordships Argument rests wholly upon the
importance of the particle a or an, which cannot be applied but to particulars,
which you very learnedly disprove: whereas the main strength of what his
Lordship says, depends upon the nature of the question, and the manner of
proposing it. For the Lady enquiring after such a Church whose judgment she
might rely on as to the matters in dispute in the Christian world, must mean
such a Church whose communion must be known as distinct from other Churches
which are not infallible; for otherwise she might be deceived still. And if you
give a pertinent answer to her question, you must show her some such Church as
an Infallible Guide, which can be no other in this case, but some particular
Church considered as distinct from others. For a general answer concerning the
Infallibility of the Catholic Church, without showing how the Infallible
judgment of that Church may be known, can by no means reach the case in hand:
which does not merely respect an Infallibility in the subject, but such an
infallibility as may be a sufficient guide in all doctrinal points of Faith.
When you say therefore, she meant no other then the Universal visible Church of
Christ, Page 3
you must tell us how the Universal visible Church can become such an
Infallible guide in the matters in Controversy between those Churches, which
yet are members of that Universal visible Church. For the notion of the
Universal Church not being in its nature confined to any one of these parties,
but all of them concurring to the making of it up, can no more be an Infallible
guide in the matters in difference, then the common notion of Animal can direct
us in judging what Beings are sensitive and what rational. Therefore though you
would fain deceive the world under a pretense of the Catholic Church, yet
nothing can be more evident, then that in the question what Church must be a
guide in Doctrinal points of Faith, it must be understood of some Church as
distinct from other Churches which ought not to be relied on as infallible
guides. But the subtilty of this is, that when you challenge Infallibility to
your Church, we should not apprehend her as a particular Church, but as the
true Catholic Church, which is a thing so every way absurd and unreasonable,
that you had need use the greatest Artifice's to disguise it, which yet can
deceive none but such as are resolved to be deceived by them. For any one who
had his eyes in his head might discern without a Perspective, as you speak,
that Churches of several and distinct Communions from each other were placed in
competition for Infallibility: For Mr. Fisher's next words are. The Question
was, Which was that Church? Do you think he means, Which was that Universal
visible Church? Certainly not: for the nature of the Question supposes several
Churches: now I think you do not believe, there are several Universal visible
Churches. And it immediately follows, A Friend of the Ladies would needs defend
that not only the Roman, but the Greek Church was right; to which Mr. Fisher
answers, That the Greek Church had erred in matter of doctrine. Can any thing
be more plain then that this Question does relate to Churches considered
severally and as under distinct Communions and Denominations. And therefore
notwithstanding your pitiful pretenses to the contrary, this Question can be
no otherwise understood then, as his Lordship said, of some particular
Infallible Church, in opposition to some other particular Church which is not
Infallible. And if you judge this an affected mistake as you call it, your
discerning faculty will be as liable to Question as your Churches Infallibility.

That you might seem to avoid the better the force of his Lordships following
discourse against Bellarmine about the Infallibility of the particular Church
of Rome; you first tell us,. 4.
That it is sufficient for a Catholic to believe that there is an
Infallibility in the Church, without further obligation to examine whether the
particular Church of Rome be infallible or no. Which is an egregious piece of
Sophistry. For, put case a man believes the Catholic Church of all Ages
Infallible, but not of any one particular Age since the Apostles times; suppose
a man believe the Catholic Church of the present Age Infallible, but not of
any one particular Communion but as it takes in those common truths wherein
they are all agreed; will you say this is sufficient for a Catholic to believe
without obligation to examine further? If you will, speak it out, and, I dare
say, you shall not have much thanks at Rome when you have done it. But the
mystery is, If a man believes the Roman Church only, to be the Catholic
Church, it is no matter whether he enquires whether the Catholic Church be
only at Rome or no. It is not the place, but the communion of the Roman Church
which is now enquired after in the question of Infallibility; although I cannot
see but those places out of the Fathers which are produced to prove the Roman
Church Infallible, will hold for the continuance of that Infallibility in that
particular place of Rome. For St. Cyprian says expressly of the Romans,
Navigare audent ad Petri Cathedram, and Ecclesiam Principalem, etc. nec
cogitare, eos esse Romanos ad quos p^rfidea habere non potest accessum. Cypr.
l. 1. c. 3.

Scito, Romanam fidem ejusmodi praestigias non recipere. Hierony. Apol. 3. c.
Ruff.

Roma semper fidem retinet. Greg. Nazianz. carm. de vita sua.


that they are such to whom Perfidia (what ever be meant by it) cannot have
access. St. Jerome says, The Roman Faith admits no deceits into it. Gregory
Nazianzene, that Rome retains the ancient Faith. Not that I think any of these
places do in the least import the Infallibility of the Roman Church (as will be
showed in its proper place) but that, on supposition that Infallibility were
employed in them, they would hold for the Infallibility of the particular Roman
Church. And therefore Bellarmin understood what he did when he produced these
places to that purpose, especially the Apostolical See remaining at Rome, as he
supposes himself in this part of the Question which he there discusseth.
Either therefore you must assert that which his Lordship learnedly proves,
Bellarm. de Pontifice Romans l. 4. c. 4. sect. 1.
viz. That no such thing as Infallibility is intended by any of these
Citations, or else that it must extend to the particular Roman Church. And when
you deny this to be an Article of Faith among Catholics, that the particular
Roman Church (the Apostolical See remaining there) is Infallible, prove at your
leisure from any of these Citations that the Church within the Roman Communion
is Infallible and not the particular Roman Church. And from what has been
hitherto said, I am so far from suspecting his Lordships candor, as you do,
that I much rather suspect your judgment, and that you are not much used to
attend to the Consequences of things, or else you would not have deserted
Bellarmin in defense of so necessary and pertinent a point as the Infallibility
of the particular Church of Rome.

Secondly, You answer to his Lordships Discourse concerning Bellarmin's
Authorities, Page 4.
That you cannot hold your self obliged to take notice of his pretended
Solutions, till you find them brought to evacuate the Infallibility of the
Catholic or the Roman Church in its full latitude, as Catholics ever mean it,
save when they say the particular Church of Rome. But taking it in as full a
Latitude as you please, I doubt not but to make it appear that the Roman Church
is the Roman Church still, that is, a particular Church as distinct from the
Communion of others, and therefore neither Catholic nor Infallible: which I
must refer to the place where you insist upon it, which I shall do without the
imitation of your Vanity, in telling your Reader as far as eighthly and lastly
what fine exploits you intend to do there. But usually those who brag most of
their Valor beforehand show least in the Combat, and thus it will be found
with you. I shall let you therefore enjoy your self in the pleasant thoughts of
your noble intendments, till we come to the trial of them; and so come to the
present Controversy concerning the Greek Church.

The Defense of the Greek Church.
It is none of the least of those Arts which you make use of for the perplexing
the Christian Faith,. 5.
to put men upon enquiring after an Infallible Church, when yet you have no way
to discern which is so much as a true Church, but by examining the doctrine of
it. So that of necessity the rule of Faith and Doctrine must be certainly
known, before ever any one can with safety depend upon the judgment of any
Church. For having already proved that there can be no other meaning of the
Question concerning the Church, as here stated, but with relation to some
particular Church to whose Communion the party enquiring might join, and whose
judgment might be relied on; we see it presently follows in the debate, Which
was that Church; and it seems, as is said already, a Friend of the Ladies
undertook to defend that the Greek Church was right. To which Mr. Fisher
answers, That the Greek Church had plainly changed, P. 21. sect. 4.
and taught false in a point of Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost: and after
repeats it, that it had erred. Before I come to examine how you make good the
charge you draw up against the poor Greek Church in making it err
fundamentally, it is worth our while to consider upon what account this dispute
comes in. The Inquiry was concerning the True Church on whose judgment one
might safely depend in Religion. It seems, two were propounded to
consideration, the Greek and the Roman; the Greek was rejected because it had
erred: From whence it follows, that the dispute concerning the Truth of
Doctrine must necessarily precede that of the Church: For by Mr. Fishers
confession and your own, A Church which has erred cannot be relied on;
therefore men must be satisfied whether a Church has erred or no, before they
can judge whether she may be relied on or no. Which being granted, all the
whole Fabric of your Book falls to the ground; for then 1. Men must be
Infallibly certain of the grounds of Faith antecedently to the testimony of the
Church; for if they be to judge of a Church by the Doctrine, they must in order
to such a judgment be certain what that Doctrine is which they must judge of
the Church by. 2. No Church can be known to be Infallible, unless it appear to
be so by that Doctrine which they are to examine the truth of the Church by,
and therefore no Church can be known to be Infallible by the motives of
credibility. 3. No Church ought to be relied on as Infallible, which may be
found guilty of any error by comparing it with the Doctrine which we are to
try it by. Therefore you must first prove your Church not to have erred in any
particular; for if she has, it is impossible she should be Infallible: and not
think to prove that she has not erred because she cannot, that being the thing
in question, and must by your dealing with the Greek Church be judged by
particulars. 4. There must be a certain rule of Faith supposed to have
sufficient Authority to decide Controversies without any dependence upon the
Church. For, the matter to be judged is the Church; and if the Scripture may
and must decide that, Why may it not as well all the rest? 5. Every man's reason
proceeding according to this rule of Faith must be left his Judge in matters of
Religion. And whatever inconveniences you can imagine to attend upon this they
immediately and necessarily follow from your proceeding with the Greek Church
by excluding her because she has erred, which while we are in pursuit of a
Church can be determined by nothing but every ones particular reason. 6. Then
Fundamentals do not depend upon the Churches declaration. For you assert the
Greek Church to err fundamentally, and that this may be made appear to one who
is seeking after a Church. Suppose then I inquire, as the Lady did, after a
Church whose judgment I must absolutely depend on, and some mention the Greek
and others the Roman Church: You tell me, It cannot be the Greek, for that has
erred fundamentally. I inquire how you know, supposing her to err, that it is
a fundamental error? will you answer me, because the true Church has declared
it to be a fundamental error? but that was it I was seeking for Which that
Church is, which may declare what errors are fundamental and what not? If you
tell me It is yours, I may soon tell you, You seem to have a greater kindness
for your Church then your self, and venture to speak any thing for the sake of
it. Thus we see how finely you have betrayed your whole Cause in your first
onset, by so rude an attempt upon the Greek Church.

And truly it was much your concernment, to load her as much as you can: For
though she now wants one of the great marks of your Church (which yet you know
not how long your Church may enjoy) viz. outward splendour and bravery, yet you
cannot deny, but that Church was planted by the Apostles, enjoyed a continual
Succession from them, flourished with a number of the Fathers exceeding that of
yours, had more of the Councils of greatest credit in it, and, which is a
commendation still to it, it retains more purity under its persecutions then
your Church with all its external splendor. P. 5. n. 4.
But she has erred concerning the Holy Ghost, and therefore has lost it. A
severe censure which his Lordship rebukes Mr. Fisher for citing King James so
boldly for: but two ways it may be taken, he adds. 1. To lose such assistance
as preserves from all error. 2. Or else from all fundamental error, P. 25. n.
17. sect. 5.
this therefore, his Lordship truly says, is an error of the first sort and
not of the latter.

. 6.
Passing by therefore his Lordships expressions of his modesty, which if an
error is one you are like to be secured from; and his cautious expressions
concerning the Greek Church which he highly showed his wisdom in, we come to
consider how you prove the Greek Church guilty of fundamental error. You say,
You pass by his trifling, and make way for truth. I wonder not to see you
reflect on his Lordship for his modesty, considering how little of it you show
toward him; let us then make way too, but it is to see you and Truth combat
together. It is to be considered, say you, that now for many hundred years, P.
6. n. 4.
the whole Latin Church has decreed and believed it to be flat Heresy in the
Greeks; and they decreed the contrary to be an Heresy in the Latin Church, and
both together condemned the opinion of the Grecians as Heretical in a General
Council (in Florentino) how then bears it any show of probability, what some
few of yesterday (forced to it by an impossibility of otherwise avoiding the
strength of Catholic arguments against them) affirm, that the matter of this
Controversy was so small and inconsiderable, that it is not sufficient to
produce an Heresy on either side? Is not this to make all the Churches of
Christendom for many hundred years quite blind, and themselves only clear and
sharp-sighted? which swelling presumption what spirit it argues, and whence it
proceeds, all those who have learned from St. Augustine that Pride is the mother
of Heresy, will easily collect. I grant this speech of St. Augustine to be
true; only let it be added, that Pride is likewise the Mother of making
Heresies, as will appear in this present Controversy; and whether we, who
vindicate the Greek Church from Heresy, or you who would find the Bill against
her (to keep her from any rivalship with your Church) be more guilty of Pride
will be soon discovered; but sure you believe us not only to be men of
yesterday, but to know nothing who should sentence the Greek Church for Heresy
upon such feeble pretenses as these are. I know not what presumption that can
be to say, Men may be too forward on both sides in calling each other
Heretics, and it may be not so much their Blindness, as Pride and Passion
which may make them do it. But if they will condemn that for Heresy, which is
not so made appear to be upon any evidence from Scripture and Reason, they were
not so blind in defining it, as we should be in following their judgment
without further examination. But this was for many hundred years. The more to
blame they, for continuing in so rash judgments so long, if it appear so. But
it is well still you tell us, that as the Latin Church condemned the Greek for
Heresy, the Greek condemned the Latin for it too. And so by your own rule the
one was as blind as the other. But the Latin Church had the right to determine
Heresy, and the Greek had not. This is the question, Which Church must be
relied on for judgment? and if they mutually condemn each other, we must have
a higher rule to judge of both by. But still, Is it not an Argument, that it is
a Heresy of one side or the other, because each party condemns the other of
Heresy? Just as much, as if two men fall out and call each other Knaves, it
must be granted, that if both be not, yet at least the one of them is so.
Heresy being grown the scolding word in Religion; and no two parties can
differ, but they seek to fasten this reproach on each other. If one should
bring greater evidence than the other of his Knavery, he ought to be more
accounted so. No otherwise can it be here; if sufficient proof be brought of
Heresy on the one side and not the other, that party may be looked on as more
guilty: but still remembering, that the more confident affirmation, the pretense
to greater honesty and power, be not taken for the only evidences of it: As I
doubt it will appear in our present case. But still suppose, that of two men
who have so reproached each other, the one of them being fallen into distress
and poverty, and not hoping for relief but from the other person, and he
denying it, unless he be content by joynt-consent to be proclaimed Knave, which
he through his necessity yiedling to, but as soon as that is over declaring on
what account they agreed; Must this man be more pitied for his Necessity, or
condemned for his Knavery? Just such I shall make it appear, that which you
call condemning the Grecians as Heretical in a General Council at Florence, to
have been and no otherwise.

But I come to a closer examination of this Subject to see with what Justice
you charge the Greek Church, either with Heresy or Schism;. 7.
For both these you accuse it of in this Chapter. Two things were the most in
dispute between the Greek and Latin Churches, the one was the Doctrine of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from Father and Son, the other was concerning the
addition of the Filioque to the Creed. And although the Greeks in the debates
at Ferrara would not meddle with the Doctrine, before the Latins could clear
themselves concerning the addition, which they said was the main cause of the
Contest between them; yet I am content to follow your method and handle the
other first. Your discourse concerning the first consists of two parts, Proofs
and Answers; Proofs of their Heresy, and Answers to his Lordships Arguments
against it. The Proofs are double, the one from Authority, the other from
Theological reason. Through every of these particulars I shall follow you, and
from them I doubt not to evince, that the Greeks are not guilty of the faults
you lay to their charge.

We have already seen what your Proofs from Authority are; their condemning one
another for Heretics, and the Greeks being condemned by a General Council. If
I can therefore prove that the Greeks opinion was not accounted an Heresy
before the Council of Florence, and that it did not become a Heresy by the
Council of Florence, I shall sufficiently discover the weakness of your
Arguments from authority.

1. That it was not accounted a Heresy before the Council of Florence; I mean
not, that there were no hot-brained persons in all the time of the difference,
who did not brand the Greek Church with Heresy, but that it was never
accounted a Heresy, by any of those whom your selves account the only
competent Judges of Heresy; and those are either the Fathers, or Popes, or
Councils: which I prove in their order.

1. That it was not accounted Heresy by the Fathers; which will be proved by
these two things. 1. Because it is very doubtful whether many of the Fathers
did believe the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son or no. 2. Because
those who did believe it, did not condemn those of Heresy who did not.

1. That it is very doubtful whether many of them did believe the Procession of
the Holy Ghost from the Son or no; at least, so far as to make it an Article of
Faith; for 1. There are clear testimonies that they make it unnecessary to be
believed. 2. The testimonies which seem to say, That they did believe it, do
not necessarily imply that they did.

1. That there are clear testimonies, that they did not account it a thing
necessary to be believed: both because they in terms asserted the nature of
this procession to be incomprehensible, and withal, did as clearly affirm the
belief of that, which does not imply this procession to be sufficient for
salvation. 1. They in terms assert, that the mystery of this Procession is
incomprehensible. And can you, or any reasonable man, imagine they should make
the manner of that Procession to be an article of Faith, which they acknowledge
to be absolutely beyond our apprehension? I grant, Something supposed by them
to be incomprehensible is made an article of Faith: but then it is not that
which is supposed as incomprehensible under that notion, which is made so; but
the thing it self which may be incomprehensible; yet being clearly revealed in
Scripture, ought to be believed, notwithstanding that incomprehensibility of
it: As the mystery of the Trinity it self, the Eternal Generation of the Son,
the Procession of the Spirit from the Father, etc. But then I say, these things
are such, as are either declared by them to be expressly revealed in Scripture,
or necessarily consequent from something supposed to be so. As for instance,
supposing the Trinity in Unity to be something divinely revealed, whatever is
necessarily consequent from that, and is necessary to be believed in order to
that, though it be incomprehensible, must be believed; as, Supposing these two
things clear from Scripture, that there is but one true God, and that there are
three Persons, who have the Name, Properties, and Attributes of God given to
them, though our reason be too short to fathom the manner how these can have
three distinct Subsistences, and yet but one Essence, because our reason ( i.
e. all those conceptions which we have formed in our mind from the observation
of things) does tell us, that Those things which agree or disagree in a third,
agree or disagree one with another; and from thence it would infer, that, if
the Father be God, and the Son God, there could be no difference between Father
and Son; yet this being merely as to the connection of two propositions, both of
which are supposed distinctly revealed in Scripture; we are bound in this case
to believe such a Connection, because both parts are equally revealed by an
Infallible Testimony, though the Mode of that Connection be to us
Incomprehensible: But it is not so, where neither clear Revelation, nor a
necessary Consequent from something which is divinely revealed does enforce our
belief of it. As in our present case: Since we suppose it revealed in
Scripture, that Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are God, whatever is necessary to
the belief of that, though incomprehensible, we ought to believe it: but if
there be something without which I may believe the Deity of the Father, Son and
Spirit, and this not clearly asserted in Scripture, but is a thing in it self
incomprehensible, that cannot be made a necessary article of Faith: Thus that
the Spirit does proceed from the Father seems necessary on both accounts, as
consequent upon the belief of the Trinity in Unity, and as clearly expressed in
Scripture: but that the Spirit should proceed from Father and Son as from one
principle, that they should communicate in an action proper to their
Subsistences, and yet be distinguished from each other in those Subsistences,
and agree only in Essence, (and if the Spirit proceeds not from their
Subsistences, but from the Essence, the Spirit must proceed from it self,
because that is common to all three;) these things being in themselves
incomprehensible, and not necessary to the belief of the Divinity either of Son
or Holy Ghost, nor pretended to be clearly revealed in Scripture, cannot be
said to make a necessary article of Faith, the denial of which must suppose
Heresy. And therefore that which is the only Objection in this case, is
removed, viz. that this Procession of the Spirit from the Father is
incomprehensible, and yet supposed to be an article of Faith; for that I have
already showed is expressly revealed in Scripture, that the Spirit does proceed
from the Father. Joh. 15.26.
But neither is the procession from the Son necessary to the belief of the
Deity of the Son; for if it were, it would be as necessary to the Deity of the
Holy Ghost that the Son should be begotten by the Spirit; neither does it
follow from any place of Scripture, for all those places which are usually
brought are very capable of such interpretations, as do not at all infer it;
from hence then it follows, that those who upon these terms acknowledge this
Procession incomprehensible, do therein imply that the belief of it is no
article necessary to salvation, and therefore the denial no Heresy.

Now for this we have the clearest testimonies of such who were the greatest
and most zealous assertors of the Doctrine of the Trinity. Athanasius says
expressly, That it is sufficient to know, that the Spirit is no creature, (...).

(...), etc. Athanas. ep. ad S^rapion. p. 357. Tom. 1.


nor to be reckoned among Gods works; for nothing of another nature is mingled
with the Trinity, but it is undivided, and like it self: These things are
sufficient for believers. But, says he, when we come hither, the Cherubims
vail their faces; but he that inquires and searches into more than these,
neglects him that has said, Be not wise overmuch, etc. If it be sufficient to
know, that the Spirit is no creature, it cannot be necessary to believe, that
the Spirit proceeds from the Son: for they who do not believe that, do firmly
believe the Deity of it. And if whatever goes beyond that, goes beyond the
bounds which God has set us, then certainly he never dreamt that men should be
condemned for Heresy as to some things which cannot be supposed to be within
them. To the same purpose speaks St. Basil in several places, acknowledging the
Procession of the Holy Ghost to be a thing inexplicable, (...); Basil. De Spir.
Sancto. c. 18.
and when the Heretics enquired of him What kind of thing that Procession was,
when the Spirit was neither (...), nor yet (...), all the answer he gives them,
is, If there be such multitudes of things in the world which we are ignorant
of, what shame is it to confess our ignorance here? And if it be here our duty
to confess our ignorance, it is far from it to be Magisterial and definitive,
that unless men acknowledge every punctilio, they are guilty of Heresy and
fundamental Errors. St. Gregory Nazianzene mentioning that Question, (...),
etc. Greg. Nazian. orat. 37. p. 597. Tom. 1. (...). Orat. 23. Tom. 1 p. 426

(...). Cyril. Paschal. 12. Tom. 5. p 2.


What this Procession is? returns this Answer, Tell me first what it is for the
Father to be unbegotten, and I will explain the Generation of the Son, and
Procession of the Holy Ghost; that we may both therein show our folly, who pry
into these Divine mysteries and do not know the things which are before our
feet. And elsewhere, If we enquire into these things, what shall we leave to
them, whom the Scripture tells us alone know and are known of each other. St.
Cyrill requires of men, To believe his Being, and subsistence, and dominion
over all; but for other things not to suffer the mind to go beyond the bounds
allotted to humane nature. These spoke like wise men, and the true Fathers of
the Church, who would have men content themselves with believing merely what
was necessary in these deep and incomprehensible mysteries, and not to make
Articles of Faith of such things which are not made necessary, either by
deduction of Reason, or clear Divine Revelation. Although therefore I should
grant, that some or all of these, did themselves believe this Procession from
the Son, yet hereby it appears they were far from imposing it upon others, or
making it a Heresy in any not to believe it. They saw well these were not
things to be narrowly searched into, but as the Philosopher said of some kind
of Hellebore, taken in the lump it is Medicinal, but beaten into powder is
dangerous, is true of these more abstruse mysteries of Religion; for whosoever
will endeavor to satisfy himself concerning them from the strange niceties
and subtilties of the Schools, may return with greater doubts then he went to
them. For not to go beyond our present Subject, whosoever would examine the way
they take to make the Procession to be immediate from the Father and the Son,
so as to be from one principle, to show how the Spirit comes from both by the
same numerical spiration; but most of all, when they come to make distinctions
between the Generation of the Son, and the Procession of the Holy Ghost, (of
which no less then nine are recounted and rejected by Petavius out of the
Fathers and Schoolmen, Dogm. Theol. de Trinit. l. 7. c. 13, 14 Tom. 2
and the last which he rests in, which is the common one of the Schools, viz.
That the one is per modum Intellectus, and the other per modum Amoris, as
unsatisfactory as any, there being so vast a disproportion between the most
immediate acts of our souls and these emanations) will see much greater reason
to commend the Wisdom of those Fathers, who sought to repress men's curiosity
as to these things, and as much to condemn you, who are so apt to charge whole
Churches with Heresy, if they come not up to every thing which you shall
pronounce to be an Article of Faith.

. 8.
2. It is plain from the Fathers, That they made the belief of that to be
sufficient for salvation, which does not imply this Procession from the Son;
which is, that the Holy Ghost does proceed from the Father: If therefore they
often mention the Procession from the Father, without taking notice of the
Procession from the Son, and when they do so, assert the sufficiency of the
belief of that for Salvation; there cannot be the least ground to imagine that
they looked on the Procession from the Son as a necessary Article of Faith. We
see before, Athanasius made no more necessary, then the belief of the Divinity
of the Holy Ghost; and in the same discourse, where he speaks expressly what the
Orthodox opinion was of the Holy Ghost, he says no more, but, If they thought
well of the Word, they would likewise of the Spirit, (...). Athanas. c. Serapi.
ubi supr.
which proceeds from the Father, and is proper to the Son, and is given by him
to the Disciples, and all that believe on him. In which words there is nothing
but what the Greeks to this day do most freely and heartily acknowledge, viz.
That the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and is the Spirit of the Son,
being given by him to all that believe. Many other Testimonies are produced out
of him and the rest of the Greek Fathers, by the Patriarch Hieremias in his
Answer to the Wirtenberg Divines, by Marcus Ephesius in his Disputes in the
Council of Florence, by Gregorius Palamas in his Answer to Beccus the
Latinizing Patriarch of Constantinople in the time of Michael Palaeologus, Acta
Theolog. Wirtenberg. p. 217. etc. Res. 2. Patriarch.

Council. Florent. sess. 19, 20, 21, etc. Arcudii opuscula aurea.

V. ep. Cyrilli Patriarch. ad Joh. Utenbogard. inter epistol. Remonstrant. p.
402.


and other modern Defendants of the Greek Church. But although I do not think,
that the places produced by them are sufficient for their purpose, viz. That
those Fathers believed the Procession from the Father, exclusive, to be an
Article of Faith; yet whosoever will take the pains to compare those
Testimonies with the others produced on the other side by those who writ in
defense of the Filioque, either Latins, as Hugo Eterianus, Anselme, etc. or
Latinizing Greeks, such as Nicephorus Blemmydes, Beccus, V. L^onis Allatii
Graeciam Orthodox. Tom. 2.
Emanuel Calecas and others, will find it most for the honor of the Fathers,
and most consonant to Truth, to assert that they did not look upon this as any
necessary Article of Faith, and therefore took liberty to express themselves
differently about it as they saw occasion. For such different Testimonies are
produced not only of different Fathers, but of several places of the same, that
it will be a hard matter but upon this ground to reconcile them to each other
and themselves: And that which abundantly confirms it, is, That when they sat
most solemnly in Council to determine the matters of Faith about the Trinity,
they were so far from inserting this, when they had just occasion to do it,
that they only mention the Proceeding from the Father, and determine this to be
a perfect Symbol of Christian Faith which contained no more. In the first
Nicene Creed, and that which is properly so called, (for that which now goes
under that Name is the Constantinopolitan Creed) there was nothing at all
determined concerning the Procession of the Holy Ghost; and yet Athanasius
says expressly of the Faith there delivered by the Fathers according to the
Scriptures, (...). Athanas. ep. ad Epictet. Tom 1. p. 562.
That it was of it self sufficient for the turning men from all impiety, and
the establishment of all Christian Piety. And afterward says, That though
certain men contended much for some additions to be made to it, yet the
Sardican Synod would by no means consent to it, because the Nicene Creed was
not defective, but sufficient for Piety, and therefore forbid the making any
new Creed, lest the former should be accounted defective. We see then by the
Testimony of Athanasius and the Sardican Synod, (which when it serves your
turn, as in the case of Appeals you extol so much, and in defense of Zozimus
his forgery of the Nicene Canons you would have confounded with the Nicene)
that the Nicene Creed without any thing at all concerning the Procession of the
Holy Ghost was looked on as sufficient to Salvation, and therefore certainly
they did not then judge this Article of the Procession to be so necessary as
you would have it be. Greg. Nazian. ep. 2. ad Cled.
But suppose we yield Nazianzene, and the Fathers of the Constantinopolitan
Council, that though this Creed was not defective as to the Son, yet there
ought to be somewhat added further concerning the Holy Ghost, upon the rising
of Macedonius: yet even here we shall find when they purposely added to the
Article of the Holy Ghost, they added only this touching the Procession (...),
which proceeds from the Father. And thus the Copies of the Constantinopolitan
Creed, either in the Councils or elsewhere have it, where they mention the
Procession at all; And when Marcus Ephesius in the Florentine Council read this
Creed, the Latins took no exceptions at all to it, but it passed then as it
does still for the Nicene Creed (although it much differs from the Original
Nicene), and therefore it is a great Mistake of them who imagine the Article of
Filioque was found in some Copies of this Creed, for this the Latins never
pretended in the Florentine Council, (but did indeed as to the Creed of the
second Council of Nice, but were therein much suspected of forgery by the
Greeks) which might be the ground of that mistake. But that which I insist on
is, If this Article of the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son had been
by these Fathers judged necessary, when had there been a fitter time to insert
it, then now, when purposely they added the Procession to the former Creed? And
yet we see they did not judge it at all necessary to be inserted. It may be you
will say, it was, Because the Controversy was not then started concerning the
Filioque; But that can signify nothing here, because we have already showed
that the Fathers themselves spoke differently concerning it, and looked upon it
as a thing not necessary to be known; but the things which were upon the rising
of Heretics inserted into the Creed, were such as by the Fathers were judged
and believed as necessary before ever those Heretics arose; as in the Case
here of Macedonius, for I hope you will not say it was no Heresy to deny the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost till it was determined in this Ecumenical Council?
For the Fathers never thought that they made Articles of Faith in Councils, but
only declared themselves and what they believed against the Heretics which did
arise in the Church: And therefore that Answer of the Filioque not being then
controverted comes to nothing. From hence we come to the third Ecumenical
Council, to see if that adds any thing concerning this Procession; instead of
which it highly confirms what was established before; for the Fathers of that
Council discerning at last the great inconveniency of making such additions to
the Creed, because the Nestorians had got the art of it too, Council. Ephesians.
part. 2. Act. 6. p. 357. Tom. 2. Binii ed. Paris. 1636.
and made a new Creed of their own, (which by Charisius was brought to the
Council and there read) upon which the Ephesine Fathers make an irrevocable
decree against all additions being made hereafter to the Creed. For after they
had caused the Nicene, or rather the Constantinopolitan Creed to be publicly
read (in which yet the Article of Procession was left out, Council. Florent.
sess. 5. p. 587.
as appears by that Copy which Marcus Ephesius produced at the Council of
Ferrara, as it is likewise in the Copies of the Ephesine Council) upon which
they pass this definitive Sentence; That it should not be lawful hereafter for
any one to produce, write, or compose any other Creed, (...). Council. Ephesians.
Part 2. Act. 6. p. 366.
besides that which was agreed on and defined by the Holy Fathers, who were met
together at Nice by the Holy Spirit. Concerning the meaning of this Decree, we
shall fully enquire when we come to the addition of the Filioque. That which I
take notice of it now for, is, not only the further ratification of what was in
the Creed before, and that what was therein contained was as much as was judged
necessary, but an express Decree made against all after-additions; which does,
as fully as a General Council could do, declare that nothing else was necessary
to be believed, but what was already inserted in the Creed: or else, To what
end did they prohibit any further additions? To the like purpose, the fourth
General Council of Chalcedon determins, That by no means they would suffer that
Faith to be moved which was already defined. (...). Council. Chalced. Act. 5.
Council. Florent. As^. 5. p. 590.
I might proceed to the fifth and sixth Councils, but these are sufficient. Let
me now put some few Questions to you, Are General Councils Infallible, or no?
Yes, say you, if confirmed by the Pope. Were not these four first Councils
confirmed? Yes, it is evident they were. Were they then Infallible in all their
Decrees or no, especially concerning matters of Faith? If they were, were they
not Infallible in this Determination, That it should not be lawful to add to
the Creed any thing else but what was in before? were they Infallible in
declaring the received Creed to be full and sufficient? If they were so, how
comes any Article to become necessary, which was not then in the Creed? If you
say, The Pope and another General Council have power Infallibly to contradict
these, and to say that somewhat else is necessary to be inserted into the
Creed, and to be believed in order to Salvation; I must content my self with
having brought you to the humble confession, that both parts of a Contradiction
may be Infallibly determined. Thus we see that the Fathers, whether single or
joined, in such Councils which are of the greatest Authority in the Christian
world, have been so far from believing or determining this Article of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost to be necessary, (which must be, if the denial of
it be a fundamental error) that they have plainly enough expressed and
determined the contrary.

2. The next thing we come to, is,. 9.
That those Testimonies which are produced out of the Fathers, are so far from
asserting the necessity of this Article, that the most of them do not evidently
prove that they believed it. For these two Answers the Greeks return to them.
1. That they do not assert the Procession of the Spirit from the Son, but the
consubstantiality of the Spirit with the Son. 2. That those which speak of a
Procession do not mean it of an Eternal Procession, but a Temporal, which is
the same with the Spirits Mission.

1. That they do not assert the Eternal Procession of the Spirit from the Son,
but the consubstantiality of the Spirit with the Son. And therefore no more can
be inferred from them, but only the (...) which the Greeks constantly
acknowledge. This they make probable by two things: 1. That, when the Fathers
dispute not with those who denied the consubstantiality of Son and Spirit, they
use not the particle ex, but only say that the Spirit is the Spirit of the Son.
So Cyril expressly, when Theodoret had denied the Procession from the Son, he
gives no other Answer, but this, (...). Cyril. Alexan. Tom. 6. edit. Paris. p.
229.
The Holy Spirit does truly proceed from God and the Father, according to our
Saviors words, but is not of another nature from the Son. We see he contents
himself with the acknowledgement that the Spirit is of the same nature with the
Son: To the same purpose is another testimony of his produced by the Patriarch
Hieremias; speaking of the Spirit whereby the Apostles spoke, he says, Which
proceeded in an ineffable manner from the Father, but is not different from the
Son in regard of his essence. (...). Acta Theolog. Wirtenberg. Resp. 2.
Patriarch. p. 202.
Several other testimonies are there produced by him, and elsewhere by others
which need not be here recited. 2. That when they use the particle ex, it is
against those who denied the Consubstantiality both of the Son and Spirit; and
therefore Gregorius Palamas lay's down this Rule, That, as often as the
praepositions, ex and per, have the same force in Divinity; Gregorius Palamas,
c. 1. apud Petavium Dogmat. Theolog de Trin. To. 2. l. 7. c. 18. (...) -- (...).
they do not denote any division or difference in the Trinity, but only their
conjunction and inseparable union, and consent of their wills. For which, he
cites the famous Epistle of Maximus to Marinus which was made the foundation of
the Union at the Council of Florence, who therein says, that when the Latins
said in their Synodical Epistle, sent to Constantinople, that the Spirit did
proceed ex filio, they meant no more than to show (...), the perfect and
inseparable Union of the Divine Essence. So when S. Basil says, that the
Father did create the world, per filium; he adds, that notes no more than
(...), the conjunction of their Wills. And by this means the Greeks interpret
all those passages of the Fathers, which seem most express for the Spirit's
proceeding ex filio. So Marcus Ephesius tells the Latins in the Florentine
Council, Sess. 19.
that when we say, Man comes (...), from the Essence of a man, therein is not
employed, that the Essence of man is the productive cause of man, but only it
notes the (...), that Communion of Essence which is in men; so, when the Greek
Fathers speak of the Spirit's proceeding ex filio, that does not imply that the
Son is the Principle of Spiration, but that there is a Communion of Essence
between the Son and the Spirit. So, when Athanasius disputing against the
Arrians (says the Patriarch Hieremias) says, that the Spirit (...) from the
Son, is given to all; and that the Father (...), Ubi supra.
by the Son, in the Spirit, does create, work, and give all things; you must
consider, that Athanasius was then disputing against the Arrians, who made both
Son and Spirit to be creatures: that therefore he might show that the Spirit
was of the same Substance with the Father and the Son; he therefore uses that
preposition ex, (...) very opportunely and conveniently. Therefore, says he,
It is to be observed, that he never uses this but in opposition to the
Arrians, and such who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost? To which purpose
it is well observed by Spalatensis, Spalatens. de Rep. Eccles. Tom. 3. l. 7. c.
10. sect. 125.
that when the Fathers of the Constantinopolitan Council did insert into their
Creed the article of the Spirit's Procession from the Father; they did it not
with a purpose to define any thing concerning the Procession as an article of
Faith, but that they might from those words of S. John infer the Divinity of
the Holy Ghost, because it proceeds from the Father: And withal, it is further
observable, that in the Creed, which Charisius delivered into, and was accepted
by, the Council of Ephesus, all that he says as to the Holy Ghost, is, And in
the Spirit of Truth, the Paraclete who is consubstantial with the Father and
the Son. (...). Apud Acta Council. Ephesians. part 2. Act. 6. p 360.
By which, that which Spalatensis says is much confirmed; for this Symbol of
Charisius was accepted by the Council as agreeable to the Nicene Creed. Thus we
see, how probable this Answer of the Greeks is, That the intention of the
Fathers in those expressions is only to assert the consubstantiality of the
Spirit with the Father and the Son, because when they used them it was in their
disputes with them who denied it. And therefore Petavius spends his pains to
very little purpose, Petav. ubi supra.
when going about to take off this answer of the Greeks, he only shows that
those expressions in themselves cannot be confined merely to the signification
of the Consubstantiality of the persons, whereas the main force of this answer
ly's in the intention and scope of the persons who used them, and the
adversaries they disputed against, and not in the importance of the Articles
themselves.

2. The second answer of the Greeks, is, that most of those places which speak
of the procession of the Spirit from the Son, are not to be understood of the
Eternal Procession, but of the Temporal, which is the same with the Spirits
Mission. This, as the rest of the Greeks, so the Patriarchs Hieremias and Cyril
especially insist upon; the first in his last answer to the Divines of
Wirtenberg. For when they in their reply to his second answer, had produced
several testimonies of Athanasius, Cyril, Epiphanius, Basil, and Nazianzen, in
behalf of the Spirit's Procession from the Son; Acta Theolog. Wirtenb. p. 350.
etc. Resp. 3. Patriarch.
he wonders at them, that leaving the plain and clear places both of Scriptures
and Fathers, which do (as he says) so openly proclaim the Spirit's Procession
from the Father only, they should hope for relief from other obscure places,
which are capable of a different interpretation. As from the word (...), which
only relates to the Spirit's manifestation, and is quite different from the
(...), and so cannot imply his Eternal Procession. Therefore for the clearing
the controversy, and giving account of the mistakes in it, he begins with the
signification of the Spirit, which when it is applied to the Divine Spirit, is
capable of different significations being taken either for the several gifts of
the Spirit, or for the person of the Spirit; and so, though the word Procession
be taken in a peculiar manner for the Eternal Procession of the Spirit, yet it
is not only some times attributed to the bestowing the forementioned gifts, but
likewise to the Eternal Generation of the Son; and therefore whenever they meet
with the word Procession attributed to the Spirit with a respect to the Son,
they must not presently infer the Eternal Procession, but the word (...) there
signifies no more than (...), i. e. that the Spirit does come through, is sent,
and given by the Son, which the Fathers often mention, the better thereby to
assert (...), the Identity of nature and essence, which is in the Spirit with
the Father and Son. This he does therein very largely explain, and endeavor to
make it out, that this is the most proper interpretation both of Scripture and
Fathers, when they seem most clearly to speak of the Procession of the Spirit
from the Son, The same likewise the Patriarch Cyril insists upon, who
acknowledges these several words to be attributed to the Spirit in reference
to the Son (...), Cyril. ep. ad Utenbogard. p. 403.
and several others in the writings of the Fathers, all which he acknowledges
to be true, but he denies that any of them do import a Hypostatical Procession
of the Spirit from the Son, but that they all refer to the temporal mission and
manifestation of the Spirit through Christ, under the Gospel. Whether this
answer will reach to all the places produced out of the Fathers, is not here my
business to enquire, only that which is pertinent to my purpose may be
sufficiently inferred from hence, that the Fathers certainly were not
definitive in this Controversy, when their expressest sentences seem capable
of quite a different meaning to wise and learned men, who, one would think, if
the belief of this Procession had been a tradition of their Church, or fully
expressed in the Writings of the Fathers of the Greek Church, could not be so
ignorant or wilful as either not to see this to have been their meaning, or
supposing they had seen it to persist in so obstinate a belief of the contrary.
I can therefore with advantage return your words back again to you. It is to be
considered, that for many hundred years the whole Greek Church never believed
this to be an article of Faith; nay the Fathers were so far from it, that both
single and in General Councils they did plainly express the contrary; how then
bears it any show of probability, what some few of yesterday (forced to it by
an impossibility of otherwise defending the Power and Infallibility of the
Roman Church) affirm, that the matter of this Controversy is so great and
considerable, that it is sufficient to produce an Heresy on either side? Is
not this to make Fathers, and General Councils, and consequently all
Christendom for many hundred years, quite blind, and themselves only clear and
sharp-sighted? Which swelling presumption, what spirit it argues, and whence it
proceeds, all those who have learnt from reason, if not from S. Augustine, That
Pride is the Mother of making Heresies in unnecessary articles of Faith, will
easily collect. Do not you see now, how unadvisedly those words came from you,
which with so small variation in the manner of expression, and much greater
truth in the matter of it, is restored upon your self?

. 10.
But I go on still, if possible, to make you sensible, how much you have wronged
the Greek Church in this charge of a fundamental error in her, for denying
this Procession of the Spirit from the Son. Which shall be from hence that
although there were some who did as plainly deny this as ever the Modern Greeks
did or do, yet they were far from being condemned for Heresy in so doing. For
which we must consider, that although the Fathers, as we have already seen, did
speak ambiguously in this matter, yet the first who appears openly and stoutly
to have denied it, was Theodoret; which, being the rise of the Controversy,
must be more carefully enquired into. It appears then, that a General Council
being summoned by the Emperor Theodosius to meet at Ephesus concerning the
opinions of Nectorius which were vehemently opposed, by Cyril of Alexandria,
and several Egyptian and Asian Bishops, who being there convened, proceed to
the deposition of Nestorius and Anathematizing his doctrine, before Johannes
Antiochenus, and several other Bishops who favored Nestorius, were come to
Ephesus. When these therefore came and found what had been done by the other
Bishops, they, being seconded by Candidianus there and the Court-party at
Constantinople, assemble apart by themselves, and proceed on the other side to
a deposition and excommunication of Cyril and Memnon, who were the leaders of
all the rest; and these make an Anti-Synod to the other, which consisted of
persons of several interests and persuasions, some Pelagians, some Nestorians,
and others, more as Friends to Nestorius than his opinions, as being his
Ancient Familiars and acquaintance, did join with them to prevent his
deposition; among which, the chief were Johannes Antiochenus, and Theodoret.
But, before the Council, Cyril had published his twelve Anathema's against the
opinions of Nestorius: to these therefore, not only the Oriental Bishops gave
an answer, but John the Patriarch of Antioch particularly appoints Theodoret to
refute them. The ninth Anathema of Cyril was against Nestorius, and all others
who said, That Christ used the Holy Ghost as a distinct power from himself, for
the working of miracles, and that did not acknowledge him to be the proper
Spirit of Christ. Theodoret grants the first part, wherein he shows he was no
Nestorian, but quarrels with the latter part; for says he, If by that he means
that the Spirit is of the same nature with the Son, and that it proceeds from
the Father, (...), -- (...). Theodoret. c. Cyril. Anathemat. Tom. 4. p. 718.
ed. Sirmond. Council. Ephesians. part 3^ p. 497. ed. Bin.
we acknowledge it together with him -- but if by that he understands as though
the Spirit had his subsistence from or by the Son, we reject it as blasphemous
and impious. Was ever any thing in this kind spoken with greater heat and
confidence than this was here by Theodoret? And if this had been looked on as
Heretical at that time, can we possibly imagine that so zealous an opposer of
all Heresies, and especially of the Nestorians, as S. Cyril of Alexandria was,
Cyril. Tom. 6. p. 229.
should so coolly and patiently pass this by as he does? For all the answer he
gives, is only that which was before cited out of him; that he acknowledges
The Spirit does proceed from the Father, but yet (...), it is not of another
nature from the Son; but did not Theodoret expressly assert that, as well as
Cyril? Is it then possible that any one who has his wits about him, should
imagine, that if that doctrine of Theodoret had been accounted Heretical, it
being expressed in so vehement a manner as it is, it should have no other
answer from Cyril, but only approving that which Theodoret confesses, viz. the
Consubstantiality of the Spirit with the Son. All the answer which Petavius and
others give, is so weak and trifling, Dogmat. Theol. To. 2. l. 7. c. 18.
that one may easily see how much they were put to it to find out any:
Sometimes it was because Cyril was intent upon his business, and therefore
passed it by; c. 1.
as though he were so weak a man as to let his adversary broach Heresy and say
nothing to it, because it was not pertinent to the present cause. But if it
were not, it is an argument the second Answer is false, viz. that Theodoret was
herein a Nestorian; for if he were so, it could not be besides the business,
but was a main part of it. Moreover, if this were a piece of Nestorianism, it
is very strange the Fathers of that Council, when they purposely collected the
opinions of Nestorius out of his own Writings, should never make any mention at
all of this, Council. Ephesians. Part. 2. Act. 1. p. 177.
no not when they produce his opinion concerning the Spirit of God. Why was it
not then condemned and Anathematized as one of his Heresies? why did not the
Oriental Bishops, when they subscribed to the deposition of Nestorius, and the
election of Maximianus at Constantinople, and sent a Confession of their Faith
to Cyril at Alexandria by Paulus Emesenus, mention this among the rest, of
their agreement with the Orthodox Bishops? Yet in that extant both in Cyril's
works, Part 3. p. 596.
and in the third part of the Council at Ephesus, there is not the least
intimation of it. And therefore the learned Jesuit Sirmondus in the life of
Theodoret prefixed by him to the first Tome of his works which he set forth,
vindicates Theodoret from all suspicion of Nestorianism, and imputes all the
troubles which he fell into on that account to the violence of Dioscorus the
successor of Cyril at Alexandria, who being a great Patron of the Eutychians
thought to revenge himself on Theodoret by blasting his reputation as a
Nestorian. There is not then any show of probability that this opinion in
Theodoret was condemned as a piece of Nestorianism, which certainly the whole
Greek Church could not have been ignorant of, from that time to this. But
though that piece of Theodoret against Cyrils Anathema's were condemned in
succeeding Councils, yet that might be for the defense of other things, which
they judged bordered too near on Nestorianism, or because they would not have
any monument remain of that discord between the Oriental Bishops, and the
Ephesine Council; which Theodosius does so much and so heartily lament in his
excellent Epistle to Johannes Antiochenus about a reconciliation between him
and Cyril, Part. 3. p. 581.
after the banishment of Nestorius, and the choice of Maximianus. Thus we see
one who in a divided and busy time ventured upon the absolute denial of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son not as a bare error, but as impious
and blasphemous, yet was far from being condemned for Heretical himself for
saying so, by those Fathers, who were the most zealous defenders of the true
Apostolical Faith. And if these things considered together, do not make it
appear that the Fathers did not make the denial of the Procession of the Holy
Ghost from the Son to be a Heresy, I know not what can be made plain from them.

But I know, whatever the Fathers say, you are of Cornelius Mussus his mind,.
11.
who heartily professed, that he preferred the judgment of one Pope, before a
thousand Augustines and Hieroms; but what if the Popes should prove of the same
mind with the Fathers, how then can this be accounted an Heresy? And that they
were exactly of the same mind, might be made appear by the several Epistles of
Vigilius and Agatho in confirmation of the Faith established in the four first
General Councils, in which it was determined, that all necessaries were already
in the Creed, and that there needed no further additions to it, both which are
produced and insisted on by the Greeks in the fifth Session at Ferrara. Council.
Floren^. sess. 5. p. 593.
But I pass by them, and come to more particular testimonies of Popes, and that
either in Councils, or upon a reference to them from Councils. The first time
we read of this Controversy in the Western Churches was about A. D. 767. in
the time of Constantinus Copronymus, upon which in the time of Pepin King of
France, there was a Synod held at Gentilly near Paris for determining a
Controversy between the Greeks and Latins about the Trinity, as appears by the
several testimonies of Ado and Rhegino in their Chronicles, produced by
Pithaeus, Pithaeus Opus. de process. S.S. p. 26.

Petav. Dogm. Theol. To. 2. l. 7. c. 1.


Petavius, and others: but little more is left of that Convention, besides the
bare mention of it; but it seems the ashes were only raked over these coals
then, which about two and forty years after, A.D. 809. broke out into a
greater flame; for, as appears by the testimonies of the same Ado, and Adelmus
or Ademarus, a Synod was held at Aquisgrane, about this very question, Whether
the Spirit did proceed from the Son as well as the Father; which question, they
say, was started by one John a Monk of Jerusalem, which Monk Pithaeus
supposes to be Johannes Damascenus, who after Theodoret most expressly denied
the Procession from the Son; but whether it was he or any other, it seems from
that Council called by Charles the Great, there were several Legates (called
Apocrisiarij) dispatched to Rome to know the judgment of the present Pope Leo
3. concerning this Controversy; the Legates were Bernarius, Jesse, and
Adalhardus, the two former the Bishops of Worms and Amiens, the latter the
Abbot of Corbey. But Petavius herein betrays either his fraud or inadvertency,
that he will by no means admit that these came to the Pope to know his
judgment concerning the Procession it self, but only concerning the Addition
of the Filioque to the Creed, which now began to be used in the Gallican
Churches with that Addition. But although I grant, that the main of their
business was concerning the Addition of Filioque, by the same token that Leo
condemned it, as will appear afterward; yet that brought on the discourse
concerning the Doctrine it self of the Procession from the Son. For in the Acts
of Smaragdus which were sent to Charles the Great, giving an account of this
Controversy, which are published both by Baronius, and Sirmondus; Baron.
Annal. ad An. 809. Sirmond. Council. Gallic. Tom. 2. p. 256, 257.
it appears that when they urge the Pope for his consent to the addition of
Filioque, they make use of this Argument, That it was a matter of Faith, and
therefore none should be ignorant of it; upon which they ask the Pope this
Question; Whether if any one does not know or does not believe this Article, he
could be saved? To which the Pope returns this wise and cautious Answer.
Whosoever by the subtilty of his wit can reach to the knowledge of it, Quisquis
ad hoc sensu subtiliori pertingere potest, and id scire, aut ita sciens,
credere noluerit, salvus esse non poterit. Sunt enim multa, e quibus istud unum
est, sacrae fidei altiora mysteria, ad quorum indagationem pertingere multi
valent: multi vero aut aetatis quantitate, aut intelligentiae qualitate
praepediti non valent; and ideo, ut praediximus, qui potuerit, and noluerit,
salvus esse non potuerit. Apud Sirmond. ubi supra.
and knowing it, will not believe it, he cannot be saved. For there are many
things, of which this is one, which being the deeper mysteries of Faith, to the
knowledge of which many can attain, but many others cannot, being hindered
either through want of age, or capacity; and therefore, as we said before, he
that can and will not, shall not be saved. I pray, Sir, do me the Favor to let
me know your judgment, whether this Pope were Infallible or no? or, will you
acknowledge that he was quite beside the Cushion, that is, not in Cathedra when
he spoke it? What? not then, when Solemn Legates were dispatched from a Council
purposely to know his judgment in a matter of Controversy, which the Church
was divided about? If so, the Pope shall never be in Cathedra but when you will
have him; or if he were there, you will surely say, he did not act very
Apostolically, when he spoke these words. For, can any thing be more plain,
then that the Pope determins this Article of the Procession from the Son, to be
no necessary Article of Faith: but acknowledges it to be one of the deeper
mysteries of Religion which none were obliged to believe, but such as could
reach to the knowledge of; which either want of age in some, capacity in
others, and invincible prejudice in many more, might keep them from the
knowledge of? Thus it appears by the Pope's judgment, the denial of this could
be no Heresy then, because he declares it, not to be necessary to be believed
by all. What now must we think of this Pope, if we apply your words to him.
Were all other succeeding ages blind, and this Pope only clear and
sharp-sighted? which judgment of his must be called nothing short of swelling
presumption; and if you please St. Austin shall be quoted for it too, but it
must be in some other place, besides that where he says, that Pride is the
Mother of Heresy. Do you think we can do other then hugely applaud our selves,
in seeing you so furiously lay about you, when we know, your first blows fall
on the Fathers, and your second cut off one Leg at least of your Infallible
Chair. Can we have better security against you then the judgment of one of
your own Popes? may we not well be accounted blind, when for our sakes
Infallibility it self must be so too? If you tell us that after- Popes declared
otherwise: I have but one request to make to you, viz. To make it appear, that
when two Popes shall determine both parts of a Contradiction to be true, they
both are Infallible in doing so.

But if we proceed a little further, it may be we shall find the judgment of
another Pope agreeing with this.. 12.
For which we must consider that A. D. 858, Ignatius the Patriarch of
Constantinople being imprisoned by the Emperor Michael, and Photius being
placed in his room, in a Council held by Photius A. D. 861, Ignatius was
condemned, upon which he being likewise condemned by Pope Nicolaus at Rome, he
does as much for him at Constantinople. So that those grudges which had been
before more closely carried between the Greeks and Latins, did now openly
discover themselves. But among several other things which Photius charged the
Latin Church with, the chiefest and that which he insists on with the greatest
vehemence is, That they did attempt to corrupt and adulterate the holy and
sacred Symbol of Faith, (...). Photius ep. 7. p. 51.
which had obtained an unalterable force by the Decrees of Synods and Councils,
with false senses and new additions, by an unmeasurable confidence. O their
Diabolical machinations! for by a strange innovation, they make the Holy Ghost
proceed not only from the Father, but the Son too. This we find in his
Encyclical Epistle, published by him on the account of the difference between
the Latin and the Greek Church, in which he largely disputes against the
Doctrine of the Procession of the Spirit from the Son, and, as we see, charges
the Latins with fraud, presumption, and a desire of Innovation, in the
inserting that Article into the Creed. Not long after, this Pope Nicolaus
having advised with the Gallican Bishops what to do in this business, dies; to
whom Adrian succeeds as bitter against Photius as his Predecessor, and had more
advantage against him then the other had. For, at Constantinople the Emperor
Michael being slain by Basilius whom he had adopted to a Partnership in the
Empire the year before, he presently banisheth Photius, restores Ignatius,
calls a Council A. D. 869, in which Photius is Anathematized; and, for the
greater execration of him, they dipped their Pens wherewith they subscribed, in
the Sacred Chalice. This the Latins call the eighth Ecumenical Synod.
Notwithstanding all which, Ignatius being dead, Photius is restored by Basilius
Macedo, A. D. 878. Legates are dispatched to Pope John 8. (as in courtesy to
you we call him) who succeeded Adrian, that Photius might be restored to the
communion of the Church and his Patriarchal dignity; which is presently done.
The year following, a General Council is held at Constantinople, in which the
Popes Legates are present, and this the Greeks only admit for the eighth
Ecumenical. In which all that was done against Photius is abrogated, the
Constantinopolitan Creed without the addition of Filioque is solemnly read, and
it is decreed against the Latins, the Popes Legates consenting, that nothing
should be added to the Creed. But lest you should think the Popes Legates were
practiced upon by some arts of Photius (for some of his Enemies among other
reproaches, did not stick to say, he learnt Magic from the famous
Santarabenus). And, that it was done without the Popes free consent: we have
his own testimony afterward in approbation of it. For Pithaeus, an ingenuous
as well as very learned man, Opuscul. edit. Lutet. 1609.
confesses, that the Letters of this Pope are still extant among the Latins,
by which it appears that he condemned all the Synods held against Photius,
whether at Rome or Constantinople; and the Patriarch Hieremias (whose testimony
in other cases you make much of) says expressly, not only that the Pope
consented to this Synod, by the Cardinal Peter, and Paulus, and Eugenius who
were there his Legates; but that in an Epistle he writ to Photius, he has these
words. I declare again to your Grace, concerning that Article, (...). Acta
Theolog. Wirtenberg. Resp. 2. Patriarch. p. 213, 214.
by which such scandals have been in the Churches of Christ. Assure your self,
that we not only speak this, but that we really judge, Those who first durst
out of their presumption do this, to be transgressors of the sacred Oracles,
changers of the Doctrine of our Lord Christ, and the Holy Fathers, and we place
them in the Society of Judas. What Article was this, I pray, which the Pope is
so zealous against? even no other then that which you account all blind who do
not esteem the denial of it Heresy. It seems then we have one more added to
the number of Heretical Popes; for, Photius himself could not express more
vehemence against this Article then the Pope does, and that when by his Legates
in a Council (therefore Infallible, according to you, because confirmed by the
Pope) he had declared himself utterly against the addition of this Article to
the Creed. And instead of accounting them Heretics who denied it, you see how
much worse then Heretics he accounted them who first added it. So that I
wonder, you do not rather account the belief of that Article Heresy, than the
denial of it. I know well enough, how your party rail here to purpose against
Photius; but what is all that to the business? Let Photius be what he will,
Were not the Popes Legates present at the Council? Did not they confirm the
decrees of it? Did not the Pope afterward ratify it? So that if ever Council
were Infallible according to your Principles, this must be; choose therefore,
either to relinquish the Pope's and Councils Infallibility, or else acknowledge
that men at one time may be infallibly guilty of violating Scriptures, Fathers,
Councils for asserting that Doctrine, which they may be Infallibly guilty of
Heresy for not asserting at another. I know very well, that Marinus who
succeeded John 8. at Rome, condemned his Predecessors acts and Photius
together, (for he was before employed both by Nicolaus and Adrian in the
excommunicating and condemning Photius) but what this proves I understand not,
any further, then that still one Pope may Infallibly contradict another, or
that a Pope without a Council shall be more Infallible then with one, or lastly
(which is the grand Arcanum Imperii) those Popes and those Decrees which are
for the present interest of the Church of Rome must be owned as Infallible; but
for the rest, the best Art must be used to blast them that may be. And for this
you want not your many tricks and devices to accuse Authors of Forgery, cry out
on them for Heretics, rail out of measure when you have nothing else to say;
or if after all this, Testimonies stand of force against you, then nothing is
left, but Excogitato commento detorquere in alium sensum, to find out some
trick to wrest them to another sense, as the Authors of the Belgic Index
Expurgatorius professed in the case of Bertram. But for all men who think it
not lawful to say any thing in a bad Cause, this may certainly be sufficient to
show, that if Fathers and Councils may be relied on, if Popes and Councils be
Infallible, that was not accounted an Heresy by them, which you condemn for
such in the Greek Church.

Having thus discovered,. 13.
that this opinion you condemn for Heresy in the Greek Church, was otherwise
esteemed both by Fathers, Ecumenical Councils, and Popes; I come to that which
you seem to rely on for making it Heretical, viz. That the Greeks and Latins
both together condemned it for Heretical in the General Council at Florence.
Although it might be worth our while to inquire how far any General Council can
either make or declare that to be a necessary Article of Faith, which was
determined to be otherwise by former General Councils. But omitting that at
present which we may have a fitter occasion to discuss in the question of
fundamentals, and the Infallibility of General Councils; I therefore come to
examine the matter of fact in the Florentine Council, concerning the
determination of this opinion there as Heretical. Wherein if we consider the
time in which, and the occasion upon which this Council was called, if we
consider the way of the managery of it, the Arts whereby the Greeks were drawn
to this consent, the manner of proposing the Decrees of it, or the acceptance
which it found in the Greek Church, upon none of these respects we shall have
cause to look upon it as a free and General Council, determining that opinion
as Heretical, which you say was so determined here. In all which we must
profess how much we are obliged to that faithful and impartial account of all
the proceedings relating to this Council, written by Sylvester Sguropulus one
present at the most secret negotiations of it, transcribed out of the MS in the
King of France his Library, by Claudius Sarravius, and first published for the
general good of the world by our learned Dean of Wells. It appears then, that
which gave the first rise to the thoughts of union between the Greek and Latin
Churches, was the miserable condition which the Greek Empire was now reduced
to, by the incursions of the Turks and Saracens. For it seems for thirty years,
(before that an Ambassador was sent to Rome from Manuel Palaeologus to
negotiate the business of the union) from the time of the Patriarch Nilus and
Pope Urban, there had been no intercourse at all between the Popes and
Patriarchs, but now upon this address made to them by the Greeks, the Popes
caress them with all imaginable kindness, feed them high with Promises, engage
their utmost to promote this union, (well knowing with what advantage to
themselves it might be managed in this Critical juncture of their affairs). For
now Amurath. 2. having subdued Peloponnesus, Sylvester Sguropul. Histor.
Council. Florent. sect. 2. c. 10.
had advanced almost to the walls of Constantinople, and therefore when the
Pope sent one to the Emperor and Patriarch to appoint a day for the Council,
they told him they could not then have leisure to think of Councils; and if
they had, by reason of the fury of the Wars the Bishops could not be assembled
together to make a full Council. But it seems the state of affairs grew worse
still with them, and the Dead-Palsy of Manuel Pelaeologus was but an Emblem of
a worse in the State, the Empire being brought daily into greater dangers.
Which put Johannes Palaeologus upon further thoughts, how any help or relief
might be had from the West in this extremity. But they might easily understand
the terms of that Union from the Speech of the Cardinals to the Emperors
Legates, That the Roman Church was the Mother, and the Eastern only the
Daughter, and therefore it was but fit that the Daughter should submit to the
Mother; That for their parts, they would not leave the decision of this
Controversy to multitudes of voices, (it seems then they had high thoughts of
the Infallibility of General Councils), Sect. 2. c. 12.
but three should be chosen on either side, who being apart by themselves
should invoke God, and whatever he should reveal unto them, that all should
consent to: For he that has said, that Where two or three are gathered
together in his Name he would be in the midst of them; he that made the Ass to
speak (the Cardinal's own Argument) would not fail of letting them know his
Will Infallibly, which was to be received from them by all others. (There may
be then a much readier way for Infallibility, than by Pope and Councils). But
if nothing else would satisfy but a Council, it must be in Italy, contrary to
the Popes promise before, that it should be at Constantinople; but when they
urged the vastness of the expense, and unsuitableness of it to their present
necessities; rather then a matter likely to be so much for the advantage of the Sea of Rome should not go forward, the Pope proffers to advance a considerable
sum of money for the defraying the charges of the Greeks, both in coming to,
and abiding at the Council. Which those who understand not the intrigues of
that Court, would have thought had been far better spent in a present supply of
the Greek Emperor, the better to have enabled him to defend the Christian
Churches from the invasion of their enemies. But any one who looks into the
management of things, will easily discern upon what grounds the Pope chose
rather a dilatory proceeding, drawing the Emperor and so many Bishops from
Greece into Italy at that time, and all the while to feed them with rich
Promises of Assistance upon condition that the Union was accomplished; but at
last after two years attendance (for so long the Council continued at Ferrara
and Florence) the poor Emperor was sent home as empty as he came, and found
things in a much worse condition then he left them. Which could not rationally
be expected to be otherwise. When the Greeks knew that the Emperor had
assented that the Council should be in Italy, C. 17, 18.
they began strangely to be troubled at it, some resolved never to communicate
more in the Councils of the Union; the Patriarch often said, that he knew no
good issue could come of a Council held in the Popes Territories; and if they
must receive their allowance from the Pope, what did they else but therein
confess themselves his Vassals already, and therefore nothing could be expected
from them, but to do just what he would have them; or else he might easily
starve them into consent and approbation of his Will. For they should be wholly
under his power, and if he denied their stipends, there was no possibility of
getting from him. Was not this then like to be a very free Council? And it
proved accordingly: for when they were at Council the Pope kept them short
enough, so that many of them were reduced to the greatest necessities, and were
not suffered unless by stealth to go so much as out of the Gates of the City,
as Bessarion himself once found, Sect. 6. c. 1.
when he attempted it at Florence. But notwithstanding all the persuasions of
the wisest of his Counselors at home to the contrary, Sect. 3. c. 12.
notwithstanding an Express from the Emperor Sigismund to dissuade the Greek
Emperor in the present state of affairs from this journey into Italy, yet he
was resolved upon it, and used all the arts he could beforehand to make choice
of such persons as might be most for his purpose. Himself without the consent
of the Patriarch, appointing the Legates of the three other Patriarchs of
Jerusalem, Antioch, and Alexandria: Sect. 3. c. 3.
and when these Patriarchs had given no other instructions to these Legates,
then that they should have power to give their suffrages upon these terms and
no other, That all things were carried fairly, and defined Canonically,
according to the decrees of Ecumenical Councils and Holy Fathers, so that
nothing should be added, changed, or innovated in the Symbol of Faith; he at
the instigation of one of the Latin Legates, then resident at Constantinople,
sent away to the several Patriarchs, for the altering their instructions, upon
a solemn Promise that the conditions mentioned by them should however be
exactly observed: C. 4.
which whether they were or no, will appear by the series of the story. And
that we may better judge how General this Council was like to be, at the same
time that these negotiations for Union were on foot, the Council of Basil was
then sitting in opposition to Pope Eugenius; to them and to the Pope at the
same time, the Emperor dispatcheth several Legates with the same instructions,
and both of them returned theirs to the Emperor, seeking as much as possible
to outvy each other in large Promises if the Greeks did join in Council with
them; Cap. 12.
both which the Emperor held in play till he could see with whom he was like
to make the best terms. But as the Romanists are never backward at such arts,
they had caused it by their Instruments to be reported at Constantinople, that
the Council at Basil had submitted to the Pope, which within fifteen days was
confuted by the arrival of the Gallyes sent from the Council to convey the
Greeks over to it; C. 11.
upon which the Emperor had much to do to keep Condelmerius the Popes Nephew
from fighting the Councils Galleys within his view; for he said, he had express
order from the Pope to sink them wherever he met them. And were not these
fair tendencies to a free and General Council? And yet after all this, not full
thirty Bishops of the Greek Church went along with the Patriarch, C. 15.
as appears by the particular enumeration of them by Sguropulus: other Officers
indeed, and Monks, there were to fill up the number; and yet these were more
then the Emperor could well mould to his designs when he had them there. But
the Pope soon accomplished the Patriarchs prediction in keeping them bare
enough, when they were at his finding, Sect. 6. c. 3.
that he might be sure to make them hungry Greeks, and then he supposed the
other part of the Proverb would follow after. After the Council had begun at
Ferrara, and continued there sixteen Sessions, wherein were many public and
solemn Disputes between the Greeks and Latins, it was removed to Florence;
where the Greeks still underwent the same hardships, and the Latins sought to
hold out at Disputations, till the Greeks necessity should be so pressing, as
to necessitate them to an absolute submission to the Latin Church. But, Reports
and Messages coming from Constantinople, acquainting the Emperor with the
difficulties the City was in, and the Progress which the enemies made; and
finding, that during the sitting of the Council the Pope still put him off and
gave him nothing but words, he therefore resolves upon another course; he
breaks all public and Conciliary proceedings, pretending that no issue would
come of those Disputations, calls a private Cabal of such whom he knew fittest
for his purpose to contrive some shorter way to put an end to this business.
For that end, makes choice first of ten Persons of either side to agree upon
some proposals for Union, Sect. 8. c. 12.
and acquaints none else of the Greeks with their transactions. When these
things took no effect, the Patriarch who carried on the Emperor's design,
often convenes the Greeks together, and in plain terms persuades them to
perfect dissimulation, that since the necessity of affairs was such, it would
be hugely for their advantage, if in some things they did yield to the Latins
desires. When they told him that in matters of Faith they could not do it, he
replies, that if in twenty four Articles of Faith they yielded but in one, the
soundness of twenty three would make amends for the twenty fourth. Such kind of
Arguments as these were they driven to, to bring the Greeks to hearken to any
terms of Union. After this, the Latins sent them an explication of Faith, which
if the Greeks would subscribe, there might be an Union between them: which
being read among them, C. 13.
containing chiefly the acknowledgement of the Procession from the Son, all but
the four who were the Emperor's instruments in this work, unanimously disown
it: and when the Emperor urged them every one to deliver their Suffrages in
writings, C. 14.
they tell him, it was contrary to the proceeding of all Ecumenical Councils:
However, he told them he commanded them to do it. By which means rebuking some,
cajoling others, he at last brought it by the multitude of Suffrages, that five
persons were selected among the rest, C 16.
to draw up a Form of Union; which, though drawn up very favorably for the
Greeks, yet, those who were for it, C. 18.
did not easily carry it from those who opposed it. And yet to this the Latins
returned no less than twelve Exceptions: Upon which the Emperor was fain to
take a new course, and exclude those from the Councils, who were of greatest
authority in obstructing his designs; Sect. 9. c. 4.
but Marcus Ephesius still continued in so great opposition, that he publicly
charged the Latins opinion with Heresy. Notwithstanding all which, C. 5.
when it was put to Suffrage, Whether the Spirit did proceed from the Son; for
ten who affirmed it, there were seventeen who denied it, C. 8.
which put them yet to more disquietment, and new Councils. At first the
Emperor would vote himself, which when the Patriarch kept him from, some
advised him to remove more of the Dissenters: but, instead of that, they used a
more plausible and effectual way; the Emperor and Patriarch sent for them
severally, and some they upbraided with ingratitude, others they caressed with
all expressions of kindness, both by themselves and their Instruments: Yet, at
the last, C. 9.
they could get but thirteen Bishops to affirm the Procession from the Son, all
others being excluded the power of giving Suffrage; who were accustomed
formerly to give it, such as the great Officers of the Church of
Constantinople, the Coenobiarchs and others; but to fill up the number, all the
Courtiers were called in, who made no dispute, but did presently what the
Emperor would have them do. C. 10.
Having dispatched this after this manner, the other Controversies concerning
the Addition to the Creed, unleavened bread in the Eucharist, Purgatory, Pope's
Supremacy, the Emperor agreed them privately, never so much as communicating
them to the Greek Synod. Among the Emperors Instruments, Sect. 10. c. 1.
the Bishop of Mitylene went roundly to work, saying openly, Let the Pope give
me so many Florens to be distributed to whom I think fit, and I make no
question but to bring them in very readily to subscribe the Union; C. 4.
which he accordingly effected; and the same way was taken with several others:
by which, and other means, most of those who were excluded from the Suffrages
were at last persuaded to Subscribe. This is the short account of the
management of those affairs at Florence, which are more particularly and
largely prosecuted by the Author, wherein we see what Clandestine Arts, what
menaces, and insinuations, what threats and promises were used to bring the
poor Greeks to consent to this pretended Union. For it afterward appeared to
be no more than pretended; for the infinitely greater number of Bishops at home
refused it, and these very Bishops themselves, when they saw what arts were
used in it, fell of^ from it again, and the Emperor found himself at last
deceived in his great expectations of help from the Latins. Must we then
acknowledge this for a free and General Council, which has a promise of
Infallibility annexed to the definitions of it? Shall we from hence pronounce
the Greeks Doctrine to be Heretical, when for all these proceedings, yet at
last no more was agreed on, than that they did both believe the Procession from
the Son, without condemning the other opinion as Heretical, as you pretend,
which the Greeks would never have consented to? or Anathematizing the persons
who denied it, as was usual in former General Councils, who did suppose it not
enough to have it virtually done by the positive definition, but did expressly
and formally do it. For when this Anathematizing dissenters was propounded
among the Greeks by Bessarion of Nice, and Isidore of Russia (who for their
great service to the Pope in this business were made Cardinals) it was refused
by the rest, who were zealous promoters of the Union. Thus I have at large
(more out of a design to vindicate the Greek Church, than being necessitated to
it by any thing you produce) showed, that there is no reason from Authority
either before or after the Council of Florence, to charge the Greek Church with
Heresy.

I now come to the examination of your Theological Reason, by which you think
you have so evidently proved the Greeks Opinion to be Heresy,. 14.
that you introduce it with confidence in abundance. But, say you, though this
persuasion had not been attested by such clouds of witnesses, P. 6.
Theological Reason is so strong a Foundation to confirm it, that I wonder how
rational men could ever be induced to question the truth of it. Still you so
unadvisedly place your expressions, that the sharpest which you use against
your adversaries return with more force upon your self: For it being so fully
cleared, that these clouds of witnesses are Fathers, Councils, and Popes
against you, What do you else by this expression, but exclude them from the
number of Rational men, because, forsooth, not acquainted with the depth of
your Theological Reason. But, Is not this to make all the Churches of
Christendom for many hundred years quite blind, and your self only clear and
sharp-sighted? Which swelling presumption what Spirit it argues, etc. You see
we need no other weapons against you, but your immediate preceding words. What
pity it is, that the Fathers and Councils had not been made acquainted with
this grand Secret of your Theological Reason? but happy we that have it at so
cheap a rate! but it may be that is it which makes us esteem it no more. But
such as it is, it being Reason and Theological too, it deserves the greatest
respect that may be, if it makes good its title. His Lordship had said, Sect.
9. n. 1. p. 24.
That since the Greeks, notwithstanding this opinion of theirs, deny not the
equality or Consubstantiality of the Persons in the Trinity, he dares not deny
them to be a true Church for this opinion, though he grants them erroneous in
it. So this you reply, Is it (think you) enough to assert the Divinity, and
Consubstantiality, and personal Distinction of the Holy Ghost (as the Bishop
says) to save from Heresy the denial of his Procession from the Father and
the Son as from one Principle? But why is it not enough? your Theological
Reason is that we want, to convince us of the contrary; That therefore follows.
Would not he that should affirm the Son to be a distinct person from, and
Consubstantial to the Father, but denied his eternal Generation from him, be an
Heretic? Or he, who held the Holy Ghost, distinct from, and Consubstantial to
them both, but affirmed his Procession to be from the Son only, and not from
the Father, be guilty of Heresy? It is then most evident, that not only an
error against the Consubstantiality and Distinction, but against the
Origination, Generation, and Procession of the Divine Persons, is sufficient
matter of Heresy. Your faculty at Clinching your Arguments, is much better
than of Driving them in: For your Conclusion is most evident, when your
Premises have nothing like evidence in them. For, 1. He that does acknowledge
the Son to be Consubstantial with the Father, and yet a distinct person from
him, must needs therein acknowledge his Eternal Generation: for how he should
be the Son of the same nature with God, and yet having a distinct Personality
as a Son, without Eternal Generation; is so hard to understand, that I must
confess, that whoever asserts the one, and deny's the other, is so far from
Theological Reason, that I think he has no common reason in him. Is this then,
think you, a parallel case with the Procession of the Spirit from the Son,
which may be supposed Consubstantial to Father and Son, and a distinct person
from both, without any Connotation of respect to the Personality of the Son, as
a principle of Spiration? 2. He that should affirm the Procession of the Spirit
only from the Son, and not the Father, would speak much more absurdly than the
Greeks do; for thereby he would destroy the Father's being the fountain or
principle of Origination, as to the distinct Hypostases of Son and Spirit; he
would plainly and directly thwart the Creed of the second General Council; and,
which is more than would speak directly against express words of Scripture,
which say, The Spirit proceeds from the Father: which by the consent of the
Christian Church, has been interpreted of the Eternal Procession. And by this
time, I hope you begin to have better thoughts of rational men, than to make
such a wonder at their questioning the Greeks Heresy; but if this be your
Theological Reason, one scruple of common reason goes far beyond it.

We have had a fair proof of your skill at charging,. 15.
we shall now see how good you are at standing your ground. Your main defense
lies in a distinction which ruins you; for you think to ward off all the
citations his Lordship produces against you out of the Schoolmen and others,
that the Greeks and Latins agree with each other, in eandem fidei sententiam,
P. 7. n. 5.
upon the same sentence of Faith, but differ only in words, by saying, That the
Greeks must be distinguished into Ancient and Modern. The Ancient, you say,
expressed themselves per filium, but they meant thereby a filio: whereas the
Modern Greeks will not admit that expression a filio, but per filium only, and
that too in a sense dissignificative to a filio. This is the substance of all
the answer you give, both in general, and to the particular authorities for
several pages; The disproof therefore of this distinction must by your own
Confession, make all those testimonies stand good against you; which I shall do
by two things. 1. By showing that the Ancient Greeks did assert as much as the
Modern do in this Controversy. 2. That those who speak expressly of the Modern
Greeks, do deny their difference from us in any matter of Faith. 1. That the
Ancient Greeks did assert as much as the Modern do. By the Ancient Greeks, we
must here understand those who writ before the Schoolmen, whose testimonies you
would answer by this distinction. Now nothing can be more clear than that those
Greeks who writ before them, did as peremptorily deny the Procession from the
Son, as any of the Modern Greeks do. We have already produced the testimony of
Theodoret, who accounts the contrary opinion blasphemous and impious; and that
of Photius, who so largely and vehemently disputes against the Procession from
the Son. To whom I shall add two more of great reputation, not only in the
Greek, but in the Latin Church; and those are Theophylact and Damascen.
Theophylact, whether he lived in the time of Photius, about 870, as the common
opinion is, or more probably in the time of Michael Cerularius, as great an
adversary as Photius to the Latins, about 1070. yet was long enough before the
Schoolmen: for Peter Lombard flourished. A. D. 1145. and Thomas and
Bonaventure, about 1260. So that in this respect he must be one of the Ancient
Greeks; He therefore delivers his opinion as expressly as may be in his
Commentaries on St. John; and that not as his own private opinion, Theophylact.
in Joh. 3.26.
but as the common sense of the Greek Church; for there taking occasion to
speak how the Spirit is the Spirit of the Son, For the Latins, says he,
apprehend it amiss, and mistaking it, say, That the Spirit proceeds from the
Son. But we answer, That it is one thing to say, (...). Theophylact. in Joh. 3.
The Spirit is the Spirit of the Son, which we assert; and another, that it
proceeds from the Son, which we deny; for it has no testimony of Scripture for
it, and then we must bring in two principles, the Father and the Son. And
withal adds, that when Christ breathed the Spirit on his Disciples, it is not
to be understood personally, but in regard of the gift of remission of sins;
after which, he briefly and comprehensively sets down the opinion of the Greek
Church: Believe thou that the Spirit does proceed from the Father, (...). Id.
ib.
but is given to men by the Son; and let this be the Rule of sound doctrine to
thee. And what now do the Modern Greeks say more than Theophylact did? or what
do they say less; for they acknowledge, that the Spirit is the Spirit of the
Son as well as he? To the same purpose Damascen, who lived between the 6. and
7. Synod, about A. D. 730. in the time of Leo Isaurus, delivers the sense of
the Greek Church in his time concerning this Article. It must be considered,
says he, That we assert not the Father to be from any, but that he is said to
be the Father of the Son. (...). Joh. Damascenus de Trinit. c. 8. and l. 1. de
Orthodoxa fide c. 11.
We say not, that the Son is a proper cause, neither the Father, but we say,
the Son is from the Father, and of the Father. The Holy Spirit, we say, is from
the Father; and of the Father; but we say not, the Spirit is from the Son, but
we call him the Spirit of the Son; And we confess, that by the Son, the Spirit
is manifested and given to us. These words are so plain, that the Patriarch
Hieremias producing them, says, Nothing can be more clear and evident than
these words are. Acta Theolog. Wirteab. p. 220.
But the Philosopher, who was so much pleased to see the Ass mumble his
thistles, could not take much less contentment to see how the Schoolmen handle
this testimony of Damascen. For, being very loath that so zealous an assertor
of Images, should in any thing seem opposite to the Church of Rome, they very
handsomely, and with wonderful subtilty bring him off, by admiring the wisdom
and caution he uses, in these words. So your own St. Bonaventure, whose
testimony youthink so considerable, P. 8.
as to produce at large, Tamen ipse caute loquitur, unde non dicit quod
Spiri^us non est a filio, sed dicit, non dicimus a filio, which you put in
great letters the more to be taken notice of. But, I pray, What was it which
Damascen was there delivering of? was it not the sense of the Greek Church
concerning the Persons of the Trinity? and how could he otherwise have
expressed it, than by non dicimus; but if this must argue what Bonaventure and
you would have from it (for this is the only testimony you give of your
distinction of Ancient and Modern Greeks) will it not as well hold for the
other things before mentioned concerning the Father and the Son, where he uses
dicimus and non dicimus, as well as here? And therefore Aquinas was much wiser,
who plainly condemns Damascen for a Nestorian in this, licet a quibusdam
dicatur, Sum. 1. q 36. a^t 2. Vasquez in Tho^. To. 2. dis. 146. c. 7. Petavius
dogm. Theol. To. 2. l. 7. c. 17.
etc. Although it be said by some, that in these words, he neither affirms or
denis it; wherein I am much mistaken, if he reflects not on Bonaventure.
Vasquez, Petavius, and several others think to bring Damascen off by the
distinctions of a filio, and per filium, much to your purpose: but in the great
dispute at the Council at Florence between Bessarion and Marcus Ephesius, about
the importance of the Articles (...), Marcus Ephesius produces the words of
Damascen expressly, that the Spirit does not proceed from the Son, but by the
Son, whereby it is plain, (...). Hist. Council. Florent. sect. 8. c. 15. p. 239.
that he understood per filium, in opposition to a filio. And Bessarion had
nothing else to return in answer to it, but that he could produce but one out
of Antiquity, who said so. Thus we see, if Theophylact and Damascen, as well as
Theodoret and Photius, be Ancient Greeks; your distinction comes to nothing.
But besides this, it appears by the disputations of Hugo Etherianus against the
Greeks, who lived, says Bellarmin, A. D. 1160. still extant in the Bibliotheca
Patrum, that the Greeks held the very same then that they do now. And so in the
Synod of Bar in Apulia, when Anselm disputed so stoutly against the Greeks,
that Pope Urban said, he was, alterius orbis Papa, Eadmer. de vita Anselm. l.
2. Malmesbu. de gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 1.
as the story is related by Eadmerus and Wilhelmus Malmesburiensis; it appears,
they denied the Procession of the Spirit absolutely from the Son; (and this was
A. D. 1096.) as is evident from the Letter of Hildebertus to him about the
publishing his Disputation, and from the Book of Anselm still extant on that
subject. We find not therefore any ground for this distinction of yours
concerning the Ancient and Modern Greeks; and therefore they who said, that
there was no real difference in any matter of Faith between the Ancient Greeks
and Latins, must be understood as well of the Modern Greeks, as them: Their
words being no more capable of such a tolerable interpretation as you speak of,
than the words of any of the Modern Greeks are.

His Lordship was proving, that the point was not fundamental,. 16.
that the Greeks and Latins differed in from that acknowledgement of Peter
Lombard, and the Schoolmen; that is to say, The Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the
Father and the Son, and that he is, or proceeds from the Father and the Son, is
not to speak different things, but the same sense in different words. Now in
this cause, says he, where the words differ, but the sentence of Faith is the
same, (penitus eadem) even altogether the same, can the point be fundamental?
P. 25.
But, say you, he was to prove, that such as were in grievous error in
Divinity, erred not fundamentally; and, for proof of this, he alleges such as
have no real error at all in Divinity. P. 8.
But do you not herein wilfully mistake his Lordships meaning? For in the
Paragraph foregoing, his Lordship first declares his own judgment concerning
the denying the Procession of the Holy Ghost, viz. That he did acknowledge it
to be a grievous error in Divinity: but yet he could not judge the Greeks
guilty of a fundamental error, which he proves by a double medium. 1. Because
they did not thereby deny the Equality and Consubstantiality of the persons. 2.
Because diverse learned men were of opinion, [that a filio, and per filium] in
the sense of the Greek Church, was but a question in modo loquendi, and
therefore not fundamental; now for this he produces those testimonies. Now, I
pray, do you put no difference between the making the denial of a Proposition
to be an error, and the saying, that such persons are guilty of the denial of
that Proposition. His Lordship grants the denial of the Procession to be a
grievous error in Divinity, but he questioned ( as the Greeks expressed
themselves, for those very words he inserts) whether they were guilty of
denying that Proposition, as appears by the authorities of the Schoolmen, and
therefore certainly much less guilty of a fundamental error. Thus you see his
Lordship fully proves what he intends; for if they agreed in sense, they were
much less guilty of a fundamental error, than if they had plainly denied the
Procession, which he supposes from those Authorities that they did not. And
therefore when you Sarcastically ask, Is not this strong Logic? The only
answer I shall give you, is, That if you apprehend it not to be so, it is
because of the weakness of your Theological Reason. And therefore you put his
Lordships Defender on a strange task, to prove from those Authorities, that
those Greeks who err grievously in Divinity, err not fundamentally. When the
only design of his Lordship, in producing those Authorities, was to show, that
according to their opinion, the Greeks were so far from erring fundamentally,
that they did not err grievously in Divinity. And to this purpose the citation
of Peter Lombard was pertinent, who says, That because the Greeks acknowledge,
that the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Son, Sentent. 1. did. 11.
though he does not proceed from him; therefore the difference between the
Greeks and Latins, is in words, and not in sense; but, you say, He speaks only
of such as differed in words, and not in substance; as though he put a
difference between the Greeks, that some differed in words, and others really,
which is quite beside his meaning: for he takes not the least notice of any
such difference among themselves; but says, The difference it self concerning
the Procession, the Greeks acknowledging the Holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the
Son, is more verbal, than real. And that the present Greeks say full as much,
is evident; for they acknowledge the same things in express words. In sent. l.
1. did. 11. art. 1. q. 1.
The testimony of Bonaventure has been already considered, as far as concerns
Damascen; as for the rest, it was sufficient for his Lordships purpose, to
produce such a Confession from so bitter an enemy of the Greeks, as Bonaventure
was (so his Lordship in his Marginal Citation says truly of him, licet Graecis
infensissimus, etc.) that he does not deny but that salvation might be had
without the article of Filioque; but whether on that supposition there were
sufficient reason to add it to the Creed, will be considered afterward. Though
Bonaventure held the Greeks to be Heretics and Schismatics, I hope you do not
think, that is Argument enough to persuade us that they were so. That any
thing, without which salvation might have been had before, may, by the
definition of your Church, become so necessary, that men cannot be saved
without the belief of it, had need be more than barely asserted either by
Bonaventure, or you; and we must wait for the proof of it, for any thing here
said by either of you. That the Greeks might be excused by Ignorance, before
such Declaration of your Church concerning the Filioque, and not be excused
after through greater ignorance of any such Power in your Church, to declare
such things to be matters of Faith, is an assertion not easy to be swallowed
by such as have any strength of Logic, or one dram of Theological Reason: Or
else it is a very strange thing, you should think it sufficient for the Greeks
to know, what your Church had declared without an antecedent knowledge that
your Church had power to declare. How much you answer at random, appears by
your answering Aquinas his testimony, instead of that of Jodocus Clictoveus, as
is plain enough in his Lordships Margin; and you might have been easily
satisfied that it was so, if you had taken the pains to look into either of
them. But the art of it was, Aquinas his testimony might be easily answered,
because he speaks only by hearsay, concerning the opinion of some certain
Greeks; but Clictoveus, his was close to the purpose, who plainly confesses,
that the difference of the Ancient Greeks was more in words, and the manner of
explaining the Procession then in the thing it self. This therefore you thought
fit to slide by, and answer Aquinas for him. Your answer to Scotus depends on
the former distinction of Ancient and Modern Greeks, and therefore falls with
it. Bellarmin's answer concerning Damascen, and your own after Bonaventure of
his non dicimus, has been sufficiently disproved already. What Tolet holds, or
the Lutherans deny, the words of neither being of either side produced, deserve
no further consideration.

You tell us, his Lordships Argument depends upon this, That the Holy Ghost may
be equal and consubstantial with the Son,. 17.
though he proceed not from it; Ib.
which, you say, is a matter too deep for his Lordship to wade into. But any
indifferent Reader would think it had been your concernment to have shown the
contrary, that thereby you might seem to make good so heavy a charge, as that
of Heresy, against the whole Greek Church. For, if the Holy Ghost cannot be
equal and consubstantial with the Son, if it proceeds not from the Son; then it
follows, that they who deny this Procession, must deny that Equality and
Consubstantiality of the Spirit with the Son: which you ought to prove, to make
good your charge of Heresy. But on the other side, if the Spirit may be proved
to be God by such Arguments as do not at all infer his Procession from the Son;
then his equality and consubstantiality does not depend upon that Procession:
for I suppose you grant, that it is the Unity of Essence in the Persons which
make them equal and consubstantial; but we may sufficiently prove the Spirit to
be God by such Arguments as do not infer the Procession from the Son; as I
might easily make appear by all the Arguments insisted on to that purpose: but
I only mention that which the second General Council thought most cogent to
that purpose, which is the Spirit's eternal Procession from the Father; if that
proves the Spirit to be God, then its equality with the Son, is proved without
his Procession from the Son; for I hope you will not say, that the proving his
Procession from the Father, does imply Procession from the Son too: because the
Procession cannot be supposed to be from the essence, for then the Spirit would
proceed from it self, but from the Hypostasis, and therefore one cannot imply
the concurrence of the other. And since you pretend so much to understand these
depths; before you renew a charge of Heresy against the Greek Church in this
particular, make use of your Theological reason in giving an Intelligible
Answer to these Questions. 1. Why the Spirit may not be equal and
consubstantial to the other Persons in the Trinity, supposing his Procession to
be only from the Father, as the Son to be equal and consubstantial with them,
when his Generation is only from the Father? 2. If the Procession from the Son
be necessary to make the Spirit consubstantial with the Son, why is not
Generation of the Son by the Spirit necessary to make the Son consubstantial
with the Spirit? 3. If the Spirit does proceed from Father and Son as distinct
Hypostases, how he can proceed from these Hypostases as one principle by one
common Spiration, without confounding their Personalties? or else, show how two
distinct Hypostases always remaining so, can concur in the same numerical
action ad intra? 4. If there be such a necessity of believing this as an
Article of Faith, why has not God thought fit to reveal to us, the distinct
emanations of the Son and Spirit; and wherein the eternal Generation of the Son
may be conceived as distinct from the Procession of the Spirit, when both
equally agree in the same essence, and neither of them express the personality
of the Father? Either I say undertake intelligibly to resolve these things, or
else surcease your charge of Heresy against the Greek Church, and upbraid not
his Lordship for not entering into these depths. Methinks, their being
confessed to be Depths on both sides, might teach you a little more modesty in
handling them, and much more charity to men who differ about them. For you may
see, the Greeks want not great plausibleness of reason on their side, as well
as Authority of Scripture and Fathers, plain for them, but not so against them.
As long therefore as the Greek Church confesses the Divinity,
Consubstantiality, Eternal Procession of the Spirit; and acknowledges it to be
the Spirit of the Son, there must be something more in it then the bare denial
of the Procession from the Son, which must make you so eager in your charge of
Heresy against her. The truth is, there is something else in the matter; by
this Article of Filioque, the Authority of the Church of Rome in matters of
Faith is struck at: and therefore if this be an Heresy, it must be on the
account of denying the plenitude of her power in matters of Faith, as Anselm
and Bonaventure ingenuously confess it, and plead it on that account. And
therefore wise men are not apt to believe, but that if the Church of Rome had
not been particularly concerned in this addition to the Creed; if the Greeks
would have submitted in all other things to the Church of Rome, this charge of
Heresy would soon be taken off the File. But, as things stand, if she be not
found guilty of Heresy, she may be found as Catholic as Rome, and more too,
and therefore there is a necessity for it, she must be contented to bear it,
for it is not consistent with the Interest of the Church of Rome, that she
should be free from Heresy, Schism, etc. But if she has no stronger
Adversaries to make good the charge then you, she may satisfy her self, that
though the blows be rude, yet they are given her by feeble hands. For let us
now make way for Theological reason to enter the lists armed Cap-a-pe in Mood
and Figure. For now at last you tell us, You will argue in Form against his
Lordship and the Greek Church together. P. 11.
And thus it proceeds, If the Greeks error be not only concerning, but against
the Holy Ghost, then (according to the Bishops own distinction) they have lost
all assistance of that blessed Spirit, and are become no true Church; But their
error is not only concerning, but against the Holy Ghost: Therefore, etc. The
Major or first Proposition contains the Bishops own Doctrine, the Minor or
second Proposition (wherein you learnedly tell us, what the Major and Minor in
Syllogisms are) you thus prove. All errors, specially opposite to the
particular and personal Procession of the Holy Ghost, are (according to all
Divines) not only errors concerning, but errors against the Holy Ghost: But
the Greeks error is opposite to the particular and personal Procession of the
Holy Ghost, as is already proved: Ergo, their error is not only concerning,
but against the Holy Ghost; whose assistance therefore they have lost, not only
according to the first, but even latter branch of the Bishops distinction: and
consequently remain no true Church. Now who is there, that out of mere pity
can find in his heart not to yield this to you, when you have been at such
pains to prove it? But things set out with the greatest formality have not
always the most solidity in them. All the force of this Argument, such as it
is, lye's in this, that his Lordship had said, That the error of the Greeks
was rather about the Doctrine concerning the Holy Ghost, then against the Holy
Ghost, which he after explains, by saying, It was not such an error, as did
destroy the equality or Consubstantiality of the Spirit with the other persons
of the Trinity; I pray now take his Lordships explication of himself, and you
must form your Argument after another way then you have done: but you saw well
enough, that you could not make any show of an Argument but merely from words.
If I thought it worth considering, it were easy to tell you, that what is only
against the Procession from the Son, is not thereby against the Holy Ghost,
because it may be the Holy Ghost, i. e. the third person in the Trinity, though
it proceed only from the Father. And as well you might say, that whatever
Doctrine denies the Son to be begotten of the Spirit, is not only concerning,
but against the Son, and urge the consequences upon as good terms as you do
about the Spirit: But so trifling an Argument is too much honored by any
serious confutation. And, it seems, you were something sensible of it your
self, when you say, His Lordship seemed to have provided against the force of
it (as who would not?) by hinting a difference between errors fundamental and
not fundamental; which point I shall purposely examine in the following
Chapter. When you therefore come to hold forth what is now but hinted at, I
shall readily hearken to what you have to say.

Thus for any thing you have produced to the contrary, it sufficiently appears,
that the Greek Church is very unjustly charged with Heresy by you, and that
those testimonies which his Lordship produced, would as well hold for the
Modern as Ancient Greeks: to which I might add the judgment of others of your
own side, who speak as much concerning the Modern Greeks, as Thomas a Jesu,
Azorius and others; but I think not that way of arguing to have much force on
either side, and therefore pass it over.

And come to the debate of the Filioque, with which, you say, his Lordship
begins to quibble, on occasion of the Popes inserting it into the Creed.. 18.
But I am quite of another mind, I think he speaks very seriously, P. 11.
and with a great deal of reason, when he says, And Rome in this particular
should be more moderate, if it be but because this Article (Filioque) was added
to the Creed by her self. And it is hard to add and Anathematize too. P. 25.
For what you say to this, of the Holy Ghost's having leave to assist the
Church, in adding expressions for the better explication of any Article of
Faith: and then the Pope has leave and command too, to Anathematize all such,
as shall not allow the use of such expressions: I commend you, that when you
must beg something, you would beg all that was to be had at once; but, before
you persuade us to the digesting such crudities as these are, prove but these
following things. 1. Where it is, that there is any promise of the Holy Ghost's
assistance, in adding any Articles to the Creed, under pretense of better
expressions for explication of them? 2. Supposing such an assistance, what
ground is there to impose such additional expressions, so that those who admit
them not, must be guilty of Heresy, and consequently (by your principles)
incurr eternal damnation. 3. How those expressions can be accounted a better
explication of an Article of Faith, which contain something not employed in, nor
necessarily deduced from, any other Article of Faith? 4. If this assistance be
promised to the Church, how any one part of that Church, as great a part stiffly
opposing such additional expressions, can claim that assistance to it self; the
other parts of the Catholic Church, utterly denying it? 5. If an assistance as
to such things be promised the Church, why may it not be more reasonably
presumed to be in an Ecumenical Council, as that at Ephesus forbidding such
additions, than in any part of the Church, which after such a Decree shall
directly contradict it? 6. What right can the Church have to Anathematize any
for the not using such expressions, which that Church which determins the use
of them, does acknowledge to be only expressions for better explication of an
Article of Faith? and consequently the denial of them cannot amount to the
denial of an Article of Faith? but only of the better explication of it. 7. If
all these things be granted, how comes the Pope, not only to have leave, but
command too, to Anathematize all such as use not these expressions? Where is
that Command extant? how comes it to be limited to him? Is he expressed in it?
or does it by necessary consequence follow from it? What good would it do us,
to see but one of these proved, which you very fairly beg in the lump together:
And, till you have proved them all, you may assure your self, that we shall
never believe that the Pope has so much as leave, much less command, to Add
and Anathematize too.

As to the Filioque, you grant, That many hundred years had passed from the
time of the Apostles, before Filioque was added to the Nicene Creed, and more
since the declarations and decrees were sufficiently published, and in all
these years salvation was had without mention of Filioque. A fair Concession;
and nothing is wanting to destroy all that you had said before, but only this,
that what was not once necessary to salvation, cannot by any after-declaration
of the Church be made necessary, as shall be abundantly manifested in the
Controversy of Fundamentals. What follows, must be more particularly
considered, because therein you would fain remove the Article of Filioque, from
being the cause of the Schism between the Eastern and Western Churches, and
impute it wholly to the Pride and Ambition of the Eastern Prelates. P. 11, 12.
Your words are. But it is also true, That the addition of Filioque to the
Creed, was made many years before the difference brake out between the Latins
and Greeks; so that the inserting this word (Filioque) into the Creed, was not
the first occasion of Schism: But grudges arising among the Greeks, who had
been a large flourishing Church, with a number of most learned and zealous
Prelates, and held the Articles still, though upon emptier heads; such, quickly
filled with wind, thinking their swelling places, and great City of
Constantinople, might hold up against Rome; they began to quarrel, not for
places (that was too mean a motive for such as looked so big) but first they
would make it appear, they could teach Rome; nay, they spyed out Heresies in it
(the old way of all Heretics) and so fell to question the Procession of the
Holy Ghost; and must needs have Filioque out of the Creed, These words of
yours, lay the charge of Schism on the Greeks wholly, and therefore, in order
to our vindication of them from that, two things must be enquired into. 1.
Whether it was in your Churches Power to make the Addition of Filioque to the
Creed. 2. Whether the Greeks Ambition and Pride were the only cause of the
Separation between the Eastern and Western Churches.

1. Concerning the addition of Filioque, two things must be enquired into; 1.
When it began, and by whom it was added to the Creed. 2. Whether they who added
it, had power so to do, and to impose on all others the use of it.

1. Concerning the time of this Addition, nothing seems more dark in
Church History than the precise and punctual time of it. And so much you
acknowledge your self elsewhere. But it seems, it is your concernment, P. 164.
to say, That the Addition was made before the difference brake out. To that I
answer, if you mean, that in some Churches the Procession from the Son was
acknowledged before that difference, I grant it, as is clear by some Councils
of Toledo; and, that the doctrine of the Procession was received in France too,
about the time of Charles the Great, I acknowledge, and that it was admitted
into the solemn Offices of the Church; but, that it was added to the Nicene and
Constantinopolitan Creed to be received by all Churches; so that it should not
be lawful for any to use that Creed without such Addition, that I deny to have
been before the Schism, but, assert it to have been a great occasion of it. It
is acknowledged, that in Spain, several Councils of Toledo, in their profession
of Faith, do mention the Procession from the Son; but this they delivered only
as their own private judgments, and not as the public Creed received by all
Churches. For, Petavius confesses, that, in Symbolo ipso nihil adjecerunt,
Dogmat. Theol. To. 2. l. 7. c. 2.
they added nothing at all to the Creed. And, although the custom of singing
the Constantinopolitan Creed in the Liturgy, seems first to have begun in
Spain, from whom Petavius supposes both the French and Germans received it;
yet, even there it appears, it was not universally received. For, the Church of
Sevil contented it self still with the Mozarabick Liturgy, in which only the
bare Nicene Creed was used. You tell us indeed, That the inserting the Article
in the Councils of Toledo, is supposed to have been done upon the authority of
an Epistle they had received from Pope Leo: which, P. 164.
though it be not barely supposed, but asserted with great confidence by
Baronius; yet, (as most other things in him which are brought to advance the
Pope's Authority) it has no other ground but his confident assertion. There
being not the least shadow of proof for it, but only that this Leo, Baron. To.
5. An. 405. n. 58.
in a certain Epistle of his to the Spaniards, did, once upon a time, mention,
that the Son proceeded from the Father. Therefore, in Spain, I grant the
Doctrine to be received; I deny the Addition to be made to the
Constantinopolitan Creed: although it be read, as added to it in the 8. or 10.
Council of Toledo, under Reccesuintus A. D. 653. But this was still only the
declaration of their own Faith, in this Article, and no imposing it on others.
In France, that it began to be received in public Use A. D. 809. must be
acknowledged by the proceedings of the Legates from the Council of Aquisgrane to
Pope Leo 3. But, it appears as clearly, that Pope Leo did then condemn the use
of it, as will be showed afterward. When it should creep into the Athanasian
Creed, seems as hard to find out, as when first added to the
Constantinopolitan; but, if we believe Pithaeus, the whole Creed was of a
French Composition (there being many Arguments to persuade us, it never was
made by Athanasius; of which, in their due place) and Vossius adds, That it is
very probable it was composed about the time of Charles the Great, Magni
Athanasii symbolum, quamvis Treve^is ut plerique tradiderunt, i. e. in Gallia a
Theologo tam^n inter illos doct^ssimo, acutissimuque scriptum. P. Pithaeus
opusc. de process. ^p S.

Vossius de tribus symbol. Addend ad p. 55 31. Spala^ensis de Rep. Eccles. Tom.
3. l. 7. c. 10. sect. 124.

Patriarch. Cyril. ep. ad Joh. Utenbogard. p. 404.


the Controversy being then so rise about the Procession. But that seems the
less probable, because the Article of Filioque is not found in the Ancient
Copies of that Creed. For Spalatensis says, That in all the Greek Copies he
had seen, there was only mention made of the Procession from the Father. And
the Patriarch Cyril says, That not only the Symbol of Athanasius is
adulterated among the Latins; but, that it is proved to be so by the more
ancient and genuine Copies: But, however this be, we deny not but the Article
of Procession from the Son, grew into use, especially in the Gallican and
Spanish Churches, before the Schism broke out between the Eastern and Western
Churches; but, our enquiry is not concerning that, but concerning the time when
it was so added to the Constantinopolitan Creed, that it was required to be
used only with that addition. For this you tell us, P. 164.
That Hugo Eterianus affirms, that it was added by the Pope in a full Council
at Rome, but he names not the Pope. So likewise the Latin Divines, at the
Council of Florence, pretended still, that it was added by the Pope in a full
Council, but very carefully forbear the mention of the person, or the punctual
time. But, it is your unhappiness, if there be diverse opinions to be followed,
to make choice of the most improbable; as you do here, when you embrace that of
Socolovius, which is, That the Fathers of the first Council at Constantinople,
sending the Confession of their Faith to Pope Damasus, and his Council at Rome;
the Pope and Council at Rome approved of their said Confession; but yet added,
by way of explication, the word Filioque to the Article which concerned the
Holy Ghost; and this they did, to signify, that the Holy Ghost as true God,
proceeded from the Son, and was not made or created by him, as some Heretics
in those times began to teach. Neither does he, say you, affirm this without
citation of some credible authority. I could wish you had produced it, not only
for our satisfaction, but of the more learned men of your own side* who look on
this as an improbable fiction. Bellarmin produces many Arguments against it,
saying, That no mention is made of it in the Councils, or Theodoret's History,
who particularly relates the Letters of the Council to Damasus, Bellarmin. de
Christo. l. 2. c. 21. sect. ult.
and his to the Council; that Leo 3. caused the Constantinopolitan Creed to be
inscribed in a silver Table, without that Addition; that the third Council of
Toledo used the Creed without that Addition; that the Greeks did not begin this
Controversy till A. D. 600. And how could they possibly charge the Latins with
breaking the Canons of the third Ecumenical (when, according to this opinion)
it was added in the second. Petavius is so great a friend to your opinion, that
in plain terms he calls it ridiculous, Petav. dogmat. Theolog. de Trinit To. 2.
l 7. c. 2.
and abundantly confutes that imagination of its being inserted, because of the
Heresy of the (...), as Manuel Calecas calls it, who with Aristinus are all
those worshipful Authorities which this opinion stands on. But, setting aside
the contrary Authorities to these, any one, who is any thing versed in this
Controversy, must needs esteem this the most improbable account that can be
given of this Addition. For, if this were true, how little did the Latins at
the Council at Florence understand their business; when, if they could have
produced such an Addition before the Ephesine Council, all the Greeks
objections had come to nothing? If this were true, how little did Leo 3.
consult his own, or his predecessors honor, who dissuaded the Legates of the
Council at Aquisgrane, from continuing in the Creed that Addition of Filioque:
for, when after a great deal of discourse concerning the Article and the
Addition; the Legates at last tell him, That they perceived, his pleasure was,
that it should be taken out of the Creed, and so every one left to his liberty.
His answer is, So it is certainly determined by me, and I would persuade you by
all means to assent to it: Ita procul-dubio a nostra part decernitur; ita
quoque, ut a vestra ass^ntiatur, a nobis omnimodis suadetur. Apud. Sirmond.
Council. Gallic. To 2. p. 256.
And, to manifest this to be his constant judgment, he caused the
Constantinopolitan Creed, without the Addition of Filioque to be inscribed in a
greater silver Tablet, Baron. Annal. ad An. 809.
and placed publicly in the Church, to be read of all, as appears by the
testimony of Photius, Phot in ep. ad Patriarch. Aquileiens. Pet. Lombard. lib.
1. sent did 11.
and Peter Lombard, that so all, both Greeks and Latins, might see, that
nothing was added to the Creed. Had not this now been a strange action of his,
if this Addition had been so long before in the time of Damasus? Nothing then
can be more evident, than that in this Leo's time, no such Addition was made to
the Creed: Therefore, it seems most probable, which the famous Antoninus
delivers, that this Addition was made by Pope Nicolaus 1. For, when he relates
he causes, why Photius excommunicated him, he mentions that in the first place,
That he had made an Addition to the Creed, Ta^^ inter alias accusationes hoc
principaliter posuit, Ipsum fore excommunicatum, quod apposuerat ad symbolum,
Sp. Sanctum a filio procedere. Similiter and depositum, quod ipse Nicolaus Papa
incidisset in sententiam tertit Concilii. Antonin. Part. 3. Tit 22. cap. 13.
sect. 10.
by making the Spirit to proceed from the Son; and therefore had fallen under
the sentence of the third Ecumenical Council, which prohibited such Additions
to be made. To which P. Pithaeus subscribes likewise, and Petavius seems not to
dissent; the only thing which is pretended against it, is, that Andreas
Colossensis in the Council at Ferrara, says, Council. Florent. sess. 8.
That though Photius was a known and bitter enemy of the Latin Church, yet he
never objected this Addition against Nicolaus or Adrian; but how strangely
overseen Andreas was in these words, sufficiently appears by Photius his
Encyclical Epistle, wherein he does in terms object this against the Latins, as
appears by the words already produced. So that although you would willingly
have set this Addition far enough off from the Schism, yet you see how
improbable a fiction you produce for it; and withal, you see, that this
Addition, by the consent of your own most learned and impartial Writers, falls
just upon the time when the Schism broke out, viz. in the time of Nicolaus and
Photius; and therefore now judge you, whether these words were so long added
before the Schism, that they could give no occasion to it.

2. The next thing to be considered, is, Whether they, who added it,. 19.
had power so to do? Two things the Greeks insist on, to show, that it was not
done by sufficient authority. 1. Because all such Additions were directly
prohibited by the Ephesine Council. 2. That supposing them not prohibited, yet
the Pope had no power to add to the Creed, without the consent of the Eastern
Churches.

1. That such Additions were severely prohibited by the Ephesine Council: the
Sanction of which Council to this purpose has been already produced, and is
extant both in the Acts of the Ephesine and Florentine Councils, Council. Ephesians.
part. 2. Act. 6. p. 366.

Council. Florent. sess. 5. p. 587.


in which latter it is insisted on as the Foundation of the Greek's Arguments
against the Addition of Filioque, by Marcus Ephesius; and the reason he there
gives of such a Sanction made by the Council at Ephesus, is, that after the
Nicene Council, in several Provincial Councils, there were above thirty several
Expositions made of the Nicene Creed; upon which, the second Ecumenical
Council made a further explication of it, explaining those things which
belonged to the Divinity of the Spirit, and the Incarnation of Christ; and,
because they did not prohibit any Additions, the Nestorians easily depraved the
Nicene Creed, inserting their own opinions into it (as appears by the
confession of Faith exhibited to the Council by Charisius) which being read in
the Council, and the Fathers thereby understanding how easily, after this rate,
New Creeds might be continually made in the Church, they severely prohibited
any further Additions to be made to the Creed. And therefore, although they
decreed in that Council the Virgin Mary to be (...), in opposition to
Nestorius; yet, they never offered to insert it into the Creed, although they
apprehended it necessary to explain the Economy of our Savior's Incarnation.
And that which much confirms the meaning of the Decree, to be the absolute
prohibition of all kind of Additions to the Creed, is, the Epistle of S. Cyril
of Alexandria to Johannes Antiochenus, wherein reciting this decree of the
Council, he adds these words as the explication of it. We neither permit our
selves or others to change one word or syllable of what is herein contained
(speaking of the Nicene Creed) which Epistle was read and approved in the
fourth Ecumenical Council. (...). p. 589. Sess. 5.
To this the Latins answered them, that which is still answered in the same
case, viz. That this Article of Filioque was only a declaration, and not a
prohibited Addition: But the Greeks say, this answer is unsatisfactory on these
accounts. 1. Because there is no reason to say, that Decree does not forbid the
inserting Declarations into the Creed. 2. That if it did not forbid that, yet
there is as little reason to say, this was a mere Declaration. 1. Because there
is no reason to say, that the Council did not forbid the inserting Declarations
into the Creed: For, as Bessarion well observes, it never was lawful to add new
and distinct Articles of Faith, from those which are contained in Scripture,
Council. Florent. sess. 8. p. 626.
but the Church only undertook the explication and declaration of the things
therein contained; and this was only lawful. Therefore the Ancient Fathers had
full liberty of explaining Articles of Faith, and using those explications, as
they judged most expedient, and to place them where they thought good, so it
were not in Scripture: thence they might insert them into the Creed, or
elsewhere. But afterward ( i. e. after this decree of the Ephesine Council)
this liberty was partly taken away, and partly continued. For, it never was, or
will be, unlawful to explain or declare Articles of Faith; but to insert those
explications into the Creed, is now unlawful, because forbidden by the decree
of a General Council. For, says he, the Fathers of the third Council,
observing what great inconveniences had followed in the Church, upon the
enlargement of Creeds, and that no injury could at all come by the prohibition
of any further Additions to be inserted (for by that means they should only be
bound to believe no more than what those Holy Fathers believed; and who dare
charge their Faith with imperfection) and they did therefore wisely forbid all
other expositions of Faith to be inserted into the Creed, as he there at large
proves. And in the progress of that discourse, takes off that which Bellarmin
looked on as the only satisfactory answer, viz. That the prohibition concerned
only private persons; For, says he, It cannot be conceived, that the Council
should take care about the Declarations of the Creed, made by particular
persons (whereas it always was, and is lawful for such to declare their Faith
more particularly, as appears by the Creed of Charisius, received in this
Council) but this they looked after, that the Creed, which was commonly
received in the Christian Churches, and into which men are baptized, should
receive no alteration at all. And to show what their meaning was, though their
Council was purposely assembled against Nestorius, yet they would not insert
(...) into the Creed. And the same decree was observed in the 4, 5, 6, 7.
Councils; which, by their actions, did declare this to be the meaning of the
Ephesine Council, that no Declarations whatsoever, should hereafter be inserted
into the Creed. For, if they were mere Declarations, there was much less
necessity of inferting them into the Creed, which was supposed to be a Systeme
of the necessary Articles of Faith.

2. There was as little reason to say, that this Article was a mere
Declaration. For, the Latins pretended, that the Article of Filioque, was only
a further explication of that ex Patre. For, if so, then whosoever does believe
the Procession from the Father, does believe all that is necessary to be
believed: And therefore certainly it can be no Heresy not to believe the
Procession from the Son, because that is only supposed to be a Declaration of
that from the Father. And since you are so ready to charge the Greek Church
with Heresy, I pray tell us whether this Article be a Declaration or not: If
not, then the Latins were all deceived, who pleaded the lawfulness of inserting
Filioque on that account; and consequently it must be a prohibited Addition: If
it be, then show us what Heresy lies in not acknowledging a mere explication,
when all that is supposed necessary is believed in the substance of the
Article. Moreover, Bessarion rightly distinguishes between an explication,
(...), from (...), and therefore grants, P. 625.
that the Filioque might be said to be an explication of something contained in
the Creed, but not out of any thing contained in the Creed; and therefore the
Medium being extrinsecal, it could not be said to be a mere Declaration. For,
there can be no necessary Argument drawn from the Procession from the Father,
to infer the Procession from the Son; but it must be proved from some
extrinsecal distinct Argument.

2. Suppose this to be no prohibited Addition, yet what right had the Pope and
his Council, without the consent of the Eastern Churches,. 20.
to make this Addition to the Creed? For, the Greeks said, whatever authority
the Church of Rome had, it received by the Canons, and its authority was
therefore less then that of an Ecumenical Council, wherefore it could not
justly repeal, or act contrary to the decree of a General Council, as it did
apparently in this case. By which means, the Latins were driven off from those
which they looked on as slighter velitations, and took Sanctuary in the
Plenitude of the Pope's Power, that therefore no Council could prescribe to
him; there could be no necessity of his calling the Eastern Churches to debate
this Addition, for he could do it of himself, by virtue of his own authority in
and over the Church. Here Anselm and Bonaventure think to secure themselves,
and hither they are all driven at last. So that we plainly see, whatever else
is pretended, the Pope's usurped Power was that which truly gave occasion to
the Schism: For, it was not the Latins believing the Procession from the Son,
which made the separation between the Eastern and Western Churches, but the
Pope's pretending a Power to impose an Article of Faith in the Creed against
the decree of a former, and without the consent of a present Ecumenical
Council. If you pretend, that there has been since an Ecumenical Council at
Florence, which has declared it; by that very answer you justify the Greeks
before that Council, and so lay the guilt of the Schism wholly on the Pope, who
did insert and impose this Article, before an Ecumenical Council. Thus still
it appears, the cause of the Schism began at Rome; and by the same Argument
with which you charge them with Heresy, viz. the Council at Florence, you
vindicate the Greek Church from Schism, in all the actions of it before that
Council.

And this might suffice to show, that it was not the levity, vanity, or
ambition of the Greeks, which gave the great occasion of the Schism, but the
Pride, Encroachments, and Usurpations of the Church of Rome, as might largely
be manifested from the history of those times, when the Schism began. The rise
of which ought to be derived from the times of the Constantinopolitan, and
Chalcedon Councils; the second and fourth Ecumenical. For, the Canons of those
Councils decreeing equal Privileges to Constantinople, with those of Rome,
made the Popes have a continual jealousy upon the Greek Church, and watch all
opportunities to disgrace it, and infringe the liberties of it. Thence came the
rage of Leo against Anatolius the Patriarch of Constantinople, in the time of
Martianus; thence the feud between Simplicius and Felix 3. of Rome, and Acacius
of Constantinople, for defending the Privileges of his See, in opposition to
the Pope's; insomuch that Felix fairly excommunicates him, because he would not
submit to the Pope's trial in the case of the Patriarch of Alexandria; which
continued so long, that Euphemius, who succeeded Acacius, though he
excommunited Petrus Moggus of Alexandria, yet could not be received into the
Communion of the Roman Church by Felix, because he would not expunge the name
of Acacius out of the Diptychs of the Church; and afterward Gelasius refused
it on the same grounds; which Euphemius still denying to do, the Schism
continued. And, although afterward the Emperor Anastasius, and the Greek
Church, desired the making up of this difference; yet no other terms of
communion would be accepted by Hormisdas, without the expunging the name of
Acacius. So implacably were they bent against the very memory of Acacius, for
defending the Privilege of his See, that they would rather continue that
lamentable Schism, than not avenge themselves upon him; and consequently, make
all future Patriarchs fearful of opposing the Pope's Authority. If we look yet
further, we shall still find the ambition of the Popes to have caused all the
disturbance in the Greek Churches, although some of the Patriarchs of
Constantinople cannot be excused from the same faults. In the time of the
second Council at Nice, Pope Adrian not only contends for the enlargement of
his Jurisdiction, but threatens to pronounce them Heretics, Petrus de Marca,
de Concord. Sacerd. and Imp. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 5.
who did not consent to it, which makes Petrus de Marca say, That he supposes
[that] the first time ever any were charged with Heresy on such an account.
The same pretense we find still in all the Schisms which after happened, as
that in the time of Photius, that afterward, in the time of Michael Cerularius,
and in the successive ages, still the terms of communion were, Submission to
the Church of Rome, and acknowledgledging the supremacy of that See, which the
Greeks did then, and do still constantly deny; so that it was not the Greeks
Levity, but the Romanists ambition and usurpation which gave occasion to that
fearful Schism.

. 21.
But for all this, It must still be lawful for your Church to add, and
Anathematize too: which his Lordship thought a little unreasonable, but it
seems you do not: For, say you, The Church did rightly Anathematize all such
denyers; why so? Because the meaning of the Latin Church being understood by
the Addition of Filioque, and that whosoever denied, must be supposed to deny
the Procession, then it became Heresy to deny it, and the Church did rightly
Anathematize all such denyers. So you say indeed; but, you would do well 1. To
show, that the understanding the meaning of the Latin Church, is sufficient to
make the denyers of what she affirms, to be Heretics. 2. How any one that
denies the Filioque, must be supposed to deny the Procession, if you mean the
Procession a Filio, you speak very wisely, but prove nothing; for some might
grant the Procession, and yet deny the lawfulness of your Churches adding to
the Creed. 3. All this while we are to seek how the Latin Church can make any
thing to be a Heresy, which was not so before. And therefore if your
Anathema's have no better grounds, the Greeks need not much fear the effects of
them. That your Church on any occasion is apt enough to speak loud words, we
may very easily believe, but whether she had just cause to speak so big in this
cause, is the thing in question, and we have already manifested the contrary.

His Lordship says, It ought to be no easy thing, to condemn a man of Heresy
in foundation of Faith; P. 26. n. 3.
much less a Church; least of all, so ample and large a Church as the Greek,
especially so as to make them no Church. Heaven Gates were not so easily shut
against multitudes, when S. Peter wore the Keys at his own Girdle. To this you
answer; Neither is the Roman Catholic Church justly accusable of cruelty
(though the Bishop taxes her of it) because she is quick and sharp against
those that fall into Heresy. P. 12.
But, if she has power to pronounce whom she please Heretics, and on what
account she please (as Hadrian I. in case of his Patrimony) and then it be
commendable in her to deal with them as Heretics, it must needs be dangerous
opposing her in any thing, for such who dread her Anathema's. But his Lordship
was not speaking of what was to be done, in case of notorious Heresy, but what
tenderness ought to be used in condemning men for Heresy; and much more in
condemning whole Churches for it, on such slender accounts as you do the Greek
Church. You should show, When S. Peter, or any of the Apostles did exclude
Churches from communion, for denying such Articles as that you charge the Greek
Church with. And it would be worth your enquiry, why those in the Corinthian
Church, who at least questioned the Resurrection; those in the Galatian and
other Churches, who asserted the Necessity of the Ceremonial Law under the
Gospel, both which errors are by the Apostle said to be of so dangerous a
nature; are not Anathematized presently by the Apostle, and thrown out of the
Church, at least, to prevent the infection of other Christians, if not for the
good of the Libertine Heretics, as you speak. Your mentioning S. Peter's
proceeding with Ananias and Sapphira, must be acknowledged a very fit
resemblance for your Churches dealing with Heretics; only they whom you are
pleased to account Heretics, have cause to rejoice, that since your Churches
good will is so much discovered, she has not the same miraculous Power: For,
then she would be sure to have few left to oppose her. But do you really think,
Anania's and Sapphira's fault was no greater than that of the Greek Church,
that you produce this instance? and, do you think the Church enjoyes still the
same power over offenders, which S. Peter then had? If not, to what purpose do
you mention such things here; unless to let us see, that it is want of some
thing else besides will, which makes you suffer any whom you call Heretics to
live. That S. Paul chastised his untoward Children, indeed you tell us, from 1
Cor, 5.5. 1 Timothy 1.20. but if you bring this to any purpose, you must make the
Greeks Error, as bad as Incest, or a denying the Faith; and when you have done
so, you may hear of a further answer. On what account your Church punishes
Delinquents, will be then necessary to be showed, when you have a little
further cleared what Power your Church has to make Delinquents in such cases
as you condemn the Greek Church for. But, as long as your Church is Accuser,
Witness, and Judge too, you must never expect that your Anathema's will be
accounted any other than bruta fulmina, noise and no more.

CHAP. 2. Of Fundamentals in General.
The Popish Tenet concerning Fundamentals, a mere step to the Roman Greatness.
The Question about Fundamentals stated. An enquiry into the nature of them.
What are Fundamentals, in order to particular persons; and what to be owned as
such, in order to Ecclesiastical Communion. The Prudence and Moderation of the
Church of England, in defining Articles of Faith. What judged Fundamental by
the Catholic Church. No new Articles of Faith can become necessary. The
Churches Power in propounding matters of Faith, examined. What is a sufficient
Proposition. Of the Athanasian Creed, and its being owned by the Church of
England. In what sense the Articles of it are necessary to Salvation. Of the
distinction of the material and formal object of Faith, as to Fundamentals. His
Lordship's integrity, and T. C's. forgery, in the testimony of Scotus. Of
Heresy, and how far the Church may declare matters of Faith. The testimony of
S. Augustine vindicated.

. 1.
THe Greek Church appearing not guilty of Heresy, by any evidence of Scripture,
Reason, or the Consent of the Primitive Church, nothing is left to make good
the charge, but that the Church of Rome has defined it to be so; which
Pretense, at first view, carrying the greatest partiality, and unreasonableness
in it, great care is taken, that the partiality be not discovered, by not
openly mentioning the Church of Rome, but the Church in General (as though it
were impossible to conceive any other Church but that at Rome) and for the
unreasonableness of it, it must be confidently asserted, That all Points
defined by the Church are Fundamental: So to be sure the Greek Church will
never escape the charge of Heresy. For this end, Mr. Fisher in the Conference
acknowledges, that when his Lordship had denied the error of the Greek Church
to be Fundamental, he was forced to repeat what he had formerly brought against
Dr. White, concerning Points Fundamental. The reason of which was, that, easily
perceiving that it was impossible to stand their ground in their charge on the
Greek Church upon other terms, he is forced to take Sanctuary in the Churches
Definition; and if that will not make it good, there is nothing else remaining
to do it. And this is the cause of the following Dispute concerning
Fundamentals; wheren the main thing undertaken, is, the proof, that the formal
reason of Fundamentals, is to be taken from the Definition of the present
Church; but, as this must be confessed to be the main Fundamental of the Church
of Rome, (for which yet the thing being manifest, no Definition of that Church
is necessary;) so withal, I doubt not, but it will be made evident in the
progress of this discourse, that never was there any pretense more partial,
absurd, and tyrannical than this is. Which his Lordship takes notice of in
these words, which deserve a repetition; P. 27. sect. 10, n. 2.
It was not the least means by which Rome grew to her Greatness, to blast every
opposer she had with the name of Heretic or Schismatic; for this served to
shrivel the credit of the persons. And the persons once brought into Contempt
and Ignominy, all the good they desired in the Church, fell to dust, for want
of creditable persons to back and support it. To make this proceeding good, in
these latter years, this course, it seems, was taken. The School that must
maintain (and so they do) that all Points defined by the Church, are thereby
Fundamental, necessary to be believed, of the substance of Faith; and that,
though it be determined quite extra Scripturam. And then leave the wise and
active Heads to take order, that there be strength enough ready to determine
what is fittest for them. To this you answer, with an (...)! You call it a
Squib, a Fancy, a weak Discourse, one of the Bishop's Railleries, and what not.
It seems it pinched you hard, you cry out so Tragically. But it is very
certain, you are more impatient to have your Politics, P. 13. n. 1.
than your Errors discovered; and if you have any Curses more dreadful than
others, they are sure to light on those who discover the intrigues of your
Designs. For if once men come to discern how much more of Artifice and cunning,
than of Truth and Religion, there is in the managing the Interest of your
Church, they would not easily think, the way to Heaven can lie among so many
foldings of the old Serpent: And this is not to think as you tragically speak,
That all the world is turned mad or Heathen: for, thanks be to God, as
Catholic as your Church is, it must be a huge Catachresis to take it for all
the world: neither do we think your Church mad, but very wise and Politic in
these pretenses; and that still you are resolved to show, that though other
Churches may be more Children of Light than yours (ignorance being so much in
favor with you) yet yours is Wiser in its Generation. But how the pretending
of your Church to Infallibility, and power to define Fundamentals, should make
us imagine all the world Heathen, is not easy to conceive, unless you are
conscious to your self, that such pretenses as these are, are the way to make
it so. But we must see still how your Cothurnus fits you. No truth left upon
earth, but all become Juglers? See what it is to be true Catholics, that if
they juggle, all the world must do so too; as though totus mundus exercet
histrioniam, were Latin for the Infallibility of the Church of Rome. But have
you indeed such a Monopoly of Truth, that if your party prove Juglers, there
will be no truth left upon earth? if you had said, none unsophisticated, yet
even that had been a great Truth left upon earth still. But I shall cut you
short in what follows of your Declamation, by telling you, that though your
Harangue were ten times longer than it is, and your exclamations louder, and
your Authorities better than of your Prelates, Miracles, Doctors, Heads of
Schools, austere and religious persons (in English Monks and Friars) yet all
these would not one jot persuade us contrary to common sense, and the large
experience of the world, That Religion is not made by you an Instrument to
advance the Pope's Ambition, and that the Church is but a more plausible name,
whereby to maintain the Court of Rome. And we need not go from our present
subject, for a proof of it. I will not charge this upon all persons of your
Communion, for all of them do not believe the State-Principles of your Church;
and others are kept, as much as may be, from all ways of discovering the great
Designs of it; and therefore there may be so much innocence and simplicity in
some, as may keep them from prostituting their Salvation to the Pope's
Greatness: but this is no plea on behalf of those who have the managery of
those Designs; who if they do not see what things are fittest for the Pope's
temporal ends, will not long be thought fit for their employment. But, is it
not palpable how much you endeavor to shrivel Christianity into a Party and
Faction, excluding all others that are not of your party out of the Church, and
consequently from hopes of salvation, though never so pious and conscientious?
Are not the far greatest part of the opinions you contend for, against all the
rest of the Christian world, such as are manifestly subservient to temporal
ends? And are not such more zealously disputed for, than the plain Articles of
Faith, and the indispensable precepts of the Christian Religion? Have you not
found out all the Artifices imaginable, to enervate the force of Christian
Piety, by your Doctrines about Repentance, Prayer, Indulgences, Probability,
Purgatory, and such like? And instead of those rational acts of Devotion, which
our Religion requires from us, have made choice of such fond, ludicrous,
unintelligible pieces of Devotion (by the most who are concerned in them) as
though you were resolved to see how much it was possible to debauch
Christianity, and make it contemptible in the world? Add to these the Arts you
have to violate Humane Societies, by dispensing with oaths, breaking Faith,
dissolving Obedience to Civil Authority, when it opposes your designs; and is
it possible then for persons not blind-folded with the grossest sort of
implicit Faith, to judge otherwise, but the design of your Chvrch is to
determine, not what is truest, but what is fittest for your ends? And, although
you scurrilously call his Lordship's discourse, stuff that might serve
sometimes for Pulpit-babble, to deceive the giddy multitude, and cast a mist
before their eyes; yet you see, he was not afraid of what any adversary could
say against it, by writing it in a Polemical Discourse, in which we could be
glad to see some of those famous Legends, and Seraphical Notions, which your
Pulpit-entertainments consist so much of, especially where you are out of the
reach of Heretics, and then we should judge Which looks more like babbling, and
deceiving the giddy multitude. But, to let us see what men of reach and
Politicians you are, you have found out a strange Fetch in his Lordships
discourse, viz. that all this, is, That they might not see the impurity of
their own English-Protestant Church, P. 13.
even in its first rise under Henry the eighth, and the people-cheating
Policies it was beholding to for its restoration under Queen Elizabeth, as may
be seen in History. History is a large wood to bid us seek for these cheating
Policies in; and if you had any other design, but merely to show your self a
Politician in this, that you can fortiter calumniari, use your tongue manfully
when reproaches are useful; you would have produced some evidence so clear of
them, as his Lordship here insists on in reference to your Church. But, as long
as you converse only in Generals, you will give us leave to think who those are
which use to do so, viz. such grand Politicians as your self. For the
Particulars of our Reformation, we shall have occasion to vindicate them in
another place, and therein shall easily manifest what an Itch you had to
calumniate here, though you were sure to smart for it afterward. That which
you call weakness of judgment, or want of Charity in his Lordship, will be
found to lie at another door, by our making it appear, that what you call a
groundless and impossible slander, is a real and undoubted truth. But when you
tell us, That such Railleries do not become one that would be esteemed a grave
Doctor of the English Church, P. 14.
an alterius orbis Patriarcha, as the ancient Primates of England have been
called: I know not whether you discover more judgment or reading in it; your
judgment in calling that an unbecoming Raillery, which is a great and
seasonable Truth; your reading, in mistaking Patriarcha for Papa, or else you
were willing to dissemble it, because then by the advantage of his title, he
might be fitter to discover the Artifices and Designs of his Fellow-Pope. The
laying open of which is certainly vastly different from sporting with all that
can be serious on earth (man's salvation) as you most injuriously calumniate
his Lordship in your next words, in affirming so of him, when his only design
was, to clear the way to man's salvation, by discovering the gins and traps
which are laid in the way of silly men, by the pernicious subtilty of those of
your party.

The way being thus cleared, we come to the main question, viz. Whether all
Points, defined by the Church, are Fundamental; and here,. 2.
because you tell us, His Lordship is like one that provides for a retreat or a
subterfuge, by cutting out a number of ambiguous distinctions; you give us fair
hopes what clear proceedings we may expect from you, who abhor as much the
clear stating of a question, as Foxes do running in beaten Roads. But, as well
as you love them, you must be drawn out of your Holes, which will be much for
the advantage of Truth, though very little for yours. To come therefore close
to the business, that you may not think I seek subterfuges, or retreats, I
shall wave all other acceptions of Fundamentals, and take the Question in your
own sense, that is, for Points necessary to Salvation. The Question then in
controversy between us, is this* Whether the ground or reason why any thing is
fundamental or necessary to salvation, be, because it is defined by the Church
to be so, and consequently, Whether all Points, defined by the Church, be not
fundamental or necessary to Salvation? For the occasion of this Controversy
was from the Greek Church, whether her error, as to the Procession from the
Son, be fundamental or no, i. e. such as excludes her from being a Church, and
consequently from Salvation. The ground of your affirmation, is, because the
Church has defined it to be so; so that the ground and reason why any thing is
supposed fundamental or necessary to Salvation, must be the Definition of the
Church: But for our better understanding your meaning, you distinguish of two
ways, whereby Points may be necessary to Salvation; the one absolutely, P. 15.
by reason of the matter they contain; which, say you, is so fundamentally
necessary in it self, that not only the disbelief of it, when propounded by the
Church, but the mere want of an express knowledge, and belief of it, will
hinder Salvation; and those are such Points, without the express belief
whereof, no man can be saved, which Divines call necessary necessitate medii;
others of this kind they call necessary necessitate praecepti, which all men
are commanded to seek after, and expressly believe; so that a culpable Ignorance
of them hinders Salvation, although some may be saved with invincible Ignorance
of them. And all these are absolutely necessary to be expressly believed, either
necessitate praecepti, or medii, in regard of the matter which they contain.
But the rest of the Points of Faith are necessary to be believed necessitate
praecepti, only conditionally, that is, to all such to whom they are
sufficiently propounded, as defined by the Church: which necessity proceeds not
precisely from the material object, or matter contained in them; but from the
formal object of Divine Authority, declared to Christians by the Churches
Definition. Whether therefore the Points in question be necessary in the first
manner or no, by reason of their precise matter; yet if they be necessary, by
reason of the Divine Authority, or Formal* object of Divine Revelation,
sufficiently declared and propounded to us, they will be Points Fundamental,
that is, necessary to Salvation to be believed, as we have showed Fundamental
must here be taken. These words of yours containing the full state of the
question in your own terms, and being the substance of all you say on this
Controversy, I have recited at large; that you may not complain, your meaning
is mistaken in them. You assert then, that besides that necessity which arises
from the matter of things to be believed, and from the absolute Command of God;
there is another necessity conditionally upon the Churches Definition, but,
supposing that Definition, the thing so propounded becomes as necessary to
Salvation, as what is necessary from the matter; for in all hypothetical
propositions, the supposition being in act, the matter becomes necessary. For,
unless you speak of such a necessity, as becomes as universally obligatory, on
supposition of the Churches Definition, as that which arises from the matter,
or absolute command; you are guilty of the greatest tergiversation, and
perverting the state of the Question. For, otherwise that cannot be said to be
fundamental or necessary to Salvation, in the sense of this Question, which is
not generally necessary to Salvation to all Christians. For no man was ever so
silly, as to imagine, that the Question of Fundamentals, with a respect to
whole Churches, as it is here taken, can be understood in any other sense, than
as the matter, called Fundamental or Necessary, must be equally fundamental and
necessary to all persons. And that this must be your meaning, appears by the
rise of the Controversy, which concerns the whole Greek Church, which you
exclude from being a Church, because she erres fundamentally, and that she
errres fundamentally, because the Church has defined it to be an error. So
that what the Church determines as matter of Faith, is as necessary to be
believed in order to Salvation, as that which is necessary from the matter, or
from an absolute Command. For, otherwise the Greek Church might not be in a
Fundamental Error, notwithstanding the Churches Definition: the ground of this
Error being Fundamental, not being derived from the matter, or absolute
Command, but from the Churches Definition. If therefore the denial of what the
Church defines, does exclude from Salvation; the necessity and obligation must
be equal to that which arises from the matter to be believed. And if the
Church defines any particulars to be explicitly believed as necessary to
Salvation, not only the not disbelieving them, but the not explicit believing
them, will be as destructive to Salvation, as if the matter of the things
themselves were necessary; or that it were absolutely commanded; for in those
cases you say, the not explicit believing is that which damns, and so on your
principles it will do here, when the explicit belief is the thing defined by
the Church. This will be more plain by an Instance. It is notoriously known,
that at the shutting up of the Council of Trent, a Confession of Faith was
drawn up, and confirmed by the Bull of Pius 4. A. D. 1564. and that, ut unius
and ejusdem fidei professio uniformiter ab omnibus exhibeatur, That the
Profession of one and the same Faith, may be made known to all, and declared
uniformally by all. In which Confession, after the enumeration of the Articles
contained in the Ancient Creed; there are many others added concerning
Traditions, Seven Sacraments, the Decrees of the Council of Trent, as to
Original sin and Justification; The Sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation,
Communion in one kind, Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images,
Indulgences, the Pope's Supremacy, etc. All which are required to be believed
with an equal assent to the former, as absolutely necessary to Salvation, and
necessary Conditions of Catholic Communion, For thus it ends; Hanc veram
Catholicam Fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, quam in praesenti sponte
profiteor, and veraciter teneo, eandem integram and inviolatam usque ad
extremum vitae spiritum, etc. This true Catholic Faith, without which none can
be saved, which at present I profess, and truly hold, and will do whole and
undefiled to my lives end, etc. Judge you now, whether an equal explicit Faith
be not here required to the Definitions of the Church, as to the Articles of
the Creed; and if so, there must be an equal necessity, in order to Salvation,
of believing both of them, it being here so expressly declared, that these
Definitions are Integral Parts of that Catholic Faith, without which there is
no Salvation. And what could be more said of those things, whose matter or
absolute precept do make them necessary? This Confession of Faith therefore,
gives us the truest state of the present Question, in these particulars. 1.
That the Definitions of the Church are to be believed, to be as necessary to
Salvation, as the Articles of the Ancient Creed, without the belief of which no
Salvation is to be expected. 2. That the explicit Belief of these Definitions
as necessary to Salvation* may be required in order to Catholic Communion, and
that they are to be believed of all as such, because they are defined by the
Church. So that the Question is not, What is so required by the Churches
Definition, declared and propounded to us, that it ought not to be dis-believed
without mortal and damnable sin, which unrepented destroys Salvation, as you
stated it; for this seems only to respect the Faith of particular persons, who
are to believe according as the Proposition may be judged sufficient: but the
true state of the Question, is, Whether any Definitions of the Church may be
believed as Necessary Articles of Faith; and whether they may be imposed on
others to be believed as such, so that they may be excluded Catholic Communion
if they do not. For this is really the true state of the Question, between your
Church, and ours, ever since the Council of Trent; and as to it thus stated (as
it ought to be) I do most readily join issue with you.

For the clearing of which important Question, on which the main cause of our
being separated from your Communion depends,. 3*
these three things will be necessary to be exactly discussed. 1. What the
Grounds are on which any thing does become necessary to Salvation? 2. Whether
any thing, whose matter is not necessary, and is not required by an absolute
Command, can by any means whatsoever afterward become necessary? 3. Whether
the Church has power by any Proposition or Definition to make any thing become
necessary to Salvation, and to be believed as such, which was not so before?
These three I suppose you cannot deny but will take in all that is considerable
in this Controversy. Which I shall with the more care examine, because nothing
tends more to the peace of the Christian World, than a through and clear
discussion of it; and nothing causes more the Schisms and Divisions of it,
than the want of a right and due conception of it.

1. What the Grounds are on which any thing does become necessary to Salvation?
For our better understanding of which, we must consider two things. 1. What
things are necessary to the Salvation of men as such, or considered in their
single and private capacities? 2. What things are necessary to be owned in
order to Salvation, by Christian Societies, or as the bonds and conditions of
Ecclesiastical Communion? The want of understanding this distinction of the
necessity of things, has caused most of the perplexities and confusion in this
Controversy of Fundamentals.

1. What those things are which are necessary to the Salvation of particular
persons? But that we make all as clear as possible, in a matter of so great
intricacy, two things again must be inquired into. 1. What the Ground is, why
any thing becomes necessary to be believed in order to Salvation? 2. What the
Measure and Extent is of those things which are to be believed by particular
persons as necessary to Salvation?

1. What the Ground or Foundation is, on which things become necessary to be
believed by particular persons? And that which is the true ground of the
necessity, why any thing is to be believed, is the proper ratio of a
Fundamental Article. For, I suppose it a much clearer notion of Fundamentals,
to understand them, not as Principles, from whence Deductions may be drawn of
Theological Truths; but in regard of that immediate respect which they have to
men's Salvation. Those things therefore which are necessary to be explicitly
believed by particular persons, are Fundamentals in order to their Salvation.
Now all belief in this case supposing Divine Revelation, nothing can be
imagined to be necessary to be believed, but what may be certainly known to be
of Divine Revelation. But when we consider, that besides the general reason of
believing what God has revealed; we must either suppose, that all things are
of equal necessity, which are revealed in order to the general end of this
Revelation; or, that some things therein contained, are expressly necessary to
the end, and other things to be believed on the general account of Faith, so
far as they are known to be of Divine Revelation. Now from hence arises a
twofold necessity of things to be believed; the first more general and large,
the second more particular and absolute. The first depends upon the formal
reason of Faith; the second, on the particular end of Divine Revelation. That
which depends on the formal reason of that Assent we call Faith, is that which
supposes Divine Veracity, or the impossibility of Gods deceiving us in any
thing revealed by Him; now this extends to all things whatsoever, which are
supposed by men to be of Divine Revelation. For, though men may mistake in the
matter, yet the reason of Assent holding, under that mistake, they are bound
necessarily to believe whatever is supposed by them to be Divine Revelation.
Here lies no difficulty in the ground of Faith, but all the care is to be used
in the search into the matters which are to be believed on the account of this
Revelation. But here we are to consider, that the only thing which is in
general and absolutely necessary to Salvation, is, the general act of Faith,
viz. Believing whatever God reveals to be true, else God's Veracity would be
called in question; but particular objects cannot be said, on this account, to
be absolutely and universally necessary, but only so far as there are
sufficient convictions, that those particulars are of Divine Revelation. And,
the more general and extensive the means of conviction are, the more large and
universal is the obligation to Faith. As, that the Scriptures contain in them
the Word of God, is a matter of more universal obligation, than particular
things therein revealed; because the belief of the one depends upon the
acknowledgement of the other. And withal, supposing it believed, that the
matters contained in Scripture are of Divine Revelation; yet all things are not
equally clear to all capacities, that they are therein contained. Which is a
sufficient ground for us, to say, It was not God's intention, that all things
contained in his Word, should be believed with the same degree of necessity by
all persons. And therefore, though the general reason of Faith depends on Gods
Veracity, yet the particular obligation to the belief of particular things, as
revealed by God, depends on the means, whereby we may be assured, that such
things are revealed by him: which means admitting of so great Variety, as to
the circumstances and capacities of particular persons, there can be no general
Rule set down what things are necessary to be believed by all particular
persons. For, those who have greater means of knowledge, a larger capacity, and
clearer proposal, are bound to believe more things explicitly, than those who
want all these, or have a lower degree of them. In which case, it is an
unreasonable thing to say, that such a one, who dis-believes any thing
propounded to him as a matter of Faith, does presently call in question God's
Veracity; for he may as firmly believe that as any in general, and yet may have
ground to question whether God's Veracity be at all concerned in that which is
propounded to him as a matter of Faith; because he sees no reason to believe
that this was ever revealed by God. And, by this, P. 1^.
a clear answer is given to that Question, which you propose: Whether all those
Truths which are sufficiently proposed to any Christian, as defined by the
Church for matter of Faith, can be dis-believed by such a Christian, without
mortal and damnable sin, which unrepented destroys Salvation? To which the
answer is easy upon the grounds here assigned: for this question concerning
particular persons, and particular objects of Faith, the resolution of it does
depend upon the sufficiency of the means, to convince such a person, that
whatever is propounded as Defined by the Church for a matter of Faith, is
certainly and truly so. For to instance in any one of those new Articles of
Faith, Transubstantiation, or the Pope's Supremacy, etc. you tell me, These are
necessary to be believed, or at least cannot be dis-believed without sin (which
is all one in this case, supposing clear conviction, for then what cannot be
dis-believed without sin, must be explicitly believed.) I desire to know the
grounds why they may not? you tell me, These are truths which are sufficiently
proposed to me, as defined by the Church for matters of Faith. I deny the
Churches Proposition to be sufficient to convince me, that these are matters of
Faith; for I understand not what Power your Church has to define any thing for
matter of Faith: if I granted that, I must understand what you mean by
sufficient Proposition; whether that your Church has so defined them, or that
she has power so to define them; and because I am heartily willing to believe
any thing that I have reason to believe is a matter of Faith; certainly it can
be no sin in me, not to believe that which I can see no ground at all to
believe, either in it self, or because of your Churches Definition. And all
this while, I have as high thoughts of God's Veracity, as you can have, and it
may be higher; because I interest it not in the false and contradictory
Definitions of your Church. If therefore you will prove it to be a damnable sin
not to believe whatever is proposed by your Church for a matter of Faith, you
must first prove, that there is as universal an obligation to believe whatever
is sufficiently proposed as defined by the Church for matter of Faith, as there
is to assent to whatever God reveals as true. And when you have done this, I
will give you leave to state the Question as you do: for then you would offer
something to the proof of it, which now you do not. The substance then of what
concerns the obligation to Faith, as to particular objects, on the account of
Divine Revelation, lies in the means of conviction concerning those particular
objects being divinely revealed, which being various, the degrees of Assent
must be various too: but yet so, that the more men are negligent of the means
of conviction, the more culpable their unbelief is; but where men use all moral
diligence to understand what is revealed, and what not, if they cannot be
convinced, that some particular thing is of Divine Revelation; it is hard to
prove them guilty of mortal and damnable sin, without first proving, that God
absolutely requires from men an Assent to that, which it is impossible in their
Circumstances they should believe. And this is the first sort of things
necessary to be believed by particular persons; such as are believed on the
general account of God's Veracity in revealing them.

But because there must be a more particular reason assigned of any such
intention in God to reveal his mind to the world,. 4.
viz. Some peculiar end which he had in it; therefore a further degree of the
necessity of things to be believed, must be enquired after, viz. such as have
an immediate and necessary respect to the prosecution of that end. Now the only
end assignable of that great expression of Divine Goodness, in declaring to man
the Will of God, is the Eternal Welfare and Happiness of mankind, for nothing
else can be imagined suitable and proportionable to the Wisdom and Goodness of
God; besides that, this is expressly mentioned in Scripture as God's great end
in it. Now this being the great end of Divine Revelation, the necessity of
things to be believed absolutely and in themselves, must be taken from the
reference or respect which they have to the attainment of this end. And,
although the distinction be commonly received, of necessity of the means, and
of the command, as importing a different kind of necessity, yet in the sense I
here take Necessity in, the members of that distinction do to me seem
coincident. For I cannot see any reason to believe that God should make the
belief of any thing necessary, by an absolute Command, but what has an
immediate tendency by way of means, for the attainment of this end: For
otherwise, that which is called the Necessity of Precept, falls under the
former degree of Necessity, viz. That which is to be believed on the general
account of Divine Revelation. And, although these things which are necessary,
as means, are to be believed on the same formal reason of Faith; yet since God
had a different end in the Revelation of these from the other, therefore there
is a necessity of putting a difference between them. For, supposing God to have
such a design to bring the souls of men to Happiness; in order to this end,
some means must be necessary, and these must consequently be revealed to men,
because they are so necessary in order to such an end: now it is apparent, All
things contained in Scripture, are not of that nature; some being at so great a
remove from this end, that the only reason of believing them, is, because they
are contained in that Book, which we have the greatest reason to believe,
contains nothing false in it. Now the only way whereby we may judge of the
nature of these things, is, from the consideration of what is made the most
necessary condition in order to happiness; and the way by which we may come to
it. And nothing being more evident, than that the Gospel contains in it a
Covenant of Grace, or the conditions on which our Salvation depends; whatever
is necessary in order to our performance of the conditions required of us, must
be necessary to be believed by all. The Gospel therefore tendering Happiness
upon the conditions of our believing in Christ, and walking in him; these two
things are indispensably necessary to Salvation (where the Gospel is known, for
we have no reason to enquire into the method of God's proceeding with others)
An hearty Assent to the Doctrine of Christ, and A conscientious walking
according to the Precepts of it. But to undertake to define what parts of that
Doctrine are necessary to Salvation, and what not, seems to me wholly
unnecessary; because the Assent to the Doctrine of Christ, as revealed from
God, must necessarily carry in it so much as is sufficient in order to
Salvation. Whatever therefore is necessary to a Spiritual Life, is necessary
absolutely to Salvation, and no more; but what, and how much that is, must be
gathered by every one as to himself from Scripture; but is impossible to be
defined by others, as to all persons. But in all Faith toward God, and in our
Lord Jesus Christ; and repentance from dead works, are absolutely and
indispensably necessary to Salvation, which imply in them, both an universal
readiness of mind to believe and obey God in all things: And by this we see,
what the Rule and Measure of the necessity of things to be believed is, as to
particular persons; which lies in these things.

1. Whatever God has revealed, is undoubtedly and infallibly true.

2. Whatever appears to me, upon sufficient enquiry, to be revealed by God, I
am bound to believe it by virtue of God's Veracity.

3. All things not equally appearing to all persons to be revealed of God, the
same measure of necessity cannot be extended to all persons.

4. An universal Assent to the Will of God, and universal Obedience to it, are
absolutely and indispensably necessary to all persons, to whom God's Word is
revealed.

Thus much may suffice concerning what is necessary to be believed by
particular persons, considered as such.

But this controversy never need break Christian Societies in that sense,. 5.
but the great difficulty lies in the other part of it, which is most commonly
strangely confounded with the former, viz. What things are necessary to be
owned, in order to Church-Societies, or Ecclesiastical Communion? For which, we
must consider, that the combination of Christian Societies, o^ that which we
call the Catholic Church, does subsist upon the belief of what is necessary to
Salvation. For the very notion of a Christian Church does imply the belief of
all those things, which are necessary in order to the end of Christian
Religion, which is men's eternal Happiness. From whence three things must be
taken notice of.

1. That the very being of a Church, does suppose the necessity of what is
required to be believed in order to Salvation. For else there could not be such
a thing as a Church imagined, which is only a combination of men together, upon
the belief of such a Doctrine as necessary to Salvation; and for the
performance of those acts of Worship which are suitable thereto: Therefore to
assert the Church to have power to make things necessary to Salvation, is not
only absurd, but destructive to the Being of that Church* For when it offered
to define any thing to be necessary, which was not so before, was it a Church
or no? If it was a Church, it believed all things necessary; if it believed all
things necessary, before it Defined; how comes it to make more things necessary
by its Definition? But of this more afterward.

2. Whatever Church owns those things which are antecedently necessary to the
Being of a Church, cannot so long cease to be a true Church. Because it retains
that which is the Foundation of the Being of the Catholic Church. Here we must
distinguish those things in the Catholic Church, which give its Being, from
those things which are the proper Acts of it, as the Catholic Church. As to
this latter, the solemn Worship of God in the way prescribed by him, is
necessary; in order to which there must be supposed lawful Officers set in the
Church, and Sacraments duly administered: but these, I say, are rather the
Exercise of the Communion of the Catholic Church, than that which gives its
Being, which is, the belief of that Religion whereon its Subsistence and Unity
depends; and as long as a Church retains this, it keeps its Being, though the
Integrity and Perfection of it depends upon the due exercise of all acts of
Communion in it.

3. The Union of the Catholic Church depends upon the agreement of it, in
making the Foundations of its Being, to be the grounds of its Communion. For
the Unity being intended to preserve the Being, there can be no reason given,
why the bonds of Union should extend beyond the Foundation of its Being, which
is, the owning the things necessary to the Salvation of all. From whence it
necessarily follows, that whatsoever Church imposes the belief of other things
as necessary to Salvation, which were not so antecedently necessary to the
Being of the Catholic Church, does, as much as in it lies, break the Unity of
it; and those Churches, who desire to preserve its Unity, are bound thereby not
to have communion with it so long as it does so. Of what great consequence
these principles are to the true understanding the Distance between our Church
and yours, if you see not now, you may feel afterward.

These things being premised, I come to that which is the main subject of the
present Dispute,. 6.
which is, What those things are which ought to be owned by all
Christian-Societies as necessary to Salvation, on which the Being of the
Catholic Church depends. If we can find any sure footing for the Definition of
these, we shall thereby find what the necessary conditions of Ecclesiastical
Communion are, and consequently where the proper cause of Schism lies in
transgressing those bounds, and what Foundations may be laid for the Peace of
the Christian world. Which being of so vast importance, would require a larger
discussion, than this place will admit of: but so far as is pertinent to our
present subject, I shall enquire into it; and give an account of my thoughts,
in these Propositions.

1. Nothing ought to be owned as necessary to Salvation by Christian-Societies,
but such things, which, by the judgment of all those Societies, are
antecedently necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church. For, no reason can
be assigned (as I said before) why the Bonds of Union should be extended beyond
that which is the Churches Foundation; neither can there any reason be given
why any thing else should be judged necessary to the Churches Communion, but
what all those Churches (who do not manifestly dissent from the Catholic
Church of the first Ages) are agreed in, as necessary to be believed by all;
this will be further explained afterward. Only I add here, when I speak of the
necessary conditions of Ecclesiastical Communion, I speak of such things which
must be owned as Necessary Articles of Faith, and not of any other Agreements
for the Churches Peace. I deny not therefore, but that in case of great
Divisions in the Christian world, and any National Churches reforming it self,
that Church may declare its sense of those abuses in Articles of Religion, and
require of men a Subscription to them; but then we are to consider, that there
is a great deal of difference between the owning some Propositions in order to
Peace, and the believing of them as necessary Articles of Faith. And this is
clearly the state of the difference between the Church of Rome, and the Church
of England. The Church of Rome imposes new Articles of Faith to be believed as
necessary to Salvation; as appears by the formerly cited Bull of Pius 4. Which
Articles contain in them the Justification of those things which are most
excepted against by other Churches; and by her imposing these as the conditions
of her Communion, she makes it necessary for other Churches, who would preserve
the Unity of the Catholic Church upon her true Foundations, to forbear her
Communion. But the Church of England makes no Articles of Faith, but such as
have the Testimony and Approbation of the whole Christian world of all ages,
and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it self, and in other things she
requires Subscription to them not as Articles of Faith, but as Inferior
Truths, which she expects a submission to, in order to her Peace and
Tranquillity. So the late learned L. Primate of Ireland often expresses the
sense of the Church of England, as to her thirty nine Articles. Neither does
the Church of England, says he, define any of these Questions, as necessary to
be believed, either necessitate medii, or necessitate praecepti, which is much
less; Bishop Bramhall. Schism Guarded. sect. 7* p 396.
but only binds her Sons, for Peace sake, not to oppose them. And in another
place more fully. We do not suffer any man to reject the thirty nine Articles
of the Church of England at his pleasure; Sect. 1. cap 11. p. 190. V.
Replication to the Bishop of Chalcedon* p. 264.
yet neither do we look upon them as Essentials of Saving Faith, or Legacies of
Christ and his Apostles: but in a mean, as pious Opinions fitted for the
preservation of Unity; neither do we oblige any man to believe them, but only
not to contradict them. By which we see, what a vast difference there is
between those things which are required by the Church of England, in order to
Peace; and those which are imposed by the Church of Rome, as part of that
Faith, extra quam non est salus, without belief of which there is no Salvation.
In which she has as much violated the Unity of the Catholic Church, as the
Church of England by her Prudence and Moderation has studied to preserve it.

2. Nothing ought to be imposed as a necessary Article of Faith to be believed
by all, but what may be evidently propounded to all persons,. 7*
as a thing which God did require the explicit belief of. It being impossible
to make any thing appear a necessary Article of Faith, but what may not only be
evidently proved to be revealed by God, but that God does oblige all men to the
belief of it in order to Salvation. And therefore none of those things, whose
obligation does depend on variety of Circumstances, ought in reason be made the
Bonds of that Communion which cannot take notice of that variety as to men's
conditions and capacities. There are many things in Christian Religion, which,
whosoever believes the truth of it, cannot but easily discern to be necessary
in order to the profession and practice of it, in most of which the common
sense and reason of mankind is agreed. Not only the Existence of a Deity, the
clear discovery of the Wisdom, Goodness and Power of God, with his Providence
over the world, and the Immortality of Souls, being therein most evidently
revealed; but, the way and manner of the restitution of men's souls by Faith in
Jesus Christ as our only Savior, and Obedience to his Commands, is so fully
laid down in the clearest terms, that no rational man, who considers the nature
of Christian Religion, but must assert the profession of all these things to be
necessary to all such, who own Christian Religion to be true. But there are
many other things in Christian Religion, which are neither so clearly revealed
in the Scriptures, nor unanimously assented to in any age of the Christian
Church; and, why any such things should be made the conditions of that
Communion in the Catholic Church, whose very being depends only on necessary
things, would puzzle a Philosopher to understand. As if none should be
accounted Mathematicians, but such as could square circles; and none
Naturalists, but such as could demonstrate whether quantity were infinitely
divisible or no: much so it is, if none should be accounted members of the
Catholic Church, but such as own the truth and necessity of some at least as
disputable Points, as any in Religion. Let therefore any Romanist tell me,
whether the Pope's Supremacy be as clear in Scripture, as that Christ is
Savior of the world; whether Purgatory be as plain as Eternal Life;
Transubstantiation as evident, as that the Eucharist ought to be administered;
whether Invocation of Saints be as manifest, as the Adoration of God; the
Doctrine of Indulgences, as Repentance from dead works; and if there be so
great a clearness in the Revelation of the one, and so far from it as to the
other; let them give any just account why the belief of the one is made as
necessary to Salvation as the other is. Certainly, such who take in things at
least so disputable as all these are, and enforce the belief of them in order
to their Communion, cannot otherwise be thought but to have a design to exclude
a great part of the Christian world from their Communion; and, to do so, and
then cry out of them as Schismatics, is the most unreasonable proceedings in
the world.

3. Nothing ought to be required as a necessary Article of Faith, but what has
been believed and received for such by the Catholic Church of all Ages.. 8.
For, since necessary Articles of Faith are supposed to be so antecedently to
the Being of the Catholic Church, since the Catholic Church does suppose the
continual acknowledgement of such things as are necessary to be believed, it is
but just and reasonable to admit nothing as necessary, but what appears to have
been so universally received. Thence it is, that Antiquity, Universality, and
Consent, are so much insisted on by Vincentius Lerinensis, in order to the
proving any thing to be a necessary Article of Faith. But the great difficulty
of this lies in finding out what was received for a necessary Article of Faith,
and what was not by the Catholic Church; which being a subject, as necessary,
as seldom spoken to, I shall not leave it untouched, although I must premise,
that Rule to be much more useful in discovering what was not looked on as a
necessary Article of Faith, than what was; and therefore I begin with that
first.

1. It is sufficient evidence, that was not looked on as a necessary Article of
Faith, which was not admitted into the Ancient Creeds. Whether all those
Declarations which were inserted in the enlargements of the Apostolical Creed,
by the Councils of Nice and Constantinople, and in that Creed which goes under
the name of Athanasius, were really judged by the Catholic Church of all Ages,
to be necessary to Salvation, is not here my business to enquire; but there
seems to be a great deal of reason for the Negative, that what was not inserted
in the Ancient Creeds, was not by them judged necessary to be believed by all
Christians. I know, it is said by some of your party, That the Apostolical
Creed did only contain those Articles which were necessary to be believed, in
opposition to the present Heresies which were then in the Church. As though the
necessity of believing in Christians, came only by an Antiperistasis of the
opposition of Heretics; And if there had been no Heretics to have denied
God's being the Creator, and Christ's being the Savior; it had not been
necessary to have believed either of them so explicitly as now we do. But when
we speak of all things necessary to be believed by all; I mean not, that all
circumstances of things contained in those Creeds are necessary to be believed
in order to Salvation; but, that all those things which were judged as
necessary to be believed by all, were therein inserted, will appear to any one
who either considers the expressions of the Ancients concerning the Creeds then
in Use; or the primary reason why such Summaries of Faith were ever made in the
Christian Church. The testimonies of the Fathers to this purpose are so well
known in this subject, that it were a needless task to repeat them, who so
unanimously assert the sufficiency, Irenaeus. l. 1 c. 2, 3. Tertul. de veland.
virgin. c. 1. de praescript. c. 13, 14. Cyril Hierosolomit* Catech 4, 5.
Hiero^. ep. 61. ad Pammach. Augustine. de symbol* ad Catec^. l. 3* c. 1 de temp.
sermon. 115, 119, 131* 181. Ambros. sermon. 38. de jejun. and Quadrag. etc. Hilar.
ad Constant. Aug. Ruffinus in symbol. c. 2.
unalterableness and perfection of that Faith, which is contained in the Creed;
making it, the sum of all necessary Doctrines the Foundation of the Catholic
Faith and of the Church, the first and sole Confession of Evangelical Doctrine.
Of all which, and many more expressions to the same purpose, produced not only
by our Writers, but by yours too, no tolerable sense can be made, without
asserting, that whatever was judged necessary to be believed by all, by the
Catholic Church of that Age they lived in, or before them, was therein
contained. Besides, what account can be given why any such Summaries of Faith
should at all be made either by Apostles, or Apostolical persons; but only for
that end, that necessary Articles of Faith might be reduced into such a
compass, as might become portable to the weakest capacities? If the rise of
Creeds were (as most probable it was) from the things propounded, to the
Catechumens, to be believed in order to Baptism, can we reasonably think, that
any thing judged necessary to be believed, should be left out? If the
Apostolical Creed be a summary comprehension of that Form of sound Doctrine,
which the Apostles delivered to all Christians at their first conversion (as it
is generally supposed) either we must think the Apostles unfaithful in their
work, or the Creed an unfaithful account of their Doctrine, or that such things
which were supposed universally necessary to be believed, are therein
comprehended. Which is sufficient for my purpose, that nothing ought to be
looked on as a necessary Article of Faith, or was so esteemed by the Catholic
Church, which is not contained in the Ancient Creeds.

2. Nothing ought to be judged a necessary Article of Faith, but, what was
universally believed by the Catholic Church, to be delivered as such by
Christ, or his Apostles. So that it is not the judgment, but the testimony of
the Catholic Church, which must be relied on, and that testimony only, when
universal, as delivering what was once infallibly delivered by Christ, or his
Apostles. From whence it follows, that any one who will undertake to make out
any thing as a necessary Article of Faith, by Catholic Tradition merely, must
do these things:

1. He must make it appear to be universally embraced at all times, and in all
places, by such who were members of the Catholic Church.

2. That none ever opposed it, but he was presently disowned as no member of
the Catholic Church, because opposing something necessary to Salvation.

3. That it be delivered by all those Writers of the Church, who give an
account of the Faith of Christians, or what was delivered by Christ and his
Apostles to the Church.

4. That it was not barely looked on as necessary to be believed by such as
might be convinced it was of Divine Revelation, but that it was delivered with
a necessity of its being explicitly believed by all.

5. That what is delivered by the consent of the Writers of the Catholic
Church, was undoubtedly the Consent of the Church of those ages.

6. That all those Writers agree not only in the Belief of the thing it self,
but of the Necessity of it to all Christians.

7. That no Writers or Fathers of succeeding Ages, can be supposed to alter in
the belief either of the matters believed before, or the necessity of them.

8. That no oppositions of Heretics, or heats of Contention, could make them
judge any Article so opposed, to be more necessary, than it was judged before
that Contention; or they themselves would have judged it, had it not been so
opposed.

9. That when they affirm many Traditions to be Apostolical, which yet varied
in several Churches, they could not affirm any Doctrine to be Apostolical,
which they were not universally agreed in.

10. That when they so plainly assert the sufficiency of the Scriptures as a
Rule of Faith, they did yet believe something necessary to Salvation, which was
not contained therein.

When you, or any one else, will undertake to make good these conditions; I
shall then begin to believe, that something may be made appear to be a
necessary Article of Faith, which is not clearly revealed in Scripture, but not
before: but till then, this Negative will suffice, that nothing ought to be
embraced, as the judgment of the Church concerning a necessary Article of
Faith, but what appears to be clearly revealed in Scriture, and universally
embraced by the Catholic Church of all Ages.

3. Nothing ought to be looked on as a necessary Article of Faith, by the
judgment of the Catholic Church, the denial of which was not universally
opposed, and condemned as Heresy. For otherwise the Catholic Church, was very
little sensible of the honor of Christian Faith, if it suffered dissenters in
necessary things, without putting a mark of dishonor upon them. Therefore we
may conclude, that whatever was patiently born with in such as dissented from
the generality of Christians, especially, if considerable persons in the Church
were the authors or fomenters of such opinions, however true the contrary
Doctrine was supposed to be, yet it was not supposed necessary, because then
the opposers would have been condemned of Heresy, by some open act of the
Catholic Church.

. 9.
But if, beyond these Negatives, we would enquire what was positively believed
as necessary to Salvation, by the Catholic Church; we shall hardly find any
better way, than by the Articles of the Ancient Creeds, and the universal
opposition of any new Doctrine on its firsts appearance, and the condemning the
broachers of it for Heresy in Ecumenical Councils, with the continual
disapprobation of those Doctrines by the Christian Churches of all Ages. As is
clear in the cases of Arrius and Pelagius. For it seems very reasonable to
judge, that since the necessary Articles of Faith were all delivered by the
Apostles to the Catholic Church, since the foundation of that Church lies in
the belief of those things, which are necessary, that nothing should be
delivered contrary to any necessary Article of Faith but the Church, by some
evident act, must declare its dislike of it, and its resolution thereby to
adhere to that necessary Doctrine, which was once delivered to the Saints. And
withal, it seems reasonable, that because Art and Subtilty may be used by such
who seek to pervert the Catholic Doctrine, and to wrest the plain places of
Scripture, which deliver it, so far from their proper meaning, that very few
ordinary capacities may be able to clear themselves of such mists as are cast
before their eyes; the sense of the Catholic Church in succeeding ages, may be
a very useful way for us to embrace the true sense of Scripture, especially in
the great Articles of the Christian Faith. As for instance, in the Doctrine of
the Deity of Christ, or the Trinity; though the subtilty of such Modern
Heretics, who oppose either of these, may so far prevail on persons, either
not of sufficient judgment, or not sufficiently versed in the Scriptures, as
at present to make them acknowledge the places are not so clear as they
imagined them to be; yet they being always otherwise interpreted by the
Catholic Church, or the Christian Societies of all ages, lays this potent
prejudice against all such attempts, as not to believe such interpretations
true, till they give a just account, why, if the belief of these Doctrines were
not necessary, the Christians of all ages from the Apostles times, did so
unanimously agree in them, that when any began first to oppose them, they were
declared and condemned for Heretics for their pains. So that the Church of
England does very piously declare her consent with the Ancient Catholic
Church, in not admitting any thing to be delivered as the sense of Scripture,
which is contrary to the consent of the Catholic Church in the four first
ages. Not as though the sense of the Catholic Church were pretended to be any
infallible Rule of interpreting Scripture in all things which concern the Rule
of Faith; but that it is a sufficient Prescription against any thing which can
be alleged out of Scripture, that if it appear contrary to the sense of the
Catholic Church from the beginning, it ought not to be looked on as the true
meaning of the Scripture. All this security is built upon this strong
presumption, that nothing contrary to the necessary Articles of Faith, should
he held by the Catholic Church, whose very being depends upon the belief of
those things which are necessary to Salvation. As long therefore as the Church
might appear to be truly Catholic by those correspondencies which were
maintained between the several parts of it, that what was refused by one, was
so by all; so long this unanimous and uncontradicted sense of the Catholic
Church, ought to have a great sway upon the minds of such who yet profess
themselves members of the Catholic Church. From whence it follows, that such
Doctrines may well be judged destructive to the Rule of Faith, which were so
unanimously condemned by the Catholic Church within that time. And thus much
may suffice for the first Inquiry, viz. What things are to be esteemed
necessary, either in order to Salvation, or in order to Ecclesiastical
Communion.

2. Whether any thing which was not necessary to Salvation,. 10.
may by any means whatsoever afterward become necessary, so that the not
believing it becomes damnable, and unrepented destroys Salvation? We suppose
the Question to proceed on such things as could not antecedently to such an act
whereby they now become necessary, be esteemed to be so, either from the
matter, or from any express command. For you in terms assert a necessity of
believing distinct from the matter, and absolute command, and has the Churches
Definition for its formal object, which makes the necessity of our Faith
continually to depend upon the Churches Definition; but this strange kind of
Ambulatory Faith, I shall now show to be repugnant, to the design of Christ and
his Apostles, in making known Christian Religion, and to all evidence of
Reason, and directly contrary to the plain and uncontradicted sense of the
Primitive and Catholic Church.

1. It is contrary to the design of Christ and his Apostles, in making known
the Christian Religion to the world. For, if the design of Christ was to
declare whatever was necessary to the Salvation of mankind, if the Apostles
were sent abroad for this very end, then either they were very unfaithful in
discharge of their trust, or else they taught all things necessary for their
Salvation; and, if they did so, how can any thing become necessary, which they
did never teach? Was it not the great Promise concerning the Messiah, that at
his coming, the Earth should be full of the Knowledge of the Lord, as the
Waters cover the Sea; that then they shall all be taught of God? Was not this
the just expectation of the people concerning him, Isa. 11.9. Joh. 6.45. Joh.
4.25. Joh. 15.15.
That when he came he would tell them all things? Does not he tell his
Disciples, That all things I have heard of my Father, I have made known unto
you? And, for all this, is there something still remaining necessary to
Salvation, which neither he, nor his Disciples, did ever make known to the
world? Does not he promise Life and Salvation to all such as believe and obey
his Doctrine? And can any thing be necessary for eternal life, which he never
declared? or did he only promise it to the men of that Age and Generation, and
leave others to the mercy of the Churches Definitions? If this be so, we have
sad cause to lament our condition, upon whom these heavy loins of the Church
are fallen: how happy had we been, if we had lived in Christ's, or the Apostles
times; for then we might have been saved, though we had never believed the
Pope's Supremacy, or Transubstantiation, or Invocation of Saints, or
Worshipping Images; but now the case is altered; these Milstones are now hung
about our necks, and how we shall swim to Heaven with them, who knows? How
strangely mistaken was our Savior, when he said, Blessed are they that have
not seen, and yet have believed; For, much more blessed certainly were they,
who did see him, and believe in him; for then he would undertake for their
Salvation; but now, it seems, we are out of his reach, and turned over to the
Merciless Infallibility of the present Church. When Christ told his Disciples,
His yoke was easy, and burden light; he little thought, what Power he had left
in the Church to lay on so much load, as might cripple men's belief; were it not
for a good reserve in a corner, called Implicit Faith. When he sent the
Apostles to teach all that he commanded them, he must be understood so, that
the Church has power to teach more if she pleases; and though the Apostles,
poor men, were bound up by this commission, and S. Peter himself too, yet his
Infallible Successors have a Paramount Privilege beyond them all. Though the
Spirit was promised to the Apostles, to lead them into all Truth, yet there
must be no incongruity, in saying, They understood not some necessary Truths
(for how should they, when never revealed) as Transubstantiation, Supremacy,
etc. Because, though they never dreamt of such things, yet the Infallible
Church has done it since for them; and, to say truth, though the Apostles
names were put into the promise, yet they were but Feoffees in trust for the
Church, and the benefit comes to the Church by them. For they were only Tutors
to the Church in its minority, teaching it some poor Rudiments of Christ and
Heaven, of Faith and Obedience, etc. But the great and Divine Mysteries of the
seven Sacraments, Indulgences, Worship of Images, Sacrifice of the Mass, etc.
were not fit to be made known till the Church were at age her self, and knew
how to declare her own mind. When S. Paul speaks so much of the great Mysteries
hidden from Ages and Generations, but now made known, it must be understood
with a reference to those silly people who lived in that Age; but there were
greater Mysteries than these, which neither Christ, nor any of his Apostles
were ever acquainted with, as Purgatory, and those before mentioned; for these
were reserved as the Churches Portion, when her Infallibility-ship should come
to Age. S. Paul, honest man, spoke as he thought, when he told not the common
people, but the Bishops of the Church, That he had not shunned to declare unto
them all the Counsel of God; Act. 20.27.
but if he had lived to our Age, he would have heard of this mistake with both
ears; and if he had not sworn the contrary, he must have been contented to have
been called Schismatic and Heretic a thousand times over. These are all the
just and rare consequences of your Churches blessed Infallibility, and Power of
Defining things necessary, which were not so in Christ, or his Apostles times.
But, the greatest knack of all is yet behind; for men are bound to believe all
the Doctrines of your Church to be Apostolical, and yet that your Church has
power to make things necessary to be believed, which were not so in the
Apostolical times. Yes, say you, They were Doctrines then, but not so necessary
as now, because they had not the Churches Definition. It seems, at last, the
Apostles knew them, but did not understand the worth of them; else, no doubt,
they were such charitable souls, they would have declared them to the world.
Blessed S. Paul, who was continually employed in teaching and instructing men
in the way to Salvation, could he have held back any thing that had tended to
it, when he says, He kept back nothing that was profitable to them, but showed
them, and taught them publicly, Act. 20.20, 21.
and from house to house, testifying to the Jews, and also to the Greeks,
Repentance toward God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ: What, not one word
of the necessary Points all this while? nothing of the Church of Rome, nor
Christ's Vicar on Earth, and his Infallibility? How slily and cunningly did S.
Paul, and the rest of the Apostles carry it, if they had believed these
things; never let one word drop from their mouths or pens concerning them? and
instead of that, speak so, and write so, that one that believes them honest,
would swear they never heard of them. In what another kind of strain would S.
Paul have writ to the Church of Rome, if he had had but any inckling of the
Chair of Infallibility, being placed there? How soon would he have blotted out
the whole 14. Chapter of his Epistle to the Corinthians, if he had known his
Holiness his pleasure about serving God in an unknown tongue? How well might he
have spared saying, That a Bishop should be the Husband of one Wife, if he had
known de jure divino he must have none at all? At what another rate would he
have discoursed of the Eucharist, had he believed Transubstantiation, Sacrifice
of the Mass, Communion under one kind? What course would he have taken with the
Schismatical Corinthians, that were divided like other Churches, if he had
known the Infallible Judge of Controversy? If he had but understood the danger
of reading Scriptures, he might have spared his exhortations to the people of
the Word of God dwelling richly in them, and filled his Epistles with Pater
Nosters, and Ave Mary's, or given good directions about them. But he must be
pardoned, he was ignorant of these things, as well as we: only S. Paul never
heard of them, and we do not believe them; because neither he, nor his Brethren
ever revealed them to us, though they were the Stewards of the Mysteries of
God; and they tell us themselves, That it is requisite such should be faithful,
which we cannot understand how they could be, if they knew these deep
Mysteries, but never discovered them that we can learn. But, if they knew them
not, I pray from whence is it your Church learns them? By immediate
inspiration? no, as bold as you are, you dare not challenge that: but whence
then come you to know them to be necessary? infallibly forsooth: But whence
comes this Infallibility? must there not be a peculiar Revelation, to discover
that to be necessary, which was never discovered to be so before? But if
discovered before, and declared before, the things were as necessary before
your Churches Definition, as after; and therefore your Churches Definition adds
nothing of necessity to them. If neither discovered, nor declared, you must
have particular Revelation for them, and then work miracles, and we will
believe you, but not otherwise; but, before you do it, consider what S. Paul
has said concerning an Angel from Heaven preaching another Gospel, let him be
accursed; and what can be more preaching another Gospel, than making other
things necessary to Salvation, than Christ or his Apostles did; and think then
what your Church has deserved for all her Definitions concerning Articles of
Faith, or things necessary to be believed in order to Salvation. But yet
further you say, That these things were declared by the Apostles, but they need
a further Declaration now: And why so? show us the Apostle's Declaration, and
it suffices us; we shall not believe them one jot the more for your additional
Definition. And it is surely a sign, you did not think the Apostles Declaration
sufficient, or else you would never pretend to new ones. Perhaps you will tell
us, It was to their Age, but not to ours? why not, as well as the other
necessary Articles of Faith contained in Scripture? I know your Answer is, We
can know no necessary Article of Faith at all; but from your Church. So then,
we have brought all into a narrow compass, and instead of new Definitions of
the Church concerning necessary things, we can know nothing at all to be
necessary to be believed, but from your Church. This is high, but the higher it
is, the better Foundation it had need stand on, which we shall thoroughly search
into; in the Controversy of the resolution of Faith: to which we referr it,
and return. If there were once a Declaration, but still there needs another,
What is become of that Declaration? was it lost in its passage down to us? how
then was that present Church infallible, which lost a Declaration in matter of
Faith? was it necessary to be believed in the intermediate Age or no? if it
was, then it was not lost, and then what need a new Declaration? if not, then a
thing once necessary to Salvation, may be not necessary to Salvation, and
become necessary to Salvation again. But still we have cause to envy their
happiness, who lived in the Age when they might be saved without believing
these things: for the case goes hard with us, for you tell us, Unless we
believe them necessary, we cannot be saved; and our consciences tell us, that
if we did profess to believe them necessary, when we do not, and cannot, we
cannot be saved. What a case then were we in, if the Pope were Christ's Vicar
in Heaven, as he pretends to be on Earth; but it is our comfort, he is neither
so, nor so. Thus we see what repugnancy there is both to Scirpture and Reason
in this strange Doctrine of your Churches Definitions, making things necessary
to Salvation, which were not so before.

. 11.
I should now proceed to show how repugnant this Doctrine is to the unanimous
consent of Antiquity; but I find my self prevented in that, by the late
Writings of one of your own Communion; and if you will believe him in his
Epistle Dedicatory (which I much question) the present Popes most humble
Servant, our Countryman Mr. Thomas White. Whose whole Book, called his Tabulae
Suffragiales, is purposely designed against this fond and absurd Opinion; nay,
he goes so high, as to assert the Opinion of the Pope's Personal Infallibility,
Tabulae suff. cap. 19, 20, 21.
not only to be Heretical, but Archi-heretical; and that the propagating of
this Doctrine is in its kind a most grievous sin. It cannot but much rejoice us
to see, that men of wit and parts begin to discover the intolerable arrogance
of such pretenses, and that such men as D. Holden, and Mr. White, are in many
things come so near the Protestant Principles; and that since they quit the
Plea of Infallibility, and rely on Universal Tradition, we are in hopes that
the same reason and ingenuity which carried these persons thus far, will carry
others, who go on the same principles, so much farther, as to see, how
impossible it is to make good the points in Controversy between us, upon the
Principle of Universal Tradition. Which the Bigots of your Church are
sufficiently sensible of, and therefore, like the Man at Athens, when your
Hands are cut off, you are resolved to hold this Infallibility with your Teeth:
and so that Gentleman finds by the proceedings of the Court of Rome against him
for that and his other pieces. But, this should not have been taken notice of,
lest we should seem to see (as who does not, that is not stark blind?) what
growing Divisions and Animosities there are among your selves both at home and
in foreign parts; and yet all this while the poor silly people must be told,
that there is nothing but Division out of your Church, and nothing but Harmony
and Music in it, but such as is made of Discords. And that about this present
Controversy; for the forenamed Gentleman in his Epistle to the present Pope,
tells him plainly, That it is found true by frequent Experience, That there is
no defending the Catholic Faith against the subtilties of his Heretical
Countrymen, Neque si complurium experimentis fidem habere liceat, adversus
nostratium haereticorum subtilitates fides Catholica sustineri potest absque
praecipuis hujus libelli dogmatibus, and (si conjicere fas sit) aliquibus
accusatis. Tabulae suffrag. ep. dedicat. ad Papam Alex. 7.
without the principles of that Book, which was condemned at Rome. And what
those principles are, we may easily see by this Book, which is writ in defense
of the former. Wherein he largely proves, that the Church has no power to make
New Articles of Faith, which he proves both from Scripture, Reason and
Authority; this last, is that I shall referr the Reader to him for: for in his
second Table, as he calls it, he proves from the testimonies of Origin, Basil,
Chrysostom, Cyril, Irenaeus, Tertullian, Tabulae suffrag. tab. 2. p. 11, etc.
Pope Stephen, Hierom, Theophylact, Augustine, Vincentius Lerinensis, and
several others; nay, the testimonies, he says, to this purpose, are so many,
that whole Libraries must be transcribed to produce them all. And afterward
more largely proves, That the Faith of the Church lies in a continued
succession from the Apostles, both from Scripture and Reason, and abundance of
Church-Authorities in his 4, 5, and 6. Tables: and, through the rest of his
Book, disproves the Infallibility of Councils and Pope. And, can you think all
this is answered by an Index Expurgatorius, or by publishing a false-Latin
Order of the inquisition at Rome, whereby his Books are prohibited, and his
Opinions condemned as heretical, erroneous in Faith, rash, scandalous,
seditious, and what not? It seems then, it is grown at last de fide, that the
Pope is infallible, and never more like to do so, than in this age; V. exemplar
ipsius Decreti apud Tho. Albii purgat. p. 9.
for the same person gives us this character of it in his Purgation of himself,
to the Cardinals of the Inquisition, saying, That their Eminencies, by the
unhappiness of the present Age, in which Knowledge is banished out of the
Schools, Eminentissimos Praesules, infortunio prae^entis seculi in quo scientia
ex Scholis exulat, et fidei and Theologiae veritates numero votorum
aestim^ntur, incidisse in Consultores ex majori part and ignaros and
arrogantes, qui intrepid^ consigant propositiones, quas jurati asserant se
nescire, sintne verae vel falsae. Appendix Albiana ad Purgat. sect. poster. p.
212. A. D. 1662.
and the Doctrines of Faith and Theological Truths are judged by most voices;
fell, it seems, upon some ignorant and arrogant Consultors; who, hand over
head, condemn those Propositions, which, upon their oaths, they could not tell
whether they were true or false. If these be your proceedings at Rome, happy we
that have nothing to do with such Infallible Ignorance: This is the Age your
Religion were like to thrive in, if Ignorance were as predominant elsewhere, as
it seems it is at Rome. But I leave this, and return.

3. The last thing is,. 12.
Whether the Church has Power by any Proposition or Definition, to make any
thing become necessary to Salvation, and to be believed as such which was not
so before? But this is already answered by the foregoing Discourse; for if the
necessity of the things to be believed, must be supposed antecedently to the
Churches Being, if that which was not before necessary, cannot by any act
whatsoever afterward become necessary, then it unavoidably follows, That the
Church neither has, nor can have any such power. Other things which relate to
this, we shall have occasion to discuss in following your steps: which, having
thus far cleared this important Controversy, I betake my self to.

And we are highly obliged to you, for the rare Divertisements you give us in
your excellent way of managing Controversies. Had my Lord of Canterbury been
living, What an excellent entertainment would your Confutation of his Book have
afforded him? But, since so pleasant a Province is fallen to my share, I must
learn to command my self in the management of it, and therefore, where you
present us with any thing which deserves a serious Answer, for truth and the
causes sake, you shall be sure to have it. In the first place, you charge his
Lordship with a Fallacy, and that is, because, when he was to speak of
Fundamentals, he did not speak of that which was not Fundamental. ^. 15. n. 4.
But, say you, He turns the difficulty, which only proceeded upon a
Fundamentality or Necessity, derived from the formal Object, that is, from the
Divine Authority revealing that Point, to the Material Object, that is, to the
importance of the Matter contained in the Point revealed; which is a plain
Fallacy, in passing a sensu formali ad materialem. Men seldom suspect those
faults in others, which they find not strong inclinations to in themselves; had
you not been conscious of a notorious Fallacy in this distinction of Formal and
Material Object, as here applied by you; you would never have suspected any
such Sophistry in his Lordship's Discourse. I pray consider what kind of
Fundamentals those are, which the Question proceeds on, viz. such as are
necessary to be owned as such by all Churches, in order to their being true
Churches, as is plain by the rise of this Controversy; for Mr. Fisher was
proving the Greek Church to be no true Church, and, in order to that, proves,
that she erred Fundamentally, for which he makes Use of this Medium; That,
whatever is defined by the Church is Fundamental. So that the whole Process of
the Dispute lies thus. TWhat ever Church is guilty of a Fundamental Error,
cease to be a true Church; but the Greek Church is guilty of a Fundamental
Error; ergo. The Minor being denied, he thus proves it: If whatever is defined
by the Church be Fundamental, then the Greek Church is guilty of a Fundamental
error, because she denies something defined by the Church; but whatever is
defined by the Church is Fundamental; which is the thing his Lordship denies,
and his adversary is bound to prove. So that any one who was not resolved to
wink as hard as you do, might easily see, the state of the Controversy does
not concern what things are Fundamental, supposing men know them to be
sufficiently propounded; but what things are so necessary to be owned for
Fundamentals, that upon the denying them, a Church cease to be a true Church.
Yet this mistake as gross and palpable, as it is, runs through your whole
Discourse of Fundamentals, which, without it cannot hold together. If you will
therefore prove, that, besides such things whose necessity arises from the
matter, there are other from the Formal Object, which all Churches are equally
bound to believe, in order to their being true Churches, you do something; but
not before.

But we must still attend your Motions, especially when they tend toward
proofs, as yours do now. For, say you, Now I show (the difficulty being
understood, as it ought to be of the Formal Object, whereby Points of Faith are
manifested to Christians) that all Points defined by the Church as matter of
Faith, are Fundamental; that is, necessary to Salvation to be believed by all
those to whom they are sufficiently propounded to be so defined by this
Argument. Whosoever refuses to believe any thing sufficiently propounded to
him for a truth revealed from God, commits a sin damnable and destructive of
Salvation: But, whosoever refuses to believe any Point sufficiently propounded
to him for defined by the Church as matter of Faith, refuses to believe a thing
sufficiently propounded to him for a truth revealed from God. Ergo, Whosoever
refuses to believe any Point sufficiently propounded to him for defined by the
Church as matter of Faith, commits a sin damnable and destructive of Salvation.
Before you proceed to the proof of your Minor, several things must here be
considered, that we may better understand your meaning, and know what it is you
intend to prove. Especially what you intend by sufficient Proposition. Do you
mean such a Proposition as carries evidence along with it, or not? in which
case the very understanding the terms, is sufficient Proposition, as that, two
and two make four; but, I suppose, you mean not this, therefore it must be the
sufficient Proposition of something which wants natural evidence; and therefore
something else must be required, besides, the propounding the thing to make the
Proposition be said to be sufficient. For Sufficiency relates to some end; so
that a sufficient Proposition must be such a Proposition as is sufficient for
its end: now the end of the Proposition of Matters of Faith, is, that they may
be believed; and therefore the sufficiency of the Proposition lies in the
Arguments or Motives inducing men to believe. Now the Objects of Faith being of
a different nature, the Sufficiency of the Proposition must be taken from a
respect to them: for in things which are so clearly revealed, as necessary to
Salvation, that none who acknowledge the Scripture to be God's Word, can doubt
but such things are necessary; in this case the Sufficiency of the Proposition
lies in the Evidence of Divine Revelation, and the clearness of it to all
understandings who consider it, and the Reasons or Motives of Faith in that
case, are the same with those which induce men to believe, that the Scripture
it self is from Divine Revelation. But, there being other things in Scripture,
which neither appear so clear, or so necessary to be believed by all, something
else is required in order to a sufficient Proposition of them, and in order to
the making any of these things universally obligatory to Christians on pain of
damnation, for not believing them these things are necessary. 1. It must be
much clearer than the thing which is propounded to be believed on the account
of it; for, to propound a thing to be believed by something at least as
disputable as the matter it self, cannot certainly be called a sufficient
Proposition. 2. It must be antecedently proved to be a true and certain
Proposition, before any thing can be believed on the account of it. For, if men
cannot see any reason to believe that there is any necessary Connection between
that which you call a sufficient Proposition, and any matter of Faith; they
cannot be guilty of any sin at all in not believing what you think is
sufficiently propounded. But, in this case, it is not your judgment, what
Proposition is sufficient that makes it so, but the Reason of the Thing, and
the Evidence that God has appointed that way to reveal his Will to men, and
that what is so propounded is necessary to be believed. As for instance,
suppose you were told by the Greek Church, that to believe the Pope's
Supremacy, jure divino, were a damnable sin, and that whosoever did not believe
this being sufficiently propounded to them as a matter of Faith, as defined by
the Church, were guilty of a sin destructive to Salvation, what answer would
you return in this case? Would you not say, That the Proposition, though judged
sufficient by them, is not judged so by you; and that they must first prove,
that whatever their Church defines as a matter of Faith, is to be believed for
such, before the other can be believed on the account of it. Just the same
answer we return to you; prove first of all to us in a clear and evident
manner, that God has appointed the Definition of your Church, as the means
whereby we may be infallibly assured, what is Matter of Faith, and what not;
and then we may grant, that what your Church propounds as a matter of Faith, is
sufficiently propounded as a matter revealed from God, but not before. For,
while I see no reason to believe the Churches Proposition to be sufficient, I
have no reason to believe, that what she propoundes, as defined for matter of
Faith, is truly so: And, as long as I can see no reason to believe it, prove
the disbelief of it to be a sin in me when you can. Thus we see, how far from
being evident that Major of yours is, though you are pleased to tell us, it is
so; but we do not believe your Defining it to be so, to be any matter of Faith,
unless we had better reason for it, than we have. For, say you, P. 16.
To refuse to believe God's Revelation, is either to give God the lie, or to
doubt whether he speak truth or no? But, have you so little wit, as not to
distinguish between not believing God's Revelation, and not believing what is
propounded for God's Revelation? Must every one, who does not believe every
thing that is propounded for God's Revelation, presently give God the lie, and
doubt whether he speak truth or no? And are not you then guilty of that fault
every time a Quaker or Enthusiast tells you, That the Spirit of God within him
told him this and that? But you said, Sufficiently propounded. But the Question
is, What sufficient Proposition is, and who must be Judge whether the
Proposition be sufficient or no, you, or the conscience of the person to whom
the thing is proposed to be believed? If any one indeed that judges a
Proposition sufficient, do notwithstanding question the truth of it, he does
interpretatively call God's Veracity into question; but not he certainly who
thinks not God's Veracity at all concerned in that which you call a sufficient
Proposition, but he judges not to be so.

Let us now see, how you prove your Assumption, which is very fairly done from
a Supposition which his Lordship denies; which is, That General Councils cannot
err. But, say you, he adds, That though he should grant it, yet this cannot
down with him, that all Points even so defined were Fundamentals. P. 28. n. 3.
I grant, those are his words, and his reasons follow them. For, Deductions are
not prime and native Principles; nor are Superstructures, Foundations. That
which is a Foundation for all, cannot be one and another to different
Christians, in regard of it self; for then it could be no common Rule for any,
nor could the souls of men rest upon a shaking Foundation. No, if it be a true
Foundation, it must be common to all, and firm under all; in which sense the
Articles of Christian Faith are Fundamental. What now do you prove to destroy
this? You very strenuously prove, That if men believe, A General Council cannot
err, they believe it cannot err so far, and no further than it cannot err.
But, if you mean any thing further, your meaning is better than your proof: for
when you would prove that to disbelieve the Churches Definition, is to
dis-believe God's Revelation; and in order to that confound the Church and
General Councils together, P. 16.
and from the General Council's not erring, infer the former Proposition,
because, what is testified by the Church, is testified by an Authority that
cannot err; you do not consider, that all this while you prove nothing against
his Lordship, unless you first prove, that whatever is testified to be revealed
from God, is presently Fundamental to all Churches and Christians, which his
Lordship utterly denies, by distinguishing even things which may be testified
to be revealed from God, into such things as are common to all Christians to be
believed by them, and such things as vary according to the different respects
of Christians. But yet further, I add, that taking Fundamentals in your sense,
you prove not the thing you intended, but only to such as do acknowledge, and
as far as they do acknowledge, that General Councils cannot err. For, they who
acknowledge them infallible only in Fundamentals, do not judge any thing
Fundamental by their Decision, but judge their Decisions infallible, so long as
they hold to Fundamentals; and so (for all that I can see) leave themselves
Judges, when General Councils are infallible, and when not: and therefore if
they go about to testify any thing as revealed from God, which is not
Fundamental, they do not believe that their testimony cannot err, and so are
not bound to believe that it is from God. They who believe General Councils
absolutely infallible, I do verily think do believe General Councils infallible
in all they say; for that is the substance of all you say. But, what that is to
those who neither do, nor can see any reason to believe them infallible in all
they say or testify as revealed from God, I neither do, nor can possibly
understand. And, if you hope such kind of Arguments can satisfy your ingenuous
Reader, you suppose him a good-natured man in the Greek sense of the phrase.

But all of a sudden, we find you in a very generous strain, and are contented
to take Fundamentals for Fundamentals (which is a huge Concession, and his
Lordship, were he living, would take it for a singular favor from you.) Yet to
deal freely with the Bishop (say you) even taking Fundamentals in a General way
(as it ought to be taken only here) for a thing belonging to the Foundation of
Religion (and it is a strange Fundamental which has no respect to the
Foundation, but they who build downwards, must have their Foundations on tops
of their houses) It is also manifest, that all Points defined by the Church are
Fundamental, by reason of that formal Object, or infallible Authority,
propounding them, though not always by reason of the matter which they
contain. The main proof of which lies in this, That he who does not believe the
Church infallible, can believe nothing at all infallibly, and therefore no
Fundamental of Religion; but, P. 16, 17.
if he believe any thing upon the Churches Infallibility, he must believe all
things on the same account of her Infallibility, and therefore must believe all
equally; and so, whatever is propounded by the Church, is to be believed as
Fundamental. This you cannot deny to be the force and strength of your verbose,
and confused way of arguing. And therefore I give you a short Answer, That I
utterly deny the Infallibility of any Church, to be in any thing the Foundation
of Divine and Infallible Faith; as you will find it abundantly proved in the
proper place for it, in the Controversy of the Resolution of Faith. Where it
will be largely discussed, in what sense Faith may be said to be Divine and
Infallible, what the proper grounds and reasons of our believing are, and how
much you impose upon the world, in pretending that the Resolution of Faith, is
into the Catholic Churches Infallibility; whereby it will appear to be far
from a Fundamental Error, not to believe on the Churches Infallibility, and
that he who denies it, will have no reason to call into Question the Canon of
Scripture, or the Foundations of all Religion. But, that you rather, by these
absurd and unreasonable pretenses of yours, have done your utmost to shake the
true Foundations of Religion, and advance nothing but Sceptiscism, not to say
Atheism in the world. These things I take upon me to make good in their proper
place, and therefore shall not enter the discussion of them here: but since,
this is the main, and, in truth, the only Foundation of your Doctrine of
Fundamentals, the vanity, falsehood and absurdity of it, cannot be sufficiently
understood, till we have gone through the Account of the Grounds of Faith.

If S. Augustine make some no Catholic Christians, for holding obstinately
some things of no great moment in his Book of Heresies; it was, because by
Catholic Christians he understood all such, and only such, as were the members
of the sound and Orthodox Church, in opposition to all kind of unnecessary
separation from it upon matters of small moment, and not because he believed
the Churches Infallibility, in defining all matters of Faith; and that all such
things were so defined, which men are called Heretics for denying of: unless
you will suppose, it was ever infallibly defined, that there were no Antipodes;
for some were accounted Heretics for believing them; and that by such whom you
account greater than S. Austin. But, for S. Austin, how far it was from his
meaning, to have all those accounted Fundamental Errors, which he recounts in
his Book of Heresies, appears not only from the multitude of particulars
mentioned in it, which no one in his senses can acknowledge Fundamental, or
declared by the Church as necessary to be believed by all, but from his
declared scope and design in the preface to that Book, wherein it appears, he
was desired not only to write the greater errors concerning Faith, the
Trinity, Baptism, Repentance, Christ, the Resurrection, the Old and New
Testament, Sed omnia omnino quibus a veritate dissentiunt, i. e. all kind of
errors whatsoever; and do you think that there could then be no error, but it
must be against some thing then defined by the Church as necessary to
Salvation? If not, then all truths were then defined by the Church, and
consequently there could be no new Definitions ever since; if there might, then
those errors mentioned by S. Austin, were not about matters necessary to be
believed; and so S. Austin's Book of Heresies makes nothing for you; but very
much against you, considering that in all that black list of Heretics, there
are none brought in for denying those grand Fundamentals of your Church, the
Pope's Supremacy, your Churches Infallibility, nor any of that new brood of
necessary Articles, which were so prudently hatched by the Council of Trent. But
if S. Austin do you no good, you hope S. Gregory Nazianzen may, because he
says, That nothing can be more perilous than those Heretics, who with a drop
of poison do infect our Lord's sincere Faith. Therefore all things defined by
the Church are Fundamental. What an excellent Art this Logic is, that can
fetch out of things that which was never in them! What a rare consequence is
this, If Heresy be dangerous, then, whatever is defined by the Church, is
Fundamental: but it may be, the strength lies in the drop of poison, as though
S. Gregory thought a drop of poison as dangerous as a whole dose of it. But,
were I your Physician, instead of the least drop of poison, I should prescribe
you good store of Hellebore, and should hope to see the effect of it, in making
better consequences than these are. But to see yet further, the strange effects
that Logic has upon some men; for, say you, in the prosecution of your proof,
that all things defined by the Church are Fundamental. Hence it is, that Christ
our Savior says, Matthew. 8.17. If he will not hear the Church, let him be to
thee as a Heathen and a Publican. The Argument in form runs thus; Whosoever
deserves excommunication, is guilty of a Fundamental Error; but he that will
not hear the Church, deserves Excommunication; ergo, Or else there may be more
in it than so. For, no doubt, the Heathens and Publicans as such, were guilty
of Fundamental Errors; therefore they who will not hear the Church, are guilty
of as Fundamental Errors as Heathens and Publicans. But, before you urge us
any more with this dreadful Argument, I pray tell us, What that Church is which
our Savior speaks of; what the cases are, wherein the Church is to be heard;
what the full importance is, of being as a Heathen and Publican; and you must
prove this Church to be understood in your sense of the Catholic Church, and
that this Church has hereby power to define matters of Faith, and that none
can possibly in any other sense be accounted as Heathens and Publicans, but as
guilty of as Fundamental Errors as they were.

Your next Objection concerning giving God and the Church the lie, and
preferring and opposing a man's private judgment and will before and against
the Judgment and Will of God and the Church, if men deny or doubt of any thing
made known by the Church to be a truth revealed by God; signifies nothing at
all, unless it be antecedently proved, that the Church can never err in
declaring any thing to be a truth revealed by God, which none, who know what
you mean by the Church, will easily assent to, till you have attempted a
further proof of it, than yet we find. And, although the questioning Divine
Veracity be destructive to that which you call Supernatural Faith, yet I hope
it is possible to believe God to be true, and yet that all men are liars, or
that there is no such inseparable Connection between God's Veracity, and the
present Declarations of any Church, but that one may heartily assent to the
former, and yet question the truth of the latter. If you think otherwise, show
your pity to the weakness of our understandings, by something that may look
like a proof of it, which we are still much to seek for.

But, your greatest strength, like Sampson's, seems to lie there where one
would least suspect it, viz. in Athanasius his Creed. For thus you go on.. 14.
Wherefore it is said in S. Athanasius his Creed (which is approved in the
thirty nine Articles of the pretended English Church) that, P. 18.
Whosoever will be saved, it is necessary that he hold the Catholic Faith --
which unless every one hold whole and inviolate, without doubt he shall perish
for ever: Neither can the Bishop reply, That all Points expressed therein are
Fundamental in his sense; for (to omit the Article of our Saviors descent into
Hell) he mentions expressly the Procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and
the Son, which his Lordship has denied to be a Fundamental Point, as we saw in
the former Chapter. But, the better to comprehend the force of this Argument,
we must first consider what it is you intend to prove by it, and then in what
way and manner you prove it from this Creed. The matter which you are to prove,
is, that all things defined by the Church, are Fundamental, i. e. in your sense
necessary to Salvation; and, that the ground why such things, whose matter is
not necessary, do become necessary, is, because the Church declares them to be
revealed by God; now, in order to this, you insist on the Creed commonly called
Athanasius his, wherein some things, acknowledged not to be Fundamental in the
matter, are yet said to be necessary to Salvation, and that this is owned by
the Church of England. This is the substance of the Argument, which being
resolved into its parts, will consist of these Propositions. 1. That some
things owned not to be Fundamental in the matter, are yet acknowledged in the
Creed of Athanasius, to be necessary to Salvation. 2. That the reason why these
things do become necessary, is, because the Church has defined them to be so.
3. That this is acknowledged by the Church of England. And therefore, by parity
of reason, whatever is defined by the Church, must be necessary to Salvation.
But every one of these Propositions being ambiguous, the clear stating of them
will be the best way of solving the difficulty, which seems to lie in the
present Argument. And the main Ambiguity lies in the meaning of that necessity
to Salvation, which is implied in the Athanasian Creed, as to the Articles
therein contained; for, there being different grounds and reasons upon which
things may be supposed necessary, there can be no just consequence made from
the general owning a necessity of the belief of some things, to the making
those things necessary to be believed upon one particular account of it. For
the necessity of believing things to Salvation, may arise from one of these
three grounds. 1. The Supposition, that the matter to be believed is in it self
necessary this makes it necessary to all those persons who are of that
persuasion; and on this ground it is plain, that the main Articles of the
Athanasian Creed are generally supposed necessary, viz. those concerning the
Trinity in Unity, the Incarnation, Resurrection, and Eternal Life, etc. Now
these being supposed to be necessary from the Matter, any Church may own them
under this degree of necessity, in that expression used in several places of
the Athanasian Creed, Whosoever will be saved, it is necessary that he hold the
Catholic Faith -- which Catholic Faith is, etc. But then we are to consider,
that this is only a Declaration of the sense of that Church, what things she
owns as necessary, and what not. And this Declaration does not oblige the
conscience of particular persons any further, than as the Articles of that
Church are required to be owned as the conditions of Communion with her, i. e.
where the degree of necessity is not declared, nor expressly owned by a Church,
but left in general terms; no man is bound to believe the things judged as
necessary, with any particular kind of necessity, exclusive of others, but only
that the Church in General may use that Creed supposed necessary, and that the
Use of that Creed is a lawful condition of that Churches Communion. 2. The
belief of a thing may be supposed necessary, because of the clear Conviction of
men's understandings, that though the matters be not in themselves necessary,
yet being revealed by God, they must be explicitly believed; but then the
necessity of this Belief does extend no further than the clearness of that
Conviction does. As, suppose it inserted into a Creed, that the Article of the
Descent must be understood according to the sense of the Scriptures, this does
oblige no man to any further necessity of belief of the sense of the Article,
then he is convinced, that it is the sense of the Scriptures; And the case is
the same, when the Article is expressed only in general terms, which are known
to be capable of very different senses, when none of which are expressed, no
particular sense can be said to be necessary to Salvation, to particular
persons, but only that sense in general, which all must agree in who own it,
and the particulars are left to the Convictions of men's understandings upon the
use of the best means of satisfaction. So that he that believes fully that the
meaning of this Article from Scripture, is, that Christ's soul did locally
descend to Hell, it is necessary for him to believe so, upon such Conviction;
but he that sees no more necessary to be believed by it, but that Christ's soul
was, during his Body's lying in the Grave, in a state of Separation from it;
how can you prove it necessary to Salvation for him to believe any more than
this? And the case is the same as to all Modes of Existence, and particular
explications of Articles in themselves owned, as of the different Subsistencies
in the Trinity, the manner of the Hypostatical Union of the two Natures in
Christ's Person, supposing the Doctrines themselves believed, what reason can
there be to assert it necessary to Salvavation to all persons, to believe them
under such a sense, if the Article may be it self believed without it, any
further than as things under those explications, are manifested to such persons
to be necessary to be believed. As Leo 3. defined in the Article of the Holy
Ghost's Procession from the Son, To such, who, by reason of capacity and
apprehension, could attain to the Knowledge of it, it was necessary to be
believed, but not by others; as appears in our former Discourse on that
Subject. Therefore from hence we see another account, why things may become
necessary to be believed and owned as such, besides the matter and the Churches
Definition. These things may be said to be necessary to be believed by such,
who believe the Churches Proposition to be sufficient, though it be not; as,
suppose any member of the Greek Church should believe their Church infallible,
it is necessary, for such a one to believe whatever is propounded by that
Church, though you suppose that judgment of his to be false in it self,
because you say, the Greek Church is not infallible. So that from hence it
appears, that the necessity arising from the Churches Definition, does depend
upon the Conviction, that whatever the Church defines, is necessary to be
believed. And, where that is not received as an antecedent principle, the other
cannot be supposed. By this opening the several grounds of necessity, your
difficulty concerning the Athanasian Creed comes to nothing: For granting, that
the Church of England does own and approve the Creed, going under the name of
Athanasius, and supposing that her Use of the Creed, does extend to the owning
of those expressions, which import the necessity of believing the things
therein contained in order to Salvation; yet this does not reach to your
purpose, unless you prove that the Church of England does own that necessity
purely on the account of the Churches Definition of those things which are not
Fundamental, which it is very unreasonable to imagine; it being directly
contrary to her sense in her nineteenth and twentieth Articles. And thence,
that supposed necessity of the belief of the Articles of the Athanasian Creed,
must, according to the sense of the Church of England, be resolved either into
the necessity of the Matters, or into that necessity which supposes clear
Convictions, that the things therein contained are of Divine Revelation. From
hence then it cannot at all follow, because the Church of England owns the
Creed of Athanasius, therefore all things defined by the Church are, eo nomine,
necessary to Salvation. Other particulars concerning that Creed, as to its
Antiquity and Authority, we may have occasion afterward more at large to
discuss; it suffices now, that nothing is thence produced pertinent to the
present Controversy.

His Lordship, in the progress of this Discourse, takes away that slight and
poor evasion,. 15.
N. 8. P. 31, 32.
That the Declaration of the Church makes any thing Fundamental, quoad nos,
because that no respect to us can vary the Foundation. And that the Churches
Declaration can bind us only to peace and external obedience, where there is
not express letter of Scripture and sense agreed on: but it cannot make any
thing Fundamental to us, that is not so in its own nature. For, says he, if
the Church can so add, that it can by a Declaration make a thing to be
Fundamental in the Faith that was not, then it can take a thing away from the
Foundation, and make it by declaring not to be Fundamental, which all men grant
no power of the Church can do. For the power of adding any thing contrary, and
of detracting any thing necessary, are alike forbidden, and alike denied. Now
you say, That all this is satisfied by the foresaid distinction, P. 18.
of material and formal Object; and you desire the Reader, to carry along with
him this distinction of objectum materiale and formale, materia attestata; and
authoritas attestantis, and he will easily discover the fallacies of his
Lordship's Discourse, in this main Point of Controversy, and solve all his
difficulties supported by them. No doubt, an excellent Amulet to preserve from
the infection of reason! But it is your great mishap, that where you commend it
so much, it does you so little service: For, let your distinction of formal and
material Object, be supposed as sound and good, as I have showed, it in your
sense, to be false and fallacious; yet it does not reach that part of his
Lordship's Discourse, which you apply it to. For, still his reason is
conclusive, though the necessity only be supposed to arise from the Churches
Authority, yet if it be in the power of the Church, to make any thing necessary
which was not, why may it not be equally in her power to make something not
necessary which was? For, either the grounds of the necessity of things to
Salvation, does depend on the Doctrine of the Gospel, as at first declared to
the world, or it does not. If it does, then it is not in the Churches Power to
make any thing necessary, which was not made necessary by it; if it does not,
then the Church may as well pretend to a power to make something not necessary,
which was; as to make something necessary, which was not. So that your
distinction of Formal and Material Object, signifies nothing at all here; only
this is observable, that you make the Churches Definition to be the Formal
Object of Faith here, which you very solemnly contradict afterward. ( Chap.
5.. 4.) And can any thing be more evident from this Discourse of yours, than
that you make the last resolution of Faith, as to the necessity of things to be
believed into the Churches Definition, as its Formal Object? But this
distinction with the grounds of it being removed in our former Discourse, I
shall ease my self and the Reader of any further labor in examining what
follows in this Chapter, which depends wholly upon it; or else run out into the
Churches Infallibility, the infallible Assent requisite to Faith, the Canon of
Scripture, and our certainty of it, or the Authority of General Councils; P.
19, 20, 21.
all which shall be fully and particularly examined in their proper places.
There being nothing said here, but what either has been answered already, or
will be more at large in a more convenient place.

The only things remaining then in this Chapter, which deserve a further
discussion here,. 16.
are the testimonies of Scotus and S. Austin, and the Discourses which depend
thereon. For our better clearing the testimony of Scotus, in which you charge
his Lordship with falsification, we must consider on what account, and for what
purposes that testimony is produced. His Lordship had said before, P. 29. n. 5.
That Fundamentals are a Rock immovable, and can never be varied; therefore
what is Fundamental after the Church has defined it, was Fundamental before
the definition, and no Decrees of Councils, how general soever, can alter
immovable Verities; wherefore, if the Church in a Council define any thing, the
thing defined is not fundamental because the Church has defined it; nor can be
made so by the definition of the Church, if it be not so in it self. For if the
Church has this power, she might make a New Article of Faith, which the
learned among themselves deny. For the Articles of Faith cannot increase in
substance, but only in explication: For which he appeals to Bellarmin. Nor,
says he, N. 2.
Is this hard to be further proved out of your own School. For Scotus
professes it in this very particular of the Greek Church. If there be, says
he, a true real difference between the Greeks and Latins about the Point of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost, then either they or we be, vere haeretici, truly
and indeed Heretics. Which he speaks of the old Greeks long before any
decision of the Church in this Controversy. For he instances in S. Basil, and
Greg. Nazianzen, on one side; and S. Jerome, Augustine, and Ambrose, on the
other. And who dares call any of these Heretics is his challenge? That then
which his Lordship proves by this testimony, is that the nature of Heresy does
not depend on the Churches Definition, but on the Nature of the things; for,
according to Scotus, antecedently to the Churches Definition, if there had been
any real difference between the Greeks and Latins one side of them had been
Heretics. P. 22.
To this you answer, That hence it follows not, that Scotus thought they could
be Heretics, unless they denied or doubted of that which they had reason to
believe was revealed by God, But it only follows, that if they knew this (as
those learned Greeks had sufficient reason to know it) they might well be
esteemed Heretics, before any special Declaration of the Church; although it
be more clear, that he is an Heretic, who denies to believe that Doctrine,
after he confesses that it is defined by the Church. From which answer of
yours, several things are to our purpose observable. 1. That the Formal Reason
of Heresy, is, denying something supposed to be of Divine Revelation. 2. That
none can reasonably be accused of Heresy, but such as have sufficient reason
to believe that which they deny is revealed by God. 3. That none can be guilty
of Heresy, for denying any thing declared by the Church; unless they have
sufficient reason to believe, that whatever is declared by the Church, is
revealed by God. Which unavoidably follows from the former, and therefore the
Churches Definition cannot make any Heretics, but such as have reason to
believe that she cannot err in her Definitions. From whence Protestants will
be in less danger of Heresy than Papists, till you give us more sufficient
reasons to prove, that whatever the Church declares, is certainly revealed by
God. And, although you tell us, Men may be accounted Heretics before they are
condemned as such by General Councils, if they oppose the Doctrine clearly
contained in Scripture, or generally received by the Church; yet you tell us
not, what the measures are, whereby we ought to judge what things are thus
clearly contained in Scripture, or universally received; whether the Churches
judgment must be taken, or every man's own judgment: if the former, the
ground of Heresy lies still in the Churches Definition, contrary to what
Scotus affirms; if the latter, then no one can be an Heretic, but he that
opposes that which he is or may be convinced, is clearly contained in
Scripture, or generally received by the Church. If that which he is convinced,
then no man is an Heretic, but he that goes against his present judgment, and
so there will be few Heretics in the world; If that which he may be convinced
of, it must be understood either in his own judgment, or yours; if in his own
judgment, then a Heretic is one who dissents to things rashly, without using
means to inform himself: if in yours, why may not he say, You may as well be
convinced of the truth of that which he believes, as he be convinced of the
truth of that which you believe; and so you may be a Heretic to him by the
same reason that he is to you. But you say further, That there are many things,
which in themselves are matters of Faith; yet so obscure, in relation
especially to unlearned and particular persons, that before the decree of the
Church, we are not Heretics, though we should either doubt of them, or deny
them: because, as yet, there appears no sufficient reason that can oblige us to
believe them; although, after the Definition of the Church, we ought as well to
believe them as any other. But it is impossible to understand how there can be
such things which men might safely not believe, but upon the Definition of the
Church they are bound to believe them necessarily, unless it be clear to them,
that the Church has power to make obscure things plain, and unnecessary things
to become necessary. For, suppose one of these obscure things be this very
Power of the Church in defining such things, while this remains so obscure, you
tell me, I may doubt or disbelieve it without Heresy, and while I do so, I may
certainly doubt or disbelieve all she declares. But, by what means shall this
thing become clear? must it be by the Churches defining it? But that very Power
of defining, is the thing in question, and therefore cannot be cleared by it.
And if there be any thing then so obscure, that men may without sin doubt of
it, or disbelieve it, certainly the Churches Power in defining matters of
Faith, is such; it being not capable, by any act of the Church, of being made
so clear, as to oblige men to believe it.

But we must see how his Lordship has wronged the Testimony of Scotus: For
first, say you, He would persuade his Reader, that this Author supposed a real
difference between the Ancient Greek and Latin Fathers, about the Procession of
the Holy Ghost; whereas Scotus declares, that there was no real difference
between them: But does his Lordship say, there was? does he not expressly cite
Scotus his testimony in an hypothetical manner; If there be a true real
difference, etc. and it is evident from Scotus his words, that he supposes, If
the difference had been real, that either the Greeks or Latins were truly
Heretics. Pateret utique tandem, ipsam contrarietatem non esse veraciter
realem sicut est vocalis, alioquin vel ipsi Graci, vel nos Latini sumus vere
haretici. Scotus Did. 11. l. 1. q. 1. sect. 2.
And therefore you are guilty of a much greater injury to his Lordship than he
was to Scotus. Again, you say, He wrongs him, in saying, That after the
Churches Definition, it becomes of the substance of Faith. Now, say you, Scotus
has not one word of the substance of Faith, P. 22, 23.
much less of Fundamental, which he imposes presently upon him, but says only
thus, Ex quo Ecclesia declaravit hoc esse tenendum, etc. tenendum est, quod
Spiritus Sanctus procedat ab utroque, Since the Church has so declared, so it
must be held. Sure you never expect to be believed, but by a very implicit
Faith; for if one does but offer to search an Author, your Juggling becomes
notorious. Had you the confidence to say, That Scotus has not one word of the
substance of Faith; I pray who made that, etc. for you in the sentence? If you
did it your self, you abuse your Readers; if another did it for you, he abused
you: For that very, etc. leaves out those words, sicut de substantia fidei, and
try if you can render that otherwise, than as of the substance of Faith:
Quicquid sit de iis ex quo Ecclesia Catholica declaravit hoc esse tenendum,
sicut de substantia fidei, sicut pa^et extra. de sum. Trin. and ^id. Cath. c.
^irmiter tenendum est quod Spiritu^ Sanctus procedat ab utroque. Scotus. ib.
to manifest your Forgery, the whole place is cited in the Margin. Is this your
fidelity in quoting Authors, even when you charge others with wronging them? It
may be you will say yet, That Scotus does not say, it is to be held, sicut de
substantia fidei, though it be declared by the Church to be so held! But what
means then the ex quo, if men's Faith must not be guided by the Churches
Declaration: for if it be therefore to be believed necessarily, because
declared by the Church, it must be believed as it is declared by the Church: If
therefore the Church declares that it is to be held as of the substance of
Faith, it ought to be held so by such as are bound to believe it on the
Churches Declaration. Besides, you will not say, but that it was to be believed
before; now, what alteration is caused by the Declaration of the Church, but
this, That which was before to be believed simply and in it self, is now to be
believed on the account of the Churches Declaration, as of the substance of
Faith. And thus it is impossible to relieve your self with your old shift of
Material and Formal Object, which you betake your self to. Thus still we see
you are that most unhappy person, who never begin a charge against your
adversary, but it falls back most unevitably upon your self, who so readily
make use of forgeries, to prove others guilty of them.

Upon Scotus his mentioning the Churches Declaration, his Lordship inquires,
What this Declaration is, and how far it extends. For which,. 17.
P. 31. n. 7.
his Lordship says, The Master teaches, and his Scholars too, that every
thing which belongs to the Exposition or Declaration of another, intus est, is
not another contrary thing, but is contained within the bowels and nature of
that which is interpreted: from which, if the Declaration depart, it is faulty
and erroneous, because, instead of declaring, it gives another and contrary
sense. Therefore when the Church declares any thing in Council, either that
which she declares was intus, or extra; in the nature and verity of the thing,
or out of it. If it were extra, without the nature of the thing declared, then
the Declaration of the thing is false; and so, far from being Fundamental in
the Faith. If it were intus, within the nature and compass of the thing, though
not open and apparent to every eye; then the Declaration is true, but not
otherwise Fundamental then the thing is which is declared: for that which is
intus, cannot be larger or deeper, than that in which it is; if it were, it
could not be intus. Therefore nothing is simply Fundamental, because the Church
declares it; but because it is so, in the nature of the thing which the Church
declares. In answer to this, you seem more ingenuous than usual; for you
acknowledge, that his expression is learnedly solid and good: but yet you would
seem to return some answer to this Argument, viz. That although there be no
alteration in the nature of the Articles by the Churches Declaration; P. 23.
yet this does not hinder them from becoming Fundamental in that sense in which
we dispute, i. e. such as cannot be denied or doubted of under pain of
damnation, although they were not thus Fundamental before the Declaration, as
not being so clearly proposed to us, as that we were bound to believe them.
Neither does this take away any thing from their intus, or that Being which
they had of themselves; but only gives a certainty of their being so, and
declares that they ought to be so quoad nos, as well as quoad se, and
internally. And it is no evasion, but a solid distinction, P. 24.
that the Declaration of the Church varies not the thing in it self, but quoad
nos in its respect to us. The substance of your Answer lies in this, That
though the Church by her Declaration, does not alter the nature of things, yet
she may, and does, our Obligation to believe them; so that such things which
men might have been saved without believing before, when once the Church has
declared them, become necessary to be believed in order to Salvation. And yet
you would not have this called making new Articles of Faith: P. 20. n. 8.
But I pray tell us, what you mean by Articles of Faith; are not those properly
Articles of Faith, as distinct from Theological Verities, which are necessary
to be believed by all? If therefore those things which the Church declares,
were before not necessary, and by the Churches Declaration do become necessary;
than certainly those things which were not Articles of Faith, do become
Articles of Faith, and what then does the Church by her Declaration, but make
New Articles of Faith? But, though you assert the thing, you like not the
terms, because they do not sound so pleasantly to the ears of Christians, who
believe all Obligation to Faith does depend upon immediate Divine Revelation.
Setting aside therefore the terms, let us examine the thing, to see upon what
grounds the Church can make that necessary to us, which was not in it self. In
which case the Obligation not arising from the necessity of the Matter in it
self to be believed, it is no otherwise intelligible, but that it must result
from the supposition of some Immediate Revelation. For nothing else can bind us
to an Internal Assent, which you require as necessary to the Churches
Definitions but that, unless you can show how any Society of men considered as
such, have power to oblige all other men to believe what they declare on pain
of damnation for not doing it. I pray tell me, whether the Apostles themselves
had power to bind all Christians to the belief of something as necessary, which
the Spirit of God did not immediately reveal to them to be so? If not, what
power can any Church have to do it, without a greater measure of Infallibility,
than the Apostles ever pretended to? For, they never attempted to define any
thing as necessary, which was supposed unnecessary to be believed after the
Doctrine of the Gospel was declared to the world. Before then you can persuade
us to believe that your Church can make any thing necessary, which was not so,
you must prove an Absolute Infallible Divine Assistance of God's Spirit with
your Church, in whatever she shall attempt to declare or define as matter of
Faith. As for instance, Supposing it not necessary to Salvation in it self to
believe the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary, how is it possible to
conceive, after your Churches Definition of it, it should become necessary,
unless it be supposed that there was an Immediate Divine Revelation, in that
Definition. For, nothing but Divine Authority commanding our Assent, the ground
of Faith must be resolved into that; now in this case, besides the Immediate
Assent to the thing declared as a truth, there is a distinct Proposition to be
believed, which is, That what was not before necessary to be believed, does now
become necessary to be believed by all; and show us, either that there is
Divine Revelation for this, or else excuse us, that we cannot give an Internal
Assent to it. For, we have not learnt to give an Assent of Faith to a mere
humane Proposition, or, in our Savior's words, we call no man, Master upon
Earth, so as to promise to believe it in the power of any Church whatsoever, to
make any thing necessary to be believed, which was not so before. Hence it
appears, that your Distinction of, in se, and quoad nos, is as insignificant,
as your pretense of the Churches Power to define matters of Faith is
presumptuous and arrogant, being the highest degree of Lording it over the
Christian world.

Why your Church may not as well declare something not to be of Faith, P. 24.
which before was of Faith, as declare something to be of Faith, which before
was not of Faith, it is not easy to apprehend, if that thing might be supposed
of Faith before, without the Churches explicit Declaration. For in that case
the Church would not so apparently contradict her self; for that Contradiction
does not lie in varying the respects of things, but in one Declaration
contradicting another. For otherwise, it is as great a contradiction to say,
That something which was not necessary, is become necessary; as that a thing
which was necessary, is become not necessary. Therefore if there be a
contradiction in one, there is in the other. If the Contradiction lies in the
Declaration, you must say, That nothing could be supposed necessary to be
believed, but what was declared by the Church to be so, and as declared by the
Church: which is a Province as difficult as necessary to be undertaken, to rid
your hands of this difficulty. For otherwise, that Answer of yours cannot reach
the Objection.

And now we come to that Testimony of S. Augustine, which was produced to
prove, That all Points defined by the Church are Fundamental:. 18.
Which say, It is a thing founded. An erring Disputant is to be born with in
other Questions, Fundata ista res est; ferendus est disputator errans in aliis
quaestionibus, non diligen^er digestis, nondum plena eccl siae autoritate
firmatis, ibi ferendus est error: non tantum progredi debet, ut etiam
Fundamentum ipsum Ecclesiae quatere moliatur. August. sermon. 14. de verb.
Apostol. Tom. 10. p. 2^4. edit. Froben. 1529.
not diligently digested, not yet made firm by full Authority of the Church;
there error is to be born with: but it ought not to proceed so far, that it
should labor to shake the Foundation it self of the Church. Now to this place
his Lordship answers. 1. He speaks of a Foundation of Doctrine in Scripture,
not of a Church-Definition: This appears, says he, P. 32, 33. n. 9, 10.
For few lines before, he tells us, There was a Question moved to S. Cyprian,
Whether Baptism was concluded to the eighth day, as well as Circumcision? and
no doubt was made then of the beginning of sin; and that out of this thing,
about which no Question was moved, that Question that was made was answered.
And again, that S. Cyprian took that which he gave in Answer from the
Foundation of the Church, to confirm a Stone that was shaking* Now S. Cyprian
in all the Answer that he gives, has not one word of any Definition of the
Church: therefore ea res, that thing by which he answered, was a Foundation of
prime and settled Scripture-Doctrine, not any Definition of the Church:
Therefore that which he took out of the Foundation of the Church, to fasten the
Stone that shook, was not Definition of the Church, but the Foundation of the
Church it self, the Scripture upon which it is builded: as appears in the
Milevitane Councils; where the Rule by which Pelagius was condemned, is the
Rule of Scripture. Therefore S. Augustine goes on in the same sense, that the
Disputer is not to be born any longer, that shall endeavor to shake the
Foundation it self, upon which the whole Church is grounded. 2. His Lordship
answers, That, granting that the Churches Definition, was meant by S. Austin,
yet it can never follow out of any, or all these Circumstances, that all Points
defined by the Church are Fundamental, because this Foundation may be upon
Humane Authority; and that which follows, only is, That things are not to be
opposed, which are made firm by full Authority of the Church; but it cannot be
thence concluded, They are therefore Fundamental in the Faith. P. 2^.
This is the substance of his Lordships Answer to this place; which we must
consider what you reply to. First, you say, That it cannot be doubted but that
S. Austin 's judgment was, that all our Faith depended on the Authority of the
Church, and therefore that he that opposes himself against this, endeavors
to shake and destroy the very groundwork of all Divine and Supernatural Faith.
This is a rare way of silencing Adversaries, by telling them, That cannot be
doubted, which others can see no reason at all to believe. As in this present
case you, tell me, that cannot be doubted, which I utterly deny, viz. That S.
Austins judgment was, that all our Faith depended on the Authority of the
Church; and if all the proof you have for it, be only that well-known place,
Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, etc. You shall in time see, what an ill choice
you made of fixing your proof wholly upon that. But whoever is never so little
conversant in S. Augustin's way of disputing either against the Donatists,
Pelagians, or Manichees, will find very little reason to doubt, but that he
made the Foundation of Faith, to be God's Word, and not the Authority of the
Church. Indeed S. Austin, by way of Prescription, often makes use of the
Churches Authority, not where there has been particular Definitions, but
Universal Consent, which he understands by the settlement, by full Authority of
the Church; but this he insists not on as the ground of Faith, but to show the
unreasonableness of men's opposing those things which the Universal Church was
agreed in, as in this Controversy here disputed by him concerning Original Sin
in Infants. Therefore if I understand S. Austin in this place, he does not at
all speak concerning what is to be owned as a matter of Faith simply in it
self, but what the Churches Carriage toward Dissenters is. For after that
Citation of S. Cyprian at the Conclusion of his Sermon, he addresseth himself
to the Pelagians, as his dissenting Brethren; Therefore, says he, Let us, if
possible, entreat this of our Brethren, That they would no longer call us
Heretics; because we might as well call them so if we would, Impetremus ergo,
si possumus, a fratribus nostris, ne nos insuper appellent Haereticos; quod eos
talia dispurantes nos appellare possimus sorsitan, si vellemus, nec tamen
appellamus. Id. ib.
but we do not. Why was S. Austin so scrupulous of calling the Pelagians
Heretics, if he made the Definition of the Church the Foundation of Faith, and
looked on this Controversy as defined by full Authority of the Church? And
after, speaks of the Churches bearing with them still, in order to their
instruction; though they were gone so far, that they were scarce to be born
with; and that the Church exercised great patience toward them; therefore
entreats them not to abuse this patience of the Church, but to be reformed,
since they did exhort as Friends, and not contend as enemies. And so brings in
the former words, which I thus paraphrase; It is a thing to be taken for
granted, that in disputable Points, and such as the Church has not always
been agreed in, dissenters may be born with: but if direct and full opposition
to the clear sense of the Church should still be suffered, it would overthrow
the very Foundation of the Church it self. And that this, and no other, is the
plain and genuine meaning of S. Austin, is evident to any one who impartially
considers antecedents and consequents, and the natural sense of the words
themselves. Before, he spoke how far the Church had born with them: in the
words themselves, he tells them, They must not expect the Church would always
bear with them, if they joined Obstinacy with their Errors for that would
ruin the Church, if she continually suffered such as violently opposed things
contrary to her clearest sense: and after tells them, This is not expedient:
for hitherto, it may be, our patience is not to be found fault withal; Non
expedit: adh^c sort nostra non est reprehendenda patientia; sed de^emus
time^c, ne culpetur etiam negligentia.
but we ought likewise to fear, lest we be blamed for our negligence: Which
words immediately follow the former. And is not this now a rare consequence, If
the Church must not always bear with such as oppose her, then whatever is
defined by the Church is Fundamental? For it is most evident, S. Austin speaks
not of the Churches Power, in defining matters of Faith, but of the Churches
proceeding with obstinate Heretics. And therefore the Foundation spoken of, is
not the Foundation of her Belief, but of her Communion; which the continual
bearing with such obstinate persons as the Pelagians were, would in time
overthrow. The want of understanding this to be S. Augustine's meaning, has
made you spend many words to very little purpose, supposing all along that he
speaks of the Churches Definition, and not her proceedings. Your Reply to his
Lordships second Answer, runs upon the same mistake, that he speaks of Shaking
the Foundation of Faith, whereas I have already showed, that he speaks of no
such thing, and therefore that, as well as the former Answer, fall to the
ground together, being both built on the same mistaken Foundation.

CHAP. III. The Absurdities of the Romanists Doctrine of Fundamentals.
The Churches Authority must be Divine, if whatever she defines be Fundamental.
His Lordship, and not the Testimony of S. Augustine, shamefully abused, three
several ways. Bellarmine not mis-cited; the Pelagian Heresy condemned by the
General Council at Ephesus. The Pope's Authority not employed in that of
Councils. The gross Absurdities of the distinction of the Church teaching and
representative, from the Church taught and dissusive, in the Question of
Fundamentals. The Churches Authority and Testimony in matters of Faith,
distinguished. The Testimonies of Vincentius Lerinensis explained, and showed
to be directly contrary to the Roman Doctrine of Fundamentals. Stapleton and
Bellarmine not reconciled by the vain endeavors used to that end.

THe main Doctrine of Fundamentals being in the foregoing Chapter settled and
cleared,. 1.
what remains of that subject will be capable of a quicker dispatch. The scope
of this Chapter, is, to assoil those difficulties, which your doctrine of
Fundamentals is subject to. What little footing that has in the place of S.
Augustine, was the last thing discussed in the preceding Chapter; and therefore
must not be repeated here. His Lordship urges this reason why S. Augustine, or
any other reasonable man could not believe, P. 34. n. 11.
that whatever is defined by the Church is Fundamental in the Faith; because
full Church Authority (always the time that included the Holy Apostles being
past by, and not comprehended in it) is but Church Authority; and
Church Authority, when it is at full Sea, is not simply divine; therefore the
sentence of it not Fundamental in the Faith. To this you very wisely and
learnedly answer; I will not dispute with his Lordship, whether it be, or no;
because it is sufficient that such Authority be infallible. P. 28. n. 1.
For if it be infallible, it cannot propose to us any thing as revealed by God,
but what is so revealed. So that to dispute against this Authority, is in
effect to take away all Authority from divine Revelation; we having no other
absolute certainty, that this or that is revealed by God, but only the
Infallibility of the Church proposing, or attesting it unto us as revealed.
Whence also it follows, that to doubt, dispute against, or deny any thing that
is proposed by the Infallible Authority of the Church, is to doubt, dispute
against, and deny that which is Fundamental in Faith. His Lordship denies the
sentence of the Church to be Fundamental in the Faith, because not Divine; you
dare not say, It is Divine, but contend that it is Infallible, and from that
Infallibility infer, That Whosoever denies the Churches Infallibility, must
deny something Fundamental in the Faith, because we can have no other absolute
certainty that any thing is revealed by God, but only from the Churches
Infallibility, So that your whole proof rests upon a very rotten and uncertain
Foundation, viz. that all certainty in matters of Faith, does depend upon the
Churches Infallibility; the falsehood and unreasonableness of which principle,
will at large be discovered in the succeeding Controversy. And if this fails,
then the denial of the Churches Infallibility does not infer the denial of any
thing Fundamental in the Faith, because men may be certain of all Fundamentals,
without believing this Infallibility. But yet, say you, There is no necessity
of asserting Church Authority to be Divine, but only to be infallible, in order
to the making what she defines to be Fundamental. A rare and excellent piece of
your old Theological Reason; as though any thing could be any further
Infallible than it is Divine, or any further owned to be Divine, than as it is
Infallible. I pray, acquaint us with these rare Arts of distinguishing between
an Authority Divine and Infallible, when the ground of that Infallibility, is
the supposition of something properly and simply Divine, which is the
Infallible Assistance of God's Spirit. Is that Assistance Infallible too, but
not Divine? If it be Divine, as well as Infallible, how comes that
Infallibility which flows from it not to be Divine, when the cause of it was
simply and absolutely so? Besides, what Infallible Authority is that which
makes all its Definitions Fundamental, and yet is not in it self Divine? From
whence comes any thing to be Fundamental? You tell us your self, as it is known
to be revealed by God. And can any thing be known to be revealed by God, but by
an Authority Divine? especially on your principles, who make all certainty of
knowing it to depend on that Churches Authority? If so, then since the Churches
sentence makes things become matters of Faith, some things may become matters
of Faith, which have no Divine Authority for them. But this excellent and
subtle distinction between Divine and Infallible Authority, we shall have
occasion to examine afterward. And therefore it is well you tell us,
Notwithstanding that Infallible and Divine, seem to many great Divines to be
terms convertible, which only acquaints us with thus much, that there are some
men who understand things better than you do; and that to do so, is to be a
great Divine. And if Stapleton be one of these, we are not much offended at it;
and so far we will take the Testimonies which you produce out of him. -- That
which next follows depends upon the proof of the Infallibility of General
Councils, which when you have sufficiently cleared, we will believe, that there
can be no plain Scripture, or Evident Reason against any of their Definitions,
but till then we must believe there may be room for both.

Your next Section promises to show us a shameful abuse of S. Augustine 's
Testimony,. 2.
three several ways; But, if it appears, that not one of those ways will
hold, then it only follows, that so many ways you have abused his Lordship,
and not he S. Augustine. His Lordship having affirmed, That plain Scripture
with evident sense, P. 32. n. 11.
or a full demonstrative Argument, must have room, where a wrangling and erring
Disputer may not be allowed it. And there is neither of these but may convince
the Definition of the Council, if it be ill founded. Over against these words
he cites that sentence of S. Austin; Aug. contra ep. Fundam. c. 4.
Quae quidem si tam manifest a monstratur, ut in dubium venire non possit,
praeponenda est omnibus illis rebus, quibus in Catholica teneor. Ita si aliquid
apertissimum in Evangelio, etc. The plain meaning of which words of S.
Augustine, is, That evident Truth is to be preferred before all
Church Authority: Now a threefold Exception you take to his Lordships insisting
on this Testimony. 1. That S. Austin speaks not either of plain Scripture, or
evident sense, P. 30.
or of a full demonstrative Argument; but addressing his speech to the
Manicheans, he writes thus, Apud vos autem ubi nihil horum est quod me invitet
ac teneat, sola personat veritatis pollicitatio ( and then follow the words
cited by the Bishop) quae quidem si tam manifesta monstratur; where it is plain
quae, which is relative only to Truth, and not to Scripture, or any thing else.
A wonderful abuse of S. Austin to make him parallel plain Scripture, evident
sense, or a full Demonstrative Argument with Truth! As though if evident Truth
were more prevalent with him than all those Arguments which held him in the
Catholic Church, plain Scripture, evident Sense, or Demonstrations would not
be so too. What Truth can be evident, if it be not one of these three? Do you
think, there is any other way of manifesting Truth, but by Scripture, Sense or
Demonstration? if you have found out other ways, oblige the world by
communicating them; but till then, give us leave to think, that it is all one
to say, Manifest Truth, as plain Scripture, evident Sense, or clear
Demonstrations. But, say you, He speaks only of that Truth which the Manichees
bragged of, and promised* As though S. Austin would have been persuaded sooner
as it came from them, than as it was Truth in it self. I suppose, S. Austin did
not think their Testimony sufficient, and therefore says, Quae quidem si tam
manifesta monstratur, etc. i. e. If they could make that which they said,
evident to be Truth, he would quit the Church, and adhere to them: and if this
holds against the Manichees, will it not on the same reason hold every where
else, viz. That manifest Truth is not to be quitted on any Authority
whatsoever? which is all his Lordship asserts.

But, You offer to prove, that S. Austin, by Truth, could not mean plain
Scripture; But can you prove, that by Truth, he did not mean Truth, wherever
he found it, whether in Scripture, or elsewhere? No, say you, It cannot be
meant, that by Truth, he should mean plain Scripture, in opposition to the
Definitions of the Catholic Church, or General Councils; For which, you give
this Reason, because he supposes it impossible, that the Doctrine of the
Catholic Church, should be contrary to Scripture; for then men, according to
S. Austin, should not believe infallibly, either the one or the other. Not the
Scriptures, because they are received only upon the Authority of the Church;
nor the Church, whose Authority is infringed by the plain Scripture which is
brought against her. C. ep. Fund. c. 5.
For which you produce a large citation out of S. Austin. to that purpose. But
the Answer to that is easy. For, S. Austin, when he speaks of
Church Authority, qua infirmata jam nec Evangelio credere potero; he does not
in the least understand it of any Definitions of the Church; but of the
Universal Tradition of the Catholic Church concerning the Scriptures from the
time of Christ and his Apostles. And what plain Scriptures those are
supposable, which should contradict such a Tradition as this is, is not easy
to understand. But the case is quite otherwise as to the Churches Definitions;
for neither does the Authority of Scripture at all rest upon them; and there
may be very well supposed some plain Scriptures contrary to the Churches
Definitions, unless it be proved, that the Church is absolutely Infallible, and
the very proof of that depending on Scripture, there must be an appeal made to
plain Scripture, whether the Churches Definitions may not be contradicted by
Scripture. When therefore you say, This is an impossible Supposition, that
Scripture should contradict the Churches Definitions, like that of the Apostle;
If an Angel from Heaven teach otherwise, let him be accursed, Gal. 1. You must
prove it as impossible for the Church to deviate from Scripture in any of her
Definitions, as for an Angel to preach another Gospel; which will be the braver
attempt, because it seems so little befriended either by sense or reason. But,
say you, If the Church may be an erring Definer, I would gladly know, why an
erring Disputer may not oppugn her. That which you would so gladly know, is not
very difficult to be resolved, by any one who understands the great difference
between yielding an Internal Assent to the Definitions of the Church, and open
opposing them; for it only follows from the possibility of the Churches Error
in defining, that therefore we ought not to yield an absolute Internal Assent
to all her determinations, but must examine them by the best measures of Truth,
in order to our full Assent to them: but, though the Church may err, it does
not therefore follow, that it is lawful in all cases, or for all persons, to
oppugn her Definitions, especially if those Definitions be only in order to the
Churches Peace: but if they be such as require Internal Assent to them, then
plain Scripture, evidence of Sense, or clear Reason, may be sufficient cause to
hinder the submitting to those Definitions.

2. You tell us, That his Lordship has abused S. Austin 's Testimony, because
he speaks not of the Definitions of the Church, Ibidem.
in matters not Fundamental, according to the matter they contain; but the
Truth mentioned by him was Fundamental in its matter. This is the substance of
your second Answer, which is very rational and prudent, being built on this
substantial Evidence. If S. Austin does prefer manifest Truth before things
supposed Fundamental in the matter, then no doubt S. Austin would not prefer
manifest Truth, before things supposed not-Fundamental in the matter. And do
not you think this enough to charge his Lordship with shamefully abusing S.
Austin? But certainly, if S. Austin preferred manifest Truth before that which
was greater, would he not do it before that which was incomparably less? If he
did it before, all those things which kept him in the Catholic Church, such as
the consent of Nations, Miracles, Universal Tradition, which he mentions
before; do you think he would have scrupled to have done it, as to any
particular Definitions of the Church? These are therefore very excellent ways
of vindicating the Fathers Testimonies, from having any thing of sense or
reason in them.

3. You say, He has abused S. Austin, by putting in a wrangling Disputer: But
I wonder where his Lordship ever says,. 3.
that S. Austin mentions any such in the Testimony cited. For his words are
these. But plain Scripture, with evident Sense, or a full Demonstrative
Argument must have room, where a wrangling and erring Disputer may not be
allowed it. And there is neither of these (over against these words, he referrs
to S. Austin's Testimony, and not the foregoing) but may convince the
Definition of the Council, if it be ill founded. When you therefore ask, Where
the wrangling Disputer is to be found; had it not been for the help of this
Cavil, we might have been to seek for him. But when you have been enquiring for
him, at last you cry out, (...), Oh! I see now: And you are the fittest man to
find him out that I know. You say, This is done to distinguish him from such a
Disputer as proceeds solidly and demonstratively against the Definitions of the
Church, P. 32.
when they are ill founded; which S. Austin is so far from supposing that one
may do, that he judges him a mad man, who disputes against any thing quod
universa Ecclesia sentit; and that they have hearts, not only of Stone, but
even of Devils, who resist so great a manifestation of Truth, as is made by an
Ecumenical Council, for of that he speaks. Your design is, to prove, that S.
Austin does not admit of any plea from Scripture, Sense, or Reason, against any
Definitions of the Church, for which you first produce that known place in
which S. Austin accounts it madness to oppose the universal practices of the
Church, which will hold for your purpose, as far as rites and matters of Faith
have any Analogy with each other; your latter Testimony seems more to the
purpose to all persons who do not examine it, and to none else. For, although
you seemed very careful to prevent any examination of the place by a false
citation of Epist. 153. for 152. yet that has not hindered my discovering your
fraud, in asserting, that S. Austin there speaks of an Ecumenical Council. For
there is not so much as any thing like it in that Epistle. I acknowledge those
words to be found there which you produce, Nulla excusatio jam remansit: nimium
dura, nimium diabolica sunt hominum corda, quae adhuc tantae manifestationi
veritatis obsistunt. But there needs no more to confute the most of your
Testimonies out of the Fathers, but to mention the occasion of their being
produced, or the scope and design of the Authors, as is most evident in this
place. For this Epistle is written in the name of Silvanus, Valentinus,
Aurelius, Innocentius, Maximinus, Optatus, Augustinus, Donatus, and other
Bishops, for satisfaction of the Donatists concerning the proceedings at the
Council of Carthage; For the Donatist Bishops being therein baffled, had
dispersed among their Proselytes many false rumors of that Council, and of
their being circumvented by their Catholic Adversaries. To disprove which in
this Epistle, they first show the fraud and falsitie of the Donatists, and then
the Integrity of their own proceedings, by the choice of seven persons on
either side, who should speak in behalf of the rest; and seven others as
Counselors to them; and four Notaries on either side, and four other persons
who should keep the Records to prevent all fraud. Besides all this, every one
was to subscribe in his own words, that no man might complain that any thing
was corrupted afterward; which things being dispersed, while the persons
themselves lived, there was no probability Posterity should be deceived in the
report of them. And then follow those words; That no excuse has now been left,
but that their hearts are too hard and diabolical, who could gainsay so clear a
manifestation of Truth. Is it not now a rare consequence from hence to infer,
That it is not lawful upon any ground of Scripture, Sense or Reason, to dispute
the Definitions of General Councils? Whereas no such thing was ever mentioned
as a General Council, as appears by the very next words, where he says
expressly, it was only a Council of African Bishops; and elsewhere S. Austin
tells the Donatists, that they never durst appeal to a General Council. And
supposing the Council never so Ecumenical, Ecce putemus illos Episcopos qui
Romae judicarunt, non bonos judices fuisse, restabat adhuc plenarium Ecclesiae
universae Concilium, ubi etiam cum ipsis judicibus causa posset agitari, ut si
male judicasse convicti essent, eorum sententiae solverentur. Quod utrum
fecerint, probent. Nos enim non factum ^sse sa i will probamus, ex eo quod totus
o^bis non iis communicate. Aug. Epist. 162.
he mentions nothing of the Definitions of it, but the manner of its
proceedings. So that the greatest Truth hereby manifested, is, your design to
abuse his Lordship and the Reader together.

Since you disown the distinction of things,. 4.
being Fundamental in the matter and in the manner, I shall not trouble you
with showing you the weakness of it: but it were easy to manifest it as good
as that you embrace of the material and formal Object, which has been
sufficiently refuted in the precedent chapter, and I have no leisure for
repetitions.

His Lordship endeavoring further to show, P. 35. n. 13.
What little Foundation your Doctrine of Fundamentals has in the forecited
place of S. Augustine; urges this as an Argument against it, That if all
Points defined by the Church, are therefore Fundamental, because that is not to
be shaken, which is settled by full Authority of the Church; then it must
follow, That the Point there spoken of, the remission of Original Sin, in the
Baptism of Infants, was defined when S. Augustine wrote this, by a full
sentence of a General Council. You deny the Consequence; for, say you, By
Authority of the Church you mean (and not unproperly) the Church generally
practicing this Doctrine, P. 3^. n. 2.
and defining it in a National Council confirmed by the Pope. For this was
plena authoritas Ecclesiae, though not plenissima; and to dispute against what
was so practiced and defined, is, in S. Augustine's sense, to shake the
Foundation of the Church, if not wholly to destroy it. It seems a little hard
to understand what you mean by the Churches being (not unproperly) said to
practice this Doctrine: What, did the Church practice the Doctrine of the
remission of Original Sin in Infants? That a Church should practice a matter of
Faith, seems a little wonderful; but that it should do this and that not
unproperly, increases the admiration. And we might think it a peculiar
privilege belonging to your Church, but that she is not so much used to
practice things more capable of it. And can you think it enough to run us down,
by telling us, That the Pope, with a National Council, has defined it, unless
you first prove, that the Pope, and a National Council, have as much authority
as a General Council, which you pretend to be infallible; and if a National
Council with the Pope be so too, I wonder to what end General Councils are ever
called, since the Infallibility may be had at a much cheaper rate.

And by the same reason you make National Councils Infallible, you may do
Provincial, if the Pope concurrs with them; and, by the same reason, the
College of Cardinals may be Infallible without any of them, because of the
Pope's concurrence with them. And so, all this business of Councils, is but a
formal piece of Pageantry, since all the Infallibility they have by this
pretense, is conferred by the Pope in his concurrence; whose Infallibility does
not depend on the presence of a Council; and therefore he must be as Infallible
without a Council, as with it. So that at last this Discourse comes to this
issue, He that shakes the Pope's Infallibility, shakes the Foundation of the
Church: and prove but this to have been S. Augustine's meaning, you will highly
advance the interest of your cause.

. 5.
But, whatever S. Austin's meaning be, you think your self engaged to vindicate
Bellarmine, who, his Lordship had said, was deceived, in saying, That the
Pelagian Heresy was never condemned in an Ecumenical Council, but only in
Nationals. P. 35. n. 13.
For, says he, While the Pelagians stood out impudently against National
Councils, some of them defended Nestorius, which gave occasion to the first
Ephesine Council, to excommunicate and depose them. To which you answer. P. 33.
n. 3.
1. It is not credible, that Bellarmine, who writ so much of Controversy,
should not have read that Council; nor can there be any suspicion of his
con^ealing the matter, had he found it there, etc. and therefore you suspend
your Assent till the Council's words be produced. 2. You tell us, That it is
not enough to prove that Pelagianism was condemned by a General Council,
because some who were Pelagians were; but, say you, They were condemned not for
Pelagianism, but Nestorianism, and therefore his Lordship shoots wide of the
mark. Your Argument from Bellarmine will have no great force with them, who see
no reason to admire his fidelity; and they who enquire into the matter of fact,
in the present debate, will have cause to suspect it. The short account whereof
is this. After that Julianus, Florus, Orontius, Fabius and others, had been
deposed and banished in the Western Churches, for the Pelagian Heresy, they
fly to Constantinople, and shroud themselves under the protection of Nestorius
the Patriarch there, who secretly favored them, and writ several Letters to
Pope Celestine in behalf of them: who is supposed to have received his Doctrine
of the person of Christ from the Pelagians. But when he saw that no good was to
be done by these Letters, but by the daily spreading of Nestorianism, the
Emperor was forced to summon a Council at Ephesus, A. D. 431. The Pelagians
accompany Nestorius thither, and join with Johannes Antiochenus, and his party,
in opposition to the Synod. But the Council understanding the proceedings which
had been in the Western Churches against the Pelagians, ratifies and confirms
their deposition, as appears by the Synodal Epistle of the Council to Pope
Celestine, which is extant in the Acts of the Ephesine Council: and in the
Epistles of Cyril of Alexandria. And besides this, some of the Canons of that
Council, do equally concern Celestius and Nestorius; the first Canon decreeing
as well the favorers of Celestius as Nestorius to be excommunicate; and the
fourth dereeing the Deposition of all such who should embrace either of them.
And therefore it is truly said by Jansenius, that the Pelagian Heresy, Paulo
post enim, lectis Commentariis Romae sub Coelestino conscriptis, and haeresis
ipsa Pelagiana, and authors, sautoresque ejus episcopi, ab Oecumenica Synodo
iterum condemnati sunt. Jansenius de haeres. Pelag. lib. 1* p. 31.
and the Bishops who favored it, were again condemned by an Ecumenical
Council. And thence Prosper in the Epitaph of the Nestorian and Pelagian
Heresies, as he makes the Nestorian only an Offspring of the Pelagian;
Nestoriana lues successi Pelagianae,
Quae tamen est utero progenerata meo.
Me tamen una dedit victam sententia letho:
Illa volens iterum surgere, bis cecidit.
Mecum oritur, mecum moritur, mecum sepulchrum
Intrat, and inferni carceris ima subit.
Prosper in Epitaph. Nestor. and Pelag. haeres.
so he makes both of them to fall, and be condemned together. From whence it
appears, that the Pelagians were not condemned in the Ephesine Council merely
for Nestorianism, but for their proper and peculiar sentiments; the former
deposition of them being ratified by the Council, and a new Canon made to that
purpose for the future. And now let the Reader judge whether his Lordship or
Bellarmine were herein the more mistaken.

His Lordship adds;. 6.
If this Heresy were condemned only by a National Council, then the full
Authority of the Church here, P. 36.
is no more than the full Authority of this Church of Africa. And I hope, says
he, That Authority does does not make all Points defined by it, to be
Fundamental. You will say, Yes: if that Council be confirmed by the Pope. And
then I must ever wonder, why S. Augustine should say, The full Authority of the
Church; and not bestow one word upon the Pope, by whose Authority only that
Council, as all other, have their fullness of Authority in your judgment. An
inexpiable Omission; if this Doctrine concerning the Pope were true. To this
you answer, That there was no need of any special mention of the Pope, P. 33.
n. 4.
in speaking of the Authority of the Church; because his Authority is always
chiefly supposed, as being Head of the whole Church. But by whom was this
supposed? by you, or by S. Augustine? Can you prove that S. Austin, or any of
the African Fathers did ever suppose any such thing, that the Pope being Head
of the Church, his Authority is chiefly supposed in the Acts of National
Councils? Where was the supposal of this Authority in the Dispute between the
African Fathers, and the Popes, in the case of Appeals? These are suppositions,
only to be obtruded upon ignorant Novices; and such, who look no further into
Antiquity, than the Implicit Faith in their Priests will give them leave. But
what a stranger to all true Antiquity this supposition of the Pope's being Head
of the Church, is, we shall see abundantly, when we come to the Controversy of
the Pope's Authority. Yet granting the Supposition true (than which nothing can
be more false) when the main strength lies not in the bare Definition of a
National Council, which you grant of it self has not full Authority, but in
the confirmation of that Decision by the Pope which makes that Authority full,
which was not so before; Was it not necessary to declare, that the Pope did
concur to the giving it full Authority, which without it could not be had? You
do not say, That all National Councils have this full Authority, not being
confirmed by the Pope; if therefore S. Augustine designed to show that Council
to have full Authority, the only way, to prove it, was to produce the Pope's
Confirmation of it; which cannot therefore be otherwise looked on, than as an
inexpiable Omission, if your Doctrine be true; for he left out that which was
only pertinent and material to the business. Your parallel between S. Austin
and your self (which is a very worthy one) in leaving out the mention of the
Pope's Authority when it is understood, will then hold when you produce as
great evidence that S. Austin was a Jesuit, as we have from your principles
that you are. When you give as manifest proof, that the Pope's Power is
necessary to all Definitions of Councils, as there is in our Laws for our Kings
assenting to Acts of Parliament; we may give you leave to parallel the Omission
of the express mention of one with the other. If the Definitions of Ancient
Councils did run in the name of Pope and Council, as our Acts of Parliament, in
the name of the King, and both Houses, we might easily say, the Authority of
them came from the Pope, as of these from the King; but there is nothing of
that nature, but much of the contrary, as will appear in due time. When you
therefore prove that the Pope's Power is implied, though it be not mentioned,
you must prove it by some evident Confession, that no Authority of a Council
was full, unless the Pope concurred with it: else you may as well say, That the
great Mogul has no full Authority to decree any thing without the Pope's
consent; for I dare say, There is no denial of it in any of his Laws. And yet,
that is more than can be said here, for we have sufficient testimony from the
records of that age, That the Pope's Authority was not supposed necessary to
Councils, from his being Head of the Church. What follows p. 34. n. 5, 6.
depends wholly upon the often-mention'd distinction of the Formal and Material
Object of Faith; the foundation of which, having been already removed, whatever
you offer to build upon it, must of necessity fall to the ground; but I shall
not follow your ill example, in making tedious Repetitions, and then cry out,
You are forced to it.

His Lordship urges further, from the Romanists Doctrine of Fundamentals,. 7.
That the Churches Definition, must be the Churches Foundation. His words are;
Besides, whatsoever is Fundamental in the Faith, is Fundamental to the Church,
which is one by the Unity of Faith: Therefore, if every thing defined by the
Church be Fundamental in the Faith, P. 36. n. 14.
then the Churches Definition, is the Churches Foundation. And so, upon the
matter, the Church can lay her own Foundation, and then the Church must be in
absolute and perfect Being, before so much as her Foundation is laid. To which
you answer; P. 35.
But what Absurdity is it to grant, That the Definition of the Church teaching,
is the Foundation of the Church taught? or, the Definition of the Church
representative, is the Foundation of the Church diffusive? I pray, inform us
whether this Church teaching and representing, be the same Church with the
Church taught and diffusive, or one different from it: If it be different, it
must have a different Foundation, and so must be fundamentally different; if it
be the same, then the Church must still lay its own Foundation: for whatever
becomes Fundamental by the Definition of the Church, is, I suppose, to be
believed as necessary, i. e. Fundamental, by the Church teaching and
representing, as well as taught and diffusive. Unless you think those who
decree things, to be believed by all in order to salvation, do exclude
themselves out of that number; and therefore, though it be necessary for all
others to believe it, it is still indifferent for them, whether they will
believe it or no. And therefore, were I of your Church, I should heartily wish
my self of the teaching and representative Church; for then others might go to
Hell for not believing that, which I might choose whether I would or no. What an
excellent invention this is, to make the Pope and Cardinals go to Heaven,
though they be Atheists and Infidels? For, you tell us, we can have no
assurance of any matter of Faith, but from the Infallibility of your Church;
this Infallibility lies not in the taught and diffusive, but in the teaching
and representative Church; and this distinction here supposes, that what is
made the Foundation of the Church taught, is not the Foundation of the Church
teaching, i. e. what is necessary to Salvation for one, is not so for the
other; for that is your meaning of Fundamentals. Now, since all things become
necessary to be believed by the Church diffusive, upon the Authority of the
Church representative; it necessarily follows, from this distinction, That
nothing at all is necessary to be believed by the Church representative. And is
not this a rare Church the mean while? but what is it which makes it a Church?
for though it represents and teaches, yet it is still called a Church teaching
and representative: If it be a Church, something must make it so: What can make
it so, if not the belief of what is necessary to Salvation? And if it does not
believe all that is necessary to Salvation, the Church diffusive is much more
truly a Church, than the representative: If it does believe all that is
necessary, then it must believe its own Definitions, because those are supposed
to be so; and consequently, if those be Fundamental, the Church must still lay
her own Foundation. Or else these consequences follow. 1. That may be a true
Church, which does not believe all things necessary to Salvation. 2. The Church
teaching is not bound to believe that which she teaches, but only the Church
taught. 3. That may be the same Church which Fundamentally differs from it
self. 4. When the Church defines a thing to be necessary, she does not believe
it to be necessary, but it becomes necessary after her Definition. For, I pray,
satisfy us as to this Teaching Church, when she defines something necessary to
be believed in order to Salvation, which was not so defined before; Does she at
that Instant of her Definition believe that to be necessary to Salvation, or
does she not? If she does, then it is necessary before her Definition; and so
the belief of it as necessary, cannot depend upon it: But if she believes it
only to be necessary, because she defines it to be so; then she cannot believe
it to be necessary, till she has defined it, and consequently defines that to
be necessary, which she believes not to be necessary: and so defines contrary
to her own judgment and belief. Let me therefore ask here some more Questions,
which I doubt you will think troublesome, If the Church representative believed
that not to be necessary to Salvation, which she defined to be necessary to
Salvation, was she infallible in that belief or no? If she was not infallible,
then at that time what assurance could men have, of any matter of Faith, since
you tell us, That must be had from the Churches Infallibility? If she were
infallible, then either in some things only, or in all she believed? if only in
some things we ought to know what she is infallible in, and what not, lest we
deceive our selves in believing her infallible in that in which she is not
infallible? If in all things, then she is infallible in believing that not to
be necessary to Salvation, which yet she infallibly defines to be necessary to
Salvation: And so the Church may infallibly define that to be true, which at
the very moment of that Definition, she infallibly believes to be false. All
these are the just and excellent Consequences of this useful Distinction of
yours, which you look on as the only happy Expedient, whereby to free your self
from asserting, that the Church, by making things Fundamental, by her
Definitions, does thereby lay her own Foundation.

But as absurd and unreasonable as this is, you would seem to have something to
say for it:. 8.
for you tell us, That the Pastors, in all Ages preserving Christian People
from being carried away with every wind of Doctrine, Ibid.
are a Foundation to them of constancy in Doctrine. Wonderfully subtle! it is
pity such excellent reasoning should want the ornaments of Mood and Figure: but
thus it is in them. If the Pastors of the Church may be the means of preserving
men from errors, then the Definition of the Church teaching, is the Foundation
of the Church taught: which in short amounts to this; If the Pastors of the
Church may be a Foundation of men's constancy in Doctrine, then they may be a
Foundation of men's inconstancy in Doctrine. If this be not that you mean, I can
make no sense of what you say; and if it be, let any one else make Sense of it,
that has a gift for it. For, by constancy in Doctrine, is meant, the adhering
to that Doctrine which God has revealed as necessary in his Word, but by the
Definitions of the teaching Church, you understand a Power to make more things
necessary to the Salvation of all than Christ has made; so that, join these
two together, the Consequence is this: If the Pastors of the Church may, and
ought to keep men from believing any other Doctrine, then they have power to
impose another Doctrine; which things are so contradictious to each other, that
none but one of your faculty would have ventured to have set one to prove the
other. Therefore when you would prove any thing by this Argument, your Medium
must be this, That the Pastors of the Church are a Foundation of constancy in
Doctrine, by laying New Foundations of Doctrines by her Definitions, which is
just as if you would prove, That the best way to keep a House entire, without
any additions, is to build another house adjoining to it.

But, say you further, Were not the Apostles in their times (who were Ecclesia
docens) by their Doctrine and Decrees, a Foundation to the Church which was
taught by them? Does not S. Paul expressly affirm it, superaedificati supra
Fundamentum Apostolorum, etc. To which I answer. 1. That the Apostles were not
therefore said to be the Foundation on which they were built who believed on
that Doctrine, because, by virtue of their Power, they could define or decree
any thing to be necessary to Salvation, which was not so before; but, because
they were the Instruments whereby the things which were necessary to Salvation,
were conveyed to them. And because their Authority, by virtue of their Mission,
and the Power accompanying it, was the means whereby they were brought to
believe the Doctrine of the Gospel, as in it self true. But there is a great
deal of difference between teaching what is necessary to Salvation, and making
any thing necessary to Salvation, which was before, merely because it is taught
by them. 2. I grant, that those things did become necessary to be believed,
which the Apostles taught; but, it was either because the things were in
themselves necessary, in order to the end declared, viz. Man's Salvation, or
else it was on the account of that evidence which the Apostles gave, that they
were persons immediately employed by God, to deliver those Doctrines to them.
But still here is nothing becoming necessary, by virtue of a Decree or
Definition, but by virtue of a Testimony, that what they delivered, came from
God. 3. When the Apostles delivered these things, the Doctrine of the Gospel
was not made known to the world; but they were chosen by God, and infallibly
assisted for that end, that they might reveal it to the world: And this is
certainly a very different case from that, when the Doctrine of Salvation is
fully revealed and delivered down to us in unquestionable records. And
therefore, if you will prove any thing to your purpose, you must prove as great
and as divine assistance of the Spirit in the Church representative of all
Ages, as was in the Apostles in the first Age of the Christian Church. 4. When
you say from hence, That the Apostles, as the teaching Church, laid the
Foundation of the Church taught; that can only be understood of those
Christians who became a Church, by the Apostles preaching the Doctrine of the
Gospel to them: but this is quite a different thing from laying the Foundation
of a Church already in being as your Church, taught, and diffusive, is supposed
to be. Can you tell us, where the Apostles are said to lay further Foundations
for Churches already constituted; that they made or declared more things
necessary to Salvation, than were so antecedently to their being a Church? But
this is your case, you pretend a power in your Church representative, to make
more things necessary to Salvation, than were before to a Church already in
Being, and therefore supposed to believe all things necessary to Salvation. You
see therefore, what a vast disparity there is in the case, and how far the
Apostles declaring the Doctrine of Christ, and thereby founding Churches, is
from being an Argument that the representative Church, may lay the Foundation
of the Church diffusive, which being a Church already, must have its Foundation
laid before all new Decrees and Definitions of the teaching Church. So that
still it unavoidably follows upon your principles, That the Church must lay her
own Foundation, and then the Church must have been in absolute and perfect
Being, before so much as her Foundation is laid. Your weak endeavor of
retorting this upon the Bishop, because of the Apostles teaching the Church of
their Age, only shows, that you have a good will to say something in behalf of
so bad a cause, but that you want ability to do it: as appears by the Answers
already given, as to the difference of the Apostles case and yours. The
subsequent Section, which is spent in a weak defense of A. C's. words, P. 3^.
has the less cause to be particularly examined; and besides, its whole
strength lies on things sufficiently discussed already, viz. the sufficient
Proposition of matters of Faith, and the Material and Formal Object of it.

That which follows pretending to something New, and which looks like
Argumentation, must be more distinctly considered.. 9.
A. Cs. words are, That if one may deny, or doubtfully dispute against any one
Determination of the Church, then he may against another, and another, and so
against all: since all are made firm to us by one and the same Divine
Revelation, sufficiently applied by one and the same full Authority of the
Church; which being weakened in any one, cannot be firm in any other. P. 38. n.
15.
To which his Lordship answers, 1. That this is understood only of Catholic
Maxims, which are properly Fundamental, by Vincentius Lirinensis, from whom
this Argument is derived. 2. He denies, that all Determinations of the Church
are made firm to us by one and the same Divine Revelation. 3. He denies, n. 16.
that all Determinations of the Church are sufficiently applied by one and the
same full Authority of the Church. Of each of these he gives his reasons; the
examination and defense of which, is all that remains of this Chapter. To the
first, you answer three things (for I must digest your Answers for you. P. 37.
) 1. That there is no evidence, that A. C. borrowed this from Vincentius, and
you give an excellent reason for it, because good wits may both hit on the same
thing, or at least come near it; which, had it been said of your self, had been
more unquestionable: but, to let that pass, 2. You tell us, That the Doctrine
is true, whosoever said it. For which, you give this reason. For the same
reason which permits not our questioning, or denying the prime Maxims of Faith,
permits not our questioning, or denying any other Doctrine declared by the
Church; because it is not the greatness or smalness of the matter, that moves
us to give firm Assent in Points of Faith; but the Authority of God speaking by
the Church. To which I answer, that all this runs upon a Supposition false in
it self, which is, That all our Assurance in matters of Faith, depends upon the
Infallible Authority of the present Church; which being granted, I would not
deny; but, supposing that Infallibility absolute, on the same reason I believe
one thing on the Churches Authority, I must believe all. For the case were the
same then, as to the Church, which we say, it is as to the Scriptures; he that
believes any thing, on the account of its being contained in that Book as the
Word of God, must believe every thing he is convinced to be therein contained,
whether the matter be in it self small or great; because the ground of his
belief, is the Authority of God, revealing those things to us. And if therefore
you could prove such a Divine Authority, constantly resident in the Church, for
determining all matters of Faith, I grant your consequence would hold: but that
is too great a boon to be had for begging, and that is all the way you use for
it here. If you offer to prove it afterward, our Answers shall be ready to
attend you. But at present, let it suffice to tell you, That we believe no
Article of Faith at all upon the Churches Infallible Authority; and therefore,
though we deny what the Church proposes, it follows not that we are any more
liable to question the truth of any Article any further than the Churches
Authority reaches in it; i. e. we deny that any thing becomes an Article merely
upon her account. But now, if you remove the Argument from the present Churches
Infallible Authority, to the Universal Churches Testimony, we then tell you,
That he who questions a clear, full, universal Tradition of the whole Church
from Christ's time to this, will, by the same reason, doubt of all matters of
Faith, which are conveyed by this Testimony to us. But then we must further
consider, That we are bound by virtue of the Churches Testimony, to believe
nothing any further, than it appears to have been the constant, full, Universal
Testimony of the Church, from the time of Christ and his Apostles. Whatever
therefore you can make appear to have been received as a necessary Article of
Faith in this manner, we embrace it, but nothing else; and on the other side,
we say, That whoever doubts, or denies this Testimony, will doubt of all
matters of Faith, because the ground and rule of Faith, the Scriptures, is
conveyed to us only through this Universal Tradition.

3. You answer, That his Lordship mistakes Vincentius Lerinensis his meaning,.
10.
and falsifies his testimony thrice at least. Whereof the first is in rendering
[de Catholico dogmate] of Catholic Maxims: P. 37. ^. 8.
and here a double most dreadful charge is drawn up against his Lordship; the
first from the accusation of Priscian, and the second of no less Authors, than
Rider and the English Lexicons: the first is, for translating the Singular
Number by the Plural; whereas our most Reverend Orbilius himself in the
following page, tells us, that this Catholicum dogma, Vincentius speaks of,
contains the whole Systeme of the Catholic Faith, and in that Systeme some are
Fundamentals, some Superstructures, (both Plurals) yet all these contained in
this one singular, Dogma: but it was his Lordships great mishap not to have his
education in the Schools of the Jesuits, else he might have escaped the lash
for this most unpardonable oversight of rendering verbum multitudinis by our
Authors own confession (who makes it larger too then his Lordship does; for
his Lordship says, it contains only Fundamentals, but our Author
Superstructures too) by the Plural Number. But the second fault is worse then
this; for, says our Author very gravely and discreetly with his rod in his
hand, But in what Author learnt he, that Dogma signifies only Maxims, were it
in the Plural number? Page 38.
Dogma according to our English Lexicons, Rider, and others, signifies a
Decree, or common received Opinion, whether in prime, or less principal
matters. What a learned dispute are we now fallen into? But I see you were
resolved to put all, but Boys and Paedagogues out of all likelihood of
confuting you; For those are only the persons among us, who deal in Rider and
English Lexicons. I see now, there is some hopes, that the orders of the
Inquisition may have better Latin, then that against Mr. White had; since our
old Jesuits begin to be so well versed in such Masters of the Latin tongue.
How low is Infallibility fallen, that we must appeal for knowing what dogma
fidei is, to the definition not of Popes and Councils, but of Rider and English
Lexicons? But it is ill jesting with our Orbilius in so severe a humor, that
his Grace of Canterbury cannot escape his lash for not consulting Riders
Dictionary for the signification of Dogma. But our Author passes, and we must
attend him, out of his Grammatical into the Theological School; and there tells
us, That the Ecclesiastical signification of Dogma, extends it self to all
things established in the Church, as matters of Faith, whether Fundamentals or
Superstructures; and for this, Scotus is cited (somewhat a better Author than
Rider) who calls Transubstantiation, Dogma fidei. I begin to believe now, that
Dogma is a very large word, and Fides much larger, that can hold so prodigious
a thing as Transubstantiation within them. But, notwithstanding what Rider and
Scotus say, None so able to explain Vincentius his meaning, as Vincentius
himself. To him therefore at last our Author appeals and tells us, That he
declares in other places, that he means by Dogma such things as in general
belong to Christian Faith without distinction. But does Vincentius any where by
Dogma mean any such things which were not judged necessary by the ancient and
Primitive Church, but become necessary to be believed upon the Churches
Definitions? Nothing can possibly be imagined more directly contrary to the
design of his whole Book then that is, when he appeals still for matters to be
believed to Antiquity, Universality, and Consent; and to be sure, all these are
required to whatever he means by a Dogma fidei: if you therefore can produce
any testimonies out of his Book, which can be supposed in the least to favor
the power of the Church in her new Definitions of matters of Faith, you may
justly challenge to your self the name of an excellent Invention, who can find
that in his Book, which all other persons find the directly contrary to. Your
first citation is out of chapter 33. (not 23. as you quote it, or some one else for
you) where he is explaining what St. Paul means by, Prophanas vocum novitates.
Vocum, says he, i. e. Dogmatum, rerum, sententiarum novitates; quae sunt
vetustati, quae antiquitati contrariae. I shall not scruple to grant you that
Vincentius by Dogmata here, does mean such things as the Definitions of your
Church are, for he speaks of those things, which all Christians, who have a
care of their Salvation are to avoid; of such things as are contrary to all
Antiquity; and such kind of Dogmata, I freely grant the Definitions of your
Church to be. Your second citation is as happy as the first, cap. 28. Crescat
(says he, speaking of the Church) sed in suo duntaxat genere, in eodem
scilicet Dogmate, eodem sensu, eademque sententia. An excellent place, no
doubt, to prove it in the Churches power to define new Articles of Faith;
because the Church must always remain in the same Belief, sense, and opinion.
When his words but little foregoing are, Profectus sit ille fidei non
permutatio, which without the help of English Lexicons you would willingly
render by leaving out that troublesome Particle non, that the best progress in
Faith is by adding new Articles, though it be as contrary to reason as it is to
the sense of Vincentius Lerinensis. If Vincentius says, that the Pelagians
erred in Dogmate fidei (which words neither appear cap. 24. nor 34.) he gives
this reason for it, because they contradict the Universal sense of Antiquity,
and the Catholic Church, cap. 34. So that still Vincentius, wherever he
speaks of this Dogma fidei, speaks in direct opposition to your sense of it,
for new definitions of the Church in matters of Faith. There being scarce any
book extant which does more designedly overthrow this opinion of yours, then
that of Vincentius does.

To show therefore how much you have wronged his Lordship, and what little
advantage comes to your cause by your insisting on Vincentius his testimony:.
11.
I shall give a brief account both of his Design and Book. The design of it,
is, to show what ways one should use to prevent being deceived, by such who
pretend to discover new matters of Faith, and those he assigns to be these two,
Commonit. 1. c. 1.
settling ones faith, on the Authority of Scripture, and the tradition of the
Catholic Church. But since men would enquire, The Canon of Scripture being
perfect, and abundantly sufficient for all things, what need can there be of
Ecclesiastical tradition? He answers, For finding out the true sense of
Scripture, Cap. 2.
which is diversely interpreted, by Novatianus, Photinus, Sabellius, Donatus,
Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, Apollinaris, etc. In the following Chapter he
tells us, what he means by this Ecclesiastical tradition, Quod ubique, quod
semper, ab omnibus creditum est, Cap 3.
that which has Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, joining in the belief of
it. And can any new Definitions of the Church pretend to all, or any of these?
He after enquires, what is to be done in case a particular Church separates it
self from the communion of the Catholic? Cap. 4.
He answers, We ought to prefer the health of the whole body, before any
pestiferous or corrupted member. But in case any Novel Contagion should spread
over, not a part only, but endanger the whole Church? then, says he, a man
must adhere to Antiquity, which cannot be deceived with a pretense of Novelty.
But if in Antiquity, we find out the error of two or three particular Persons,
or City, or Province; what is then to be done? then, says he, the Decrees of
General Councils are to be preferred: But in case there be none? then he adds,
The general consent of the most approved writers of the Church is to be
enquired after; and what they all with one consent, openly, frequently,
constantly held, writ, and taught, that let every man look on himself as bound
to believe without hesitation. Now then, prove but any one of the new Articles
of Faith in the Tridentine Confession by these rules of Vincentius; and it will
appear, that you have produced his Testimony to some purpose: else nothing will
be more strong and forcible against all your pretenses, than this discourse of
Vincentius is; which he inlarges by the examples of the Donatists, Arrians, and
others, in the following Chapters; in which still his scope is to assert
Antiquity, and condemn all Novelties in matters of Faith under any pretext
whatsoever. For this, Nihil novandum nisi quod traditum est. Nosque religionem,
non qua vellemus ducere, sed qua illa duceret, sequi oportere. Idque esse
proprium Christiana modestiae and gravitatis, non sua posteris tradere, sed a
majoribus accepta servare. cap. 9.
chapter 12, 14. he cites a multitude of Texts of Scripture; forbidding our
following any other Doctrine, but what was delivered by Christ and his
Apostles; and Anathematizing all such as such as should Preach any other
Gospel: and concludes that, with this remarkable speech; Adnunciare ergo
aliquid Christianis Catholicis praeter id quod acceperunt, nunquam licuit,
nunquam* licet, nunquam licebit: and Anathematizare eos qui Adnuncient aliquid,
praeterquam quod semel acceptum est, nunquam non oportuit, nusquam non oportet,
nusquam non oportebit. Vincent. Lerin. cap. 14.
It never was, never is, never will be, lawful to propose any thing (as matter
of Faith) to Christian Catholics, besides what they have received. And it was,
is, and will be becoming Christians to Anathematize all such who declare any
thing but what they have received. Do you think this man was not of your mind
in the Doctrine of Fundamentals? could he do otherwise then believe it in the
Churches power to define things necessary to Salvation, who would have all
those Anathematized, who pretend to declare any thing as matter of Faith, but
what they received as such from their Ancestors? And after he has at large
exemplified this in the Photinian, Nestorian, Apollinarian Heresies, and showed
how little the Authority of private Doctors, how excellent soever, is to be
relied on in matters of faith; he concludes again with this, Whatsoever the
Catholic Church held universally, that and that alone is to be held by
particular persons. Quicquid universaliter antiqui^us Ecclesiam Catholicam
tenuisse cognovent, id solum sibi tenendum, credendumque decernit. cap. 25.
Mirari satis nequeo tantam quorundam hominum vesaniam, tantam excacatae men^is
impietatem, tantam postremo errandi libidinem, ut contenti non sint trad^ta
semel and accepta antiquitus credendi regula; sed nova and nova in diem
quaerunt, semperque aliquid gest^u^t religioni addere, mutare, detrahere. Quasi
non coeleste dogma sit, quod semel revelatum esse sufficiat; sed terrena
institutio, quae aliter perfici nisi assidua emendatione, immo potius
reprehensione, non possit. cap. 26.
And after admires at the madness, blindness, perverseness of those, who are
not contented with the once delivered and ancient rule of Faith; but are still
seeking new things, and always are itching to add, alter, take away, some
thing of Religion (or matter of Faith). As though that were not a Heavenly
Doctrine, which may suffice to be once revealed; but an earthly institution,
which cannot be perfect, but by continual correction and amendment. Is not this
man now a fit person to explain the sense of your Churches new Definitions, and
Declarations in matters of Faith? And have not you hit very right on this sense
of Dogma, when here he understands by it that Doctrine of Faith, which is not
capable of any addition or alteration? And thus we understand sufficiently what
he means by the present controverted place; that if men reject any part of the
Catholic Doctrine, they may as well refuse another, and another, till at last
they reject all. Abdicata enim qualibet part Catholici dogmatis, alia quoque
item atque alia, etc. quid aliud ad extremum sequetur, nisi ut totum pariter
repudietur? cap. 31.
By the Catholic Doctrine, or Catholicum dogma, there he means the same with
the Coeleste dogma before, and by both of them understands that Doctrine of
Faith which was once revealed by God, and which is capable of no addition at
all, having Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, going along with it; and when
you can prove that this Catholicum dogma, does extend beyond those things which
his Lordship calls Catholic Maxims, or properly Fundamental Truths, you will
have done something to the purpose, which as yet you have failed in. And thus
we say, Vincentius his rule is good, though we do not say, that he was
infallible in the application of it, but that he might mention some such things
to have had Antiquity, Universality, and Consent which had not so, such as the
business of not rebaptizing Heretics, and the observation of Easter, which you
instance in. And withal we add, though nothing is to be admitted for matter of
Faith which wants those three marks, yet some things may have all three of
them, and yet be no matters of Faith at all; and therefore not at all pertinent
to this question; Such as those things are which you insist on, as deposita
dogmata; which doubtless is a rare way of probation. viz. to show that by
dogmata deposita, Vincentius means some articles of Faith which are not
Fundamental in the matter of them; and for that make choice of such instances
which are no matters of faith at all: but either ritual traditions, or matters
of order, such as the form and matter of Sacraments, the Hierarchy of the
Church, Paedobaptism, not rebaptizing Heretics, the perpetual virginity of the
Virgin Mary. For that of the Canon of Scripture, it will be elsewhere
considered, as likewise those other Church-traditions.

How the Church should still keep, hoc idem quod antea, as you confess she
ought,. 12.
and yet make some things necessary to be believed by all, which before her
declaration were not so, Page 39.
is somewhat hard to conceive; and yet both these you assert together. Is that
which is necessary to be believed by all, the same with that which was not
necessary to be so believed? if the same measure of Faith will not serve after,
which would have done before, is there not an alteration made: Yes, you grant,
as to our believing, but not as to the thing, for that is the same it was. But
do you in the mean time consider what kind of thing that is which you speak of,
which is a thing propounded to be believed, and considered in no other respect,
but as it is revealed by God in order to our believing it; now when the same
thing which was required only to be believed implicitly, i. e. not at all
necessarily, is now propounded to be believed expressly and necessarily; the
Fundamental nature of it, as an object of Faith, is altered. For that which you
call implicit Faith, does really imply as to all those things to be believed
implicitly, that there is an indifferency, whether they be believed or no;
nothing being necessary to be believed, but what is propounded to be expressly
believed: Which being so, Can it be imagined there should be a greater
alteration in a matter of Faith, then from its being indifferent whether it
were believed or no, to become necessary to be expressly believed by all in
order to Salvation? And where there is such an alteration as this in the thing
to be believed, who can without the help of a very commodious implicit Faith
believe, that still this is hoc idem quod antea, the very same as a matter of
Faith, which it was before. Though the Church were careful to preserve every
Iota and tittle of Sacred Doctrines; yet I hope it follows not, that every Iota
and tittle is of as much consequence, and as necessary to be believed, as the
main substance of Christian Doctrine. Although when any Doctrine was violently
opposed in the Church she might declare her owning it by some overt act; yet
thence it does not follow, that the internal assent to every thing so declared
is as necessary, as to that proposition, that Jesus is the Son of God, the
belief of which the Scripture tells us was the main design of the writing of
Scripture. That General Councils, rightly proceeding, may be great helps to the
Faith of Christians, I know none that deny; but that by virtue of their
definitions any thing becomes necessary to be believed, which was not so
before, remains yet to be proved.

You much wonder his Lordship should father that saying on Vincentius, That, If
new Doctrines be added to the old, the Church,. 13.
Page 39.
which is Sacrarium veritatis, the repository of verity, may be changed in
Lupanar errorum, which, his Lordship says, he is loath to English: for you tell
us, That Vincentius is so far from entertaining the least thought of it, that
he presently adds, Deus avertat, God forbid it should be so. A stout Inference!
Just as if one should say, The Church of Rome may be in time overspread with
the Mahumetan Religion, but God forbid, it should be so; Were he not an
excellent Disputer, who should hence infer it impossible ever to be so. What
you add out of Vincentius only proves, that he did not believe it was so in his
time, but does not in the least prove, that he believed it impossible that ever
it should be so afterward; but notwithstanding all that you say, it is evident
enough, that Vincentius believed it a very supposable Case, by that question he
puts elsewhere. What if any new contagion does not only endeavor to defile a
part only, Quid si novella aliqua contagio non jam por^^unculam tantum, sed
totam pariter Ecclesiam commaculare conctur? tunc item providebit, ut
antiquitati inhaereat. cap. 4.
but the whole Church? in which, he says, we are to adhere to antiquity. If
you answer, he speaks only of an endeavor: it is soon replied, That he speaks
of such an endeavor as puts men to dispute a question, what they are to do in
such a Case, and he resolves at that time, they are not to adhere to the
judgment of the present Church, but to that of Antiquity, which is all we
desire in that Case, viz. That the present Church may so far add to matters of
Faith, that we can in no reason be obliged to rely only upon her judgment.
Wherein we are to consider, the Question is not of that you call the diffusive,
but the representative Church, all which may be overspread, and yet but a part
of the other; but yet if that Church, whose judgment you say only is to be
relied on may be so infected, it is all one as to those who are to be guided by
her judgment, whether the other be or no. For here eadem est ratio non entis
and non apparentis, because it is not the reality, but the manifestation which
is the ground of men's relying on the Churches judgment. So that if as to all
outward appearance and all judicial acts of the Church, she may recede from the
ancient Faith, and add novitia veteribus, (whether all particular persons in it
do so or no) all ground of relying on the judgment of that Church, is thereby
taken away. Whether it be the Church her self, or Heretics in the Church which
make these additions, is very little material, if these Heretics, who add
these new articles of Faith, may carry themselves so cunningly as to get to
themselves the reputation of the Catholic Church: and so that which ought to
have been Sacrarium veritatis, may become impiorum and turpium errorum Lupanar:
which your Church is concerned not to have Englished; but by the help of Rider,
and other good Authors of yours, it is no hard matter to come to understand
it. And thus we see how much you have abused his Lordship, in charging him with
a threefold falsification of Vincentius Lerinensis.

The second thing which his Lordship answers, is,. 14.
That all determinations of the Church are not made firm to us by one and the
same Divine Revelation; because some are made by Scripture, and others, as
Stapleton says, P. 39. n. 16.
without any evident or probable testimony of Holy writ: though therein
Bellarmine falls quite off, and confesses in express terms, that nothing can be
certain by certainty of Faith, unless it be contained immediately in the Word
of God: or be deduced thence by evident consequence. Your only design here, is,
to vindicate your two great Champions from contradicting each other, P. 42 n. 9.
which though it be of little consequence to the main Assertion of his
Lordship, which you knew well enough, and therefore carefully avoid the main
Charge of your enemy, to part two of your quarrelling friends: yet since you
intend this for a trial of your skill, we must see how well you play your
Prize. Stapleton, you say, means that we must submit to the determinations of
the Church and the traditions she approves, though they be not expressly
contained in Scripture. Excellently well guessed at Stapletons meaning! when
the very words you cite out of him are, We ought not to deny our assent in
matters of Faith, though we have them only by tradition, or the decisions of
the Church against Heretics, and not confirmed with evident or probable
testimony of Scripture. What a rare Interpreter are you grown since your
acquaintance with Rider, and other English Lexicons? Who make not denying
assent in matters of Faith, to be the same with submitting to the Churches
Determinations, when you know well enough, we plead for submission to the
Churches Determinations, where there may be a liberty as to internal assent:
and it is as good to make no evident or probable testimony of Scripture the
same with not being expressly contained in Scripture; as though nothing which
was not expressly contained in Scripture, could have any probable testimony from
thence. And from this we may guess what an easy matter it is for you to
accommodate all persons who differ, if one says Yes, and the other No, you
will tell them they do not differ, but that one of them by Yes, means No; and
the other by No, means Yes. Just so here you reconcile Stapleton and
Bellarmine; for you say, Stapleton by [no probable testimony] means some kind
of probable testimony, viz. such as though not express, may be yet deduced from
Scripture; and Bellarmine, when he speaks of Gods written Word, as the ground
of certainty, means that which is neither Gods Word, nor yet written, viz.
Tradition. I never met with one who had a better faculty of reconciling than
you seem to have by this attempt. But his Lordship had prevented this
subterfuge as to Bellarmine and Stapleton, as if Stapleton spoke of the Word of
God written, and Bellarmine of the Word of God unwritten (as he calls
Tradition). For Bellarmine, Page 40.
says he, there treats of the knowledge which a man has of the certainty of
his own Salvation. And I hope A. C. will not tell us, there is any Tradition
extant unwritten, by which particular men may have assurance of their several
Salvations. Therefore Bellarmine 's whole Disputation there, is quite beside
the matter: Or else, he must speak of the written Word, and so lie cross to
Stapleton as is mentioned. You tell us, This Reason is very strange: Page 43.
but I dare say, yours exceeds it in strangeness, which is, because Bellarmines
design was to show, there was no such unwritten Tradition to be found. But does
Bellarmine dispute against any body or no body? If he disputes against any body
upon your principles, those whom he disputes against must be such, who assert
that men may have certainty of Faith concerning their Salvation from Tradition;
and you would do well to tell us, Who those were that pretended that there was
a Tradition or unwritten word delivered down from the Apostles, that they
should be saved. And though Bellarmine was not to affirm this, yet those he
disputed against, upon your Principles must be supposed to do it. But certainly
you thought none of your Readers did ever intend to look into Bellarmine for
the place in Controversy; for if they did, nothing could be more plain, than
that Bellarmines reason against Catharinus and others, proceeds wholly and only
upon the written Word. For, 1. When he says, that Nothing can be certain with
the certainty of Faith, Bellarm. de justific. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 2.
but what is either immediately contained in the Word of God, or may be deduced
thence by evident consequence, because Faith can rest on nothing, but the
authority of Gods Word; he adds, That of this Principle, neither the Catholics
nor the Heretics doubt. But I pray, do those whom Bellarmine there calls
Heretics, acknowledge the unwritten Word as a foundation for certainty of
Faith in the Case Disputed? therefore it is plain, he speaks exclusively of a
written Word. 2. When he mentions the Assumption, he evidently explains himself
of the written Word; for, says he, There is no such Proposition contained in
the Word of God, that such and such a particular person is justified; for there
are none mentioned therein save Mary Magdalen, and a certain Paralytick of whom
it is said, their sins are forgiven them. Caeteri homines in sacris literis ne
nominantur quidem. And will Rider, and your other good friends the English
Lexicons, help you to interpret Sacrae literae by unwritten Traditions? Could
any one that had either any common sense left in him, or else had not a design
most grossly to impose on his Readers, offer to persuade men, that Bellarmine
could here understand the Word of God in a sense common to Scripture and
Tradition. If you can prove that Bellarmine says otherwise elsewhere, you are
so far from reconciling Bellarmine and Stapleton, that you will not easily
reconcile Bellarmine to himself.

The remainder of this Chapter either refers to something to be handled
afterward as the Infallibility of the Church and Councils, Page 43, 44.
or else barely repeats what has been discussed already concerning your sense
of Fundamentals, and therefore I dare not presume so far on the Reader's
patience, as to give him the same things over and over.

CHAP. IV. The Protestant Doctrine of Fundamentals vindicated.
The unreasonableness of demanding a Catalogue of Fundamentals. The Creed
contains the Fundamentals of Christian Communion. The belief of Scripture
supposed by it. The Dispute concerning the Sense of Christ's Descent into Hell,
and Mr. Rogers his Book confessed by T. C. impertinent: With others of the same
nature. T. C's. fraud, in citing his Lordships words. Of Papists and
Protestants Unity. The Moderation of the Church of England, compared with that
of Rome. Her grounds of Faith justified. Infant Baptism how far proved out of
Scripture alone.

. 1.
THis Chapter begins with a very pertinent Question, as you call it: we might
the easier believe it to be so, because it is none of your own proposing; but
yet your very calling it, a pertinent Question, renders it liable to suspicion,
and upon examination it will be found both unreasonable and impertinent. The
Question was, What Points the Bishop would account Fundamental; and that you
may show how necessary this Question was, P. 45. n. 1.
you add; For if he will have some Fundamental, which we are bound to believe
under pain of damnation; and others not Fundamental, which we may, without sin,
question, or deny; it behooves us much to know, what they are. I have ever
desired, say you, a satisfactory Answer from Protestants to this Question, but
could never yet have it in the sense demanded. An unhappy man you are, who, it
seems, have in your time propounded more foolish Questions, than a great many
wise men were never able to answer. But, is it not every jot as reasonable,
That since your Church pretends to the power of making things necessary to the
Salvation of all, which were not so before, we should have from you an exact
Catalogue of all your Churches Definitions? If for that, you referr us to the
Confession of Faith, at the end of the Council of Trent; so, may not we, with
far greater reason, send you back to the Apostolical Creed? there being no
objection which will hold against this, being a Catalogue of our Fundamentals,
but will hold against that Being a Catalogue of yours. Nay, you assert such
things your self concerning the necessity of believing things defined by the
Church, as make it impossible for you to assign the definite number of such
things, as are necessary for all persons, and therefore it is very unreasonable
to demand it of us. For still, when you speak, that the things defined by the
Church, are necessary to the Salvation of all, you add, Where they are
sufficiently propounded; so that the measure of Fundamentals depends on the
sufficiency of the Proposition. Now, will you undertake to assign what number
of things are sufficiently propounded to the belief of all persons? Can you set
down the exact bounds, as to all individuals, when their ignorance is
inexcusable, and when not? Can you tell what the measure of their capacity was?
what allowance God makes for the prejudices of Education, where there is a mind
desirous of instruction? Will you say, God accounts all those things
sufficiently proposed to men's belief, which you judge to be so? or, that all
men are bound to think those things necessary to Salvation, which you think so?
by what means shall the Churches Power of defining matters of Faith, be
sufficiently proposed to men as an Article of Faith? Either by its own
Definition, or without? If by its; the thing is proposed to be believed, which
is supposed to be believed already, before that Proposition; or else the
Enquiry returns with as great force, Why should I believe that Definition more
than any other? if without it; then the sufficiency of Proposition, and the
necessity of believing depends not on the Churches Definition. These Questions
I am apt to think as pertinent and necessary as yours was: and, now you know my
sense, and are so discontented you could never meet with a satisfactory Answer
from Protestants, prevent the same dissatisfaction in me, by giving a punctual
Answer to such necessary Questions. But, if you think the demands unreasonable,
because they depend on such things, which none can know but God himself; I pray
accept of that as a satisfactory Answer to your own very pertinent Question.

But if the Question be propounded not concerning what things are Fundamental
and necessary to particular persons,. 2.
which on the reasons formerly given, it is impossible to give a Catalogue of,
but, of such things which are necessary to be owned for Christian Communion, as
I have showed this Question of Fundamentals ought only to be taken here; then
his Lordship's Answer was more pertinent than the Question, viz. That all the
Points of the Creed were such: For, says he; P. 42. sect. 11: n. 1.
Since the Fathers make the Creed the Rule of Faith; since the agreeing sense
of Scripture, with those Articles, are the two Regular Precepts, by which a
Divine is governed about the Faith; since your own Council of Trent decrees,
That it is that principle of Faith, in which all that profess Christ, do
necessarily agree, and Fundamentum firmum and unicum, not the firm only, but
the only Foundation; since it is Excommunication ipso jure, for any man to
contradict the Articles contained in that Creed; since the whole body of Faith
is so contained in the Creed, as that the substance of it was believed even
before the coming of Christ; though not so expressly as since, in the number of
the Articles: Since Bellarlarmin confesses, That all things simply necessary
for all men's Salvation, are in the Creed and Decalogue, What reason can you
have to except? Thus far his Lordship: though from hence it appears, what
little reason you have to except; yet because of that, I expect your Exceptions
the sooner: and therefore very fairly passing by the sense of the Fathers, you
ask concerning the Council of Trent; What if, that call the Creed the only
Foundation? Are you come to a What if, with the Council of Trent? But, I
suppose, it is not from disputing its Authority, but its meaning; for you would
seem to understand it only of prime Articles of Faith, and not of such as all
are bound upon sufficient Proposition expressly to believe; for that is all the
sense I can make of your words. But, whoever was so silly, as to say, That all
such things which are to be believed on sufficient Proposition that they are
revealed by God, are contained in the Creed? When you seem to imply, That this
was the sense the Question was propounded in, it is a sign you little attend to
the Consequence of things: when it is most evident, that the Question was
started concerning the Greek Church, and therefore must referr only to such
Fundamentals, as are necessary to be owned in order to the Being of a true
Church. And when you can prove, that any other Articles are necessary to that,
besides those contained in the Creed, you will do something to purpose, but not
before. But, you suppose them to take the Creed in a very large sense, who
would lap up in the folds of it all particular Points of Faith whatever: and I
am sure, this is not the sense it is to be taken in here, nor that in which his
Lordship took it. He says indeed, That if he had said, that those Articles
only which are expressed in the Creed, P. 44.
are Fundamental, it would have been hard to have excluded the Scripture, upon
which the Creed it self in every Point is grounded. For nothing is supposed to
shut out its own Foundation. And this is built on very good reason. For the
things contained in the Creed are proposed as matters to be believed; all Faith
must suppose a Divine Testimony revealing those things to us, as the ground on
which we believe them; this Divine Testimor is never pretended to be contained
in the Creed; but that it is only a summary Collection of the most necessary
Points which God has revealed; and therefore something else must be supposed
as the ground and formal reason why we assent to the truth of those things
therein contained. So that the Creed must suppose the Scripture, as the main
and only Foundation of believing the matters of Faith therein contained. But
say you, If all the Scripture be included in the Creed, there appears no great
reason of scruple, P. 42. n. 2.
why the same should not be said of Traditions, and other Points; especially of
that for which we admit Scripture it self. But, do you make no difference
between the Scripture being supposed as the ground of Faith, and all Scripture
being contained in the Creed? And does not his Lordship tell you, That though
some Articles may be Fundamental, which are infolded in the Creed, it would not
follow, that therefore some unwritten Traditions were Fundamental; for, though
they may have Authority, and use, in the Church, as Apostolical, yet are they
not Fundamental in the Faith. And as for that Tradition, That the Books of Holy
Scripture are Divine, and Infallible in every part; he promises to handle it,
when he comes to the proper place for it. And there we shall readily attend
what you have to object to what his Lordship says about it.

. 3.
But yet you say, His Lordship does not answer the Question, as far as it was
necessary to be answered; we say, he does. No, say you: For the Question
arising concerning the Greek Churches error, whether it were Fundamental or
no; Mr. Fisher demanded of the Bishop, What Points he would account
Fundamental: P. 46.
to which he answers, That all Points contained in the Creed, are such, but yet
not only they; and therefore this was no direct Answer to the Question; for,
though the Greeks error was not against the Creed, yet it may be against some
other Fundamental Article not contained in the Creed. This you call fine
shuffling. To which I answer, That when his Lordship speaks of its not being
Fundamentum unicum in that sense, to exclude all things not contained in the
Creed from being Fundamental; he spoke it with an immediate respect to the
belief of Scripture, as an Infallible Rule of Faith: P. 43. n. 2.
For, says he, The truth is, I said, and say still, That all the Points of the
Apostles Creed, as they are there expressed, are Fundamental. And herein I say
no more than some of your best learned have said before me. But, I never said,
or meant, that they only are Fundamental; that they are Fundamentum unicum, is
the Council of Trent's, it is not mine. Mine is, That the belief of Scripture to
be the Word of God and Infallible, is an equal, or rather a preceding Principle
of Faith, with, or to, the whole body of the Creed. Now, what reason can you
have to call this, shuffling, unless you will rank the Greeks error equal with
the denying the Scripture to be the Word of God? otherwise, his Lordship's
Answer is as full and pertinent, as your cavil is vain and trifling. His
Lordship adds, That this agrees with one of your own great Masters, Albertus
Magnus, who is not far from the Proposition, in terminis. To which your
Exceptions are so pitiful, that I shall answer them, without reciting them; for
he that supposes the sense of Scripture, joined with the Articles of Faith, to
be the Rule of Faith, as Albertus does, must certainly suppose the belief of
the Scripture as the Word of God, else how is it possible its sense should be
the Rule of Faith? Again, it is not enough for you to say, That he believed
other Articles of Faith, besides these in the Creed; but, that he made them a
Rule of Faith together with the sense of Scripture. 3. All this while here is
not one word of Tradition, as the ground on which these Articles of Faith were
to be believed. If this therefore be your way of answering, I know none will
contend with you for fine shuffling. What follows concerning the right sense of
the Article of the Descent of Christ into Hell; since you say, P. 46. n. 4.
You will not much trouble your self about it, as being not Fundamental either
in his Lordships sense, or ours; I look on that expression as sufficient to
excuse me from undertaking so needless a trouble, as the examining the several
senses of it; since you acknowledge, That no one determinate sense is
Fundamental, and therefore not pertinent to our business. Much less is that
which follows concerning Mr. Rogers his Book and Authority; in which, and that
which depends upon it, I shall only give you your own words for an Answer, That
truly I conceive it of small importance to spend much time upon this subject;
and shall not so far contradict my judgment as to do that, which, I think,
when it is done, is to very little purpose. Of the same nature is that of
Catharinus; for it signifies nothing to us, whether you account him an Heretic
or no, who know, Men are not one jot more or less Heretic, for your accounting
them to be so or not.

You call the Bishop, your good friend, in saying, That all Protestants do
agree with the Church of England in the main Exceptions,. 4.
which they jointly take against the Roman Church, as appears by their several
Confessions. P. 48. n. 6.
For (say you) by their agreeing in this, but in little or nothing else, they
sufficiently show themselves enemies to the true Church, which is one, and only
one, by Unity of Doctrine; from whence they must needs be judged to depart, by
reason of their Divisions. As good a friend as you say his Lordship was to you,
in that saying of his, I am sure you ill requite him for his Kindness, by so
palpable a falsification of his words, and abuse of his meaning. And all that
Friendship you pretend, lies only in your leaving out that part of the
Sentence, which takes away all that you build on the rest. For where does his
Lordship say, That the Protestants only agree in their main Exceptions against
the Roman Church, and not in their Doctrines? Nay, does he not expressly say,
That they agree in the chiefest Doctrines, P. 50. n. 1.
as well as main Exceptions, which they take against the Church of Rome, as
appears by their several Confessions. But you, very conveniently to your
purpose, and with a fraud suitable to your Cause, leave out the first part of
agreement in the chiefest Doctrines, and mention only the latter, lest your
Declamation should be spoiled as to your Unity, and our Disagreements. But we
see by this, by what means you would persuade men of both, by Arts and Devices,
fit only to deceive such, who look only on the appearance and outside of
things; and yet even there, he that sees not your growing Divisions, is a great
stranger to the Christian world. Your great Argument of the Unity of your
party, because, whatever the private Opinions of men are, P. 47. n. 4.
they are ready to submit their judgments to the censure and determination of
the Church; if it be good, will hold as well (or better) for our Unity, as
yours, because all men are willing to submit their judgments to Scripture,
which is agreed on all sides to be Infallible. If you say, That it cannot be
known what Scripture determines, but it may be easily what the Church defines:
It is easily answered, that the event shows it to be far otherwise; for how
many Disputes are there, concerning the Power of determining matters of Faith?
to whom it belongs, in what way it must be managed, whether parties ought to be
heard in matters of Doctrine, what the meaning of the Decrees are, when they
are made, which raise as many Divisions as were before them, as appears by the
Decrees of the Council of Trent, and the latter of Pope Innocent relating to
the five Propositions: So that upon the whole it appears, setting aside force
and fraud (which are excellent principles of Christian Unity) we are upon as
fair terms of Union as you are among your selves.

. 5.
You tell us, That your Church does Anathematize only such persons as are
obstinate; P. 48* n. 6.
but who are they whom she accounts obstinate? even all who dissent from her in
any punctilio. And therefore this is a singular piece of Moderation in your
Church. And, you believe the troubles of Christendom rather come from too great
freedom taken in matters of Faith, than from any severity in the Church of
Rome. The truth is, you have excellent ways of ending Controversies, much like
persuading men to put out their Eyes, to end the Disputes about the nature of
Colors; and if they will not hearken to such prudent counsel, they are
pronounced obstinate and perverse, for offering to keep their Eyes in their
Heads. And if men will not say, that White is Black, when your Church bids them
do it, these men are the troublers of Israel, and the fomenters of the Discords
of the Christian world. But if your Church had kept to the primitive simplicity
and moderation, and not offered to define matters of Faith; the occasion of
most of the Controversies of the Christian world, had been taken away. Believe
what you will, and speak what you list; there are none who consider what they
believe or speak, but easily discover whence the great Dissentions of the
Christian world have risen, viz. from the Ambition and Usurpation of the Church
of Rome, which has not been contented to have introduced many silly
Superstitions into the public exercise of Devotion; but, when any of these
came to be discovered, thought it her best course to defend her corruptions
with greater; by enforcing men to the belief of them, and thereby rendering a
Separation from her Communion unavoidable by all those who sought to retrieve
the Piety and Devotion of the Primitive Church. And yet this must be called
Schism, and the persons attempting it Heretics, by that same Pious and
tenderhearted Mother of yours, who loves her Children so dearly, that if they
do but desire any reformation of abuses, she takes all possible care they shall
complain no more. As though the only way to prevent quarrelling in the world,
were to cut out peoples Tongues, and cut off their Arms; Such a kind of Unity
has your Church showed her self very desirous of, where ever power and
convenience have met for the carrying it on. But, I hope, you will give us
leave, not to envy the Unity of those, who therefore agree in the Church,
because, as soon as they do in the least differ from it, they are pronounced
not to be of it, for opposing the determinations of it. And yet,
notwithstanding, the violence and fraud used in your Church to preserve its
Unity, the world is alarmed with the noise of its Dissentions, and the increase
of the differing parties, who manage their Contests with great heats and
animosities against each other, under all the great pretenses of your Unity. I
cannot but therefore judge it a very prudent expression of his Lordship, That
as the Church of England is not such a Shrew to her Children, P. 50 n. 1.
as to deny her blessing, or denounce an Anathema against them, if some
peaceably dissent in some particulars remoter from the Foundation: So, if the
Church of Rome, since she grew to her greatness, had not been so fierce in this
course, and too particular in determining too many things, and making them
matters of necessary belief, which had gone for many hundred of years before,
only for things of pious Opinion; Christendom (I persuade my self) had been in
happier Peace at this day, then, I doubt, we shall ever live to see it. And it
is an excellent reason you give, P. 49,
why the Church of Rome does impose her Doctrine on the whole world, under pain
of damnation; because it is not in her power to do otherwise. There is little
hopes then of amendment in her, if she thinks so. But, you tell us, Christ has
commanded her to do it. What has he commanded her to do? to add to his
Doctrine by making things necessary, which he never made to be so? Is it in
that place, where he bids the Apostles, to teach all that he commanded them,
that he gives power to the Church, to teach more than he commanded: But this is
a new kind of Supererogation, to make more Articles of Faith, than ever men
required to make. Where still is this Command extant in Scripture? Not sure any
where, but in that most apposite place produced to that, and all other good
purposes which have nothing else to prove them; even Dic Ecclesiae, If he will
not hear the Church, let him be to thee as a Heathen and a Publican; therefore
the Church of Rome is commanded by Christ, to impose her Doctrine on the whole
Church, upon pain of damnation. Sure you will pronounce men obstinate, that
dare in the least question this, after so irrefragable a demonstration of it.
And you may well cry, Scripture is not fit to decide Controversies, when you
consider the lame Consequences you, above all men, derive from it.

His Lordship shows the Moderation of the Church of England, even in that Canon
which A. C. looks on as the most severe,. 6.
where she pronounces Excommunication on such as affirm, P. 51. n. 2.
that the Articles are in any part superstitious or erroneous, etc. by these
things. 1. That it is not meant of men's private judgments, but of what they
boldly and publicly affirm. 2. That it is one thing to hold contrary to some
part of an Article; and anotherp, ositively to affirm, That the Articles in any
part are superstitious or erroneous. 3. The Church of England does this only
for thirty nine Articles; but the Church of Rome does it, for above a hundred
in matter of Doctrine. 4. The Church of England never declared, That every one
of her Articles are Fundamental in the Faith; but the Church of Rome requires,
that all be believed as Fundamental, when once the Church has determined them.
5. The Church of England prescribes only to her own Children, and by those
Articles provides but for her own peaceable consent in those Doctrines of
Truth. But the Church of Rome severely imposes her Doctrine upon the whole
world, under pain of damnation. To all these very considerable Instances of our
Churches Moderation, your Answer is, The Question is not, P. 49. n. 8.
Whether the English Congregation, or the Roman Church be more severe; but,
Whether the English Protestants Severity be not unreasonable; supposing she be
subject to error, in defining those Articles. For after many words, to the
same, i. e. little purpose, the reason you give for it, is, That every just
Excommunication inflicted for opposing of Doctrine, must necessarily suppose
the Doctrine opposed to be infallibly true, and absolutely exempt from error;
otherwise the Sentence it self would be unreasonable and unjust, as wanting
sufficient ground. From whence you charge Protestants with greater Tyranny and
Injustice toward their people, than they can with any color or pretense of
reason, charge upon the Roman Church, which excommunicates no man, but for
denying such Doctrine as is both infallibly True, and also Fundamental, at
least as to its formal Object. This is the strength of all you say, which will
be reduced to this short Question, Whether the proceedings of that Church be
more unreasonable, which excommunicates such as openly oppose her Doctrine,
supposing her Fallible; or of that Church, which excommunicates all who will
not believe whatever she defines to be Infallibly true. This is the true State
of the Controversy, which must be judged by the resolving another Question,
Whether it be not a more unreasonable Usurpation, to bind men upon pain of
damnation hereafter, and excommunication here, to believe every thing
Infallible which a Church defines, or to bind men to peace to a Churches
Determinations, reserving to men the liberty of their judgments, on pain of
Excommunication, if they violate that peace. For it is plain on the one side,
where a Church pretends Infallibility, the Excommunication is directed against
the persons for refusing to give Internal Assent to what she defines: But,
where a Church does not pretend to that, the Excommunication respects wholly
that Overt Act, whereby the Churches Peace is broken. And if a Church be bound
to look to her own Peace, no doubt she has power to excommunicate such as
openly violate the bonds of it; which is only an Act of Caution in a Church, to
preserve her self in Unity; but where it is given out, that the Church is
Infallible, the Excommunication must be so much the more unreasonable, because
it is against those Internal Acts of the mind, over which the Church, as such,
has no direct power. And thus, I hope, you see how much more just and
reasonable the proceedings of our Church are then of yours; and that, eo
nomine, because she pretends to be infallible, and ours does not.

His Lordship shows further in Vindication of the Church of England, and her
grounds of Faith,. 7.
that the Church of England grounded her Positive Articles upon Scripture; P.
52. sect. 15. n. 1.
and her Negative do refute there, where the thing affirmed by them, is not
affirmed by Scripture, nor directly to be concluded out of it. And this (he
says) is the main principle of all Protestants, that Scripture is sufficient
to Salvation, and contains in it all things necessary to it. The Fathers are
plain, the Schoolmen not strangers in it. And Stapleton himself confesses as
much. Nay, and you dare not deny it, as to all material Objects of Faith, and
your formal here signifies nothing. And when A. C. says, That the Church of
England grounded her Positive Articles upon Scripture, P. 53. n. 2.
if themselves may be Judges in their own cause. His Lordship answers, We are
contented to be judged by the joint and constant belief of the Fathers, which
lived within the first four or five hundred years after Christ, when the Church
was at the best, and by the Councils held within those times, and to submit to
them in all those Points of Doctrine. This Offer you grant to be very fair, and
you do, for your selves, promise the same, and say, You will make it good upon
all occasions. P. 51.
Which we shall have trial of before the end of this Book. To what his Lordship
says, concerning the Negative Articles, That they refute where the thing
affirmed by them is either not affirmed in Scripture, or not directly to be
concluded out of it. A. C. replies, That the Baptism of Infants is not expressly
(at least not evidently) affirmed in Scripture, nor directly (at least not
demonstratively) concluded out of it. Here two things his Lordship answers. 1.
To the Expression. 2. To the thing.

1. To the Expression; That he is no way satisfied with A. C. his addition (not
expressly, P. 54. n. 1.
at least not evidently:) for (says he) What means he? If he speak of the
l^tter of Scripture, then whatsoever is expressly, is evidently in the
Scripture, and so his addition is in vain. If he speak of the meaning of
Scripture, then his addition is cunning. For many things are expressly in
Scripture, which yet in their meaning are not evidently there. And, as little
satisfied his Lordship declares himself, with that other (nor directly, at
least not demonstratively,) because many things are directly concluded, which
are not demonstratively. To the first you answer, That a Point may be expressed,
yet not evidently expressed; otherwise there could be no doubt concerning what
were expressed in Scripture, P. 51. n. 9,
since men never question things that are evident. Now, say you, the Baptism of
Infants must not only ^e expressed, but evidently expressed, to prove it
sufficiently, i. e. undeniably, by Scripture alone. But the Question being
concerning matters of Doctrine, and not mere words, those things are expressly
affirmed, which are evidently, and no other: For it is one thing for words to
be expressly in Scripture, and another for Doctrines to be so. For these latter
are no further expressly affirmed there, than as there is evidence, that the
meaning of such words does contain such a Doctiine in them. As to take your own
Instance, This is my Body, we grant the words to be express; but we deny, that
which he had then in his hands was his real Body; (for his hands were part of
his real Body) Now, we do not say, That the Doctrine of Transubstantiation is
expressly, but not evidently contained here; for, we say, The Doctrine is not
there at all, but only that those are the express words; This is my Body; as it
is in other figurative expressions in Scripture. But that which causes this
litigation about words, is, That you look upon that which is evident and
undeniable to be all one, whereas there may be sufficient evidence, where all
men are not persuaded by it. And so you would put his Lordship to prove out of
Scripture, Infant Baptism evidently and demonstratively, i. e. undeniably;
whereas his Lordship supposes it enough for his purpose, to prove it by such
sufficient evidence, as may convince any reasonable man. And this was all his
Lordship meant, when he said, That our Negative Articles do refute, where the
thing is not affirmed in Scripture, or not directly concluded out of it. And,
if you will stand to the strict sense of these words, you will be forced to
prove all those Doctrines of your Church, which ours denies to be true, so
evidently and demonstratively, i. e. undeniably, as you would put him upon for
the proof of Infant Baptism.

To leave therefore this verbal dispute, and come to the thing: His Lordship
says, That it may be concluded directly out of Scripture,. 8.
That Infants ought to be baptized, etc. For which, P. 55. n. 4.
he insists on two places of Scriture, Joh. 3.8. Except a man be born again of
Water, and of the Spirit, etc. which being interpreted according to the sense
of the Fathers, and the Ancient Church, and as your own party acknowledge it
ought to be interpreted, do evidently assert Infant Baptism. By which, P. 52.
n* ^,
your exception of a Pelagian Anabaptist, who denies Original sin, and from
thence says, That Infants cannot be born again, is taken away; for the same
Tradition of the Ancient Church, which from hence inferrs the Baptism of
Infants, does it upon that ground, because they are guilty of Original sin, as
you might have seen by his Lordship's Citations to that purpose. The other
place he insists on, is, Act. 2.38, 39. which, by the acknowledgement of Ferus
and Salmeron, P. 56*
holds for Infant Baptism. But, when you say, That you would not weaken the
Argument, from Joh. 3. for Infant Baptism; because you only would show, that it
cannot be proved demonstratively from Scripture alone, against a perverse
Heretic: You seem not much to consider what those perverse Heretics (as you
call them) hold as to Infant Baptism, which is, not merely that Infant Baptism
is not commanded in Scripture, but that it is a thing unlawful, as being a
perverting of the Institution of Christ, as to the subject of Baptism. For the
main Question between us and the Antipaedobaptists, is not, concerning an
absolute and express command for Baptizing Infants; but whether our Blessed
Savior has not by a positive Precept so determined the subject of Baptism;
viz. adult persons professing the Faith, that the alteration of the subject,
viz. in Baptizing Infants, be not a deviation from, and perversion of the
Institution of Christ in a substantial part of it; or in short thus, whether
our Savior has so determined the subject of Baptism, as to exclude Infants.
And although, the question being thus stated, the proof ought to lie on those
who affirm it, yet taking in only the help of Scripture and reason, it were no
difficult matter to prove directly and evidently, that Infants are so far from
being excluded Baptism by the Institution of Christ, that there are as many
grounds as are necessary to a matter of that nature, to prove that the
Baptizing them is suitable to the Institution of Christ, and agreeable to the
state of the Church under the Gospel. For, if there were any ground to exclude
them, it must be either the incapacity of the subject, or some express precept
and Institution of our Savior. But neither of these can be supposed to do it.

1. Not incapacity as to the ends of Baptism: for clearing which, these two
things must be premised: 1. That the rule and measure, as to the use and
capacity of Divine Institutions, is to be fetched from the end of them. For,
this was the ground of the Circumcision of the Proselytes under the Law: and
this was the way the Apostles did interpret Christ's Commission for Baptizing
all Nations, as to the capacity of the subjects of it, Acts 10.47. Can any man
forbid water, that these should not be Baptized, which have received the Holy
Ghost, as well as we: where the question was concerning the subject of Baptism.
For it might be made evident, that the Apostles at first did interpret their
Commission of Baptizing all Nations, only of the Jews of all Nations: for after
that, St. Peter looked on the Gentiles as unclean: and the Disciples at
Jerusalem charged St. Peter with it, as a great fault, for going in to men
uncircumcised, Acts 11.3. Therefore we see when the question was concerning the
subject of Baptism; the only Argument is drawn from the design and ends of it;
that they who were capable of the thing signified ought not to be denied the
use of the sign. And thus by a parity of reason built on equal grounds, those
who are capable of the great things represented in Baptism and confirmed by it,
viz. Gods pardoning grace, and acceptance to eternal life, ought not to be
denied the external sign, which is Baptism it self. And therefore, 2. Where
there is a capacity as to the main ends of an Institution, an incapacity as to
some ends does not exclude from it. As is most evident in the Baptism of our
Blessed Savior, in whom was a greater incapacity as to the main ends of
Baptism, then possibly can be in Infants; for his Baptism could not at all be
for the remission of sins. Now we see, although there were but one end, and
that a very general one mentioned, That he might fulfill all righteousness,
Matthew. 3.15. yet we see, that was sufficient to persuade John to Baptize him.
Whereby we see evidently in this practice of our Savior built on a general and
common ground, that a capacity as to one end of a positive Institution, is
sufficient to make such a practice lawful, and in some cases a duty.

These two general Principles being laid down; it were easy to show, 1. That
what incapacity there is in Infants,. 9.
is not destructive of the main ends of Baptism; which is chiefly thought to be
the incapacity of understanding the nature or ends of the Institution; and if
that exclude, it must either be, that it is a thing repugnant to reason, that
any Divine Institution should be applied to persons incapable of understanding
the nature and ends of it, which would highly reflect on the wisdom of God in
appointing Circumcision for Children eight days old, who were certainly as
incapable of understanding the ends of that, as our Children are of Baptism; or
else, that there is some peculiarity in the Institution of Baptism, which must
exclude them from it under the Gospel: which that there is not, will appear
presently.

2. That there is a capacity in Infants as to the main ends of Baptism, which
have either an aspect from God to us, in regard of its Institution, or from us
to God, in regard of our undertaking it. Now the chief ends of a Divine
Institution as such, are such as respect Gods Intention in it toward us, in
which respect it is properly a sign; but as it respects God from us, it is
properly a Ceremony betokening our profession and restipulation toward God.
Now the ends of it as a sign, are to represent and exhibit to us the nature of
the grace of the Gospel as it cleanses and purifieth, and to confirm the truth
of the Covenant on Gods part, and to enstate the partakers of it in the
privileges of the Church of God; now as to all these ends, there is no
incapacity in Infants to exclude them from Baptism, because of them. So that
nothing can seem wanting of the ends of Baptism, but that which seems most
Ceremonial in it, which is the personal restipulation, which yet may reasonably
be supplied by Sponsors, so far as to make it of the nature of a solemn
Contract and Covenant in sight of the Congregation. Thus far it appears from
Scripture and Reason, that no incapacity in Infants does exclude them from
Baptism.

2. That there is no direct or consequential prohibition made by our Blessed
Savior to exclude them. For granting that he had the power to limit and
determine the subject of Baptism, the question is, Whether he has so far done
it as to exclude Infants? And nothing of that nature is pretended, before the
last Commission given to the Apostles, of Teaching and Baptizing all Nations,
Matthew. 28.19. And that by this expression there is no exclusion of Infants will
appear; 1. If our Savior had intended the gathering of Churches among the
Gentiles according to the Law of Moses, he could hardly have expressed it after
another manner then thus, Go Proselyte all Nations, Circumcising them. Now I
appeal to any man's judgment and reason, whether in such words it could be
imagined, that the Infants of such Gentile-Proselytes should be excluded
Circumcision; and what reason can there be then from these words to imagine,
that our Savior did intend to exclude the Infants of Gentile-Converts from
Baptism? 2. We must consider, what apprehensions those whom our Savior
directed these words to, viz. the Apostles, had concerning the Church State of
such as were in an external Covenant with God, which they measured by the
general reason of that Covenant which God made with the Jews; Can we then
think, that when our Savior bid the Apostles gather whole Nations into
Churches, they should imagine the Infants were excluded out of it, when they
were so solemnly admitted into it, in that dispensation which was in use among
them? 3. The Gentiles being now to be first Proselyted to Christianity, the
order of the words was necessary: for whoever imagined, but that such as were
wholly strangers to Christianity, as those were whom Christ there speaks of,
were to be first taught, or discipled, before they were to be Baptized? For
suppose, it should be said to such persons among whom Infant Baptism is the
most used, Go and Disciple the Indians, Baptizing them, etc. Could any one
conceive the intention of such a Commission was to exclude the Infants of all
those Indians from Baptism, when it was well known that Infant Baptism was used
among those who came with that Commission? And therefore neither these words
here, nor those Mark. 16.16. He that believes and is Baptized, etc. can in
reason be so interpreted as to exclude Infants, when the mere order of nature,
and necessity of the thing, requires that those who first own Christianity by
being Baptized, ought, before such Baptism, not only to believe, but to make
profession of that Faith; but this reaches not at all to the case of such
Infants as are born of those persons. For if any one had said to Abraham, He
that believes, and is circumcised, shall be saved, Could it have been so
interpreted, that the intention was to exclude his Children from Circumcision?
No more ought these words of our Savior be strained to a greater prejudice of
the right of Infants to Baptism, then those other to their right of
Circumcision. And thus far we see there is no ground from Scriptures, or
Reason, why Infants should be excluded.

And, were it not too large a Digression, I might further show how suitable the
Baptism of Infants is to the administration of things under the Gospel;. 10.
but I shall only propound some considerations concerning it. 1. That if it had
been Christ's intention to exclude Infants, ^here had been far greater reason
for an express prohibition; then of an express command, if his intention were
to admit them: because this was suitable to the general grounds of Gods
dispensation among them before. 2. It is very hard to conceive that the
Apostles thought Infants excluded by Christ, when after Christ's Ascension they
looked on themselves as bound to observe the Jewish customs, even when they
had Baptized many thousand people. 3. If admission of Infants to Baptism were a
mere Relick of Judaism, it seems strange that none of the Judaizing Christians
should be charged with it, who yet are charged with the observation of other
Judaical rites. 4. Since the Jewish Christians were so much offended at the
neglect of Circumcision, Acts 21.21. Can we in reason think they should quietly
bear their Childrens being wholly thrown out of the Church; as they would have
been, if neither admitted to Circumcision nor Baptism? 5. Had it been contrary
to Christ's Institution, we should not have had such evidence of its early
practice in the Church as we have. And here I acknowledge the use of
Apostolical Tradition to manifest this to us; In which sense I acknowledge what
St. Austin says, That the custom of our mother the Church is not to be
contemned or thought superfluous, neither is it to be believed but as an
Apostolical Tradition. For that the words are to be read so, (and not, as you
translate them, nor at all to be believed unless it had been an Apostolical
Tradition, from thence inferring, that Infant Baptism were not to be believed
at all, but for Tradition) appears by three ancient Manuscripts at Oxford, as
well as the course of the sentence, and St. Austins judgment in other places,
viz. that it ought to be read, Nec omnino credenda nisi Apostolica traditio
esse, and not esset. But we grant that the practice of the Church from
Apostolical times is a great confirmation, that it was never Christ's intention
to have Infants excluded from Baptism. And thus much may suffice to show, what
evidence we have from Scripture and Reason, without recourse wholly to
Tradition, or building upon any more controverted places, to justify the
Churches practice in Infant Baptism, which is as much as is necessary for us to
do. What follows concerning the founding Divine Faith on Apostolical Tradition,
will be fully considered in the succeeding Controversy concerning the
resolution of Faith, to which we now hasten.

CHAP. V. The Romanists way of Resolving Faith.
The ill consequences of the resolution of Faith by the Churches Infallibility.
The grand Absurdities of it, manifested by its great unreasonableness in many
particulars. The certain Foundations of Faith unsettled by it, as is largely
proved. The Circle unavoidable by their new attempts. The impossibility of
proving the Church Infallible by the way that Moses, Christ, and his Apostles
were proved to be so. Of the Motives of Credibility, and how far they belong to
the Church. The difference between Science and Faith considered, and the new
art of men's believing with their wills. The Churches testimony must be,
according to their principles, the formal object of Faith. Of their esteem of
Fathers, Scripture, and Councils. The rare distinctions concerning the Churches
infallibility discussed. How the Church can be Infallible by the assistance of
the Holy Ghost, yet not divinely Infallible, but in a manner and after a sort.
T. C. applauded for his excellent faculty in contradicting himself.

HE that has a mind to betray an excellent Cause, may more advantagiously do
it, by bringing weak and insufficient Evidences for it,. 1.
then by the greatest heat and vigor of Opposition against it. For there
cannot possibly be any greater prejudice done to a weighty and important truth,
then to persuade men to believe it on such grounds, which are, if not
absolutely false, yet much more disputable then the thing it self. For hereby
the minds of men are taken off from the native evidence, which the truth
enquired after offers to them, and build their assent upon the certainty of the
medium's suggested as the only grounds to establish a firm assent upon. By
which means, when upon severe enquiry, the falsity and insufficiency of those
grounds is discovered, the person so discovering lies under a dangerous
temptation of calling into question the truth of that, which he finds he
assented to upon grounds apparently weak and insufficient. And the more refined
and subtle the speculations are, the more sublime and mysterious the matters
believed; the greater still the danger of Skepticism is, upon a discovery of
the unsoundness of those principles which such things were believed upon.
Especially, if the more confident and Magisterial party of those who profess
the belief of such things, do with the greatest heat decry all other ways as
uncertain, and obtrude these principles upon the world, as the only sure
foundation for the belief of them. It was anciently a great question among the
Philosophers, whether there were any certainty in the principles of knowledge;
or, supposing certainty in things, whether there were any undoubted (...), or
rules to obtain this certainty of knowledge by: If then any one Sect of
Philosophers should have undertaken to prove the certainty that was in
knowledge upon this account, because whatever their Sect or Party delivered was
infallibly true; they had not only shamefully begged the thing in dispute, but
made it much more liable to question then before. Because every error
discovered in that Sect, would not only prove the fondness and arrogance of
their pretense of being Infallible; but would, to all such as believed the
certainty of things on the authority of their Sect, be an argument to disprove
all certainty of knowledge, when they once discovered the errors of those
whose authority they relied upon. Just such is the case of the Church of Rome
in this present Controversy concerning the Resolution of Faith. The question
is, What the certain grounds of our assent are to the principles and rule of
Christian Religion? the Romanists pretend, that there can be no ground of True
and Divine Faith at all, but the Infallible testimony of Their Church; let then
any rational man judge, whether this be not the most compendious way to
overthrow the belief of Christianity in the world? For our assent must be
wholly suspended upon that supposed Infallibility, which when once it falls (as
it unavoidably, does upon the discovery of the least error in the doctrine of
that Church) what becomes then of the belief of Christianity which was built
upon that, as its only sure foundation? So that it is hardly imaginable, there
could be any design more really destructive to Christianity, or that has a
greater tendency to Atheism then the modern pretense of Infallibility, and the
Jesuits way of resolving Faith.

. 2.
Which was the reason why his Lordship was so unwilling to engage in that
Controversy, How we know the Scriptures to be the Word of God: not out of any
distrust he had of solving it upon Protestant Principles, as you vainly
suggest; nor out of any fears of being left himself in that Labyrinth, which
after all your endeavors you have lost your self and your cause in; as appears
by your attempting this way, and that way to get out, and at last standing in
the very middle of that circle you thought your self out of. If his Lordship
thought this more a question of curiosity then necessity, it was because out of
his great Charity he supposed them to be Christians he had to deal with. But if
his charity were therein deceived, you shall see how able we are to make good
the grounds of our Religion against all Adversaries, whether Papists or others.
And so far is the answering of this question from making the weakness of our
cause appear, that I doubt not but to make it evident that our cause stands
upon the same grounds which our common Christianity does; and that we are
Protestants by the same reason that we are Christians. And on the other side,
that you are so far from giving any true grounds of Christian Faith, that
nothing will more advance the highest Skepticism and Irreligion, then such
Principles as you insist on for resolving Faith. The true reason then, why the
Archbishop declared any unwillingness to enter upon this dispute, was not the
least apprehension how insuperably hard the resolution of this question was,
(as you pretend) but because of the great mischief your Party had done in
starting such questions you could not resolve with any satisfaction to the
common reason of mankind; Page 55.
and that you run your selves into such a Circle in which you conjure up more
Spirits then ever you are able to lay, by giving those advantages to
Infidelity, which all your Sophistry can never answer on those principles you
go upon. That this was the true ground of his Lordship's seeming averseness
from this Controversy, appears by his plain words, where he tells you at
first, of the danger of men's being disputed into infidelity by the Circle
between Scripture and Tradition, Sect. 16. n. 1.
and by his expressing his sense of the great harm you have done by the
starting of that question among Christians, How we know the Scriptures to be
the Word of God. But although in this respect he might be said to be drawn into
it, yet lest you should think his averseness argued any consciousness of his
own inability to answer it, you may see how closely he follows it; with what
care and accuracy he handles it, with what strength of reason and evidence he
has discovered the weakness of your way, which he has done with that success,
that he has put you to miserable shifts to avoid the force of his arguments,
as will appear afterward. I am therefore fully of his mind, that it is a
matter of such consequence it deserves to be sifted, were it for no other end,
but to lay open the juglings and impostures of your way of resolving Faith.

Which we now come more closely to the discovery of; for,. 3.
as you tell us, The Bishop propounding diverse ways of resolving the
Question, first falls to the attaquing your way, Ibid.
who prove it by Tradition and authority of the Church. And his first onset is
so successful that it makes you visibly recoyle, and withdraw your self into so
untenable a Shelter as exposes you to all the attempts which any adversary
would desire to make upon you. For, whereas you are charged by his Lordship
with running into the most absurd kind of argumentation, viz. by proving the
Scriptures infallible by Tradition, and that Tradition infallible by Scripture;
you think to escape that Circle by telling us, That you prove not the Churches
Infallibility by the Scripture, but by the motives of credibility belonging to
the Church. This then being your main principle which your following discourse
is built upon, and in your judgment the only probable way to avoid the Circle,
that you may not think I am afraid of encountering you in your greatest
strength, I dare put the issue of the cause upon this Promise, that (besides
the weak proofs you bring for the thing it self, which shall after be
considered) if this way of yours be not chargeable with all the absurdities
such an attempt is capable of, I will be content to acknowledge what you say to
be true, which is, That your way of resolving Faith has no difficulty at all,
and that ours is insuperably hard, which I think are as hard terms as can be
imposed upon me. Now there are two grand Absurdities, which any vindication of
an Opinion are subject to; first, If it be manifestly unreasonable, and, 2. If
supposing it true, it does not effect what it was intended for: now these two I
undertake to make good against this way of your resolving Faith, that it is
guilty of the highest unreasonableness; and that, supposing it true, you are in
a circle as much as before.

1. First, I begin with the unreasonableness of it, which is so great, that I
know not, whether I may abstain from calling it ridiculous; but, that I may not
seem to follow you, in asserting confidently, and proving weakly, it will be
necessary thoroughly to examine the grounds on which your opinion stands, and
then raise our batteries against it. Three grand principles your discourse
relyes upon, which are your postulata in order to the resolving Faith.

1. That it is necessary to the believing the Scriptures to be the Word of God
with a Divine Faith, that it be built on the infallible testimony of the Church.

2. That your Church is that Catholic Church whose testimony is Infallible.

3. That this Infallibility is to be known and assented to upon the motives of
credibility. These three, I suppose, if your confused discourse were reduced to
method, would be freely acknowledged by your self to be the Principles on which
your resolution of Faith depends. And although I am sufficiently assured of the
falseness of your two first Principles (as will appear in the sequel of this
discourse) yet that which I have now particularly undertaken, is, the
unreasonableness of resolving Faith upon these Principles taken together, viz.
That the Infallible Testimony of your Church, is the only Foundation for Divine
Faith; and that this Infallibility can be known only by the Motives of
Credibility. If then in this way of resolving Faith, you require Assent beyond
all proportion of evidence, if you run into the same Absurdities you would seem
to avoid, if you leave men more uncertain in their Religion than you found
them; you cannot certainly excuse this way from unreasonableness, and each of
these I undertake to make good against this way of yours, whereby you would
assure men of the Truth and Divinity of the Scriptures.

1. An Assent is hereby required beyond all proportion or degree of evidence;
for you require an Infallible Assent,. 4.
only upon Probable grounds; which is as much as requiring Infallibility in the
conclusion, where the premises are only probable. Now that you require an
Assent Infallible to the nature of Faith, appears by the whole series of your
Discourse: for, to this very end you require Infallibility in the Testimony of
your Church, because otherwise, you say Our Faith would be uncertain; it is
plain then, you require an Infallible Assent in Faith; and, it is as plain,
that this Assent, according to you, can be built only upon probable grounds,
for you acknowledge the motives of Credibility, to be no more than such; yet
those are all the grounds you give, why the Church should be believed
Infallible. If you say, That which makes the Assent Infallible, is, that
Infallibility which is in the Churches Testimony; I reply, That this is a most
unreasonable thing, to go about to establish an Infallible Assent, merely
because the Testimony is supposed to be in it self Infallible: For, Assent is
not according to the Objective Certitude of things, but the evidence of them to
our Understandings. For, is it possible to assent to the truth of a
Demonstration in a demonstrative manner, because any Mathematician tells one,
The thing is demonstrable? for in that case the Assent is not according to the
Evidence of the thing, but according to the opinion such a person has of him,
who tells him, It is demonstrable. Nay, supposing that person infallible in
saying so, yet if the other has no means to be infallibly assured, that he is
so; such a ones Assent is as doubtful, as if he were not infallible: Therefore,
supposing the Testimony of your Church to be really infallible, yet since the
Means of believing it are but probable and prudential, the Assent cannot be
according to the nature of the Testimony, considered in it self, but according
to the reasons which induce me to believe such a Testimony infallible. And, in
all such cases, where I believe one thing for the sake of another, my Assent to
the Object believed, is according to my Assent to the Medium on which I believe
it; for by the means of that, the other is conveyed to our minds. As our sight
is not according to the light in the body of the Sun, but that which presses
upon our Organs of sense: So that, supposing your Churches Testimony to be in
it self infallible, if one may be deceived in judging whether your Church be
infallible or no, one may be deceived in such things which he believes upon
that supposed Infallibility. It being an impossibility, that the Assent to the
matters of Faith, should rise higher, or stand firmer, than the Assent to the
Testimony is, upon which those things are believed. Now, that one may be
deceived according to your own principles, in judging whether the Church be
Infallible, appears by this, That you have no other means to prove the
Infallibility of your Church, but only probable and prudential Motives. For, I
desire to know, whether an Infallible Assent to the Infallibility of your
Church, can be grounded on those Motives of Credibility? If you affirm it, then
there can be no imaginable necessity, to make the Testimony of your Church
infallible, in order to Divine Faith; for you will not, I hope, deny, but that
there are at least equal Motives of Credibility, to prove the Divine Authority
of the Scriptures, as the Infallibility of your Church; and if so, why may not
an Infallible Assent be given to the Scriptures upon those Motives of
Credibility, as well as to your Churches Infallibility? If you deny the Assent
built upon the Motives of Credibility to be Infallible; how can you make the
Assent to your Churches Testimony to be infallible, when that Infallibility is
attempted to be proved only by the Motives of Credibility? And therefore it
necessarily follows, That notwithstanding your bearing it so high under the
pretense of Infallibility, you leave men's minds much more wavering in their
Assent than before; in that, as shall afterward appear, these very Motives of
Credibility do not at all prove the Infallibility of your Church, which
undoubtedly prove the Truth and Certainty of Christian Religion. Thus, while by
this device, you seek to avoid the Circle, you destroy the Foundation of your
Discourse, That there must be an Infallible Assent to the truth of that
Proposition, That the Scriptures are the Word of God (which you call Divine
Faith) which, how can it be infallible, when that Infallibility, at the
highest, by your own confession, is but evidently credible, and so, I suppose
the Authority of the Scriptures is, without your Churches Infallibility.

And thus you run into the same Absurdities which you would seem to avoid,
which is the second thing, to manifest the unreasonableness of this way;. 5.
for whatever Absurdity you charge us with, for believing the Doctrine of
Christ upon the Motives of Credibility, unavoidably falls upon your selves for
believing the Churches Infallibility on the same grounds: for if we leave the
Foundation of Faith uncertain, you do so too; if we build a Divine Faith upon
Motives of Credibility, so do you; if we make every ones reason the Judge in
the choice of his Religion, so must you be forced to do, if you understand the
consequence of your own principles.

1. It is impossible for you to give a better account of Faith by the
Infallibility of your Church, than we can do without it; for, if Divine Faith
cannot be built upon the Motives proving the Doctrine of Christ, what sense or
reason is there, that it should be built on those Motives which prove your
Churches Infallibility? so that, if we leave the Foundation of Faith uncertain,
you much more; and that I prove by a Rule of much Authority with you, by which
you use to pervert the weak judgments of such, who in your case do not discern
the Sophistry of it: Which is; when you come to deal with persons, whom you
hope to Proselyte, you urge them with this great Principle, That Prudence is to
be our Guide in the choice of our Religion, and that Prudence directs us to
choose the safest way, and that it is much safer to make choice of that way,
which both sides agree Salvation is to be obtained in, than of that which the
other side utterly denies men can be saved in. How far this Rule will hold in
the choice of Religion, will be examined afterwads: but if we take your word,
that it is a sure Rule; I know nothing will be more certainly advantageous to
us, in on present case. For both sides, I hope, are agreed, that there are
sufficient Motives of Credibility, as to the belief of the Scriptures; but we
utterly deny that there are any such Motives as to the Infallibility of your
Church; it then certainly follows, That our way is the more eligible and
certain, and that we lay a surer Foundation for Faith, than you do upon your
principles for resolving Faith.

2. Either you must deny any such thing as that you call Divine Faith; or you
must assert, that it may have no other Foundation than the Motives of
Credibility, which yet is that, you would seem most to avoid by introducing the
Infallibility of your Church, that the Foundation of Faith may not be
uncertain: whereas, supposing what you desire, you must of necessity do that
you would seem most fearful of, which is making a Divine Faith to rest upon
prudential Motives. Which I thus prove: It is an undoubted Axiom among the
great men of your side, That whatever is a Foundation for a Divine Faith, must
itself be believed with a firm, certain, and infallible Assent: Now, according
to your principles, the Infallibility of the Church, is the Foundation for
Divine Faith; and therefore that must be believed with an Assent Infallible. It
is apparent then, an Assent Infallible is required, which is that which in
other terms you call Divine Faith; now when you make it your business to prove
the Churches Infallibility upon your prudential Motives, I suppose your design
is by those proofs, to induce men to believe it; and if men then do believe it
upon those Motives, do you not found an Assent Infallible, or a Divine Faith,
upon the Motives of Credibility? And by the same reason that you urge against
us the necessity of believing the Scriptures to be the Word of God by Divine
Faith, because it is the ground why we believe the things contained in the
Scripture, we press on your side the necessity of believing the Infallibility
of the Church by a Faith equally Divine, because that is to you the only
sufficient Foundation of believing the Scriptures, or any thing contained in
them.

3. You make by this way of resolving Faith, every man's Reason the only Judge
in the choice of his Religion: which you are pleased to charge on us as a great
Absurdity: yet, you who have deserved so very ill of Reason, are fain to call
in her best assistance in a case of the greatest moment, viz. On what ground we
must believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God. You say, Because the Church
is infallible, which delivers them to us; but how should we come to know that
she is infallible? you tell us, By the Motives of Credibility; very good: But
must not every ones reason judge whether these Motives be credible or no? and
whether they belong peculiarly to your Church, so as to prove the Infallibility
of it, as it is distinct from all other societies of Christians in the world?
You tell us indeed, That these Motives make it evidently credible; but must we
believe it to be so, because you say so? If so; then the ground of believing is
not the Credibility of the Motives, but of your Testimony, and therefore you
ought to make it evidently true, that whatever you speak is undoubtedly true,
which whosoever reads your Book, will hardly be persuaded to. So that of
necessity every man's reason must be Judge, whether your Church be infallible or
no; and thus at last you give Reason the Vmpirage in the choice of Religion.
And what is there more than this that we contend for? If there be then any
danger of Skepticism, a private spirit, or what other inconveniences you
object against our way of judging the truth of Religion by the Use of Reason,
it will fall much more heavily upon your selves, in this way of believing the
Infallibility of the Church on the Motives of Credibility. Therefore I assure
you, it were much more consonant to the principles of your party, to tell men,
The Infallibility of your Church ought to be taken for granted, and that men
are damned for not believing it, though no reason be given for it, but only
because you say it (which is as much as to say, the reason of the Point is, It
must needs be so) then thus to expose it to the scorn and contempt of the
world, by offering to prove it by your Motives of Credibility. For unawares you
thereby give away the main of your Cause; for by the very offer of proving it,
you make him whom you offer to prove it to, judge whether these proofs be
sufficient or no? and if he be capable to judge of his Guide, certainly he may
be of his Way too, considering that he has, according to us, an Infallible
Rule to judge of his Way; whereas, according to you, he has but Prudential
Motives in the choice of his Guide. Thus, by this Opinion of yours, you have
gained thus much, That there is nothing so absurd, which you charge upon us,
but it falls unavoidably upon your own head.

By this way of resolving Faith, you undermine it;. 6.
and leave a sure Foundation for nothing but Skepticism; which is the last
thing to show the great unreasonableness of this way of yours, that when you
are making us believe you are taking the greatest care to make our Religion
sure, you cancel our best evidences, and produce nothing but cracked and broken
titles, which will not stand any fair trial at the bar of Reason. And that you
make the Foundations of Religion uncertain, I offer to prove by the reason of
the thing; for, if you require that as necessary for Faith, which was never
believed to be so, when the Doctrine of Faith was revealed; if upon the
pretense of Infallibility you assert such things, which destroy all the
rational evidence of Christian Religion, and if at last you are far from giving
the least satisfactory account concerning this Infallibility of your Church;
then certainly we may justly charge you with unsetling the Foundations of
Religion, instead of giving us a certain resolution of Faith.

1. You make that necessary to Faith, which was not looked on as such, when the
Doctrine of the Gospel was revealed; and what other design can such a pretense
seem to have, than to expose to contempt that Religion which was not received
by a true Divine Faith, because it wanted that, which is now thought to be the
only sure Foundation of Faith, viz. the Infallibility of the Church of Rome?
What then will become of the Faith of all those who received Divine
Revelations, without the infallible Testimony of any Church at all? With what
Faith did the Disciples of Christ at the time of his suffering, believe the
Divine Authority of the Old Testament? was it a true Divine Faith or not? If it
was, whereon was it built? not certainly on the Infallible Testimony of the
Jewish Church, which at that time consented to the death of the Messiah,
condemning him as a malefactor and deceiver: Or did they believe it because of
that great Rational Evidence they had to convince them, that those Prophecies
came from God? If so, why may not we believe the Divinity of all the Scriptures
on the same grounds, and with a Divine Faith too? With what Faith did those
believe in the Messiah, who were not personally present at the Miracles which
our Savior wrought, but had them conveyed to them by such reports as the woman
of Samaria was to the Samaritans? Or were all such persons excused from
believing, merely because they were not Spectators? But by the same reason all
those would be excused, who never saw our Savior's miracles, or heard his
Doctrine, or his Apostles: But if such persons then were bound to believe, I
ask, On what Testimony was their Faith founded? Was the woman of Samaria
infallible, in reporting the discourse between Christ and her? Were all the
persons infallible, who gave an account to others of what Christ did? yet, I
suppose, had it been your own case, you would have thought your self bound to
have believed Christ to have been the Messiah, if you had lived at that time,
and a certain account had been given you of our Savior's Doctrine and Miracles
by men faithful and honest, though you had no reason to have believed them
infallible: I pray, Sir, answer me, would you have thought your self bound to
have believed, or no? If you affirm it (as I will suppose you so much a
Christian as to say so) I pray then tell me, Whether persons in those
circumstances might not have a true and Divine Faith, where there was no
infallible Testimony, but only Rational Evidence to build it self upon? And if
those persons might have a Divine Faith upon such evidence as that was, may not
we much more, who have evidence of the same nature indeed, but much more
extensive, universal, and convincing than that was? And how then can you still
assert an infallible Testimony of the conveyers of Divine Revelation, to be
necessary to a Divine Faith? Nay further yet, How very few were there in
comparison, in the first Ages of the Christian Church, who received the
Doctrine of the Gospel from the mouths of persons infallible? And of those who
did so, what certain evidence have men, That all those persons did receive the
Doctrine upon the account of the Infallibility of the propounders, and not
rather upon the Rational Evidence of the Truth of the Doctrine delivered; and
whether the belief of their Infallibility was absolutely necessary to Faith,
when the report of the Evidences of the Truth of the Doctrine might raise in
them an obligation to believe, supposing them not infallible in that delivery
of it; but that they looked on them as honest men, who faithfully related, What
they had seen and heard. And this seems the more probable, in that the Apostles
themselves, in their undoubtedly divine writings, do so often appeal to their
own sufficiency and integrity, 1 John 1.1.
without pleading so much their Infallibility. S. John says, That which we
have seen and heard, and handled, declare we unto you. S. Peter appeals to his
being an Eyewitness, 2 Pet. 1.16.
to make it appear he delivered no cunningly devised fables. Luke 1.1, 2.
S. Luke makes this a ground, That the things were surely believed, because
delivered from them who were Eyewitnesses and Ministers of the Word. If they
insisted so much upon this Rational Evidence, and so sparingly on their own
Infallibility; certainly they thought the one afforded not a good foundation
for Faith, though the other, after believing it, might highly advance it. And
therefore I suggest not these things, in the least, to question the
Infallibility of the Apostles, but to let us see, that even at that time, when
there was a certainly infallible Testimony, yet that is not urged as the only
Foundation for Faith, but Rational Evidence produced even by those persons who
were thus infallible. If we descend lower in the Christian Church, or walk
abroad to view the several Plantations of the Churches at that time, Where do
we read or meet with the least intimation of an infallible Testimony of the
Catholic Church, so called from its Communion with that of Rome? What
infallible Testimony of that Church had the poor Britains to believe on? or
those Barbarians mentioned in Irenaeus, who yet believed without a written
word? What mention do we meet with, in all the ancient Apologeticks of
Christians, wherein they give so large an account of the grounds of Christian
Faith, of the modern method for resolving Faith? Nay, what one ancient Father
or Council give the least countenance to this pretended Infallibility, much
less make it the only sure Foundation of Faith, as you do? Nay, how very few
are there among your selves who believe it, and yet think themselves never the
worse Christians for it? If then your Doctrine be true, what becomes of the
Faith of all these persons mentioned? Upon your principles their Faith, could
not be a true and Divine Faith; that is, Let them all think they believed the
Doctrine of Christ never so heartily, and obeyed it never so conscientiously;
yet because they did not believe it on the Infallibility of your Church, their
Faith was but a kind of gilded and splendid Infidelity, and none of them
Christians, because not Jesuits. And does not this principle then fairly
advance Christianity in the world, when the belief of it comes to be settled on
Foundations never heard of in the best and purest times of it; nay, such
Foundations, as for want of their believing them, their Faith must be all in
vain, and Christ dyed in vain for them?

2. You assert such things upon the pretense of Infallibility, which destroy
all the rational evidence of Christian Religion:. 7.
And what greater disservice could you possibly do to it, than by taking away
all the proper grounds of certainty of it? And, instead of building it super
hanc Petram, upon the Rock of Infallibility, you do it only upon a Quick-sand,
which swallows up the Edifice, and sucks in the Foundations of it. You would
have men to believe the Infallibility of your Church, that their Faith might
stand upon sure grounds; and yet, if men believe this Infallibility of your
Church, you require such things to be believed upon it, which destroy all kind
of certainty in Religion. And that I prove by some of those principles which
are received among you upon the account of the Churches Infallibility.

1. That the judgment of Sense is not to be relied on, in matters of Faith:
This is the great Principle upon which the Doctrine of Transubstantiation
stands in your Church; and this is all, the most considerative men among you
have to say, when all those Contradictions are offered to them, which that
Doctrine is so big of, both to the judgment of sense and reason, viz. That
though it seem so contradictory; yet because the Church, which is infallible,
delivers it, they are bound not to question it. If this Principle then be true,
That the judgment of sense is not to be relied on, in matters which sense is
capable of judging of; it will be impossible for any one to give any
satisfactory account of the grand Foundations of Christian Faith. For if we
carefully examine the grounds of Certainty in Christian Religion, we find the
great appeal made to the judgment of Sense, (That which we have seen, and
heard, and handled.) If then the judgment of Sense must not be taken in a
proper object, at due distance, and in such a thing wherein all men's Senses are
equally Judges; I pray, tell me what assurance the Apostles could have, or any
from them, of any miracles which Christ wrought, of any Doctrine which he
preached; especially because in his miracles there was something above nature,
in which case men are more apt to suspect Impostures, than in things which are
the continual Objects of Sense, as in the case of Transubstantiation? Wherein,
if men are not bound to rely on the judgment of Sense, you must say, that our
Faculties are so made, that they may be imposed upon, in the proper Objects of
them; and if so, farewell all Certainty, not only in Religion, but in all
things else in the world. For what assurance can I have of the knowledge of any
thing, if I find that my Faculties not only may be, but I am bound to believe
that they actually are, deceived in a thing that is as proper an Object of
sense, as any in the world. And if a thing, which the judgment of all mankind
(those excepted who have given away their sense and reason in this present
case) does unanimously concur in, may be false; What evidence can we have,
when any thing is true? For, if a thing so plain and evident to our Senses may
be false, viz. That what I and all other men see, is bread, what ground of
certainty can we have, but that which my Senses, and all other men's judge to be
false, may be true? For by this means you take away the (...) both of Sense and
Reason in things, and consequently, all things are equally true and false to
us; and thence it follows, That Truth and Falsehood are but Fancies, that our
Faculties have no means to difference the one from the other, that in things we
all agree in, as proper objects of Sense, we not only may be, but are deceived;
and then farewell Sense, Reason and Religion together. For, I pray, Tell me
what Assurance could the Apostles have of the Resurrection of Christ's
Individual Body from the grave, but the Judgment of Sense? What ways did he
use to convince them, that he was not a Spectre or Apparition, but by an appeal
to their Senses? by what means did he reclaim Thomas from his Infidelity, but
by bidding him make use of his Senses? If Thomas had believed
Transubstantiation, he would easily have answered our Saviors Argument, and
told him, If there were not a productive, yet there might be an Adductive
Transmutation of some other person into him: And the Disciples might all have
said, It was true, there were the accidents of Christ's Body, the external
shape and figure of it; but, for all they could discern, there might be some
Invisible Spirit under those external accidents of shape: and therefore they
must desire to be excused from believing it to be his Body; for, Hoc est corpus
meum, had told them already, That the external accidents might remain, where
the substance was changed. Now therefore, when the Assurance of Christian
Religion came from the judgment of the Senses of those who were Eyewitnesses
of the Miracles and the Resurrection of Christ; if the Senses of men may be so
grossly deceived in the proper Objects of them in the case of
Transubstantiation, what assurance could they themselves have, who were
Eyewitnesses of them? and how much less assurance can we have, who have all
our Evidence from the certainty of their report? So that it appears upon the
whole, that, take away the certainty of the judgment of Sense, you destroy all
Certainty in Religion; for, Tradition only conveys to us now, what was
originally grounded upon the judgment of Sense, and delivers to us in an
undoubted manner, that which the Apostles saw and heard. And do not you then
give a very good account of Religion by the Infallibility of your Church; when,
if I believe your Church to be infallible, I must by virtue of that
Infallibility, believe something to be true, which if it be true, there can be
no certainty at all of the Truth of Christian Religion.

. 8.
2. Another principle is, That we can have no certainty of any of the grounds of
Faith, but from the Infallibility of your present Church. Whereby you do these
two things. 1. Destroy the obligation to Faith which arises from the rational
evidence of Christian Religion. 2. Put the whole stress of the truth of
Christianity upon the proofs of your Churches Infallibility; by which things
any one may easily see what tendency your doctrine of resolving Faith has, and
how much it designs the overthrow of Christianity. 1. You destroy the
obligation to Faith from the rational evidence of Christian Religion, by
telling men, as you do expressly in the very Title of your next Chapter, That
there can be no unquestionable assurance of Apostolical Tradition, but for the
infallible authority of the present Church. If so, then men cannot have any
unquestionable assurance that there was such a Person as Christ in the world,
that he wrought such great miracles for confirmation of his Doctrine, that he
dyed and rose again; it seems we can have no assurance of these things if the
present Church be not Infallible. And if we can have no assurance of them, what
obligation can lie upon us to believe them? for, assurance of the matters of
fact which are the foundations of Faith, is necessary in order to the
obligation to believe; I mean such an assurance as matters of fact are capable
of; for no higher can be required then the nature of things will bear. And what
a strange assertion then is this, that matters of fact cannot be conveyed to us
in an unquestionable manner, unless the present Church stamp her Infallibility
upon them? Cannot we have an unquestionable assurance that there were such
persons as Caesar and Pompey, and that they did such and such things, without
some infallible testimony? if we may in such things, why not in other matters
of fact which infinitely more concern the world to know then whatever Caesar or
Pompey did? But this will be more at large examined afterward; I only now take
notice of the consequence of this principle, and how fairly it destroys all
rational evidence of the truth of our Religion; which whosoever takes away will
be by force of reason, a Sceptick in the first place, and an Infidel in the
second. Neither is the danger merely in destroying the rational evidence of
Religion; but, 2. In putting the whole weight of Religion upon the proofs of
the present Churches infallibility, which whosoever considers how silly and
weak they are, cannot sufficiently wonder at the design of those men, who put
the most excellent Religion in the world, and which is built upon the highest
and truest reason to such a strange kind of Ordeal trial, that if she pass not
through this St. Winifreds needle, her innocence must be suspected, and her
truth condemned. So that whosoever questions the truth of this kind of
Purgation, will have a greater suspicion of a juggle and imposture if she be
acquitted, then if she had never submitted to such a trial. And when we come to
examine the proofs brought for this Infallibility, it will then further appear,
what uncertainty in Religion men are betrayed to, under this confident pretext
of Infallibility. Thus we see what Skepticism in Religion the principles owned
upon the account of Infallibility, do bring men to.

3. When you have brought men to this, that the only sure ground of Faith is
the Infallibility of your Church,. 9.
you are not able to give them any satisfactory account at all concerning it;
but plunge them into greater uncertainties then ever they were in before. For
you can neither satisfy them what that Church is which you suppose Infallible,
what in that Church is the proper subject of this Infallibility, what kind of
Infallibility this is, nor how we should know when the Church does decide
Infallibly and when not; and yet every one of these questions is no less then
absolutely necessary to be resolved, in order to the satisfaction of men's
minds, as to the foundation of their Faith.

1. You cannot satisfy men What that Church is which you suppose to be
Infallible. Certainly, if you had a design to give men a certain foundation for
their Faith, you would not be so shy of discovering what it is you understand
by that Church which you would have Infallible; if you had meant honestly, the
first thing you should have done was to have prevented all mistakes concerning
the meaning of the Church, when you know what various significations it has,
not only in Scripture, but among your selves. Whether you mean the Church
essential, representative, or vertual, for every one of these upon occasion you
make use of: and it was never more necessary to have explained them then in
this place, and yet you with wonderful care and industry avoid any intimation
of what you mean by that Church which you would prove Infallible. When you
plead so earnestly for the Churches Infallibility, I pray tell us what you mean
by the Church; do you intend the truly Catholic and Universal Church which
comprehends in it all such as own and profess the Doctrine of Christ, in which
sense it was well said by Abulensis, Ecclesia universalis nunquam errat, quia
nunquam tota errat, Praefat. in Mat. quaest. 13.
The universal Church never erres, because the whole Church is never deceived.
Or, do you mean by your Catholic Church some particular part of it, to which
you apply the name of Catholic not for Universality of extent, but soundness
of Doctrine? then it will be necessary yet further, to show what part of the
Church that is, by what right and title that has engrossed the name of
Catholic, so as to exclude other Societies of Christians from it; and whether
you must not first prove the absolute integrity and soundness of her Doctrine,
before you can attribute this title to it. For otherwise you will find that
marvellously true, which the same Tostatus says, Ecclesia Latinorum non est
Ecclesia Vniversalis sed quaedam pars ejus: Quaest. 4. in Math. ad proleg. 2.
ideo etiamsi tota ipsa errasset, non errabat Ecclesia Vniversalis, quia manet
Ecclesia Vniversalis in partibus illis quae non errant, sive illae sint numero
plures quam errantes, sive non. So that if you prove the Infallibility of the
Catholic Church, this proves nothing at all as to the Roman Church, which at
most can be supposed to be but a part of it, and though that should err, the
Catholic Church might not err, because that remains in those parts which err
not, though they be more or less in number then those that err. This is the
sense of his words; who seemed to have a much truer conception of the Universal
Church, than those now of your Sect and Party. If then we may believe the
Church to be infallible, and yet, in the mean time, condemn your Church for the
grossest Errors: Will it not be found necessary for you, to tell us yet more
distinctly, What you mean by the Church you would prove Infallible? But,
supposing that only those parts you esteem Catholic, make up the Catholic
Church, even among them the Question will still return, What you mean by this
Catholic Church; Do you mean all the Individual Persons in this number, taken
either distributively or collectively? or, Do you mean, all those who are
entrusted with the Government of these? and then, Whether all Inferior
Pastors, or only Bishops? And if Bishops, Whether all these collectively, or
else by way of Representation in a Council? and still remember to make it good,
that what you pitch upon as the acception of the Church, be not an effect of
humane Policy, as Albertus Pighius said, All Councils were no more; but that
what you fasten the acception of the Church-Catholick upon, you be sure to make
it out, that is the Catholic Church to whom the Promises are made in
Scripture: And, be sure to tell us, How a Church comes to be infallible by
Representation? Whether as they, who make the Church representative, deliver
the sense of the Church they represent; or by an immediate Promise made to them
upon their Convention. If the former, Whether it will not be necessary, in
order to the Infallibility of the Council, to know, that it speaks the sense of
all those particular Churches whom they represent: If the latter, you must
remember such places as belong to them, as representing the Church; for
otherwise any company of Christians assembled together, will challenge an equal
interest in them; and then you will find it a hard matter to prove one
infallible, and not the other. But, if after all this, your Windmill should
dwindle into a Nutcracker, and this harangue concerning the Infallibility of
the Catholic Church, should at last end in one particular Person; which by a
strange Catachresis, must be called the Church, or else, as Heir at Law to her,
does take possession of all her privileges. Then the Testament must be
produced wherein he is named so, and those clauses especially, wherein the
rights and privileges of her are devolved over to him and his Heirs for ever.
There being then so much ambiguity and uncertainty in the very name of the
Church-Catholick, which you would prove infallible, that if nothing else
discovered your Imposture, yet this would sufficiently, that you would
undertake to resolve Men's Faith by the Infallibility of the Church, and yet
never offer to show what that Church is.

2. Supposing you had shown what the Church is, yet you never tell us what the
subject of Infallibility is in that Church. For, when in this case you speak of
Infallibility, you must remember you are not to show what that Church is, which
is not deceived in judging concerning things necessary to Salvation, but what
that Church is, which is infallible in her Direction of others to Salvation:
For, you speak of such an Infallibility as must be a Guide to others, and whose
infallible judgment must be known to all such who must resolve their Faith
into her Testimony: You would have done then no more than was absolutely
necessary to have precisely shown us where this infallibility is lodged in your
Church; whether in Pope or Council, or both together. I suppose it can be no
news either to you, or to the Reader, what Controversies there are among the
greatest of your side, whether the Pope or Council be the greater, and to whom
this Infallibility belongs; neither are either side fully agreed in their own
way, for some that are for the Infallibility of a general Council, will make
that infallible without the Pope, others account that opinion, if not
haeretical, the next step to it. Those who are for the Pope's Infallibility,
are not agreed neither when he shall be said to be infallible: They who speak
Oracles tell us, when he does define ex Cathedra, but what that is, neither
they nor we can well tell; some say it is, when he has a Congregation of
chosen Cardinals about him, others make the whole College of Cardinals
necessary, and therefore some in the late Definition concerning the Jansenists
were refractory, because it was defined only by a Congregation of chosen
Cardinals, which they said, was not defining ex Cathedra: some again make
neither of these necessary, but suppose the Infallibility lodged in the Pope
himself. And are we not at a fine pass for the certainty of our Faith, if it
must rely upon the infallible Testimony of your Church; and yet you your selves
not at all agreed to whom this Infallible Testimony does belong? Think not that
we will be put off with that silly evasion, That these differences among you
hinder not the certainty of Faith, because it is not de fide either way. For 1.
How shall we come to know among you what is de fide, and what not, till you are
agreed to whom this Infallibility belongs? And if it belongs to a general
Council, then it is de fide; for it was determined at the Council of Basil, in
behalf of the Council, and therefore if one of the opinions be true, it must be
de fide; for, I suppose you make that to be so, which is determined by the
infallible Testimony of your Church. 2. How shall a man believe, that any thing
at all is de fide among you, if that on which your Faith is to rest, be not de
fide? For, supposing a difference to happen, which has often done between the
Pope and Council, and they decree contrary things to each other, if it be not
de fide, to believe either the one or the other distinctly to be infallible,
upon what Testimony at such a time must that which supposes the infallible
Testimony of your Church rely? 3. If it be said not to be de fide, because not
determined; by the same reason your Churches Infallibility cannot be de fide,
because not determined neither: For, if the Determination of the Church be
necessary to make any thing de fide, it must by the same reason be necessary to
make your Churches Infallibility de fide; and, I suppose, you will not readily
instance in any decree of the Catholic Church, where the Testimony of your
Church is determined to be infallible. And yet one would imagine, that if there
were such a necessity in order to Faith, of the Infallible Testimony of your
Church, there would be an equal necessity of believing this Infallibility on
the same Testimony: or if one may believe one Article especially so important a
one as that, without any precedent infallible Testimony, why not any other,
nay, why not all the rest? Thus you still see, how uncertainties grow upon us,
when we search into your account of Faith.

3. You are not certain neither, What kind of Infallibility this is; For you
offer to prove the Church infallible, by the same way that Moses, Christ, and
his Apostles were proved infallible: P. 55. n. 1.
A very fair Offer, if you could make it good; but then we were in hopes you
would have proved such a kind of Infallibility as they had; you tell us, No:
for your Infallibility is Supernatural, P. 58. n. 4.
but not Divine; that it is precise Infallibility, but not absolute; that it is
not by immediate Revelation, but by immediate Assistance of the Holy Ghost:
Something you would have, but you cannot tell what; an Infallibility in the
Conclusion, without any in the Use of means; an Infallibility by immediate
Assistance of the Holy Ghost, yet but in a sort Divine; an Infallibility
yielding nothing to Scripture in point of Supernaturality and Certainty, yet
nothing so infallible as Scripture. Are not these brave things to make wise men
certain in their Religion with! that they are to believe the Scriptures upon a
Testimony infallible, yet not infallible; divine, yet not divine; and therefore
certain, but not certain; true, but not true. But of the silliness of these
Distinctions, afterward. But, can you think to persuade wise or rational men
to believe their Religion on such terms as these are? Had they no other
evidence than what you give them, would they not be shrewdly tempted to reject
all Religion, as a mere Imposture, as no doubt your Doctrine of Infallibility
is? A strange kind of Talisman, which secures your Pope from a possibility of
erring, but still he must be under the certain direction of his Stars; for, if
he be not in Cathedra, this Telesm does him no good at all. It were heartily to
be wished, if he should once happen to be in Cathedra, he would infallibly
determine what it was to be in Cathedra for ever after; for it would ease men's
minds of a great many troublesome scruples, which they cannot, without some
infallible Determination, get themselves quit of. But still we are bound to
believe your Church infallible: But, I pray, whence comes this Infallibility?
Comes it from Heaven, or is it of Men? From Heaven, no doubt, you say; for it
is by a promise of the Holy Ghost. This were something, if it were proved; but
yet you maintain this Infallibility in such a manner, that none that read the
Scriptures could ever think, it were promised there. For there they always
read, That the Spirit of Truth is a Spirit of Holiness, and never dwells in
those who are carnal or wicked men; but, you tell us, That let the lives of
Popes be what they will, they have no promise to secure them from being wicked,
but the Spirit of God does by immediate Assistance secure them from being
fallible. But, I pray, Which of these two is not only more contrary to
Scripture, but to Humane Nature; Wickedness or Fallibility? This latter, so
consequent upon the imperfection of our understandings, that, till we put off
the one, we can hardly be freed from the other; but Wickedness is that which
the whole design of Christian Religion is against, and administers the highest
Motives, and the greatest Assistance for the conquest of; and can it then be
thought suitable to such a Doctrine, that the Divine Spirit should, like
Mahomet's Dove, be always ready to whisper in the ear of the most profligate
person, if it be but his fortune to sit in Cathedra? Such a kind of
Infallibility as this, I assure you, will never prevail with any such persons,
who understand Christian Religion, to believe the Doctrine of it upon such
pretenses as yours are.

4. Supposing,. 10.
you could tell men intelligibly and suitably to the Doctrine of Christianity,
What kind of Infallibility this is; yet if you cannot satisfy them, When your
Church does define infallibly, you leave them still in the same Labyrinth,
without any clue to direct them out of it. But, if we consider what things are
necessary to be believed, before we can believe any definition of your Church
infallible, how impossible it is to be infallibly assured of any such
definition of your Church, sure you cannot blame us for crying out of the
Labyrinth you have brought us into.

1. How many things in Christian Religion are to be believed, before we can
imagine any such thing as an infallible Testimony of your Church? And if the
Infallibility of that be the ground of Faith, on what account must those things
be believed, which are antecedent to the belief of such an infallible
Testimony? Now, that many things, and some of them far from being clear, are to
be believed antecedently to an infallible Testimony, will appear; if we do but
consider what they commonly mean by that Church, which they suppose infallible,
and what must be supposed, that this Infallibility be the Rule of Faith. By the
Church, they tell you, they mean the Catholic Church: but lest you should
think them too honest in saying so, at next word it is, the Roman Catholic
Church (just as if one should say, the German-Vniversal Emperor.) But lest you
should think at least they meant the Roman Church of all Ages, and think you
might have some relief from the Primitive Roman Church, they will soon rectify
your mistakes, by telling you, it is the present Roman-Church they mean; but if
it be the present Roman-Church, it may be you would be willing to hear the
judgment of all the honest men in that Church, and that you hope many of the
people and learned men (not in Orders) may speak their minds freely. To prevent
that, they tell you they mean only the representative Church. But still the
Bishops, who make up this representative Church, may in their several Synods
complain of abuses, and rectify miscarriages; therefore they understand not
Bishops by themselves, or particular Synods, but met together in General
Councils. But yet, if the Councils were truly Ecumenical, there might be some
hopes of redress. But for that they are sure; for they allow none to be members
of the General Councils, which are in Schism or Heresy; and their own Church
is to be Judge, what Schism and Heresy is; and they are hugely to blame then,
if they admit any but those of their own party. But yet, some Councils have
stood upon their privileges in opposition to the Pope, as those of Constance
and Basil. Therefore, to make all sure, no Council is lawful in it self, or its
decrees bind the Church, but such as is called and confirmed by the Pope: who
is strangely to blame then, if he suffers any thing to pass to his own
prejudice: So that this Infallibility of the Pope, is the last resort in the
resolution of Faith; for all the rest, we see, are uncertain. And what a vast
measure of Faith (greater than that which our Savior said, would remove
mountains) is necessary to believe this Infallibility of the Pope? for in the
first place, unless he believes the particular Roman-Church to be the Catholic
Church, he spoils all the Conjuring afterward, with not having Faith enough
about him. Again, he must believe, that Christ has promised an Infallible
Assistance to the Pastors of the Church as distinct from the People; but this
avails little still, unless he believes these Credentials must not be opened,
but in full Council; and that Council such a one as the Pope calls, and in
which himself presides, either in Person, or by his Legates, and that the
Decrees of the Council oblige not the Church, without the Pope's Confirmation;
and to that end you must believe, that S. Peter was made Monarch of the Church
by Christ; that this Monarchy was to be derived to all his Successors in all
places; but as to this (wherever he was besides) he never had any Successor
any where but at Rome: And these Successors of his at Rome, cannot for their
lives err, if they do but sit in Cathedra. Certainly he that has Faith to
swallow all these things, is hugely to blame if he stick at any thing; and by
that time a man's understanding is debauched sufficiently by these Principles,
I make no question but such a one will believe Infallibility,
Transubstantiation, or any thing in the world. But beside these things, in
order to the making the Churches Testimony the Rule of Faith to any one, there
must another dose of Principles be taken, which have Opium enough in them to
lay asleep all the remainders of reason: For he must infallibly believe the
Church to be infallible, though no infallible Argument be brought for the proof
of it; That this Church does judicially and authoritatively pronounce her
Sentence in matters of Faith, though we know not what that Church is, which
must so pronounce; That he infallibly know that this particular Sentence was so
pronounced, though he can have no other than Moral Means of knowing it; And
lastly, That the Infallibility must be the first thing believed, although all
these things must of necessity be believed before it. And if after this second
Purgation, he be not a true Son of the Church of Rome, he deserves to be
Anathematized as an obstinate person, for having any thing of reason in him.
Therefore I wonder not that the Doctrine of Infallibility seems no strange
thing to you; for a man must devour such Giant-like Absurdities, before he
comes to it, that when he comes at it, he finds it nothing. But still, one
would think it a little strange, that this Infallibility should be the only
Foundation of believing all things in Religion; and yet so many things, and
some of them very strange ones, must of necessity be certainly believed before
it.

2. Supposing a man not only believes all these things before it, but does
really believe your Church infallible, yet he is uncertain still how he should
know When your Church defines infallibly. For so many things are required in
reference to the Person defining, so many for the definition it self, that it
will be no easy matter to remove those difficulties which lie in the way of
his Assent to such a Definition. As to the Person, if he be not a Christian, if
he be not a Priest, if not a Lawful Pope, all his Definitions are far from
being infallible; yet none of all these can any one be assured of according to
your Principles of the intention of the Priest being necessary in the
administration of Sacraments, in order to the effect of them. (But the large
train of Consequences following from hence, I forbear to urge you with, because
they have been so often urged by abler Pens.) But, What will you say, when we
are so far from assurance, as to the Pope's being legally chosen, that we have,
if not great Evidence, yet very high Presumptions of the contrary, what becomes
then of your Pope's Infallibility? Nay, from the illegality of one, follows the
illegality of all his Successors, because they were chosen by Cardinals, made
by him; who could be no lawful Cardinals, because he was no legal Pope, and
consequently not they who were made by them. The case is this; There is a Bull
of Pope Julius the second, against the Simoniacal Election of any Pope, which
the Cardinals, upon their first entrance into the Conclave, swear solemnly to
observe. In which Bull it is expressly said, That if any Pope be Simoniacally
chosen by any of the Cardinals, upon any gift or promise whatsoever, that such
an Election is ipso facto null; and the Cardinals may oppose one so chosen, as
if guilty of manifest Heresy; and that none ought to receive or look on such a
one as Pope; neither can this Simoniacal Election be made good by
inthronisation, course of time, submission of Cardinals, etc. And that they
ought all to avoid him as a Magician, Heathen, Publican, or the Founder of
Heresy. This is the substance of that Bull. Now it is notoriously known, that
Sixtus the fifth, was Simoniacally chosen Pope. For, that he might be chosen,
he did under his hand promise to Cardinal d'Este, who had a great interest in
the Conclave, that in the time of his Popedom, he would never create Jerome
Matthew, the Cardinals great enemy, a Cardinal: upon which promise he was
through his interest chosen Pope. But, when afterward the Pope violated his
Faith to him, by creating his enemy Cardinal; d'Este, being highly incensed
against him for it, sent the very instrument subscribed by the Pope's own hand,
to Philip the second King of Spain, who in the year 1589. sent the Duke of
Suisse extraordinary Ambassador to Rome, V. Supplicat. ad Imperat. Reg.
Princip. super causis generalis Concilii convocandi contra Paulum 5. Land. 1613.
to intimate to Sixtus the fifth, his intention of calling a General Council,
according to the Bull of Julius the second, for declaring this Simoniacal
Election. When this Message was delivered to the Pope, and he saw the
Instrument was discovered under his own hand, he fell into such a perplexity,
that he dyed soon after, which stopped the progress of the business. By this it
evidently appears, that Sixtus himself was no lawful Pope, and therefore could
create no Cardinals: and, because the Cardinals created by him, had a voice in
the Election of the subsequent Popes; it follows, That there has been no legal
Pope since Sixtus the fifth. For, after the death of Sixtus, Cardinal Montallo
his Nephew, with forty Votes entered the Conclave, and chose Urban the seventh,
who lived but few days; after him Gregory the fourteenth, who was Pope but ten
months; after him Innocentius the ninth, who continued but two months; after
him Clement the eighth, who outlived the Election thirteen years. But not to
enquire any further into the irregular Election, and the Simoniacal bargains of
Paul the fifth, after the death of Clement; this certainly may suffice to let
men see, what becomes of their Faith, when they pin it upon the Pope's sleeve:
For, if we are to rely upon his infallible Testimony, and he so far from being
infallible, that by their own Constitutions he was no Pope, nor to be looked on
as other than a Magician, Heathen, and Heretic, is not our Faith then settled
on a sure Foundation? For what assurance can any one have, that amidst all the
enormities, and secret practices of the Conclave, any one is freely and legally
chosen? but, Where will his Faith stand, when it is notorious, that a Cardinal
must say, Dabo tibi claves, and that not without a Contract too. But, suppose
all the assurance that may be of the person who is to deliver this infallible
Testimony; yet at the utmost, the most men in the world can have no more than a
Moral Certainty of the Definition it self. If we can imagine, that any one
should know that great mystery, when the Pope should define ex Cathedra; yet,
can he have any greater evidence of such a Definition, than we have concerning
the things revealed in Scripture? I cannot think that you will suppose any
greater evidence of it, than if one sees and hears it; and, what do we desire
less in reference to the Doctrine of Christ? But how few in the world are
there, who stand by, when the Pope defines? May others be certain of such a
Definition or no, so as to be obliged to believe it? If not, What good can this
Infallibility do them? if they may, Why do you quarrel with our way as
uncertain? when if you grant your Infallibility, you cannot prescribe any more
certain way, but one much more liable to question and dispute than ours is.
Thus you see what little advantage you get by all these bravado's about
Infallibility; and that you are so far from giving a satisfactory account of
Faith, that you expose Christian Religion to more doubts, scruples, and
uncertainties, than ever before. Which may abundantly show to all unprejudiced
minds, the great unreasonableness of your way of resolving Faith, which was the
thing to be proved.

. 11.
2. But, suppose your way to be never so reasonable, yet if it effect not that
it was brought for, it deserves little favor from inquisitive persons, and
that I now come to evince, viz. That supposing your Church infallible, and that
Infallibility proved by the Motives of Credibility, you do not escape the
circle objected against your way. And really, whosoever considers your way of
management of things, will find, that though you give out great words, and
pretend to prove the Churches Infallibility, as Moses and Christ's was proved;
yet your eye was all the while on nothing but the circle, and thought, if you
could get rid of that, you should do well enough with any thing else. For, as
though this circle had ridden you like an Ephialtes, you tumble, and groan, and
toss this way and that, and when you think your self freed from it, it sits as
close upon you as ever. When you come so miserably off with the proofs of your
Churches Infallibility, you satisfy your self with this; It Is sufficient for
the present to have declared how the Catholics fall not into a circle, as his
Lordship here pretends they do. Though this could not be sufficient for your
design, who had promised in the page foregoing, to prove at large the
Infallibility of the Church; yet you had done somewhat, if you had done this,
which, if I much mistake not, you are as much to seek in, as in the proofs of
your Churches Infallibility. And that I prove by three things, from the nature
of that Faith whose resolution you promise, from the persons you prove it to,
from the nature of that Infallibility which you attempt to prove.

1. From the nature of that Faith, you are enquiring a resolution for, which is
not that which you call a Humane Faith, but a Divine Faith. When you go about
to prove the Churches Infallibility, by the Motives of Credibility, is it a
Divine Faith or no, which may be built on these Motives? choose which part you
please. If it be, then by your own Confession, a Divine Faith may be built on
Prudential Motives; if it be not, then what is all this to the purpose? For the
Question is not, Whether by any other kind of Assent you cannot avoid the
circle; but, Whether in the resolution of Divine Faith you can or no? For, I
hope, you deny not, but the Scriptures and the Churches Infallibility are both
to be believed with the same kind of Assent, built upon an infallible
Testimony; in this case I then ask, Why, with a Divine Faith, you believe the
Scriptures to be the Word of God? You answer, Because the Church, which is
infallible, delivers them so to us. If I then ask, Why with a Divine Faith you
believe the Churches Infallibility? Answer me if you can, any other way, than
because the Scriptures, which are infallible, say so. And thus you see, it is
only your running away from the Question, makes you think your self out of the
circle, and not any satisfactory Answer to it. Will you, or dare you say, That
is an Assent of the same nature, which is built on the Motives of Credibility,
with that which is grounded on an infallible Testimony? If it be not, bethink
your self of a new Answer: if it be, bethink your self of a new Way to oppose
us, and not to think it sufficient to charge us with building Divine Faith, on
Prudential Motives, when you do it your self. But, if you should assert that to
be a Divine Faith, which is built on the Motives of Credibility, you not only
contradict your self, but the great Ones of your own party. For your Becanus
says, Becan. sum. p. 2. Tom. pa^tr. de fide. c. 1. q. 2. sect. 8.

Valent. Tom. 1. disp. 1. q. 1. punct. 1. sect. 8. Colum. 35.


That these Motives are the Foundation only of a prudent Assent, but not
Infallible; and Valentius goes much higher, and tells us, The Faith grounded on
these Motives is not divine, or infused, but acquisite, that it is in its
nature uncertain and fallible, that it cannot be the Foundation of Christian
Faith. If this be true, To what end do you go about to resolve Faith upon such
uncertainties, in hopes to escape the circle you see others in. Thus you see,
how insufficient your attempt is, because you speak not of the same kind of
Assent as to the Scripture, and the Church.

2. You avoid not the Circle by the different considerations of the persons you
offer to prove the Infallibility of the Church and Scripture to. You tell us,
That when you prove the Infallibility of the Church by Scripture, P. 55. n. 1.
you make use only of Arguments ad hominem, and argue ex principiis concessis
against Sectaries, who deny the Infallibility of your Church, but admit the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures, and therefore you may justly use
Scripture-arguments against them. I grant it: but still I say, you avoid not
the Circle by this subterfuge neither. For, 1. The question is not, Which way
you will prove the Infallibility of the Church against those who deny it; but
which way you resolve your own faith of the Churches Infallibility? therefore
this signifies nothing at all as to your Question about the resolution of
Faith; for I suppose you build not that on any thing which your adversary
grants or denies. Is there no difference between the way of proving a thing to
an adversary, and the resolving ones own Faith? I question not, but you may
dispute with him upon Principles he grants and you deny; but, I should think
you no wise man to build your Faith upon such Principles. So that this evasion
comes not near the business. 2. Even in disputing against your Adversaries you
cannot avoid the circle, which I thus prove. You offer to prove to them the
Church to be Infallible out of Scripture; for this you bring them particular
places, and think presently to vanquish them with, Super hanc Petram, Pasce
oves, and Dabo tibi claves; but hence arises another Question, How you come
infallibly to know, that this is the sense of those places? You know, your
Adversaries presently deny any such thing as Infallibility to be proved out of
them. And, what way have you to assure them, this is the sense of them, but
because your Church, which is infallible, delivers this to be the sense of
them. And is not this then a plain circle? You are to believe the Church
infallible, because the Scripture says so; and you are to believe the
Scripture says so, because the Church is infallible. If this be not still a
plain circle, you may question whether there be any such figure in Mathematics.

3. I prove you cannot avoid the Circle from your own Confession of the nature
of that Infallibility, which you say is in the Church. For you tell us, That
the Churches Testimony does not suppose any new Revelation from God, but only a
supernatural Assistance of the Holy Ghost, P. 58. n. 4.
preserving her from all error in defining the Points of Christian Faith. By
this Assertion, you destroy all possibility of avoiding the Circle by the
Motives of Credibility; for if these had proved an immediate Divine Revelation
in the Church, I confess you had proved the Churches Infallibility
independently on Scripture; but, when you offer to prove only a Divine
Assistance with the Church, in delivering former Revelations, you cannot: and
the reason is, because you can bring no ground at all why such an Assistance
should be necessary in the Church; or why it should be expected but from the
Promises made in Scripture concerning such an Assistance of God's Spirit to be
with the Church: and therefore the utmost your Motives of Credibility can
pretend to, is only to notify that Church from others, which you suppose
infallible: but still the formal reason of your believing this Infallibility,
cannot be from those Motives, but upon those Promises which you suppose to
import such an Assistance of the Holy Ghost with the Church, which shall secure
her from error: So that still the Circle returns upon you: For, you believe
the Scriptures infallible, because of the Churches Testimony; and you believe
the Church infallible, because of the Promises in Scripture concerning the
Assistance of the Holy Ghost with the Church, so as to secure her from all
error. And thus, I hope, I have made good this general Attempt upon your way
of resolving Faith, by manifesting the great unreasonableness, and manifest
insufficiency of it.

I now come to handle the particulars of this Chapter, which consists of two
things,. 12.
Proofs and Evasions, the Proofs you produce for your Churches Infallibility,
and your Evasions as to those Arguments which are objected by his Lordship.
Both of these will deserve our Consideration; and if it appear, that your
Proofs are weak, and your Evasions silly, you will have no great cause to
triumph in this Attempt of yours. As to your Proofs, two things are
considerable, your Method of proving, and the Proofs themselves. I begin with
the first, which you deliver in these words. P. 55. n. 1.
Wherefore, as to the last demand (in which only there is difficulty viz. How
we know the Church to be infallibly governed by the Holy Ghost; we answer, that
we prove it first in general, not by the Scripture, but by the Motives of
Credibility, which belong to the Church, in the same manner as the Infallibity
of Moses, and other Prophets, of Christ and his Apostles was proved, which was
by the Miracles they wrought, and by other signs of an Infallible Spirit,
direction, and guidance from God, which appeared in them. Whence it is clear,
that we incurr no circle. That, supposing all that true which you said before,
yet thereby you avoid not the circle, I shall take it for granted, I have
already proved, till you better inform me: Our business now therefore is, to
consider, which way you prove this Infallibility of your Church, which you tell
us, is not by Scripture (for which I commend your ingenuity) but by the Motives
of Credibility. But, lest any should think this a weak way of probation, you
tell us, It is in the same manner that the Infallibility of all persons
divinely inspired was proved, not excepting Christ himself. A most heroical and
generous Attempt! For which the Church of Rome is infinitely obliged to you, if
you make it good: For then it necessarily follows, that there is as great
danger in not believing the Infallibility of your Church, as in not believing
Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles. For, where there is an equal
obligation to believe, there is an equal sin in not believing; and where the
sin is equal, it stands to reason that the punishment should be so too. I
suppose you deny not, but, Where there are equal Motives inducing to believe,
there results an equal Obligation to Faith, because the Grounds obliging to
assent, can be no other than the Motives inducing to it; and if these Motives
be as strong and evident for your Churches Infallibility* as for that of Moses
and Christ, men must be as much obliged now to believe your Church infallible,
as, that Moses and Christ were so. So that the denial of your Churches
Infallibility, must needs be accounted by you to be as high a piece of
Infidelity, as if one should call in question the Infallibility of Christ
himself. For you assert, That you have the same Proofs for the Infallibility of
your Church, which there were to prove him infallible. I do not therefore
wonder at your sharpness and severity in your censures of all out of your
Church, when upon your Principles the denying your Churches Infallibility, must
needs be an offense of as high a nature, as if one denied the Infallibility of
the Sacred Scriptures. But, lest you should not think these any Absurdities at
all, we must come yet closer to the examination of your Proofs: For which we
must enquire into these two things. 1. Whether the same Motives of Credibility
belong to your Church, by which Moses and the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles, showed their Testimony to be infallible. 2. Whether, on supposition
you had the same Motives, there were the same reason to believe the Testimony
of your Church Infallible, as there was to believe Them to be so.

1. Whether the same Motives of Credibility belong to your Church or no. And
here again, these things offer themselves to consideration. 1. By what means
their Testimony was proved infallible. 2. Whether your Churches Testimony can
be proved by the same Motives or no. For the first, you are pleased to give us
this account, Why Moses was accounted infallible; P. 56. n. 2.
for the Israelites seeing Moses to be a person very devout, mild, charitable,
and chaste, and endowed with the gift of working miracles, were upon that
ground obliged to receive him for a true Prophet; and to believe him
infallible, by acknowledging as true and certain, whatever he proposed to them
from God. All which I acknowledge to be very true; but am much to seek, how you
will apply it to the proving your Churches Infallibility. What kind of Miracles
those are which your Church pretends to, will be examined afterward; the other
Motives of Credibility mentioned, are Devotion, Mildness, Charity, and
Chastity; and these, I suppose, you look on as those Motives, which must induce
men to believe the Infallibility of your Church. But, do you really think, that
every person who is devout, mild, charitable, and chaste, is therefore
infallible? If not, to what purpose do you produce them here? if you do, some
out of your Church may be as infallible as those in it. Especially, if your
superstitious Ceremonies be the greatest part of your devotion; and your
burning of Heretics, the Argument of your mildness; and your damning all out
of your Church, be the best evidence of your Charity; and the lives of your
Popes, the most pregnant Instances of your Churches Chastity. The rest of your
discourse, wherein you endeavor after your way, to prove tha there were
sufficient Motives of Credibility, to believe the Testimony of Christ and his
Apostles, I suppose no Christian will deny; and that the Miracles wrought by
them, were Proofs that their Testimony was infallible, I am so far from
questioning, that all your other Motives signify nothing without them. Which,
because it has so great an influence on the present dispute, I think it
necessary to be a little further cleared, than it is by you, and chiefly for
this end, to let you see, how much you have befooled your self in attempting to
prove the Infallibility of your Church, in the same manner that Christ and his
Apostles Infallibility was proved in, and yet insisting on that of Miracles, as
the great evidence of their Infallibility, which your Church cannot with any
face pretend to. I acknowledge it then as a great Truth, that it was necessary,
that the Testimony of all such who pretend to be infallible, must be confirmed
by such Miracles, as Christ and his Apostles wrought; Nay, that it is
impossible, without such Evidence, to prove any Testimony infallible, where
that Infallibility is pretended to, independently upon Scripture, as it is in
your present case. Which will be thus made evident: Absolute Infallibility is
not consistent with the shortness of the Humane Understanding, for such an
Infallibility must suppose an infinity of Knowledge; for, where there is a
defect in the Apprehension, there is a possibility of deception; therefore only
an Infinite Being can be absolutely infallible. Now, man's Understanding being
so finite, and limited in its Conceptions, it is on that account apt to be
imposed upon, and to form false Notions of things; so that supposing no Being
in the world of greater Perfections than man is, there never could be any such
thing as Infallibility among men. For, though some men's Understandings might
outstrip others in the quickness of Conception, and solidity of Judgment; yet
the Nature of Man being thus finite, that presumption would lie against all
pretense of Infallibility. It being then impossible, that man's understanding
should be in it self infallible, we must consider, whether there be a
possibility it should receive any Infallibility from that Infinite Being, which
is above it. This then must be taken for granted, that as an Infinite
Understanding cannot be deceived, so Infinite Goodness cannot deceive. And
therefore, whatever does immediately proceed from a Being infinitely Wise and
Good, cannot but be infallibly True. And there is no repugnancy at all, in the
nature of the thing, but that this Infinite Being may, in a way certain, but
imperceptible by us, communicate to the Minds of Men such Notions of things,
which are the effects of his own Wisdom and Counsel: and this is that we call
Divine Inspiration. But then we are still to consider, That the understanding
of a finite Creature, cannot be any further infallible, than as it receives
those Notions which are imprinted upon it by the Infinite and Supreme Intellect
of the world; and such a person is no further infallible in what he speaks,
than as he delivers to the world those very Conceptions, which are thus formed
in his mind. And this is that which the Apostle means when he says, That Holy
men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. 2 Pet. 1.21.
And so far as they were thus moved, so far they were infallible, and no
further. But this Infallibility being not intended merely for the satisfaction
of the mind of him that has it, but for the general good of the world, it is
necessary that there be some way whereby men may come to understand who are
infallibly assisted, and who not. For otherwise the world would be more exposed
to delusions under this pretext of Infallibility; than if there were never any
such thing in the world. Either therefore every man must be infallibly assured
in his mind, that such a person is infallible in what he is to deliver, which
is a needless piece of Enthusiasm; or else such external Evidences of it are to
be used, which may induce all rational and considerative persons to the belief
of it. Which is the way that God in his infinite Wisdom has made choice of; by
making those very persons, whose understandings are thus assisted by him to be
the Instruments of doing some things above the power of nature. And nothing can
be more reasonable, than to believe their Testimony True, who are employed as
such immediate Instruments of Divine Power; and if their Testimony be believed
True, their Doctrine must be Infallible; for the greatest part of their
Testimony is this, That they deliver not their Doctrines from themselves, but
immediately from God. And consequently their Testimony must be owned as
infallible, in whatever they deliver as from God; it being very unreasonable to
think, that God would favor such persons with so extraordinary a Power, who
should falsify their message, and deceive the world. Thus you see, That
whatever Motives of Credibility you would blind the world with, there can be no
Motive independent on Scripture, which is sufficient to prove Infallibility,
but such a power of working Miracles, which Moses, and the Prophets, and
Christ, and his Apostles had, which last, as you truly say, P. 56. n. 2.
received their Commission from Christ to preach every where, and to confirm
their words with signs that followed; by which signs, all their hearers were
bound to submit themselves unto them, and to acknowledge their words for
infallible Oracles of Truth.

Now, What reasonable man could otherwise expect,. 13.
but that after you had so solemnly promised to prove the Infallibility of your
Church, in the very same manner that Moses, with other Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles were first proved to be infallible, which are twice your words; P. 55.
n. 1. P. 56. n. 2.
and your at large showing, That the main ground why they were believed
infallible, was, because of the Miracles wrought by them, whence they needed
not the Testimony of Scripture: You should have showed us what kind of parallel
Miracles are wrought in your Church, to prove its infallibility. But, instead
of that, when you come to the purpose, you shuffle us off, in a most ridiculous
and impertinent manner: For, you tell us, P. 57.
That as therefore Moses, our blessed Savior, and his Apostles, were proved
infallible by their works, signs, and miracles, without Scripture; so is the
Church without help of the same sufficiently proved to be infallible by the
Motives of Credibility. Well, but what, and where are these Motives of
Credibility? Are they of the same kind and nature with the signs and miracles
wrought by them or not? If not, How can the way and manner be the same, which
you promised to prove the Churches Infallibility? If not, What assurance can
you give us, that those will prove Infallibility, as well as their works and
miracles? This should have been demonstrated, and those motives produced to the
view of the world, if you had designed any other than juggling with your
Readers. Instead of this, you tell us, That Heretics, though they have the
Scripture, yet being out of the true Church, they do wholly want these signs of
Infallibility: of which, see Bellarmine, and other Catholic Authors
discoursing more at large, de notis Ecclesiae. It Is sufficient for the present,
to have declared how Catholics fall not into a Circle, as his Lordship
pretends they do. These are excellent ways of proof, and fit only for a Church
that pretends to be infallible, and then most of all, when her Infallibility
was to be proved. What did you lead us this long dance for, if you never
intended to prove your Church infallible? Could you not have referred us to
Bellarmine at first, as well as at last? Nay, and now you do turn us off to
him, you bid us, go seek the Notes of the Church, and not the Proofs of
Infallibility; which, sure, are different things, unless you suppose no Church
True, but what is Infallible. But however, you are sure not to miss the
Heretics, they must have a blow at parting, They are out of the Church, and do
wholly want these signs of Infallibility. What signs of Infallibility? speak
out, and tell us, What they are, and where they lie, and how they may be known?
for otherwise we may mistake in the Physiognomy of your Church, and instead of
signs of Infallibility, we may see shrewd signs of imposture and delusion in
her. And it is the more suspicious, because you are so afraid of producing them
after so solemn a promise to do it. However, you tell us, It Is sufficient for
the present to have declared how Catholics fall not into a Circle: Well, I
see, though we miss of of the Coals S. Laurence was broyled on, we shall have a
Feather from the wing of a Seraphim; Though you fail of your promise, we shall
have something as good; and as great a feat of activity as that had been, viz.
to let us see, How the Papists dance in a round, and yet make no Circle. Your
demonstrations are so good in this kind, it is pity you do not employ your
excellent wit in squaring Mathematical Circles, as well as this; and I shall as
soon hope to see you perform the one, as the other. But, Can you, without
smiling at our simplicity, tell us, (after such a wide-mouthed promise; as you
made in the page foregoing; But, because we have often promised to prove the
Infallibility of the Church, P. 56. n. 2.
it will be necessary to insist somewhat longer upon this Point, and declare
the matter at large) That it is enough to vindicate your selves from the
Circle? Was this the thing you promised, or the proofs of your Churches
Infallibility? I confess Quid feret hic tanto dignum promissor hiatu? came into
my mind at first reading those words, and it proves accordingly. You really
meant no such thing, as proving your Church infallible: and you are very
excusable in it, though you had promised it; for no Promise can bind to
impossibilities. But it may be yet, though these Proofs do not come after the
Promise, they may have gone before it; For I find before a large Catalogue
mentioned of such signs and motives, which may prove the Churches
Infallibility, as sanctity of life, miracles, efficacy, purity and excellency
of doctrine, fulfilling of Prophecies, succession of lawfully sent Pastors,
Unity, Antiquity, and the very name of Catholic, P. 55. n 1.
etc. Number enough, if that would do it. But we shall see, what force these
Motives are of, by these following Queries.

1. Is it all one with you, To know a Church to be true, and to make it
infallible? These you call the Motives of Credibility for your Churches
Infallibility, were wont to be esteemed only the Notes of Distinction of the
True Church from all others. The Question, I suppose, concerning these, had
this rise. There being, after the Reformation, several distinct Societies of
men, pretending to be the True Christian Church, to which every Christian ought
to associate himself; there was a necessity of pitching on some way, whereby
the True Christian Church might be distinguished from other Communions; which
begat a new Controversy, What were the proper Notes of this Society. Those of
your party, as Bellarmine tells you, differed much in the number of them: Some
of which are those by you mentioned; but whether they be the True Notes of the
Church or no, which has been largely examined by others, What are these to the
proof of Infallibility, setting aside that of Miracles? Is it not possible that
there should be a Society of Men joining together in the Profession of
Christian Religion, but these Men must presently be infallible in whatever they
deliver as the Sense of their Society? Their visible Profession of Christian
Religion, makes them a True Church: but cannot men seem to profess our
Religion, unless they have a visible Infallible Head to guide them? Is
Infallibility the Soul of a Church, which gives it its Being, I mean, a present
Infallibility continually actuating and informing the Body of it? Cannot a man
be known to be a True Man, unless he be inspired? Nor a Church distinguished
from other Societies, but by a Spirit of Infallibility? The truth is, Let
Bellarmine multiply his fifteen Notes of the Church to fifteen hundred, if he
please; nay, let it pretend to what Infallibility it please: if any Society of
men challenging the name of Church to it self, do destroy the end of its
Constitution, or hold any thing directly contrary to the Foundation of its
Institution; all other Notes in the world can never make it a True Church. So
that the only certain Note of a True Church, is its Agreement with the primary
Foundation of it in that Doctrine which was Infallible, and attested by
Miracles undoubtedly Divine: That which holds the Doctrine of Christ, is the
Christian Church; and the nearer any Society comes to that, the purer it is;
the more it is distant from it, the more impure: and no man who honors the
Christian Religion, can be bound to communicate with the Impurities of such a
Church, let it bear it never so high under the pretense of Infallibility. If
you boast never so much of your Unity, Succession, Antiquity, the name of
Catholic, etc. if your Doctrine be repugnant to what was originally delivered
by the Founder of the Christian Church; your Society is not the True Christian
Church. But, suppose it were, and that it were known so to be by such Notes as
these are; Can you not conceive a Church should be consonant to the Doctrine of
Christ, but it must be it self infallible in deciding Controversies? Cannot you
imagine a Society consisting of all True Christians in the world, should be
made up of such persons who all firmly believe that Doctrine infallible which
Christ delivered, but yet judge themselves all fallible, and dare not usurp
that royal prerogative of Heaven, in prescribing infallibly in matters
questioned, but leave all to judge according to the Pandects of the Divine
Laws, because each member of this Society is bound to take care of his soul,
and of all things that tend thereto? Is such an Idea of a Christian Church, a
thing unreasonable, inconsistent, or contrary to any Law of its Foundation; or
rather, is it not a very true and just representation of that Society of men,
which our blessed Savior instituted as a Church in the world?

2. Do you mean, That these Motives should prove the Christian Church at large
infallible, or your present particular universal Church of Rome?. 14.
For some of your Motives seem to respect the one, and the rest the other
Notion of it. When you mention miracles, efficacy, purity and excellency of
Doctrine, fulfilling of Prophecies, do you really intend these for the proof of
your present Roman-Churches Infallibility, as that is distinct from all other
Churches of Christians in the world? If you do (as you must, if you speak to
the purpose) show us what miracles, efficacy, purity and excellency of Doctrine
there are in your Church beyond and beside all other Churches in the world:
What fulfilling of Prophecies among you, which makes your Church infallible? Is
it the Prophecy, That your Church shall be infallible that is fulfilled? Show
then to us where that Prophecy is, and how it appears to be fulfilled? Is it
because your Church pretends to be infallible? I do heartily acknowledge, some
Prophecies are therein fulfilled, but such as your Church has little ground to
be proud of their accomplishment. But, to all impartial Christians, the
accomplishment of those Prophecies, which speak of the degenerate state of the
Church, as they are a great Confirmation of the Infallibility of the Divine
Revealer of them, when they see it so remarkably in the signatures of your
Church; so they are far from being any motive of credibility to them to prove
your Church to be Infallible. Unless it be meant that the state of your Church
is an infallible evidence that those Prophesies are fulfilled. But I pray, why
should fulfilling of Prophesies, make your Church Infallible? I had rather
thought, if you could have proved your Church to have been Prophetical, it had
been more to your purpose. And if your Popes in Cathedra had foretold future
events, which by their coming to pass, had evidenced to the world they had a
true spirit of Prophecy, then indeed you had said something toward
Infallibility. But that the mere fulfilling of Prophesies, owned Divine by all
Christians, should prove your Church Infallible, is such a motive of
Credibility concerning that Infallibility, that it proves nothing, but by this
consequence, If Christ were Infallible, then your Church is. Or do you mean,
because some Prophesies concerning your Church are fulfilled, therefore your
Church is Infallible; by the same reason I hope you will not deny, but that
Antichrist is Infallible, for when ever he did, does, or shall appear, no doubt
there will be fulfilling of Prophesies, and those very clear ones too. And
therefore Antichrist and your Pope may go together for Infallibility.

But it may be yet you have some other motives besides fulfilling Prophesies,
and those are miracles; now you speak indeed to the purpose. But yet still we
poor Infidels ( because out of your Church) desire a little satisfaction
concerning them too. 1. We very reasonably desire, That he in your Church who
pretends most to infallibility, should do these miracles himself. For that was
always the way in Scripture, for them whose testimony was to be believed
Infallible, to be the workers of those miracles which should induce men to
believe such an Infallibility. Do you think the Israelites would have believed
Moses Infallible, if any ordinary Israelite had wrought those miracles which he
did? unless you would suppose that those miracles were purposely wrought to
have attested that Moses was Infallible. But yet God thought it much more fit,
that Moses himself should be the instrument of doing them, and so it was with
our Blessed Savior. Let then your Church produce the several miracles wrought
by your Popes to attest their Infallibility; or, if you believe Pope and
Council the subject of Infallibility, produce the miracles to prove that. God
was always so just and reasonable, as not to expect the belief of any
Infallibility without such evidences given for it as might persuade men to
believe it: and you acknowledge, That independently on Scripture there can be
no such proof of Infallibility as Miracles, and you require it from us to
believe the present Church Infallible, where then are your present miracles
wrought to attest this Infallibility? For as long as you require such an assent
to the present Churches Infallibility, it is necessary on your own grounds,
that the present Church should always work miracles in order to the proving
this Infallibility.

2. We desire such miracles as may sufficiently convince the Infidels as to
this point of your Infallibility. For that was always the way used in
Scripture; The intention of miracles was to persuade those who did not believe.
Would Pharaoh, or the Egyptians have believed Moses, if all his miracles had
been wrought in a corner, where none but Israelites had been present? Would the
Jews have believed in Christ, if he had not come in public among them, and
wrought such frequent, public, and uncontrouled miracles, that his greatest
enemies durst not deny them? If you would then have us believe your present
Churches Infallibility, let your Pope, or at least your Priests come and do
such kind of miracles among us which may bear the examination of inquisitive
men, and then try whether we will not believe your Infallibility; but till
then, excuse us. Think not we are of such easy Faith, that the pretended
growing out of a Leg in Spain, or any of your famous miracles wrought by your
Priests in Italy, will persuade us to believe your Church Infallible. It is
always observed, your miracles are most talked on, where people are most
ignorant, and therefore most apt to be deceived. Your Priests, like the Devils
in the Primitive times, can do no feats when their opposers are by; It is an
easy thing for a stump to grow a Leg in its passage from Spain hither; for
Fama crescit eundo; such things are most believed where circumstances are least
capable of examination. And the juglings and impostures of your Priests have
been so notorious in this kind, that their pretenses to miracles have made more
Infidels then Catholics, by making men more apt to question, whether ever
there were any real miracles done, then believe the truth of yours. Very likely
then it is, that you should persuade the world your Church is Infallible,
because of the miracles wrought in it.

3. What discrimination do you put between those lying wonders which you are
foretold shall be wrought at the coming of Antichrist, and those pretended
miracles which are wrought among you? Convince us by sufficient evidence, that
the things which seem most confirmed by your miracles, viz. Invocation of
Saints, is a thing consonant to the doctrine established by the undoubted
miracles of Christ and his Apostles? If it be contrary to it, either you must
prove that doctrine false; or, if you admit it true, you prove your miracles to
be false: because contrary to a doctrine established by miracles undoubtedly
Divine. And God can never be supposed to attest with miracles the truth of
doctrines contrary to each other. And thence the wisest of your Church are so
far from insisting on this of miracles for a motive of credibility concerning
your Churches Infallibility, that they leave it out from being a note of the
Church; because Heretics, as they say, may as to all outward appearance work
as great miracles as the best Catholics. And therefore Bellarmin says, De
Notis ^cclesiae. cap. 14.
No man can have an absolute certainty concerning the truth of miracles,
because the Devil, though he cannot work true miracles, can work, as to
appearance, the greatest. Therefore since the confirmation of Christian
Religion by miracles undoubtedly Divine, there can be no relyance on the trial
of miracles for the truth of any doctrine: for those very miracles and doctrine
must be judged according to that rule of Faith which was confirmed by Divine
miracles. Thus we have examined those motives which seem most to prove
Infallibility, and shown how little they agree to the present Churches
Infallibility.

3. As to the other motives, what evidence do you produce, That wherever they
are, the Church is Infallible; and,. 15.
that these do infallibly belong to your Church? for both these must be made
evident, or you do nothing. Now these motives are, Sanctity of life,
Succession, Unity, Antiquity, and the very name of Catholic, etc. How hard is
it to conceive the connection between these and infallibility! Nay, they are so
far from it, that it has been abundantly proved against your party, that these
are no certain notes of the true Church, (which is a Controversy I shall not
now discuss). And if the Church cannot be proved to be true by them, much less
certainly will it be proved to be Infallible. But suppose all this, is your
Church so remarkable for Sanctity of life, that it should be a motive for your
Infallibility? Have your Popes been indeed such Holy men, that we may not
question but they were moved by the Holy Ghost when they spoke? Certainly, you
have some other way to know it then all Histories both of friends and enemies,
and the constant fame of the world, which has then much abused us with stories
quite of another nature. Or, is the state of your Church so pure and holy, that
it must show it self Infallible by that? But whom will you be judged by in this
case? I desire you not to stand to the verdict of your Adversaries. Will you
believe men of your own Communion? pray read what sad complaints are made of
the degenerate state of your Church by Petrarch, Mantuan, Clemangis,
Espencaeus, Erasmus, Cassander, and several others, and judge you whether we
have not reason to cry up the Sanctity of your Church. But these, (it may be
you will say) were discontented persons. Will you believe then your Cardinals?
And if ever you will believe them, it should certainly be, when they meet to
advise concerning the state of your Church; and was not this the expression of
the College of chosen Cardinals for reformation of the Church, under Paul 3.
Per nos, inquimus, per nos, nomen Christi blasphematur apud gentes. Is not this
a great evidence of your Sanctity? If you will not believe the Cardinals, you
will not certainly question the judgment of him whom you would fain have to be
Infallible, the Pope himself. And these are the words of Adrian 6. in his
Instructions to his Legate at the diet of Norimberg A. D. 1522. Scimus in hac
Sede aliquot jam annis multa abominanda fuisse, abusus in Spiritualibus,
excessus in mandatis, and omnia denique in perversum mutata. If ever Pope was
Infallible he was in saying so, and he could not but be in Cathedra when he
said it. You see then what evidence you have from your selves concerning that
Sanctity of life which is in your Church. But it may be still, you do not mean
real Sanctity, but that the doctrine of your Church tends more to promote it,
then that of any other Church. I heartily wish, the quite contrary could not be
too truly said of it, and it is well known, that one of your great Artifices
whereby you persuade great Persons to your Religion, is, the liberty it
indulgeth them in sin here, and yet the hopes it gives them of heaven
hereafter. Our doctrine requires indispensable obedience to all the precepts of
Christ: Yours tells them, those which are the most strict and severe, are not
precepts, but counsels of perfection. Ours, That there is no hope of Salvation
without hearty amendment of life: Yours, That Penance is requisite and
external satisfaction to the Church; and for internals, that Contrition is very
commendable, but if there be not that, Attrition will serve the turn. Ours,
Charges men to look to their Salvation in this life, because when life is ended
their estate is irrecoverable: Yours, That though men dye in their sins, yet
they may be relieved by the prayers of the living, and that there is hope they
may get through Purgatory to Heaven at last. So that supposing any persons to
own Christianity to be true, it is hard to conceive there should be more
Artifices imagined to reconcile the Love of the pleasures of sin here with the
hopes of Heaven at last, than are used by those of your Profession. So that if
I should suppose my selfa Heathen Philosopher, and any of your Profession
should come and tell me, These were the Precepts, and these the Promises of
Christian Religion, but I could believe none of them, but by the Infallible
proposition of your Church, and that I was to know your Church Infallible by
that Sanctity of life which was in it; when I had thoroughly considered not only
the impieties committed by the great ones of your Religion, even in Rome in the
first place, but the Artifices used to enervate all the Precepts of real
Sanctity, and so plainly to see what interest and design is carried on under
all these disguises: I should be insuperably assaulted with the thoughts that
those of your Religion who were the Authors of these things, were so far from
believing your Church Infallible, that they really believed neither Christian
nor any other Religion in the world. So much for that Sanctity of life which is
in your Chuch. As for your other motives of Unity, Succession, Antiquity, and
the name of Catholic, etc. they have so little affinity with any pretense of
Infallibility, and do equally agree to those Churches, as the Greek and
Abyssine, which you are so far from acknowledging Infallible, that you will not
grant them to be true Churches (notwithstanding these Motives) that I cannot
easily imagine to what end you produced them, unless to let us see, you had the
gift of saying something, though nothing to the purpose.

When you have thus apparently failed in producing any shadow of proof for your
Churches Infallibility by these motives of credibility,. 16.
we now come to see how good you are at the defensive part, who have been so
unhappy in your Attempts. Therefore we must consider what arts you use in
putting by the force of those arguments which are produced against you by his
Lordship. After he had urged that question against you, How it may appear that
your Church is infallibly governed by the Holy Ghost, to which we have seen how
impossible it is for you to give any satisfactory answer, he proceeds to
another Argument which lies in these words; Besides, P. 61. n. 3. Aristot 1.
Post. c. 2. T. 16.
this is an inviolable ground of reason, That the principles of any conclusion
must be of more credit then the conclusion it self. Therefore if the Articles
of Faith, the Trinity, the Resurrection, and the rest, be the conclusions, and
the Principles by which they are proved be only Ecclesiastical Tradition; it
must needs follow, that the tradition of the Church is more infallible then the
Articles of Faith, if the Faith which we have of the Articles should be finally
resolved into the veracity of the Churches Testimony. To this your Answer is
very considerable. 1. You tell us, That the ground of all this discourse is the
authority of Aristotle cited in the Margent, which you repeat after him. But I
pray, Whence learned you that this was all the ground of his discourse? For his
Lordship does not say, that Aristotle says so, and therefore it is so; but
says, That it is an inviolable ground of reason, (which words you prudently
left out, that there might appear some shadow for such a cavil) and cites only
the concurrent testimony of Aristotle with that evidence of reason which is in
it. And will you deny this to be an undoubted principle in reason, that, That
which is assumed as the ground and reason why I assent to any thing, must be
more certain and evident, then that is which I assent to on that ground?
Certainly you must have an art above all other men to make the superstructure
stronger then the foundation; the particular Problems in Mathematics, more
evident then the Postulata; the conclusion, surer then the Premises. But you
think to come off this absurdity. 2. By distinguishing between Science and
Faith, or, as you express it, between the proceeding of the understanding when
it works naturally and necessarily, by and from the evidence and clearness of
its object: and when it works supernaturally and produces supernatural and
free acts, Page 57.
merely or at least principally from the impulse and inclination of the will;
for in such cases the Maxim holds not, viz. That the principles of a Conclusion
must be of more credit then the conclusion it self. Now the act of believing is
such an act; that is, which the understanding elicites, rather by a voluntary
and free inclination and consent of the will, then from any evident certainty
in the object whereto it assents. A most judicious and profound discourse! to
which I know not whether ever I can persuade my will, but I am sure, I never
shall my understanding. Lest you should think, it is only some impulse of my
will which hinders my assent, I shall fairly lay down the Reasons which keep me
from it.

1. That all assent of the understanding is grounded upon evidence.

2. That however that evidence proceeds, yet the Foundation of assent must be
more evident then the thing assented to. And these two I suppose will fully
reach the scope of your Answer, by showing that your distinction of acts
natural and supernatural, is both untrue and impertinent.

1. That all assent is grounded upon evidence, i. e. that no man can assent to
any thing merely because he will, but there must be sufficient reason inducing
and persuading to that assent. You acknowledge this to be true in acts of
Knowledge, but not of Faith; but, What do you make to be the genus in your
definition of Faith? I suppose you will say, it is an assent of the mind. If it
be so, the mind cannot be supposed to elicite an act of the same nature in so
repugnant a manner to it self, that it should assent to any thing without
evidence. I know what discourses those of your party have, concerning the
obscurity which is necessary to Faith. If you mean obscurity as to the object
believed, i. e. that the matters to be believed are not so clear to us as
demonstrations, I will not gainsay it: but if you mean obscurity or want of
evidence, as to the reason inducing me to believe, I utterly deny any such
obscurity to belong to Faith, or to be consistent with it. For God does not
require us to believe any thing without sufficient grounds for our believing
it, and those grounds do bear a proportionable evidence to the nature of that
assent which he requires. If he requires an Infallible assent he gives
Infallible grounds; if he requires a firm and certain assent, he gives firm and
certain grounds; if he requires only a probable assent, he gives only probable
evidence. But still, such as the nature of the assent is, such is the evidence
he gives for it. To make this plainer by an Instance. That Christ was the true
Messiah, he requires an assent built upon Infallible grounds, and therefore God
gave such Infallible evidence of it by the Miracles which he wrought. That
these Miracles were once really done, he requires our firm assent, and
therefore gives certain evidence by an Universal and uncontrouled tradition;
but whether St. Paul or any other Apostolical person were Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, he requires only an assent built on the most probable
grounds, and therefore he has given us no more for it. But still as the assent
is, so the evidence must be. For Faith being an act of the mind, whose nature
is to judge according to reason, we cannot suppose any act of it to proceed in
a brutish manner by a mere impulse of the will. I deny not, but the will may be
said to have some kind of influence upon the understanding, both in furthering
and hindering assent: but it is not by any command it has over the mind in its
acts, but as it can divert the mind from, or incline it to, the searching into
the evidence of the things. Therefore when we commonly say, Facile credimus
quae volumus, and so on the contrary; it is not because of the wills immediate
power upon the understanding, but, as the desire of a thing makes us
inquisitive after it, so the dislike of it makes us unwilling to hear the
reasons for it, and ready to entertain any pretense against it. Thus, I grant,
the will may have power upon the mind as to the eliciting the act of Faith, not
that I can assent to a thing as true, because I desire it to be true; but this
inclination of the will removes those impediments which would obstruct my
discovery of the evidence which is in it. You havs certainly a mind of another
mould then others have that can believe thing which do not appear credible to
you; yet such a kind of Faith as this, is very necessary for your Churches
Infallibility; and for that, your discourse of believing by the impulse of the
will, is very proper and seasonable. But other persons may think it an
Imperfection in their minds, that they cannot believe any thing any further
than it appears credible; that is, that they can go no further than they have
legs; nor see when their eyes are shut, or the room dark. But, it may be, you
will tell me, All this discourse proceeds on supposition, that Faith were a
natural act of the mind; but you speak of a supernatural Faith. It may be so;
but, I hope, you speak not of an irrational Faith, which must believe things
beyond the evidence of their Credibility. Faith, whether natural or
supernatural, acquired or infused, is still an act of the mind; and let it have
but what belongs to it as such, and call it what you will. I deny not a
peculiar Operation of Grace, in the eliciting the Act of Divine Faith; but
still I say, The manner whereby it is wrought, must be agreeable to the nature
of the Understanding, and by discovering the Credibility which is in the
Objects of Faith. If you say, The Assent is infused, I must say, The Evidence
is first infused; for as Christ, when he healed the blind, did not make them
see Objects which did not appear visible; so neither does the Spirit of God in
planting Faith make men discern Objects which do not appear credible; and the
stronger the Assent is, the greater is the Evidence and Credibility of the
Object. And can you call then that any free inevident Assent, which goes no
further than the Object appears credible? It cannot be then any Act of the
Will, but merely of the Mind, which yields assent to any Object propounded as
credible to it. So that in what way and manner Assent is required, in that same
manner does God give proportionable evidence: I deny not but that Assent is
required to Objects inevident to sense and reason; but then I say, The Assent
is not required to what is obscure and inevident; but to what is evident to us,
and therefore credible. In the Incarnation of the Son of God, the manner of the
Hypostatical Union is to us inevident, but then God does not require our Assent
to the Manner, but to the Truth of the thing it self. Wherever God requires
us to believe any thing as True, he gives us evidence that it is so: wherever
it appears the thing is inevident, we may lawfully suspend our Assent, and, for
all that I know, it is our duty so to do.

But yet you have not done with this profound discourse; For you very learnedly
distinguish a double proceeding in probations; the one is,. 17.
per principia intrinseca, which you very well English ( by intrinsecal
Principles) i. e. such as have a necessary, natural connection with the things
proved, Ibid.
and do manifest and lay open the objects themselves; the other is, per
principia extrinseca (by extrinsecal Principles) that is, such as have no
natural or necessary connection with, nor do produce any such evident
manifestation of the things proved, but their efficacy, (viz. whereby they
determine the understanding to assent) does wholly depend on the worth and
virtue of that external Principle, whereby such probations are made. This you
apply to Knowledge and Faith, that as Knowledge proceeds in the former way, so
Faith does in the latter, which depends purely upon extrinsecal Principles,
viz. the Authority, Veracity, Goodness, and Knowledge of God affirming it;
which was immediately known to the Prophets and Apostles, but mediately to us,
which how^ver, must be infallibly conveyed to us, which can only be by the
testimony of the Church. This is the substance of your third Section; to which
I answer, 1. That all Certainty in the acts of the Mind, whether in Knowledge
or Faith, must equally suppose the Truth of some extrinsecal Principles, viz.
the veracity and goodness of God: for otherwise we cannot certainly judge of
those you call Principia intrinseca, to know what things have necessary and
natural connection with the things proved. For, unless I suppose that God is so
True and Good, as not to suffer me to be deceived in the proper actings of my
Faculties, I may judge such things to have connexions and dep^ndencies one upon
another, which really have nothing so. And therefore, so far your distinction
concerning Science and Faith, will not hold. But 2. If the meaning of this
distinction be only this, That there is a different proceeding in a
demonstration, from what there is in an act of Faith, I deny it not; but
suppose it nothing to your purpose. For, though the evidence be discovered in a
different way, yet there is in both proportionable evidence to the nature of
the Assent. When I assent, because I know that the thing is true, the evidence
of the thing it self, is the ground of that Assent; but, when I assent upon the
Authority of any person, the Credibility of his Testimony, is the evidence on
which that Assent is grounded. Though this latter evidence be of another kind,
yet it is sufficient for that act of the mind, which is built upon it; and that
Testimony which I establish a firm Assent upon, must be as evident in its kind,
i. e. of Credibility, as the evidence of a thing demonstrable in the nature of
a Demonstration. 3. The main strength of your Answer seems to lie in this, That
in such an Assent as is built upon Authority; as in the case of Faith, when we
do not immediately hear God speaking, but it is conveyed to us by the Testimony
of others, it is necessary that this Testimony be infallible. But, good Sir,
this is not our present Question, Whether it be necessary that this Testimony
be infallibly conveyed to us, but, supposing such an infallible Conveyance,
Whether that infallible Testimony must not be more credible than the matters
which are believed upon it? But, as though never any such thing had been
started: You give us a long discourse of the different proceeding of Science
and Faith, but never offer to apply it to the business in hand. I must
therefore ingenuously commend you for an excellent Art of gliding insensibly
away from a business you cannot answer, and casting out a great many words not
to the purpose, that you may seem to touch the matter, when you are far enough
from it.

And therefore I say, Secondly, That however the evidence proceeds in matters
of Faith, yet whatever is the Foundation of Assent, must be more evident than
the thing assented to. Especially where you suppose the Assent to be
infallible, and the Testimony infallible, which must ascertain it to us. This
will be plainer by an instance. If I ask you, Why you believe the Resurrection
of the dead, your Answer is, because of the Authority of him that reveals it:
The next Question then is, Why you believe that God has revealed it; your
Answer is, Because the Testimony of the Church is infallible which delivers it.
Whereby it is plain, That though your first Answer be from God's Authority, yet
the last resolution of your Faith, is, the Infallibility of your Churches
Testimony; and that being the last resolution, that Infallibility must be the
Principle on which the belief of the rest depends. For, according to your
Principles, though God had revealed it, yet if this Revelation were not
attested by the infallible Testimony of your Church, we should not have
sufficient ground to believe it. And if without that, we can have no sufficient
ground to believe, then this Principle The Church is infallible, must be more
credible than the Resurrection of the dead. Which was the Absurdity his
Lordship charged upon you, and you are far from being able to quit your self of.

The next thing which you busy your self much in answering of, is, That
according to these Principles of resolution of Faith,. 18.
you make the Churches Testimony the formal Object of Faith, which you
acknowledge your self to be a great Absurdity, and therefore make use of many
shifts to avoid. I shall reduce the substance of your verbose, P. 58. n. 4.
and immethodical Answer into as narrow a compass as I can, without defalking
any thing of the strength of it. You tell us then, That our Faith is resolved
into God's Revelations, whether written, or unwritten, as its Formal Object;
and our Infallible Assurance, that the things we believe as God's Revelations
are revealed from him, is resolved into the Infallibility of the Churches
Definitions, teaching us, that they are his Revelations; And that the Formal
Cause of our Assent in Divine Faith, is God's Revelation delivered to the
Church without writing; but, because that is as it were at distance from us, it
is approximated, or immediately applied to us by the infallible Declaration of
the present Church. Hence it appears, our Faith rests only upon God's
Revelation as its Formal Object, though the Churches Voice be a condition so
necessary for its resting thereon, that it can never attain that Formal Object
without it. And lastly, you tell us, The Churches Authority then being more
known to us than the Scriptures, may well be some reason of our admitting them,
yet the Scriptures still retain their prerogative above the Church: and thence
you distinguish of the certainty of the Object and Subject; from all which you
conclude, That the Churches Definition is not the Formal Object of Faith, but
that our Faith relyes upon it as an Infallible Witness both of the written and
unwritten Word of God, which is the Formal Object. This is the substance, in
your long Answer, of what has the face of reason and pertinency: Which I come
to a close and particular examination of. And that you may not say, I pass over
this important Controversy, without a through discussion of it; I shall first
prove, that it necessarily follows from your Principles, That the Churches
Infallible Testimony must be the Formal Object of Faith. And 2. That the
Answers you give are far from being satisfactory that it is not.

1. That it necessarily follows from your Principles, That the Churches
Infallible Testimony must be the Formal Object of Faith. In order to which, we
must consider, what the scope and design of this Discourse is, concerning the
Resolution of Faith. The Question started by Mr. Fisher, in the Conference,
was, How his Lordship knew Scripture to be Scripture, or, How the Divine
Authority of the Scriptures was to be proved. To this his Lordship returns a
large Answer, to which you attempt a Reply in this Chapter, and mention this to
be the main Question, How Scriptures may be known to be the Word of God. To
this, you tell us, No satisfactory Answer can be given, but from the infallible
Testimony of the Church, and the great reason given by you in all your
discourse, is this, That this is an Article to be believed with Divine Faith,
and Divine Faith must be built on an Infallible Testimony. The Question then
resulting hence, is, Whether on these Principles you do not make the Infallible
Testimony of the Church, the Formal Object of Faith? You deny, and we affirm
it; but before I come to the particular Evidences of the Cause, some general
postulata must be laid down, which by the very state of the Controversy, must
be acknowledged by you, which are;

1. That the Question in dispute is not concerning the Formal Object of all
things divinely revealed, but concerning the believing this to be a particular
Divine Revelation. For, it is obvious to any one that considers, what vast
difference there is between those two Questions, Why you believe that to be
True which God has revealed; the plain and easy resolution of this, is, into
the veracity and infallibility of God, in all his Revelations. But it is quite
another Question, when I ask, Why you believe this to have been a True Divine
Revelation? Or that such particular Books contain the Word of God. And it is
apparent, by the whole process of the the Dispute, that the Question is not
concerning the first, but the second of these two.

2. That the Question is not concerning any kind of persuasion, as to this
Divine Revelation, but concerning that which you call Divine Faith.

3. That this Divine Faith must be resolved into some Testimony supposed
infallible. These three are things agreed on between both parties, as appears
by the whole management of this Controversy. Only you suppose this Infallible
Testimony to be the Church, which your Adversary denies, and says, It will
follow from thence, that you make your Churches Testimony the Formal Object of
Faith, which I thus prove:

1. That which is the only Ground and Foundation whereon a Divine Faith is
built, must be the Formal Object of Faith: but the Infallible Testimony of your
Church, is the only Foundation whereon Faith is built. By the Formal Object of
Faith, I suppose you and I mean the same thing, which is the Foundation whereon
the Certainty of the Assent is grounded, or the principal Objective Cause of
Faith, viz. not every account that may be given Why men believe, but that which
is the only Certain Foundation to establish a Divine Faith upon. Now, let any
one but consider what the Question is, and what your resolution is, and then
judge, Whether you make not the Churches Testimony the Formal Object. The
Question is, How we know the Scriptures to be the Word of God; which in other
terms is, What the ground is why I assent to the Doctrine contained in
Scripture as a Divine Revelation? You say, The Testimony of the Scripture it
self cannot be that ground; You say, The Testimony of the Spirit cannot be it;
You say, A Moral Certainty cannot be it, because then it is not Divine Faith:
What then is the reason why you believe it? Do you not over and over say, It is
because of the infallible Testimony of the Church, which gives us
unquestionable assurance that this was a Divine Revelation; and yet for all
this, this Testimony is not the Formal Object of this Divine Faith. The most
charitable apprehension I can have of you, when you write things so
inconsistent, is, either that you understand not, or consider not what you
write of, but take what has been said in such cases by men of your own party,
and right or wrong that serves for an Answer. But for all this, 4.
you tell us confidently, That your Faith is not resolved into the voice of the
Church, as into its Formal Object; but it is enough to say, Our Faith is
resolved into God's Revelations (whether written or unwritten) as its Formal
Object: and our infallible assurance, that the things we believe are Divine
Revelations, is resolved into the Infallibility of the Churches Definitions.
These are excellent Notions if they would hang together. But,

1. We enquire not what is enough to say in such a case, but what ground you
have for saying what you do. You have enough to say upon many subjects in this
Book (or else your Book would never have swelled to the bulk it has) but you
have generally very little reason for what you say.

2. Is that infallible Assurance, that the things we believe as God's
Revelations, are revealed from him, a thing called Faith or no? If it be, as I
hope you will not deny it, then by your own Confession, Faith is resolved into
the Churches Testimony as its Formal Object; for, you say, This Infallible
Assurance is resolved into the Infallibility of the Churches Definitions,
teaching us, that they are his Revelations. These are your own words. And, do
you yet deny this Testimony of the Church to be the Formal Object of this
infallible Assurance?

3. What is it you mean, when you say, That Faith is resolved into God's
Revelations as its Formal Object? Is it, that the reason why we believe, is,
Because God has revealed these things to us? But that, you know, is not the
matter at all in question, but, How we come to assent to such a Doctrine as a
Divine Revelation? Answer me punctually to it; Can you possibly resolve your
Faith into any thing else, as its Formal Object? If you can, I pray do us the
favor to name it. If you resolve this Faith, as you seem to express your mind,
into Divine Revelation, as its Formal Object; Show us where that Revelation is
extant, for which you believe Scripture to be the Word of God. Is it the
Scripture it self, or a Revelation distinct from it? If you say, It is the
Scripture it self, then you must make the infallible Testimony of your Church
needless; for then we may have infallible Assurance, that the things we believe
are Divine Revelations, without your Churches Testimony or Definitions: Then,
what is become of the unwritten Tradition you mention in these words, If then
it be demanded, P. 55.
Why we believe such Books as are contained in the Bible to be the Word of God;
we answer, Because it is a divine unwritten Tradition, that they are his Word;
and this Divine Tradition is the Formal Object, whereon our Faith relyes. Well
then, our last resolution of Faith is into this Divine unwritten Tradition:
But, whence come you to know, that this Tradition is Divine? Into what
Revelation is the belief of that finally resolved? Does it appear to be so by
it self, and then why may not the Scripture? or has it some other Revelation,
and Divine Tradition to attest it? And then the same Question returns
concerning that, and so in infinitum, or else of necessity you must acknowledge
one of these two things; Either that some Divine Revelation may sufficiently
manifest it self, without any infallible Testimony of your Church: Or else,
that this infallible Testimony must be the Formal Object of Faith. Of these
two, choose which you please.

2. I prove that you must make the Churches Testimony the Formal Object of
Faith, because either you must make it so, or you must deny Divine Revelation
to be the Formal Object of Faith; because the reason is equal for both. I
demand then, How you resolve your Belief of the Truth of the Doctrine of
Christ, you tell me, into Divine Revelation, as its Formal Object? I ask yet
further, Why you believe the Revelation made by Christ to be Divine. Your
Answer must be, either that your Churches Testimony gives you infallible
Assurance of it, and then the former Argument returns: or else that Christ
manifested his Testimony to be infallible, and therefore his Revelation Divine,
because of the Motives of Credibility, which accompanied his preaching. If this
be your Answer, as it must be by your former discourse, then by the same reason
I prove your Churches Testimony to be the Formal Object of Faith, because you
have endeavored to prove the Churches Infallibility by the same Motives of
Credibility that Moses and Christ proved theirs. Either therefore retract all
your former discourse, or else confess, that by the same reason that the Divine
Revelation made by Christ, is the Formal Object of Faith, the infallible
Testimony of your Church must be so too. For according to your own supposition,
there are equal Motives of Credibility, and therefore equal obligation to
believe the Infallibility of one as of the other.

3. If the only reason which makes any thing be the Formal Object agrees to the
Testimony of your Church, then that Testimony must be the Formal Object of
Faith to them that believe it. Now, that which is the only reason which makes
any thing to be the Formal Object of Faith, is the Supposition that it is
infallible. For, why do you resolve your Faith finally into Divine Revelation?
Is it not because you suppose God to be infallible in all Revelations of
himself; and therefore if your Church be infallible, as you say it is, by the
same reason that must be the Formal Object of Faith; as if it were by the
revelation of God himself? But here you think to obviate this objection by some
strange distinctions concerning your Infallibility. You tell us therefore, The
Churches Infallibility is not absolutely and simply Divine; or that God speaks
immediately by her Definitions: but only that she is supernaturally infallible,
P. 58, 59.
by the assistance of the Holy Ghost preserving her from all error, in
defining any thing as a point of Christian Faith, that is, as a Truth revealed
from God, which is not truly and really so revealed. A rare Distinction this!
You say afterward, The Churches Definition is absolutely infallible, but yet
this Infallibility is not absolutely and simply Divine: I pray tell us, What is
it then? You say, It is Supernatural, but not Divine, and this Supernatural
Infallibility, by the Assistance of the Holy Ghost securing from all error,
but yet not absolutely and precisely Divine: I pray tell us, What kind of
Infallibility that was which the Apostles had in delivering the Doctrine of
Christ, was that any more than such a Supernatural Infallibility as you fondly
arrogate to your Church, viz. such a one as might secure them from all error
in defining any thing as a point of Christian Faith, which was not so, that is,
as a Truth revealed from God, which was not truly and really so revealed. And
yet, I suppose, you will not deny, but those who lived in the Apostles times,
might resolve their Faith into that Infallibility which they had as its Formal
Object, and therefore why not as well into your Churches Infallibility, since
you pretend to as great Infallibility in your Church as ever was in the
Apostles. Thus, I hope, I have shown it impossible for you, not to make the
Churches Testimony the Formal Object of Faith, since you make it infallible as
you do.

2. We come now to consider, the little evasions and distinctions, whereby you
hope to get out of this Labyrinth. But, having so manifestly proved, that it
follows from your Principles, That the Churches Testimony is the Formal Object
of Faith, all your distinctions fall of themselves; for thereby it appears,
that your Churches Testimony is not merely a necessary Condition of believing,
but is the Formal Cause and Reason of it, therefore your instance of
approximation in natural Causes, P. 59.
is nothing to the purpose. No more is that of a Commonwealth's practicing the
same Laws, being an Argument that those were its primitive Laws: Unless you
suppose it impossible, 1. That a Commonwealth should ever alter its Laws. Or,
2. That it should practice contrary to its primitive Laws. Or 3. That it should
be supernaturally Infallible in judging which are primitive Laws, and which
not; without these Suppositions, I say, That Instance signifies nothing to the
business in hand; and when you have proved these true, I will give you a
further Answer. Your Answer to Aristotle's Text, or rather to that undoubted
Maxim of Reason, with which the citation of Aristotle concurred, has been
considered already. Your Answer to the Testimony of Canus, is like the rest of
your discourse, trivial, and not to the purpose; for Canus does not only deny
the Churches Testimony to be the Formal Object of Faith, but the necessity of
believing its Testimony to be infallible. Non intelligitur necessario, quod
credo docenti Ecclesiae tanquam testi infallibili, Page 6^.
are the very words of the Testimony cited in the Margin of his Lordships Books.

Your next Section affords us some more words, but not one dram more of
reason. For, How do you prove, that the Churches Authority is more known to us
than the Scriptures? or, How can you make it appear, that there is any
Authority, but what is relative to us, and therefore the distinction is in it
self silly, of Authority in se, and quoad nos. For, whatever has Authority,
has thereby a respect to some it has its Authority over. And, Can any thing
be a ground of Faith simply and in it self, which is not so toward us: For the
Formal Object of Faith, is that for whose sake we believe, and therefore, if
Divine Revelation be, as you say, the Formal Object of Faith, then it must be
more known to us, than the Testimony of the Church: For, that must be more
known to us, which is the main cause of Believing. But, if all your meaning be,
that we must first know what the Church delivers for Scripture, before we can
judge whether it were divinely revealed or no: I grant it to be true; but what
is this to your Infallibility? Will you prove the Infallibility of your Church
to be more known to us, than that of the Scriptures; and, on supposition that
were true, can you then prove that the Scriptures should still retain their
prerogative above the Church? What your Authors distinguish concerning
objective and subjective Certainty, pertains not to this place; for the worth
and dignity of the Scriptures, may exceed that of Tradition, yet, when the
knowledge of that worth, relyes on that Tradition, your esteem of the one, must
be according to your esteem of the other. I will not here enquire, Whether the
adhesion of the Will, can exceed the clearness of the Understanding; nor,
Whether Aristotle was unacquainted with subjective Certainty; nor Whether our
adhesion to Articles of Faith, be stronger than to any Principles evident to
natural Reason: For, I look upon all these Assertions to serve you in no other
capacity, than as excursions from the matter in hand; and therefore I shall not
gratify you so far as particularly to examine them. For all then that has
been yet produced by you, his Lordships Argument remains good, that, according
to your Principles, the Churches Testimony must be made the Formal Object of
Faith, and I am the more confirmed in it by the weakness of your evasions; and,
I hope, I have now made good those words which you challenge his Lordship for,
That it were no hard thing to prove it.

The next Absurdity charged upon you by his Lordship, is,. 19.
That all the Authorities of Fathers, Councils, nay of Scripture too, P. 62.
must be finally resolved into the Authority of the present Roman Church: And,
though they would seem to have us believe the Fathers, and the Church of old;
yet they will not have us take their Doctrine from their own writings, or the
Decrees of Councils, because, as they say, We cannot know by reading them, what
their meaning was, but from the infallible Testimony of the present Roman
Church teaching by Tradition. And this, he tells you, is, the cunning of this
devise. To which you answer; By what has been said, it appears, That there is
no device or cunning at all, either in taking away any thing due to the
Fathers, P. 60, 61.
Councils, or Scripture; or in giving too much to the Tradition of the present
Church. For we acknowledge all due respect to the Fathers, and as much (to
speak modestly) as any of our adversaries party. But, they must pardon us, if
we prefer the general interpretation of the present Church, before the result
of any man's particular Fancy. As for Scripture, we ever extol it above the
Definitions of the Church, yet affirm it to be in many places so obscure, that
we cannot be certain of its true sense, without the help of a living,
infallible Judge, to determine and declare it, which can be no other than the
present Church. And what we say of Scripture, may, with proportion, be applied
to Ancient General Councils. For, though we willingly submit to them all, yet
where they happen to be obscure in matters requiring Determination, we seek the
assistance and direction of the same living Infallible Rule, viz. the
Tradition, or the Sentence of the present Church. The Question is, Supposing
your Churches Testimony to be infallible, without which we can have no
Assurance of what Fathers, Scriptures, and Councils say, What Authority remains
among you, to any, or all of these? And it is not, what respect, you tell us,
you give them; (for you may as easily speak, as believe contradictions) but
what is really left to them, if your Opinion concerning the present Churches
Infallibility be true. And he that cannot see the cunning of this Device of
resolving all into the Authority of the present Roman Church, will never
understand the interest of your Church; but, it seems, you apprehend it so
much, as not to seem to do it, and have too much cunning to confess it. But,
this must not be so easily passed over, this being one of the grand Artifices
of your Church, to make a great noise with Fathers, Scriptures, and Councils
among those most, who understand them least, when your selves resolve them all
into the present Churches Testimony. Which is first to gagge them, and then bid
them speak.

First, For the Fathers, you say, You acknowledge all due respect to them; but
the Question is, What kind of respect that is which can be due to them, when,
let them speak their minds never so plainly, and agree in what they please, and
deliver what they will as the Judgment of the Church; yet all this can give us
no Assurance at all on your Principles, unless your Church does infallibly
determine the same way. What then do the Fathers signify with you? Does the
Infallibility of your Churches Definition depend on the consent of the Fathers?
No, you tell us, She is supernaturally assisted by the Holy Ghost; and if so, I
suppose the judgment of the Fathers is not that which she relyes on. But, it
may be, you will say, This supernatural Assistance directs the Church to that
which was the Judgment of the Fathers in all Ages. This were something indeed,
if it could be proved: But then I would never read the Fathers, to know what
their mind is, but ask your Church what they meant: And, though your Church
delivers that as their sense, which is as opposite as may be, both to their
words and judgments; yet this is part of the respect due to them, not to
believe whatever they say themselves, but what your Church tells us they say. A
most compendious way for interpreting Fathers, and making them sure not to
speak any thing against your Church. Therefore I cannot but commend the
ingenuity of Cornelius Mussus, the Bishop of Bitonto, who spoke that out, which
more wary men are contented only to think. Ego, ut ingenue fatear, plus uni
summo Pontitifici crediderim in his quae mysteria fidei tangunt, quam mill
Augustinis, Hieronymis, Gregoriis. That I may deal freely, says he, I would
sooner believe the Pope in matters of Faith, In cap. 14. ep. ad Romans
than a thousand Augustines, Hieromes, and Gregory's. Bravely said, and like a
man that did heartily believe the Pope's Infallibility! And yet no more than
every one will be forced to do that understands the Consequence of his own
Principles. And therefore Alphonsus a Castro was not to be blamed for
preferring an Epistle of Anacletus (though counterfeit) because Pope, before
Augustine, Hierome, Huic Anacleto soli magis crediderim, etc quam Hieronymo,
Augustino, aut cuiviis alii recentiori, quantumlibet docto and sancto. Advers.
haeres. l. 6. verbo Episcopus.
or any other however holy or learned. These men understood themselves, and the
interest of their Church. And, although the rest of them make finer legs to
the Fathers, than these do; yet when they seem to cross their way, and entrench
upon their Church, they find not much kinder entertainment for them. We may
guess at the rest by two of them, men of great note in their several ways, the
one for Controversies, the other for his Commentaries, viz. Bellarmine and
Maldonate, and let us see, when occasion serves, how rudely they handle the
Fathers. If S. Cyprian speaks against Tradition, it was, says Bellarmine, In
defense of his error, Respondeo, Cyprianum hoc scripsisse cum errorem suum
tueri vellet, and ideo non mirum si errantium more tunc ra^iocinaretur. De
verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 11.
and therefore no wonder if he argued after the manner of erroneous persons. If
he opposes Stephen the Bishop of Rome, in the business of Rebaptization; He
seems, says he, To have erred mortally in it. Videtur, mortaliter peccasse.
De Pontif. R. l. 4. c. 7.
If S. Ambrose pronounce Baptism in the name of Christ, to be valid, without
the naming other Persons in the Trinity; Haec Opinio falsa est, meo judicio. De
Pontif. l. 4. c. 12.
Bellarmine is not afraid to say, That, in his judgment, his Opinion is false.
If S. Chrysostom says, That it is better not to be present at the Eucharist,
than to be present, and not receive it; I say (says Bellarmine) That
Chrysostom, Dico, Chrysostomum ut quaedam alia per excessum ita locutum esse.
De Missa. l. 2. c. 10.
as at other times went beyond his bounds in saying so. If S. Augustine expound
a place of Scripture not to his mind, he tells him roundly, Respondeo,
Augustinum non expendisse l^cum ^unc diligenter. De Euch. l. 1. c. 11.
He did not thoroughly consider what he said. Do not these things argue that due
respect they had for the Fathers; so long as they think they can make them
serve their turns, then Who but the Fathers? If they appear refractory, and
will not serve as hewers of wood, and drawers of water to them, then Who are
the Fathers? it is the Churches judgment they rely on, and not the Fathers.
And therefore they never want ways themselves of eluding all the Testimonies
produced out of them: If they cannot say, those Testimonies are forged (as some
of them say it, without any show of reason, concerning that part of the Epistle
of Epiphanius, about the tearing the vail, in which an Image was painted at
Anablatha.) And as Bellarmine answers concerning the Author of the imperfect
work on Matthew, because he says, There is no way to the finding Truth, but
reading the Scriptures; he therefore says, This whole place was inserted by
the Arrians; De verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 11.
as though that had been any part of the Controversy between the Arrians and
others. If Origin, or Cyril, on Leviticus, says, It is necessary to follow the
Scriptures, then an Answer is ready* Ibid.
That these Homilies are of no great Authority: but if these will serve to
defend the Apocrypha; if they speak of the Obscurity of Scripture; Dict. D. l.
1. c. 9. l. 3. c. 1. l. 4. c. 9. De Poenit* l. 3. c. 7. l. 4. c. 9*
if they mention the observation of Lent; if they speak of any thing tending to
Auricular Confession, or Penance, then they are good and authentic enough.
Thus the price of the Fathers rises and falls according to their Use, like
Slaves in the market. If yet the Fathers seem to deliver their judgments
peremptorily in a matter contrary to the present sense of their Church, then
either they speak it in the heat of disputation, or, if not, they were
contradicted by others as good as they; if many of them concur, yet it was but
their private judgment, not the sense of the Catholic Church which they
delivered. Still we see, the rate the Fathers stand at, is their agreement with
the present Roman-Church, if they differ from this, they were Men like others,
and might be deceived, only the Pope is infallible, or at least the present
Roman-Church. For, if Hilary, Gregory Nyssen, Chrysostom, Cyril, Augustine,
and others say, That Christ, when he said, Upon this Rock will I build my
Church, understood Peter's Confession or himself, Nihil magis alienum a sensu
Christi cogitari potuit, In Mat. 16.18.
says Maldonate, Nothing could be more incongruous than what they say. And in
the next words tell us, That all the Ancient Writers except Hilary, expounded,
the gates of Hell one way, but he gives another sense of them. The same liberty
he takes in very many other places. In Mat. 21.9. In Man. 19.11. In Joh. 6. n.
69. In Joh. 6. n. 116.
By which we have a taste of that due respect which you owe to the Fathers,
which is, To value them, as far as they concur with your Church, and no more;
otherwise they are but the results of men's particular phancies, and not to be
compared with the infallible Judgment of your Church.

But, though it may not be so evident, that you give so great respect to the
Fathers,. 20.
yet it is notorious what reverence you show to the sacred Scriptures. As for
Scripture (say you) we ever extol it above the Definitions of the Church: What,
ever! Do you think we have forgot the brave comparisons which have been made by
your Writers, to show the respect you bear to the Scriptures? Is it not much
for the honor of the Scriptures, Hermannus ait, Scripturas valere quantum
fabulas Aesopi, si deftituantur Ecclesiae autoritate: referente Brentio. V.
Bailly tract. 1. q. 17.

Sunt Scripturae, quidam velut nasus cereus, qui se horsum, illorsum, trahi
retrahi, fingique facile permittit. Albert. Pighius. Hierarch. l. 3. c 3.

Etiamsi scriptura dicat, libros Prophetarum and Apostolorum esse divinos,
tamen non credam esse, n^si prius hoc credidero Scripturam esse divinam: nam in
Alcorano Ma^umetis, passim legimus ipsum Alcoranum de coelo a Deo missum, and
tamen ei non credimus. De verbo Dei. l. 4. c. 4.

Scriptura debet ab Ecclesia regulari, and non contra. Caranza Controv. 1.
Pigh. Controvers. l. 1 c. 2. Valent. l. 4. c. 2. de Analys. Fid. Bellarm. l. 4.
c. 12. de verbo Dei.


to be said to have no more Authority than Aesops Fables, without the Testimony
of the Church? Did not those extol it above the Church, who called it, A Nose
of Wax? And were not these some of you? Does not Bellarmine profess his high
esteem of the Scriptures, when he says, That the Scripture is no more to be
believed, in saying, It is from God, than Mahomets Alcoran, because that says
so too? Did not Caranza prefer the Scripture before the Church, when he said,
That the Scripture must be regulated by the Church, and not the Church by the
Scripture? I need not mention Eckius his Evangelium nigrum and Theologia
atramentaria, Pighius his plumbea Lesbiae regula, Valentia his Lapis
Offensionis, Bellarmin's Commonitorium utile, which, and many others, are
remaining Testimonies of that monstrous esteem, which those of your party have
of the sacred Scriptures. But, if the esteem you have of the Scriptures be so
great, Why lock you them up so carefully from the people in an unknown
language? Is it, lest such Jewels should lose their luster by too often using?
Why are you so severe against your Proselytes reading them, Is it because you
would not cast Pearls before Swine?

But still you extol the Scripture above the Definitions of the Church: How is
that possible, when you tell us, The only Authority it has, is from the
Churches Testimony? For the Authority of it supposes it to be acknowledged for
a Divine Revelation, and that, you tell us, we can have no Assurance of, but
from your Churches Definition: And we had thought, that which gave Credit and
Authority, had been greater than that which received it. There can be then
little reason to take your word in a case of this nature, when your very next
words give so palpable a reason to the contrary. For you suppose the Scripture
unable to express it self to any intent or purpose, unless your Church be the
Interpreter. For the Scripture, say you, being in many places obscure, we
cannot be certain of its true sense, without the help of a living and
infallible Judge, to determine and declare it; which can be no other than the
present Church. I answer. 1. Your meaning is not so plain, but that it wants
the interpretation of your Church too. For what do you understand by the
Scriptures being in many places obscure? Is it only, that there are some
passages which have their difficulties in them? But what is this to the
purpose, unless you could prove, that this obscurity is such as hinders it from
being a Rule of Faith and Manners? If you prove that, you do something. The
Scripture we acknowledge has its difficulties in it, but not such as hinder
the great design God intended it for; no more than the maculae which are in the
Sun, hinder it from giving light to the world; or some crabbed pieces in our
Laws hinder them from being owned as the Laws of the Land. 2. Are those places
obscure or no, which speak of the Churches Infallibility? at least such as you
produce for it afterward? This is evident, that there are no places whose
sense is more controverted than theirs: Can these then be understood without a
living and infallible Judge, or no? If they may, so as we may be certain of
their true sense, then why not all others which concern the Rule of Faith and
manners, whose sense is far less disputed than of these? If not, then we must
suppose a living and infallible Judge, before we know whether there is such a
one or no: For that is the thing enquired after in the meaning of these places,
and you say, We cannot be certain of their sense without him, so that we must
first suppose the thing to be true, and then prove it; or else you run back
again into your old Labyrinth. How know you that God has promised, there shall
be such an infallible Judge? By such places (say you) as you produce for it.
Well, but the Scripture being in many places obscure, How shall I be certain
this is the true sense of them? You say, because the present Church is the
living and infallible Judge to determine and declare it. Do not you herein
argue like a man, that can square Circles? 3. In those places whose sense, you
say, is so obscure, Where has God made it necessary for us to have the certain
sense of them? You can have no pretense for all this for an infallible Judge,
unless you could make it evident, that God has left no mysteries in his Word,
but he has left your Church a Key to unlock them; and therefore, I hope, there
is a Clavis Apocalyptica too hanging at your Churches Girdle. It is true
indeed, your Church is happily instrumental in explaining a mystery spoken of
in Scripture, but not much for your comfort, it is a mystery of Iniquity. But
in good earnest, do you think That God has promised a living and infallible
Judge to make us certain of the sense of obscure places in Scripture? Then two
things will necessarily follow from thence. 1. That it must be necessary, that
all those that believe this infallible Judge must know the certain sense of
these obscure places. 2. That this infallible Judge must give the certain sense
of these places. But then, Why has your present Church so neglected her Talent
this way, that she has not decided all the Controversies concerning the
difficiliora loca. Such a Commentary as this were worth inquiring after. But
yet, supposing your Church had done this, Could we be more certain of the sense
of your Church, then we are now of the Scriptures? I will suppose your Church
so charitable, as to put so useful a thing in writing, for the general good of
the world: But all Writings (you tell us) are obscure, and want a living Judge
to interpret them; and so consequently must that, and so in infinitum. But 4.
All this while it is worth understanding, how you prefer the Scripture before
the Church, when you make the Church the living and infallible Judge, to
interpret the Scriptures. You make the Scripture a de^d Letter, but your Church
is a living Judge, you make the sense of Scripture obscure, uncertain, and
therefore giving occasion to all the errors in the world, but your Church is
infallible, to determine all Controversies, and yet for all this, you prefer
the Scripture before the Church. It is plain, you do not, in regard of evidence
and certainty; and, one would have thought, these had been the greatest
Excellencies of a Rule of Faith. Do you prefer it as such before your Church?
If not, you deny it the peculiar property and design of it; and therefore
whatever else you attribute to it, you are guilty of the highest disparagement
of it. Just as if one should commend a Mathematicians Square for the materials
of it, or the Excellency of the Figures engraven on it; but, in the mean time,
tell him, It is oblique, crooked, uncertain, and he cannot draw a straight line
by it: Do you think he would believe you commended his Square? Just so do you
commend the Scriptures; and can you then imagine, that any rational man will
believe, that you do prefer the Scriptures before the present Church?

It is next to be considered, what respect remains due to general Councils, if
the present Church be supposed infallible.. 21.
For (say you) though you willingly submit to them all, P. 61.
yet where they happen to be obscure in matters requiring Determination, we
seek the assistance and direction of the same living infallible Rule, viz. the
Tradition, or the Sentence of the present Church. But 1. You say, You submit to
them all: but, Do you submit to them all as infallible, or no? which you must
of necessity do, or else apparently contradict your self (which yet is no
novelty for you to do) for you spend a great deal of pains to prove general
Councils infallible; and therefore I hope you own them as infallible your self.
If you own them to be infallible, what need of the sentence of the present
Church, as to those Decrees which you already acknowledge infallible. Or, do
you really own them no further to be infallible, than as they agree with the
sentence of the present Church? and then, I pray, What does the pretended
Infallibility of general Councils signify, if your Church give all the
Authority to them? And what consents with your Church is infallible, and what
does not, is far from being so. 2. You say, General Councils may happen to be
obscure in matters requiring Determination; Do you mean, in things decreed by
them or not? If not, it is no wonder if they be obscure in matters they never
meddle with; therefore, I suppose, you mean in things determined by them. Then
I further ask, Whether these Decrees of general Councils, were the Sentence of
the present Church, to those who lived in the time of those Councils? If they
were, How could the Sentence of the present Church declare and determine the
sense of what is obscure in Scripture, if, notwithstanding this Determination,
the Sentence of the Church remains as obscure, as the sense of the Scripture?
If it was not obscure then, but is so now, Whence comes that obscurity? the
Sentence of the Council is supposed to be written then, that those who were not
present at it might understand the Decree of it; and it is supposed we have the
very same Authentical Decrees of Councils, which they had who lived in the
several Ages of them. How come they then to be more obscure to us, than they
were to them? 3. What do you mean by matters requiring Determination? Is it not
enough that things be infallibly determined once, but they must be determined
over again. If the former Determination were infallible, what need any more? or
does the Infallibility cease as soon as the Church cease to be the present
Church, and then that which comes to be the present Church, must convey an
Infallibility into it; but how comes any thing which was once infallible, to
lose its Infallibility? which is a thing really so obscure, that your present
Church would do well to help us out in it. But if, notwithstanding all your
pretense of the Infallibility of general Councils, nothing is truly to be owned
as such, but what agrees with the Sentence of the present Church, then we
plainly see, what reverence you show to all general Councils, even as much as
the present Church will let you, and no more, which, supposing it never so
great, is not showed to the Councils, but to your Church. For, the reason of
that Reverence cannot be resolved into the Councils, but into that Church for
whose sake you reverence them. And thus it evidently appears, That the cunning
of this device is wholly your own, and notwithstanding these miserable shifts,
you do finally resolve all Authorities of the Fathers, Councils, and
Scriptures, into the Authority of the present Roman-Church; which was the thing
to be proved.

The first Absurdity consequent from hence,. 22.
which the Archbishop charge your party with, is, That by this means they
ascribe as great Authority (if not greater) to a part of the Catholic Church,
as to the whole, which we believe in our Creed; and which is the Society of
all Christians. And this is full of Absurdity in nature, in reason, in all
things, that any part should be of equal worth, power, credit, or authority
with the whole. Here you deny the Consequence, which, you say, depends upon his
Lordships wilfully mistaken Notion of the Catholic Church; which he says, Is
the Church we believe in our Creed, and is the Society of all Christians; which
(you call) a most desperate extension of the Church; because thereby (forsooth)
it will appear, that a part is not so great as the whole, viz. that the
Roman-Church, in her full latitude, is but a piece or parcel of the Catholic
Church believed in our Creed. Is this all the desperate Absurdity, which
follows from his Lordships Answer? I pray, show it to have any thing tending to
an Absurdity in it? And though you confidently tell us, That the Roman-Church,
taken as comprizing all Christians that are in her Communion, is the sole and
whole Catholic Church; yet I will contentedly put the whole issue of the cause
upon the proof of this one Proposition, that the Roman-Church in its largest
sense, is the sole and whole Catholic Church; or that the present Roman-Church
is a sound member of the Catholic Church. Your evidence from Ecclesiastical
History, is such as I fear not to follow you in; but, I beseech you, have a
care of treading too near the Apostles heels: That any were accounted
Catholics merely for their Communion with the Roman-Church; or that any were
condemned for Heresy or Schism purely for their dissent from it; prove it when
you please, I shall be ready (God willing) to attend your Motions. But it is
always your faculty, when a thing needs proving most, to tell us what you
could have done: This, you say, You would have proved at large, if his Lordship
had any more than supposed the contrary: But your Readers will think, that his
Supposition, being grounded on such a Maxim of Reason, as that, mentioned by
him, it had been your present business to have proved it: but I commend your
prudence in adjourning it; and, I suppose, you will do it, as the Court of
Areopagus used to do hard causes, in diem longissimum. It is apparent, the
Bishop speaks not of a part of the Church by representation of the whole, which
is an objection no body but your self would here have fancied; and therefore
your Instance of a Parliament is nothing to the purpose, unless you will
suppose, that Councils in the Church do represent in such a manner as
Parliaments in England do; and that their decision is obligatory in the same
way as Acts of Parliament are: if you believe this to be good Doctrine, I will
be content to take the Objecters place, and make the Application.

The next Absurdity laid to your charge, is, as you sum it up, That in your
Doctrine concerning the Infallibility of your Church, ^ 62.
your proceeding is most unreasonable, in regard you will not have recourse to
Texts of Scripture, exposition of Fathers, propriety of Language, Conference of
Places, Antecedents and Consequents, etc. but argue, that the Doctrine of the
present Church of Rome, is true and Catholic, because she professes it to be
such, which, says he, is to prove idem per idem. To this you answer, That as
to all those helps, you use them with much more candor than Protestants do:
And, why so? Because of their manifold wrestings of Scriptures and Fathers. Let
the handling the Controversies of this Book, be the evidence between us in this
case, and any indifferent Reader be the Judge. You tell us, You use all these
helps: but to what purpose do you use them? Do you by them prove the
Infallibility of your Church? If not, the same Absurdity lies at your door
still, of proving idem per idem. No, that you do not, you say? But how does it
appear? Thanks to these mute persons, the good Motives of Credibility, which
come in again at a dead lift, but do no more service than before. I pray, cure
the wounds they have received already, before you rally them again, or else, I
assure you, what strength they have left, they will employ it against your
selves. You suppose, no doubt, your Coleworts good, you give them us so often
over; but I neither like proving nor eating idem per idem.

. 23.
But yet we have two Auxiliaries more in the field, called Instances. The design
of your first Instance, is, to show, That if your Church be guilty of proving
idem per idem, the Apostolical Church was so too. For you tell us, That a
Sectary might, in the Apostles times, have argued against the Apostolical
Church, by the very same method his Lordship here uses against the present
Catholic Church. P. 62, 63 n. 5.
For, if you ask the Christians then, Why they believe the whole Doctrine of
the Apostles, to be the sole true Catholic Faith, their Answer is, Because it
is agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ. If you ask them, How they know it to be
so, they will produce the words, sentences, and works of Christ, who taught it.
But, if you ask a third time, By what means they are assured, that those
Testimonies do indeed make for them or their cause, or are really the
Testimonies and Doctrine of Christ, they will not then have recourse to those
Testimonies or Doctrine, but their Answer is, They know it to be so, because
the present Apostolic Church does witness it. And so by consequence prove idem
per idem. Thus the Sectary. I know not whether your faculty be better at
framing Questions or Answers to them; I am sure it is extraordinary at both. Is
it not enough to be in a Circle your selves, but you must needs bring the
Apostles into it too? at least, if you may have the management of their
Doctrine, you would do it. The short Answer to all this, is, That the ground
why the Christians did assent to the Apostles Doctrine, as true, was, because
God gave sufficient evidence, that their Testimony was infallible; in such
things where such Infallibility was requisite. For you had told us before, That
the Apostles did confirm their words with signs that followed, P. 56.
by which signs all their hearers were bound to submit themselves unto them,
and to acknowledge their words for infallible Oracles of Truth. Was not here
then sufficient ground for assent in the Primitive Christians, to the Apostles
Doctrine? Not as you weakly imagine, because the Doctrine of the Apostles was
suitable to the Doctrine of Christ; for the ground why they assented to the
Doctrine of Christ, was, because of the Testimony of the Apostles. And
therefore, to say, They believed the Doctrine of the Apostles, because it was
agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ, and then that they believed the Doctrine
of Christ, because it was suitable to the Testimony of the Apostles, is a
Circle fit for none but your self, and that silly person of your own moulding,
whom you call the Sectary. It were worth considering too, How the works of
Christ could prove the Doctrine of the Apostles suitable to his own. I had
thought Christ's works had proved his own Testimony to be true, and not the
Apostles Doctrine to be consonant to his: The works of Christ show us the
reason, why he was to be believed in what he delivered; and did not the works
of the Apostles do so too? What need then any rational person enquire further,
why the Apostles Doctrine was to be believed? Was it not on the same account
that the Doctrine of Christ was to be believed? But, say you, How should you
know their Doctrine was the same. What, do you want an infallible Testimony for
this too? or, do you believe that God can contradict himself; or that Christ
should send such to deliver his Doctrine to the world, and attest it with
miracles who should falsify and corrupt it? Now, you will say, I am come over
to you, and answer as you do, that the Apostles Testimony was to be believed,
because of the pregnant and convincing Motives of Credibility. This, I grant;
but must be excused as to what follows, That these same Motives moved the
Primitive Christians, and us, in our respective times, to believe the Church.
Prove but that, and I yield the cause. But till then, I pray, give us leave to
believe that still you prove idem per idem; and your Answers are like your
Proofs; for this we have had often already, and have sufficiently examined
before: as likewise your other Coccysm about the Formal Object of Faith, and
certain inducements to accept the Churches Infallibility; which I shall not
think worth repeating, till you think what I have said against it before, worth
answering.

Your second Instance is, ad hominem; whereby you would prove, That if he
acknowledge the Church infallible in Fundamentals, P. 63.
he must prove idem per idem, as much as you do. For (say you) if he be
demanded a reason why he believes such Points as he calls Fundamental, his
Answer is, because they are agreeable to the Doctrine of Christ. If he be
asked, How he knows them to be so, he will, no doubt, produce the words,
sentences and works of Christ, who taught the said Fundamental Points. But, if
he be asked a third time, By what means he is assured, that these Testimonies
do make for him, then he will not have recourse to the words themselves, i. e.
to the Bible, but his final Answer will be, He knows them to be so, and that
they do make for him, because the present Church does infallibly witness so
much from Tradition, and according to Tradition, which is (say you) to prove
idem per idem, as much as we. Things are not always just as you would have
them: If we allow you to make both Objections and Answers for us, no doubt you
are guilty of no Absurdity so great, but we shall be equally guilty of it. But,
it is the nature both of your Religion and Arguments not to be able to stand a
Trial: but however, they must undergo it. I say then, that granting the Church
infallible in the belief of Fundamentals, it does not follow that we must prove
idem per idem, as you do. For, when we ask you, Why you believe your Doctrine
to be the sole Catholic Faith, your final Answer is, because your Church is
infallible; which is answering by the very thing in Question, for you have no
other way to judge of the Catholic Faith, but by the Infallibility of your
Church; but when you ask us, Why we believe such an Article to be Fundamental;
as for Instance, That Christ will give Eternal Life to them that obey him, we
answer, not because the Church, which is infallible in Fundamentals, delivers
it to be so, which were answering idem per idem; but we appeal to that common
reason which is in mankind, Whether, if the Doctrine of Christ be true, this
can be other than a Fundamental Article of it; it being that, without which the
whole design of Christian Religion comes to nothing. Therefore you much
mistake, when you think we resolve our Faith of Fundamentals into the Church as
the infallible Witness of them; for, though the Church may be infallible in the
belief of all things Fundamental (for otherwise it were not a Church, if it did
not believe them) it does not thence necessarily follow, That the Church must
infallibly witness what is Fundamental, and what not. It is sufficient that the
Church does deliver from the consent of universal Tradition, that infallible
Rule of Faith (which, to be sure, contains all things Fundamental in it) though
she never meddle with the deciding what Points are Fundamental, and what not.
If you therefore ask me, Why I believe any Point supposed Fundamental, I
answer, By all the evidence which assures me, that the Doctrine containing that
Point, is of Divine Revelation; If you ask me, How I know that this Point is
part of that Doctrine, I appeal to the common sense and reason of the world, as
to things plainly Fundamental, and therefore by this means your third Question
is prevented, How I know this to be the meaning of those words; for, I suppose,
no one that can tell, that two and two make four, can question but if the
Doctrine of Christ be true, the belief of it is necessary to Salvation, which
is it we mean by Fundamental. Either therefore prove it necessary, that the
Church must infallibly witness what is Fundamental, and what not; and that we
must rely on such a Testimony in the belief of Fundamentals, or you prove
nothing at all to your purpose, no more than your convincing Motives of
Credibility, which, were they made into a grand Sallad, would know the way to
the Table, they are served so often up: But, I have found them so dry, and
insipid already, I have no encouragement to venture on them any more.

But, still you are deservedly afraid we should not think worthily enough of
your Churches Infallibility.. 24.
You therefore tell us very wisely, that this Infallibility is not a thing, P.
63. l. 50.
that is not infallible; For, say you, Which Infallibility must come from the
Holy Ghost, and be more than humane or moral, and therefore must be truly
supernatural, etc. It is well you tell us of such a rare distinction of
Infallibility; for else, I assure you, we had never thought of it, viz. of an
Infallibility that may be deceived, and an Infallibility that cannot be
deceived, or, in your words, a humane and moral Infallibility, and a
supernatural divine Infallibility. To ease you therefore of your fears, I
solemnly promise you, that when I believe your Church infallible, I will not
believe it to have a humane, moral Infallibility, but supernatural and divine.
That is, when I believe her infallible, I believe her infallible. Your mind
being eased of this grand fear, you think all the difficulty is over, and that
you are out of any possibility of a Circle; but, I have endeavored before to
show, you are not infallible in that: For the charge you exhibit against the
Bishop, as though you had left him tumbling in the Circle you had so easily got
out of; I shall consider it in its due time and place; but, if one may guess at
being in a Circle by tumbling, you will not seem very free from it, who seem to
be at very little ease by your impatience of being held to the subject in hand.

Well, but yet our Conceptions must once more be rectified as to the nature of
this Infallibility; before our danger was least, we should have believed it to
be only a humane, moral, and not supernatural Infallibility, P. 64. n. 6.
and now we are bid have a care lest we think it to be any more, than in a
sort, and in some manner divine. But, what kind of transcendental thing is this
Infallibility? It is not humane, nor yet divine, and yet it is supernatural;
which is scarce in some sort, or in a manner sense. How comes it to be
supernatural, if it be not divine? Or, is it naturally supernatural, and
humanely divine? It must not then be called divine, but, in a manner, and after
a sort: But yet (say you) so far as concerns precise Infallibility, or certain
Connection with Truth, it is so truly supernatural and certain, that in this
respect it yields nothing to the Scripture it self. These are your own words:
And if you did not believe Transubstantiation, I should think this the greatest
nonsense in the world. But, What does that Infallibility which is more than in
a sort divine, import beyond what you assert does belong to the Church? Is that
any more than precise Infallibility, and certain Connection with Truth, and such
as is in the Scripture, and all this your Church has, and yet, when we say so,
she drops a Court^sie, and cries, No, forsooth, though she be infallible, yet
she desires to be excused, she is not infallible, but only as if one should say
in a manner, and after a sort, and so forth. Just as if one should ask a new
married woman, Whether she were certainly married to such a man, and she should
answer as to what concerns marrying, she was certainly married, but yet she was
not absolutely married, but only in a manner, and after a sort. This is so
great a mystery, you will oblige the world much to inform it a little more
fully in these following Questions, What kind of Infallibility that is, which
is supernatural, and by the assistance of the Holy Ghost, which is equal to the
Scripture it self in point of Certainty and Infallibility (your own words) and
yet is divine, but in a manner, P. 64. l. 46.
and after a sort: And what way we should come to understand that manner and
sort, and what degrees and sorts there are in Infallibility? Whether any thing,
so far as it is infallible, be not absolutely, as well as precisely infallible;
and whether that which is but in a sort divine, be not in a sort not divine;
Whether that which is in a sort not divine, be not likewise in the same sort
not infallible (since all this Infallibility, by your own Confession, is from
the Holy Ghost) and whether this be not an excellent way in a manner, and after
a sort, to reconcile Contradictions. For, if a man should ask you, Whether one
might be, and not be, at the same time; you might easily tell him, That
absolutely and precisely he cannot be, and not be; but in a manner, and after a
sort, he may be, and not be, together. You have cause therefore to make much of
this distinction, and you never need fear baffling, as long as you carry it
about with you; it is a most excellent preservative against all the batteries
of sense and reason. But lest yet, for all this, we should apprehend something
by this in a manner, and after a sort, as though they were some odd diminishing
terms: You tell us, No; Catholic Divines, by this manner of speaking, do not
intend to deny the Church to be equal even to Scripture it self in point of
Certainty and Infallibility. Ibid.
What is now become of our manner and sort, when the Church dares justle with
the Scripture for the upper hand, at least for an equal place as to
Infallibility? What then is the intent of this distinction? It is to show the
prerogatives of Scripture above the Definitions of the Church. This does well
however to follow the rest, it comes so near to a contradiction, for if the
Church be equal to Scripture in point of Certainty and Infallibility, What
prerogative can be left to the Scripture above the Church? when that which
makes it Scripture, and the Rule of Faith is only its Certainty and
Infallibility? Yes, you tell us, The Scripture does much exceed the Church in
regard of its larger extent of Truth: because there not only every reason, but
every word and tittle is matter of Faith; but in the Definitions of the Church,
neither the arguments, reasons, nor words, are absolutely speaking matters of
Faith, but only the thing declared to be such. Excellent good still, and all of
a piece! I commend you, that you would not offer to mix any thing of sense in
so good a discourse: For 1. How comes the Scripture to have a larger extent of
Truth, than the Church, if we cannot know what Truth is in the Scripture, but
from the Church? 2. How every word and tittle comes to be matter of Faith in
Scripture, and not in the Church, when you say, The Church is equal to the
Scripture in point of Certainty and Infallibility? 3. How any word and tittle
can be any where a matter of Faith? I had thought, it had been the sense and
thing understood by those words, had been matters of Faith; and then it is all
one with the Scripture and Church, for you say, as to the Church, the thing
declared is a matter of Faith? 4. What that thing is, which is declared by the
Church, which is neither arguments, reasons nor words; and if it does consist
of these, how one can be believed, and not the other: Does your Church declare
things so nakedly as to do it without arguments, reasons or words? That she can
do it without words, it is hard to believe, but very easy, that she can do it
without arguments or reasons. 5. Are men bound to believe what she so declares,
without arguments and reasons too? If they be, show whence that Obligation
comes; and when you attempt that, you endeavor to show some argument and
reason why they should believe it. 6. What do you mean, that these arguments,
reasons and words, are not absolutely speaking matters of Faith, it should seem
then, that conditionally they may be so, and then show the difference between
them, and those in Scripture. 7. How is it possible for us to assent to any
thing as a matter of Faith, if we do not first assent to the arguments, reasons
and words, by which you would persuade us to believe the thing to be declared
by the Church, and what is declared by the Church is true. 8. Whether, when you
say, That in the Scripture every word and tittle is matter of Faith, at least
implicitly, and necessarily to be believed by all that knew it to be a part of
Scripture; this will not equally hold as to the Church too, that every word and
tittle, Ibid.
is matter of Faith, at least implicitly to all that know it to be a part of
the Churches Definition? And where then lies the prerogative of Scripture above
the Church? Besides, you tell us, The Church has certain limits, and can
define nothing, but what was either revealed before, or has such connection
with it, as it may be rationally and logically deduced from it, as appertaining
to the Declaration and Defense of that which was before revealed. That herein
you consult much for the honor of the Scripture above the Church, will appear
when you have answered these Queries. 1. When the belief and sense of Scripture
depend according to you, upon the Churches Testimony, Whether has more limits,
the Church or Scripture? For, whatever is in Scripture, must as to us have its
Authority from the Church; and therefore your Church sets what bounds she
please as to things revealed in Scripture. 2. Who shall be Judge, whether your
Church define nothing but what was revealed before, when, according to you, we
can have no assurance as to any Divine Revelation, but from the Judgment of
your Church? 3. When your Church defines things to be matters of Faith, which
we think are not only not logically and rationally deduced from Scripture, but
plainly repugnant to it. How can we believe that she does not pretend to reveal
something which was not revealed before? 4. Is that rational and logical
deduction from Scripture sufficient to persuade any rational man or no? If not,
Why use you those terms? if it be, What need your Churches Definition, in a
thing that is obvious to any ones reason? 5. Must we believe your Church
absolutely, as to what is rationally and logically deduced from Scripture? If
so, then, when she declares her own Infallibility, we must believe that to be
rationally deduced, because she declares it. 6. Does your Church make use of
Logic and Reason in her deductions? then, Why may not every one else, unless
she has only the gift of Logic and Reason, which, I suppose, you will say, is
but in a manner, and after a sort.

Moreover, say you, The Church has the receiving and interpreting Scripture
for its end; and consequently is in that respect inferior to it. But, for
whose end do you mean? the Churches, or the Scriptures end? If the latter; Show
us how any end of Scripture is attained by your Churches interpretation; if you
mean the Churches end, I verily believe you; that your Church pretends to the
receiving and interpreting Scripture for her own ends, and consequently, in
that respect, P. 64*
she makes the Scripture inferior to her.

Here again we meet with another piece of your Errantry, in attempting to
vindicate your Doctrine from the enchantment of another contradiction. You say,
You hold it necessary, that we are to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of
God upon Divine Authority; and yet, you tell us* That the Churches Authority,
on which we are to believe the Scriptures is but in some sort, and after a
manner Divine. This seems to have a huge resemblance to a Contradiction; or
else you must say, That it is not necessary that we believe the Scriptures on a
simply Divine Authority, but only on such a one as is in some sort, and after a
manner Divine: For, if you make the same Authoririty to be Divine absolutely in
your pretense, and only after a sort in your Application you reach not the
thing you promised. If there be not, as you say, any necessity of defending the
Churches Authority to be simply Divine, in answering that Question, How we know
Scripture to be Scripture, then there can be no necessity of asserting, that we
are bound to believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God upon Divine
Authority? Which yet is your assertion before; but yet you would fain
distinguish between* that which is absolutely infallible and divine, the
Churches Authority (you say) must be the former, but cannot be the latter; when
yet this Infallibility is, as you again tell us, By the promised assistance of
the Holy Ghost. These are fit hedges to keep in Cuckows, but none else.. 25.


But, as you are still off and on, sometimes seeming to go forward, and then
stepping back again; sometimes answering, sometimes proving, which are great
arguments of a disturbed mind, or a being in a Labyrinth, which you take many
steps in, but can find no way out of, lest you should seem not sufficiently to
contradict your self: You go about to prove, That the Authority, teaching
Scripture to be the Word of God, must be absolutely infallible; If you prove
that, I will undertake to prove it must be simply Divine: But, let us see
however, how irrefragably you prove it. P. 65 l. 8.
And the immediate Reason, Why the Authority teaching Scripture to be the Word
of God, must be absolutely infallible, is, because it is an Article of
Christian Faith, that all those Books which the Church has defined for
Canonical Scripture, are the Word of God; and seeing every Article of Faith
must be revealed, or taught by Divine Authority, this also must be revealed,
and consequently no Authority less than Divine, is sufficient to move us to
believe it as an Article of Faith. But 1. Is it not possible for you to utter
so many words without a contradiction? Were you not just before distinguishing
that Authority which is Divine, from that which is absolutely infallible; and
but in a manner, and after a sort Divine? And yet here, that Authority which
you call absolutely infallible, in the former part of your Argument; in the
last you explain it, No Authority less than Divine; Does it not then follow,
that an Authority absolutely infallible, is an Authority no less than Divine.
But to let that pass among the rest of his Brethren. 2. Why take you this
needless pains to prove that which you say before, You and your Adversary are
agreed in. 3. Supposing you should meet with some who should question this, as
it is probable you may do before we part; I think it no difficult thing to
answer this Argument of yours, which, in short, is, Every Article of Faith must
be believed upon Divine Authority, but that the Scriptures are the Word of God,
is an Article of Faith. To which I answer, If by an Article of Faith, you mean,
that we must give an undoubted assent to, then I grant, that this is an Article
of Faith, but deny, that every such Article must be believed upon Divine
Authority; if by an Article of Faith you mean something to be believed upon
Divine Testimony, then I grant, that every such Article must be built on Divine
Authority, but shall desire you to prove, that that Faith whereby I believe
Scripture to be Scripture, must be built on a Divine Testimony. For, I cannot
see, how any, who say so, can free themselves from a Circle: and of all
persons, you have the least reason to say so; for you deny the Churches
Testimony to be properly Divine, and withal the Argument is very easily
retorted upon your self. For, say you, Whatsoever is an Article of Faith, must
be believed on Divine Authority, but that the Church is infallible, I suppose,
to you is an Article of Faith: Name therefore what Divine Authority the belief
of that is built upon? But, Do not you say, the belief of that is built on the
Motives of Credibility, and, I suppose, you distinguish them from Divine
Authority, or else they can do you no service for avoiding the Circle: Either
therefore deny that your Churches Infallibility is an Article of Faith, or else
deny it to be necessary, that every Article of Faith, must be built on Divine
Authority, and then farewell your old friends the Motives of Credibility; or
else, you see, how necessary it is for you, if you will vindicate your self
from contradiction, to answer this Argument, and when you have done so, you
will believe I did not much dread the force of it. The rest of that Paragraph,
is a bare Repetition, the fourth or fifth time of your distinction about the
Formal Object of Faith, and the infallible Assurance of it, which is a thing in
it self so incongruous, and unreasonable, that I had thoughts mean enough of
you, P. 64 n. 6.
when I met with it first; but have much meaner, now I meet with it so often,
for I see, as pitiful a shift as it is, you have no other to make use of on all
occasions.

His Lordship goes on to prove that, since it is confessed between him and his
Adversary, That we must be able to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God,
by some Authority that is absolutely Divine; this Authority cannot be that of
the Church. P. 65.
For the Church consists of men subject to error; and all the parts being all
liable to mistaking, and fallible, the whole cannot possibly be infallible in
and of it self, and privileged from being deceived in some things or other. To
this you answer, His Lordship's Argument (that the whole may err, because
every part may err) is disproved by himself; because in Fundamentals he grants
the whole Church cannot err, and yet that any particular man may err even in
those points. But, is it not plain, that his Lordship's design is to prove,
that if all the parts are fallible, the Authority of the whole cannot be simply
Divine; and therefore he says himself, that in Fundamentals, in which the
Universal Church cannot err, her Authority is not Divine, because the Church
is tied to the use of means. You must therefore prove, that when every part is
acknowledged fallible, the Authority of the whole in propounding any thing to
be believed, can be infallible in and of it self: I cannot therefore
understand, how the perfection of Infallibility in the proposition of any
Object to be believed, can be applied to the whole Church, when every
particular member of it in such a Proposition is supposed to be fallible. The
Archbishop therefore tells you, P. 65.
That there is special immediate Revelation requisite to the very least degree
of Divine Authority; to avoid which, you would fain prove, that there may be
absolute Infallibility, without Divine Authority, and immediate Assistance of
the Holy Ghost, in delivering Objects of Faith, without immediate Revelation.
You tell us therefore, Though the Church use means, yet she receives not her
Infallibility from them, but from the Assistance of the Holy Ghost, which makes
her Definitions truly infallible, though they be not new Revelations. But, How
do you prove, that any thing but an immediate Divine Revelation, can make such
a Divine Testimony which is supposed necessary for the belief of Scripture to
be Scripture? How can you make it appear, that there can be Infallibility in
the Conclusion, where there was not Infallibility in judging of the Truth of
the Premises? You say, By the Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But why should you
not believe such an Assiance in the one, as well as the other? If therefore you
assert, that the Spirit of God does not assist infallibly in the use of the
means, but only in the conclusion, then it must be an immediate Revelation; for
what else it should be, is not intelligible. For, I had thought the Revelation
had been immediate, when somewhat more was discovered than all use of means
could attain to: therefore the Churches Infallibility must be a mere
Enthusiasm. No, say you, Because it only declares what was formerly revealed.
Though that be a Question among some of your selves; yet, supposing it to be
so, it clears not the business. For, suppose that God had supernaturally
assisted the Understanding of any Prophet in declaring a Prophecy which had
been revealed before, Would not this have been as immediate a Revelation to
that Prophet, as if it had been a New Prophecy: And the case is the same here;
for, though you say, the Material Objects of Faith be revealed before, yet we
cannot know the Formal Object of Faith, without your Churches declaration, so
that on your Principles there cannot lie an Obligation to Faith on us, without
your Churches Definition; and therefore that is as necessary to us, as
immediate Revelation; and to the Church it self, when you say, The
Infallibility proceeds so immediately from God, that if the Church should fall
into error, that would be ascribed to God as much as in case of Divine
Revelation, What difference can you make between them? For, it is not, Whether
the Object be new or old, which makes an immediate Revelation; but the
immediate Impression of it on the understanding? For if the Spirit of God does
immediately discover to any one, a thing knowable by natural causes, is it any
thing the less an immediate Divine Revelation? So it must be in things already
revealed, if the same things be discovered in an immediate infallible manner to
the mind of any, the Revelation is as immediate as if they had never been
revealed before.

Your last Paragraph affords us still more evidence of your self-contradicting
faculty; for which we need no more than lay your words together. Your words
next before were, If the Church should fall into error, it would be as much
ascribed to God himself, as in case of immediate Divine Revelation; but here
you add; Neither is it necessary for us to affirm, that the Definition of the
Church, is God's immediate Revelation; as, if the Definition were false, God's
Revelation must be also such: It is enough for us to averr, that God's Promise
would be infringed, as truly it would in that Supposition. From which we may
learn very useful instructions. 1. That God's Promise may he infringed, and yet
God's Revelation not proved to be false: But whence came that Promise? Was it
not a Divine Revelation? if it was undoubtedly such, Can such a Promise be
false, and not God's Revelation? 2. That though if the Church err, God must be
fallible, yet for all this, all God's Revelations may remain infallible. 3.
That though the only ground of Infallibility be the immediate Assistance of the
Holy Ghost, which gives as great an Infallibility, as ever was in Prophets and
Apostles; yet we must not say, That such an Infallibility does suppose an
immediate Revelation. 4. That though God's Veracity would be destroyed, if the
Church should define any thing for a point of Catholic Faith, which were not
revealed from God, which are your next words; yet we are not to think, if her
Definition be false, God's Revelation must be also such, which are your words
foregoing. Those are excellent Corollaries to conclude so profound a discourse
with. And, if the Bishop (as you say) had little reason to accuse you for
maintaining a party; I am sure, I have less to admire you, for your seeking
Truth; and what ever animosity you are led by, I hope I have made it evident,
you are led by very little reason.

CHAP. VI. Of the Infallibility of Tradition.
Of the unwritten Word, and the necessary Ingredients of it. The Instances for
it particularly examined and disproved. The Fathers Rule for examining
Traditions. No unwritten Word the Foundation of Divine Faith. In what sense
Faith may be said to be Divine. Of Tradition being known by its own light, and
the Canon of the Scripture. The Testimony of the Spirit, how far pertinent to
this Controversy. Of the use of reason in the resolution of Faith. T.C's.
Dialogue answered, with another between himself and a Sceptick. A twofold
resolution of Faith into the Doctrine, and into the Books. Several Objections
answered from the Supposition made of a Child brought up without sight of
Scripture. Christ no Ignoramus nor Impostor though the Church be not
infallible. T.C's. Blasphemy in saying otherwise. The Testimonies of Irenaeus
and S. Augustine examined and retorted. Of the nature of infallible Certainty,
as to the Canon of Scripture; and whereon it is grounded. The Testimonies
produced by his Lordship vindicated.

YOu begin this Chapter with as much confidence,. 1.
as if you had spoken nothing but Oracles in the foregoing. Whether the Bishop
or you were more hardly put to it, let any indifferent Reader judge: If he did,
as you say, tread on the brink of a Circle; we have made it appear,
notwithstanding all your evasions, that you are left in the middle of it. The
reason of his falling on the unwritten Word, is not his fear of stooping to the
Church, to show it him, and finally depend on her Authority; but to show the
unreasonableness of your proceedings, who talk much of an unwritten Word, and
are not able to prove any such thing. If he will not believe any unwritten
Word, but what is shown him delivered by the Prophets and Apostles, I think he
has a great deal of reason for such incredulity, unless you could show him
some assurance of any unwritten Word, that did not come from the Apostles.
Though he desired not to read unwritten Words in their Books, which is a wise
Question you ask; yet he reasonably requested some certain evidence of what you
pretend to be so, that he might not have so big a Faith as to swallow into his
belief, that every thing which his adversary says is the unwritten Word, is so
indeed. If it be not your desire he should, we have the greater hopes of
satisfaction from you; but if you crave the indifferent Reader's Patience, till
he hear reason from you, I am afraid his patience will be tired, before you
come to it. But, whatever it is, it must be examined.

Though your discourse concerning this unwritten Word, be as the rest are, very
confused and immethodical, yet I conceive the design and substance of it lies
in these particulars, as will appear in the examination of them.

1. That there is an unwritten Word, which must be believed by us, containing
such doctrinal Traditions, as are warranted by the Church for Apostolical.

2. That the ground of believing this unwritten Word, is from the Infallibility
of the Church, which defines it to be so.

3. That our belief of the Scriptures must be grounded on such an unwritten
Word, which is warranted by the Church: under each of these I shall examine
faithfully what belongs to them in your indigested discourse.

The first of these is taken from your own words; where you tell us, That our
Ensurancer in the main Principle of Faith concerning the Scriptures being the
Word of God, P. 66 chapter 6. n. 1.
is Apostolical Tradition; and well may it be so, for such Tradition declared
by the Church, is the unwritten Word of God. And you after tell us, That every
Doctrine, which any particular person may please to call Tradition, is not
therefore to be received as God's unwritten Word, but such doctrinal Traditions
only, as are warranted to us by the Church for truly Apostolical, which are
consequently God's unwritten Word. So that these three things are necessary
ingredients of this unwritten Word. 1. That it must be originally Apostolical,
and not only so, but it must be of Divine Revelation to the Apostles too. For
otherwise it cannot be God's Word at all, and therefore not his unwritten Word.
I quarrel not at all with you for speaking of an unwritten Word, if you could
prove it; for it is evident to me, that God's Word is no more so, by being
written or printed, than if it were not so: for the writing adds no Authority
to the Word, but only is a more certain means of conveying it to us. It is
therefore God's Word, as it proceeds from him; and that which is now his
written Word, was once his unwritten Word: but however, whatever is God's Word,
must come from him, and since you derive the source of the unwritten Word from
the Apostles, whatever you call an unwritten Word, you must be sure to derive
its pedigree down from them. So that insisting on that point of time, when this
was declared and owned for an unwritten Word, you must be able to show, that it
came from the Apostles, otherwise it cannot be owned as an Apostolical
Tradition. 2. That what you call an unwritten Word, must be something
doctrinal; so you call them your self doctrinal Traditions, i. e. such as
contain in them somewhat dogmatical or necessary to be believed by us: and
thence it was, this Controversy rose from the Dispute concerning the
sufficiency of the Scriptures, as a Rule of Faith, Whether that contained all
God's Word, or all matters to be believed or no; or, Whether there were not
some Objects of Faith, which were never written, but conveyed by Tradition? 3.
That what is thus doctrinal, must be declared by the Church to be an
Apostolical Tradition; which you in terms assert.

. 2.
According then to these Rules we come to examine the Evidences by you produced
for such an unwritten Word. For which, you first produce several Instances out
of S. Austin, of such things which were in his time judged to be such, i. e.
doctrinal Traditions derived from the Apostles, and have ever since been
conserved and esteemed such in the whole Church of Christ. The first you
instance in, C. ep. fund. c. 5.
is that we now treat, That Scripture is the Word of God, for which you propose
the known place wherein he affirms he should not believe the Gospel, but for
the Authority of the Church moving him thereto. But this proves nothing to your
purpose, unless you make it appear, that the Authority of the Church could not
move him to believe the Gospel, unless that Authority be supposed to be an
unwritten Word. For, I will suppose, that S. Austin, or any other rational man
might be sufficiently induced to believe the Gospel, on the account of the
Churches Authority, not as delivering any doctrinal Tradition in the nature of
an unwritten Word, but as attesting that Universal Tradition, which had been
among all Christians concerning it. Which Universal Tradition is nothing else
but a conveying down to us the judgment of sense and reason in the present
case. For the Primitive Christians being best able to judge as to what
Authentic Writings came from the Apostles, not by any unwritten Word, but by
the use of all moral means, it cannot reasonably be supposed, that the
successive Christians should imbezzle these Authentic Records, and substitute
others in the place of them. When therefore Manichaeus pretended the
Authenticalness of some other writings, besides those then owned by the Church,
S. Austin did no more than any reasonable man would do in the like case, viz.
appeal to the Universal Tradition of the Catholic Church; upon the account of
which, he says, He was induced to believe the Gospel it self, i. e. not so
much the Doctrine, as the Books containing it. But of this more largely
elsewhere. I can hardly excuse you from a falsification of S. Austin's meaning,
in the ensuing words, which you thus render: If any clear Testimony were
brought out of Scripture against the Church, he would neither believe the
Scripture, nor the Church; whereas it appears by the words cited in your own
Margin, his meaning is only this, Ibid.
If you can find (says he) something very plain in the Gospel concerning the
Apostleship of Manichaeus, you will thereby weaken the Authority of those
Catholics, who bid me, that I should not believe you; whose Authority being
weakened, neither can I believe the Gospel, because, through them, I believed
it. Is here any like what you said, or at least would seem to have apprehended
to be his meaning? which is plainly this. If against the consent of all those
Copies which the Catholic Christians received, those Copies should be found
truer, which have in them something of the Apostleship of Manichaeus; this must
needs weaken much the Authority of the Catholic Church in its Tradition, whom
he adhered to against the Manichees; and their Authority being thus weakened,
his Faith, as to the Scriptures delivered by them, must needs be much weakened
too. To give you an Instance of a like nature; The Mahumetans pretend, that in
the Scripture there was anciently express mention of their Prophet Mahomet, but
that the Christians, out of hatred of their Religion, have erased all those
places which spoke of him: Suppose now, a Christian should say, If he should
find in the Gospel express mention of Mahomet's being a Prophet, it would much
weaken the Authority of the whole Christian Church; which being so weakened, it
must of necessity weaken the Faith of all those who have believed our present
Copies Authentic, upon the account of the Christian Churches Authority. Is not
this plainly the case S. Austin speaks of; and, Is it any more than any man's
reason will tell him? Not that the Churches Authority is to be relied on as
judicially or infallibly, but as rationally, delivering such an Universal
Tradition to us. And, might not S. Austin, on the same reason, as well believe
the Acts of the Apostles as the Gospel, when they were both equally delivered
by the same Universal Tradition? What you have gained then to your purpose from
these three citations out of S. Austin, in your first Instance, I cannot easily
imagine.

Your second Tradition is, That the Father is not begotten of any other person.
S. Austin's words are,. 3.
Tom. 2. ep. 11^*
Sicut Patrem in illis libris nusquam Ingenitum legimus, and tamen dicendum
esse defenditur. We never read in the Scriptures, that the Father is
unbegotten; and yet it is defended, that we must say so. And had they not good
reason with them to say so, who believed that he was the Father by way of
exclusion of such a kind of Generation as the Eternal Son of God is supposed to
have? But, Must this be an Instance of a doctrinal Tradition, containing some
Object of Faith distinct from Scripture? Could any one, whoever believed the
Doctrine of the Trinity as revealed in Scripture, believe or imagine any other?
that though it be not in express terms set down in Scripture, yet no one that
has any conceptions of the Father, but this is implied in them. If it be
therefore a Tradition, because it is not expressly in Scripture, Why may not
Trinity, Hypostasis, Person, Consubstantiality, be all unwritten Traditions, as
well as this? You will say, Because, though the words be not there, yet the
sense is: and I pray, take the same Answer for this of the Father's being
unbegotten,

Your third is, Of the perpetual Virginity of the Virgin Mary: This indeed, S.
Austin says, is to be believed fide integra, but he says not, divina; but, Do
you therefore make this a doctrinal Tradition, and an unwritten Word? If you
make it a doctrinal Tradition, you must show us, what Article of Faith is
contained in it; that it was not looked on as an unwritten Word, will appear by
the disputations of those Fathers, who writ most eagerly about it, who make it
their design to prove it out of Scripture. Those who did most zealously appear
against the Opinion of Helvidius, were S. Hierom, and S. Ambrose, of the Latin
Church, S. Austin only mentions it in the places by you cited: Of the Greek
Church Epiphanius, and S. Basil. And yet every one of these contends to have it
proved out of Scripture. S. Hierom enters his dispute against Helvidius upon
those terms of confuting him out of Scripture; Ipsa Scripturarum verba ponenda
sunt ut ipsis quibus adversum nos usus eft testimon^is revincatur. Advers.
Helv. prim.

Sed ut bec quae scripta sunt non ^egamus, ita (...) quae non sunt scripta
renuimus: Natum Deum esse de Virgin credimus, quia legimus; Mariam nupsisse
post partuns, non cr^dimus quia non legimus. Hierony. advers. Helv. To. 2. p.
6. col. 1. ed. P. 1533.


and toward the conclusion of that discourse, see what a friend S. Hierom is
to doctrinal Traditions. As, says he, we deny not the things which are
written, so we embrace not the things which are not written. We believe the
Incarnation, because we read it; we believe not the Marriage of Mary after her
delivery, because we read it not. St. Ambrose, V. Ambros. Tom. 3. ep. 9. Basil.
1555.
in his Epistle to Theophilus and Anysius, where he first mentions this
Opinion, argues against it wholly from the Testimony of Scripture; Epiphan.
haeres. 78. Tom. 1. l. 3. edit. Petav.
and the unreasonableness of the thing. To the same purpose Epiphanius
discourses of this subject, whose utmost Arguments are only probabilities;
Aug. de haeres. 84.
Whether the Antidicomariani were the same with Helvidians, as S. Austin
supposes: Or, Whether they were the Disciples of Apollinarius, who broached
the same Doctrine in the East, at the time Helvidius did in the West, as others
suppose is not material to our purpose; V. Vasquez in 3. p. Thom. tom. 2. disp.
1^^. c. 6.
but this latter seems to be the Opinion of Epiphanius: Who in his Epistle,
written in Confutation of that Opinion, charge the first Authors of it with
great Ignorance of the Scriptures, Epiph. haeres. 78. sect. 7. p. 1038.
and urges many places to prove the perpetual Virginity of the Virgin Mary;
and therefore did not look on it as an unwritten Word. St. Basil, in his
discourse concerning the Humane Generation of Christ, falls upon this Subject,
Homil. 25. p. 509. Tom. 1.
and goes about to prove it from the importance of (...) which (says he)
although it seems to speak some circumscription of time, yet it really denotes
(...), an indefinite time, as in that, I will be with you always to the end of
the world. (...). Ibid.
But he ushers in this discourse with this remarkable Expression; Although this
be no hinderance to the Doctrine of Piety; for till the Economy of her
delivery was accomplished, her Virginity was necessary; but what became of it
afterward is not pertinent to this mystery: however, because the ears of those
who love Christ, will hardly entertain this, that Mary ceased to be a Virgin,
we suppose these proofs sufficient for it. Judge then, whether S. Basil did
believe this to be a Doctrine of Faith, or an unwritten Word. Not. in Basil.
To. 3. p. 49. es^. Paris. 1638.
This Testimony Fronto Ducaeus, is much troubled with, and would go about to
prove this to be an Article of Faith, from the Councils of Constantinople and
the Lateran; in the first of which she is only called (...). But does that note
it to be an Article of Faith? As for his evasion of this Testimony, it is so
impertinent, that I shall not repeat it, although he voucheth Vasquez for the
Author of it. It cannot be denied, but that afterward S. Basil produces a
Tradition for it concerning Zachary's placing the Virgin Mary, after her
delivery, among the Virgins, for which he was slain of the Jews, between the
Temple and the Altar. But, we may guess at the credit of this Tradition, by
what S. Hierom says of it, Comment. in Matthew. 23. Tom. 9.
that it came ex Apocryphorum somniis and withal, gives a sufficient lash at
all Traditions, by reason of this in the next words. Hoc quia de Scripturis non
habet auctoritatem, eadem facilitate contemnitur, qua probatur. Which having no
Authority from the Scriptures, it is as easily contemned as produced. And,
think you not then, that S. Hierom was a great friend to your doctrinal
Traditions, and unwritten Word? But, say you still, The Virginity of Mary must
be an Article of Faith, because, those who denied it are called Heretics; and
S. Augustine calls Helvidius his Opinion, blasphemy. But, though Helvidius be
listed among the Heretics, yet, I suppose, you will not say that all who are
listed in those Catalogues are defined to be Heretics by the Catholic Church?
It is very apparent, that any one who seemed to broach any new fancies, and
thereby disturbed the Churches Peace, were called Heretics by them. Ubi supra.
And Vasquez confesses that Aquinas calls it an Error, and not an Heresy in
Helvidius. If it were so, he was not the first Author of it; for, Tertullian
is not only cited by Helvidius for it, and S. Hierom casts away his Testimony,
as of a man out of the Church, In 3. p. Thom. ^om. 2. q. 28. art. 3. cap. 7.
but Vasquez confesses he delivers it so often, that Pamelius could make no
antidote for those places. One would therefore think, that one so near the
Apostles as Tertullian was, might easily have learned such a Tradition, and so
great a friend to Virginity as he was (while a Montanist) should not have been
apt to believe the contrary. That which was accounted Blasphemy in Helvidius,
was the rashness of his assertion, which seemed dishonorable to the Blessed
Virgin, and not as though he did thereby overthrow any Article of Faith. For
the other part of your Tradition, that she was a Virgin in the Birth of Christ,
you will find it a greater difficulty to make it out to have been believed as a
Tradition, much less as an unwritten Word. For not only Tertullian, but
Ignatius, Irenaeus, Origin, Epiphanius, Ambrose, Theophylact oppose you in it;
and judge you then, whether this were owned as a constant Tradition or no. But
it is not worth while to insist upon it.

Your fourth Instance is, concerning the Rebaptization of Heretics. Concerning
which, two things are to be considered, The Custom it self,. 4.
and the Right and Law on which that Custom was grounded. In the places by you
cited out of S. Austin, it is plain, he speaks of the Custom and Practice of
the Church, which (says he) did not use the Iteration of Baptism, Contra
D^natist. l. 2. c. 7.
which Custom, he believed, did come from Apostolical Tradition; as many other
things which are not found in the writings of the Apostles, nor in following
Councils, yet because they are observed by the Universal Church, are believed
to be delivered, and commended by them. To the same purpose is the other
Testimony. But what is this to doctrinal Traditions, concerning matters of
Faith? That there were many Ecclesiastical Customs observed in the Church as
Apostolical Traditions, I deny not, but that is not our present Question. If
you therefore enquire into that which is only doctrinal in this case concerning
the right and lawfulness of Practice in this case, that he fixes wholly upon
the Scriptures. The Practice of the Church in admitting Heretics without
baptizing them again, might be known by Tradition, but whether the Church did
well or ill in it, must be by S. Austin's own confession determined out of
Scripture. And in that latter place by you cited, there is mentioned no such
thing as an unwritten Word, or that the Apostles had left any command that
Heretics should not be baptized again. Nihil quidem exinde praeceperunt
Apostoli, are his own words; there being then neither written nor unwritten
Word for it, S. Austin takes the likeliest course he could think of, which was,
from the Custom of the Church, to judge most probably what was most agreeable
to the Apostles minds. But still, when he comes to urge most home against the
Donatists, he makes his recourse to the Scriptures. Ex Evangelio profero certa
documenta. l. 1. c. Donatist cap. 6. Quid sit perniciosius, utrum non baptizari
an rebaptizari, judicare difficile est, veruntamen recurrens ad illam stateram
Dominicam, ubi non ex humano sensu sed ex divina auctoritate rerum momenta
pensantur, inveni^ de utraque re Domini sententiam, nempe in Scripturis. l. 2.
c. 14. Huc accedit quia been perspectis ex utroque latere disputationis
rationibus, and Scripturarum Testimoniis, potest etiam dici, Quod veritas
declaravit hoc sequimur. l. 4. c. 7. vid. l. 4. c. 24. l. 5. c. 4. l. 6. c. 1.
l. 5. c. 23. c. 26.
And offers to prove the matter in dispute from them, and would have all tried
by the balance of the Lord. And expressly says, It is against the Lords
command, that those who have had lawful Baptism already, should be rebaptized.
So that we see, S. Augustine did not himself think it a sufficient proof of
Apostolical Tradition, that it was a Custom of the Church, unless he did
likewise produce certain evidence out of Scripture for the confirmation of it.
Neither then will your fourth Instance prove what it was brought for.

Your fifth concerning Infants Baptism, you have given us occasion to consider
largely already; your sixth depends upon that; your seventh is only a rite of
the Church. To your eighth I answer, Though the Tradition of the Church be a
great confirmation of the Apostolical Practice in observation of the Lords day,
yet that very Practice, and the ground of it, are sufficiently deduced from
Scripture. Among all these Instances therefore, we are yet to seek for such a
doctrinal Tradition, as makes an unwritten Word. But, methinks an Author, who
would seem so much versed in S. Augustine, might, among all these Instances,
have found out one more, which would have looked more like a doctrinal
Tradition, than most of these, which is, the necessity of the Eucharist to
baptized Infants: The places are so many, and so express in him concerning it,
that it would be a needless task to produce them. I shall only therefore referr
you to your Espencaeus, who has made some collection of them. When you have
viewed them, Espenc. de Eucharist. ad O^at. l. 2. c. 12.
I pray bethink your self of some convenient Answer to them, which either must
be by asserting, that S. Augustine might be deceived in judging of Doctrinal
and Apostolical Traditions; and then to what purpose are your eight Instances
out of him? Or else that might be accounted an Apostolical Tradition in one
age, which may not in another; and then, since, according to your judgment,
the present Church is infallible in every age, that was infallibly an
Apostolical Tradition in one age, which infallibly is not so in another. Which
leaves us in a greater dispute than ever, what these Apostolical Traditions
are, when the Church in several ages does so much differ concerning them.

After you have, in your way, attempted to prove such unwritten Words, or
doctrinal Traditions, you fall upon a high charge against his Lordship,. 5.
and not without a severe reflection on all Protestants, in these words. It is
so natural to Protestants to build upon false grounds, that they cannot enter
into a Question, without supposing a falsehood; so his Lordship here feeds his
humor, and obtrudes many. It is well yet, P. 6^.
his Lordship meets with no worse entertainment than all Protestants do: You
think all Protestants still build upon false grounds, because not super hanc
Petram, and that they still suppose falsehoods, because they suppose your Church
fallible, whether she undertakes to explain written, or define unwritten Words.
But, whether his Lordship feeds his humor in obtruding falsehoods, or you yours
in calumniating, will appear upon examination. You say, He makes Bellarmine,
and all Catholic Doctors, maintain, that whatever they please to call
Tradition, must presently be received by all as God's unwritten Word. Upon
which you go about to vindicate Bellarmine, by repeating his distinctions
concerning Traditions, viz. That some are Divine, others Apostolical, and
others Ecclesiastical, and that some belong to Faith, others to Manners. But
all this does not serve your turn. For 1. His Lordship does not deny, that
Bellarmine uses these distinctions, but reduces all these several Traditions
under the same common title de Verbo Dei non scripto; and that his design
therein, is to impose upon unwary Readers, that all the Traditions mentioned by
him, are God's unwritten Word. Upon which, his Lordship had good reason to go
about to undeceive them, and to make it appear so evidently as he has done,
that Tradition, and God's unwritten Word, are not convertible terms; both
because there may be justly supposed to have been many unwritten Words, which
were never delivered over to the Church; and that there are many things which
go for Traditions in your Church, which have no shadow of pretense from an
unwritten Word. 2. There may be yet further cunning in all this; for, although
Bellarmine and you distinguish of Traditions, Divine, Apostolical, and
Ecclesiastical; yet when you come to put the difference between these, I
suppose you would not leave it to every particular person, to judge which of
these Traditions is of these several natures, but the Church must be judge of
them. So that a Tradition is Ecclesiastical, when your Church will have it so,
that is, when it is disused among you, as the three dippings in Baptism, the
participation of Eucharists by Infants, etc. But when any Tradition is still in
use by your Church, then your Churches Practice being in this case a sufficient
Definition as to all those things so used by your Church, they must be
accounted Apostolical, if not Divine. 3. Of what kind or nature soever these
Traditions are supposed to be, whether Divine, Apostolical, or Ecclesiastical,
prove any of them to contain any thing necessary for Faith and Salvation, and
you will then come near an unwritten Word. Your Ecclesiastical Traditions you
discard your self from being such, inform us then what Divine and Apostolical
Traditions those are which are founded on such an unwritten Word? Whether any
of your Ecclesiastical Traditions contradict God's Word, or no, is not here a
place to examine; we are now enquiring, Whether there be any such thing as an
unwritten Word at all, which contains any matter necessary for us to believe,
or practice. The only pretense you have here for it, is, That we believe by
Divine Faith, that Scripture is God's Word, and that there is no other Word
of God to assure us of this Point, but the Tradition delivered to us by the
Church, and that such Tradition so delivered, must be the unwritten Word of
God. How far we are to believe Scriptures to be the Word of God, with Divine
Faith, will be thoroughly examined in its due time; and likewise how far any
Word of God is necessary for the Foundation of this Faith: only I cannot here
but take notice, what it is which makes a Tradition be the unwritten Word of
God; and what becomes then of your former distinction concerning Traditions?
for we see, that which makes them the Word of God, is their being delivered by
the Church; so that let their Author, Nature, or Matter be what it will,
according to this Principle any Tradition being delivered by your Church,
becomes an unwritten Word. So I come to the second Proposition.

. 6.
2. That the ground of believing any unwritten word, is the Infallibility of
your Church defining it to be so. For you say, As the Church was Infallible in
defining what was written, P. 68. n. 2.
so is she also infallible in defining what was not written. And so she can
neither tradere non traditum, nor can she be unfaithful to God, in not
faithfully keeping the depositum committed to her trust: Neither can her Sons
ever justly accuse her of the contrary, but are bound to believe her Tradition,
because she being infallible, the Tradition she delivers can never be against
the Word of their Father. The substance of all which, is that which I laid down
as your Proposition, That the ground of believing any Tradition to be
Apostolical, or any unwritten word is your Churches Infallibility in defining
it to be so. Which being built on a Principle, I have already manifested to be
so fallacious and uncertain, I might, without further trouble, quit my hands of
it: but I shall, however, show how inconsistent this is with the Rules of the
Ancients, for discerning when Traditions are Apostolical, and when not. The
great Rule we meet with among the Ancients for judging Apostolical Traditions,
is that of Vincentius Lyrinensis, Commonit. c. 3.
In ipsa item Catholica Ecclesia magnopere curandum est, ut id teneamus, quod
ubique, quod semper, quod ab omnibus creditum est: hoc est enim vere proprieque
Catholicum. If this be a certain Rule to judge of Catholic and Apostolical
Traditions by, viz. That which has been held every where, always, and by all;
then the judgment of your Church cannot be the infallible definer of
Apostolical Traditions, unless you will suppose that your Church only can tell
us, what was held every where, always, and by all: And if your Church alone
can infallibly determine what Traditions are Apostolical, to what purpose
should we be put to such a VVild-goose chase, to enquire Universality,
Antiquity, and Consent in all things which pretend to be Traditions. But to any
reasonable man, as to any thing which pretends to be a matter necessary to be
believed or practiced, which is not expressly revealed in Scripture; this Rule
of Vincentius seems very just and equitable, that before we believe it
necessary, it be made appear, that it was universally believed by Christians to
be so, and that in all ages. And I assure you, I am so far convinced of the
reasonableness of this proposal, that if you will make out any of those things
controverted between us, such as Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images,
Transubstantiation, Adoration of the Eucharist, Purgatory, Indulgences, the
Pope's Supremacy, etc. by these Rules, and make it appear to me, that these
were held by all Christian Churches, at all times, or have Antiquity,
Universality, and Consent; I shall be very inclinable to embrace what your
Church would impose upon me. But when I know how impossible a task this is, I
do not at all wonder that you should quit this formerly magnified saying of
Vincentius, and resolve all into the Infallibility of the present Church. But
hereby we see, how far you are from the judgment of Antiquity, as to this very
point of the trial of doctrinal Traditions, since you can see no security any
where but in your selves, and your Churches Infallibility; I will therefore
reduce the Controversy yet shorter: prove but this Infallibility of your
Church in defining the written and unwritten Word by these Rules of
Vincentius, Universality, Antiquity and Consent, and I will yield you all the
rest. But what unreasonable men are you, if you must be Parties and Judges too;
or if we must believe an unwritten Word, because your Church is infallible;
and believe your Church infallible, because that is an unwritten Word. And
well may you call it so; for, search the whole Book of Scriptures, and all the
Records of the Primitive Church, and you find nothing at all of it. We see
plainly then, you are resolved to be tried by none but your selves, and so you
are Catholics, because you say, You are so; and, your Church infallible,
because she pretends to be so.

3. That our belief of the Scriptures must be resolved into an unwritten Word,
which is defined by your Church to be such. This is that,. 7.
for whose sake all your other discourse is brought in, and is the main thing
to the purpose: Although you pretend likewise to a power in your Church, to
declare what Christ said when he held his peace. (But, Are you sure your Church
will be infallible in that too?) For when his Lordship had said, That
wherever Christ held his peace, and that his words are not registered, no man
may dare without rashness, to say, They were these or these: You very gravely
add, That his Lordship must give you leave to tell him, P. 68.
you must bind up his whole assertion with this Proviso, but according as the
Church shall declare. Your Church then must declare when Christ held his peace,
and when he did not; when he spoke so, that others might hear him, and when he
did not; when any thing was taken notice of that he said, and when not. But
when it is apparent Christ both spoke, and did much more than ever was written,
how well does your Church acquit her Office in being Christ's Remembrancer? And
therefore I believe your Church will be guilty of the same rashness with any
private person in, S. Augustine's Opinion, In offering to determine what Christ
said* when either he held his peace, or his words are not registered. As for
those things which you mention for Traditions, P. 69.
not contrary to God's written Word, which yet are not an unwritten Word, such
as the Ceremonies of Baptism by you mentioned, they are therefore not pertinent
to our purpose, because they are only rites and ceremonies, and our discourse
is about doctrinal Traditions; neither yet if I would spend time in the
enquiry, could you derive them from Apostolical Tradition, notwithstanding what
either you, or Bellarmine say. But the substance of all you have to say,
pertinent to your purpose, is, That though every Tradition be not God's
unwritten Word, yet it being necessary for us to believe the Scripture to be
the Word of God, we must believe it either for some word written or unwritten,
or we shall have no Divine Faith at all of the Point, because all Divine Faith
must rely upon some Word of God. This being a great novelty with you, that is,
something like Argumentation, it obliges me to take a little more particular
notice of it. Any one that considers the force of this Argument, will find,
that it lies wholly upon your notion of Divine Faith: for it appearing
unreasonable to you, that our belief that the Scripture is the Word, should be
resolved into the written Word it self; therefore you find out an unwritten
Word of God for a Divine Faith to fix it self upon, which can be nothing but
some Word of God. To this therefore I answer, that when you say, It is
necessary we must believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God with Divine
Faith, this Divine Faith must be taken in one of these three senses; either
first, that Faith may be said to be Divine, which has a Divine Revelation for
its Material Object, as, that Faith may be said to be a Humane Faith, which is
conversant about natural causes, and the effects of them: And in this sense it
cannot but be a Divine Faith, which is conversant about the Scripture, because
it is a Divine Revelation: Or secondly, a Faith may be said to be Divine, in
regard of its Testimony, or Formal Object; and so that is called a Divine
Faith, which is built on a Divine Testimony, and that a Humane Faith which is
built on a Humane Testimony: Thus I assert, all that Faith which respects
particular Objects of Faith, supposing the belief of the Scriptures, is in this
sense Divine, because it is built on a properly Divine Testimony; but the
Question is, Whether that Act of Faith which has the whole Scripture as its
Material Object, be in that sense Divine or no. Thirdly, Faith may be said to
be Divine, in regard of the Divine Effects it has upon the soul of man; as it
is said in Scripture, to purify the heart, overcome the world, resist Satan,
and his Temptations, receive Christ, etc. And this is properly a Divine Faith;
and there is no Question, but every Christian ought to have this Divine Faith
in his soul, without which the other sorts of Divine Faith will never bring men
to Heaven. But it is apparent, that all who heartily profess to believe the
Scriptures to be the Word of God, have not this sort of Divine Faith, though
they have so firm an assent to the Truth and Authority of it, that they durst
lay down their lives for it. The Assent therefore, we see, may be firm, where
the effects are not saving: The Question now is, Whether this may be called a
Divine Faith in the second sense, that is, Whether it must be built on a
Testimony infallible? For clearing which, we must further consider the meaning
of this Question, How we know Scripture to be Scripture? which may import two
things, How we know that all these Books contain God's Word in them? Or
secondly, How we know the Doctrine contained in these Books to be Divine? If
you then ask me, Whether it be necessary that I believe with such a Faith as is
built on Divine Testimony, that these Books called the Scripture, contain the
principles of the Jewish and Christian Religion in them (which we call God's
Word) I deny it, and shall do so, till you show me some further necessity of
it than you have done yet; and my reason is, because I may have sufficient
ground for such an Assent, without any Divine Testimony. But, if you ask me, On
what ground I believe the Doctrine to be Divine, which is contained in those
Books; I then answer affirmatively, On a Divine Testimony; because God has
given abundant evidence, that this Doctrine was of Divine Revelation. Thus you
see, what little reason you have to triumph in your Argument from Divine Faith,
inferring the necessity of an unwritten Word of God. But, the further
explication of these things must be reserved, till I come to the positive part
of our way of resolution of Faith. I now return.

Having, after your way (that is, very unsatisfactorily) attempted the
vindicating your resolution of Faith,. 8.
from the Objections which were offered against it by his Lordship; you come
now to consider the second way propounded by him for the resolving Faith, which
is, That Scripture should be fully and sufficiently known, P. 69. n. 10.
as by divine and infallible Testimony, by the resplendency of that light which
it has in it self only, and by the witness it can so give to it self; against
which he gives such evident reasons, that you acknowledge the Relator himself
has sufficiently confuted it, and you agree with him in the Confutation. P.
69. n. 3.
Yet herein you grow very angry with him, for saying, That this Doctrine may
agree well enough with your grounds, in regard you hold, that Tradition may be
known for God's Word by its own light, and consequently the like may be said
of Scripture. This you call aspersing you, and obtruding falsehoods upon you.
Whether it be so or no, must appear upon examination. Two Testimonies are cited
from A. C. to this purpose, the first is, Tradition of the Church is of a
Company, which by its own light, shows it self to be infallibly assisted. Your
Answer is, That the word [which] must properly relate to the preceding word
Company, and not to the more remote word Tradition. But what of all this? Does
any thing the less follow, which the Bishop charged A. C. with? For it being
granted by you, That there can be no knowing an Apostolical Tradition, but for
the Infallibility of the present Church; the same light which discovers the
Infallibility of that Company, does likewise discover the Truth of Tradition.
If therefore your Church does appear infallible by its own light, which is your
own confession, May not the Scripture as well appear infallible by its own
light. For is there not as great self-evidence, at least, that the Scripture is
infallible, as that your Church is infallible? And therefore that way you take
to shift the Objection, makes it return upon you with greater force: For, I
pray tell me, how any Company can appear by its own Light to be assisted by the
Holy Ghost, and not much more the Holy Scripture to be divine? Especially
seeing you must at last be forced to derive this Infallibility from the
Scriptures. For, you pretend to no other Infallibility, than what comes by a
promise of the immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost. How then can any Company
appear by its own Light, to be thus infallibly assisted, unless it first appear
by its own Light, that there was such a Promise? and how can that, unless it
antecedently appear by its own Light, that the Scripture, in which the Promise
is written, is the Word of God? You tell us, P. 70.
A. C's. intention is only to affirm, That the Church is known by her Motives
of Credibility, which ever accompany her, and may very properly be called her
own Light. How well you are acquainted with A. C's. intention, I know not,
neither is it much matter: for, granting this to have been his intention, may
not the Scripture be known by her Motives of Credibility, as well as the
Church? and do not these accompany her, as much as the Church? and may they not
be called her Light, as properly as those of the Church? It is plain then, by
all the senses and meanings you can find out, in the very same, that you say
the Church may be known by her own Light, the Scripture may much more; and
therefore you have no reason to quarrel with his Lordship or affirming it.

The second Testimony produced, is, That a Tradition may be known to be such by
the Light it has in it self; in which (you say) you find not one word, of
Tradition being known by its own Light. But, who are so blind as those who will
not see? I pray, what difference is there between a Tradition being known to be
such by its own Light, and a Tradition being known by its own Light? Yes, say
you, known to be such, implies, that is, to be God's unwritten Word; but are
not doctrinal Traditions, and an unwritten Word, with you the same thing? Can
therefore a Tradition be known to be an unwritten Word by its own Light, and
not be known to be a Tradition by its own Light? Nay, How can it possibly be
known to be an unwritten Word, unless it first appears to be a Tradition? for
Tradition containing under it both those that are unwritten Words, and those
that are not; it must, in order of nature, be known to be a Tradition, before
it can be known to be the other: As I must first know you to be a living
Creature, before I can know you to be a reasonable Creature; and, I may much
sooner know the one than the other. You do therefore very well when you have
given us such occasion for sport to give us leave to laugh at it, as you do in
your next words.

. 9.
But before you leave this point you have some graver matter to take notice of,
which is, that you desire the reader to consider what the Relator grants, viz.
That the Church now admits of St. James and St. Judes Epistles, and the
Apocalypse, which were not received for diverse years, after the rest of the
New Testament. From which you wisely infer, That if some Books are now to be
admitted for Canonical which were not always acknowledged to be such, then
upon the same authority some Books may now be received into the Canon, which
were not so in Ruffinus his time. And therefore the Bishop does elsewhere
unjustly charge the Church of Rome, that it had erred in receiving more Books
into the Canon, then were received in Ruffinus his time. To which I Answer. 1.
By your own confession then, the Church of Rome does now receive into the Canon
more Books then she did in Ruffinus his time; from whence I enquire, whether
the present Church of Rome were Infallible in Ruffinus his time in determining
the Canon of the Scripture? If not, then the present Church is no Infallible
propounder of the Word of God, and then all your discourse comes to nothing. If
she were Infallible then, she cannot be now, for now she determins otherwise as
to a main point of Faith than she did then; unless you will say, your Church
can be Infallible in determining both parts of a contradiction to be true. 2.
Is the integrity of the Canon of Scripture an Apostolical tradition or no? I
doubt not, but you will say, It is; if so, Whether were these Books which you
admit now and were not admitted then, known to be of the Canon by this
Apostolical tradition? If not, by what right come they now to be of the Canon?
if so, then was not your Church in Ruffinus's time, much to seek for her
Infallibility, in defining what was Apostolical tradition, and what not? 3.
Your main principle on which the lawfulness of adding more books to the Canon
of the Scripture is built, is, That it is in the power of your Church
judicially and authoritatively to determine what books belong to the Canon of
the Scripture, and what not, which I utterly deny. For it is impossible that
your Church, or any in the world, can by any definition make that Book to be
Divine, which was not so before such a definition: For the Divinity of the Book
does merely arise from Divine revelation. Can your Church then make that to be
a Divine revelation, which was not so? All that any Church in the world can do
in this case, is, not to constitute any new Canon, which were to make Books
Divine which were not so, but to use its utmost diligence and care in searching
into the authenticalness of those Copy's which have any pretense to be of the
Canon, and whether they did originally proceed from such persons, as we have
reason to believe had an immediate assistance of the Holy Ghost; and, according
to the evidence they find, the Church may declare and give in her verdict. For
the Church in this case is but a Jury of grand Inquest to search into matters
of Fact, and not a Judge upon the Bench to determine in point of Law. And that
is the true reason, why the Books of the New Testament were gradually received
into the Canon, and some a great while after others, as St. James, St. Jude,
the Epistle to the Hebrews, and the Apocalypse; because at first, the Copyes
being not so publicly dispersed, there was not that occasion ministered to the
Church for examination of them; upon which, when by degrees they came to be
more public, it caused scruples in many concerning them, because they appeared
no sooner: especially if any passages in them seemed to gratify any of the
Sects then appearing; as the Epistle to the Hebrews, the Novatians; and the
Apocalypse, the Millenary's: But when upon a through search and examination of
all circumstances, it did appear that these Copyes were authentical, and did
originally proceed from Divine Persons, then they came to be admitted and owned
for such by the Universal Church, which we call being admitted into the Canon
of the Scripture. Which I take to be the only true and just account of that
which is called the constituting the Canon of Scripture, not as though either
the Apostles met to do it, or St. John intended any such thing by those words
in the end of the Apocalypse (for that Book being as much liable to question as
any, how could that seal the Canon for all the rest) much less, that it was in
the power of any Church or Council, and least of all of the Pope, to determine
what was Canonical, and what not: but only that the Church upon examination and
enquiry, did by her Universal reception of these Books, declare it self
satisfied with the evidence which was produced, that those were true and
authentic Copyes which were abroad under such names or titles, and that there
was great reason to believe by a continued tradition from the age and time
these Books were written in, that they were written by such persons, who were
not only free from any design of imposture, but gave the greatest Rational
evidence, that they had a more special and immediate assistance of Gods Spirit.
You see then, to how little advantage to your Cause you made this digression.

As to the third way propounded for resolving the Question,. 10.
How we know the Scriptures to be the Word of God, viz. by the testimony of the
Holy Ghost; three things you object against the Bishops discourse about it;
First, Page 70, 71.
that his discourse is roving and uncertain. 2. That notwithstanding his brags
he must have recourse to a private spirit himself. 3. That though the Bishop
would seem to deny it, diverse eminent Protestants do resolve their Faith into
the private spirit. This being the substance of what you say, I shall return a
particular Answer to each of them. For the first you tell us, He delivers
himself in such a roving way of discourse, as signifies nothing in effect as to
what he would drive at. No? that is strange, when that which his Lordship
drives at, is, to show how far this opinion is to be allowed and how far not,
which he is so far from roving in, that he clearly and distinctly propounds the
state of the question and the resolution of it: which in short is this, P. 71,
72.
If by the testimony of the spirit be meant any special revelation of a new
object of Faith, then he denies the truth of it at least in an ordinary way,
both because God never sends us to look for such a testimony, and because it
would expose men to the danger of Enthusiasms: but if by the testimony of the
Spirit be meant the habit or the act of Divine infused Faith, by virtue of
which they believe the object which appears credible, then he grants the truth
but denies the pertinency of it, because it is quite out of the state of the
question, which inquires only after a sufficient means to make this object
credible, against all impeachment of folly and temerity in believing, whether
men do actually believe or not. And withal adds, P. 74. n. 12.
that the question is of such outward and evident means, as other men may take
notice of, as well as our selves. Judge you now, whether this may be called
roving; if it be so, I can freely excuse you from it in all the discourses I
have met with in your Book, who abhor nothing more then a true stating, and
methodical handling any question.

But yet (say you) the Bishop cannot free himself from that imputation of
recurring to the private Spirit, against any that should press the business
home. Sure you refer us here to some one else who is able to press a business
home, for you never attempt it your self; and instead of that, only produce a
large testimony out of A. C. That he did not acquit the Bishop wholly of this.
Whether he did or no is to little purpose, and yet those very words which his
Lordship cites, are in your testimony produced out of him. Only what you add
more from him, that he must be driven to it; that his Lordship denies, and
neither A. C. or you have been able to prove it.

But though the Bishop seems not only to deny any such private revelation
himself, but will not confess that any Protestants hold it; yet (you say) there
can be no doubt in this, since Calvin and Whitaker do both so expressly own it.
But according to those principles laid down before, both these testimonies are
easily answered. For, 1. Neither of them does imply any private revelation of
any new object, but only a particular application of the evidence appearing in
Scripture to the conscience of every Believer. 2. That these testimonies do not
speak of the external evidence which others are capable of, but of the internal
satisfaction of every ones conscience. Therefore Calvin says, Institut. l. 1.
c. 7. sect. 4.
Si conscientiis optime consultum volumus, etc. if we will satisfy our own
consciences; not, If we will undertake to give a sufficient reason to others of
our Faith. Controv. de Script. q. 3. c. 1.
So Whitaker, Esse enim dicimus certius and illustrius testimonium quo nobis
persuadeatur hos libros esse sacros, etc. There is a more certain and noble
testimony by which we may be persuaded that these Books are sacred, viz. that
of the Holy Ghost. 3. Neither of these testimonies affirm any more, than the
more judicious Writers among your selves do. Your Canus asserts the necessity
of an internal efficient cause, by special assistance of the Spirit moving us
to believe, besides and beyond all humane authorities and motives, Id
statuendum est, authoritatem humanam and incitamenta omnia illa praedicta, sive
alia quaecunque adhibita ab eo qui proponit fidem, non esse sufficientes causas
ad credendum ut credere tenemur; sed praeterea opus est interiori causa
efficiente, i. e. Dei speciali auxili^ moventis ad credendum. Locor. theol. l.
^. c. 8. Resp. ad 4. arg. l 2. c. 8. sect. Jam si hac.
which of themselves are not sufficient to beget Faith, and this (a little
after) he calls, Divinum quoddam lume^ incitans ad credendum, A divine light
moving us to believe; and again, Interius lumen infusum a Spirit^ Sancto, An
inward light infused by the Spirit of God. There is nothing in the sayings of
the most rigid Protestants is more hard to explain or vindicate from a private
revelation then this is: if, as you say, one would press it home. Nay has not
your own Stapleton, Calvin's very phrase of the necessity of the secret
testimony of the Spirit that one believe the testimony and judgment of the
Church concerning Scripture. Arcanum hoc divini Spiritus testimonium prorsus
necessarium est, ut quis Ecclesiae testimonio ac judicio, circa Scripturarum
approbationem credat. Triplicat. advers Whitak. cap. 3.
And is there not then as much danger of Enthusiasm in believing the Testimony
of your Church, as in believing the Scriptures? Nay, does not your Gregory de
Valentia rather go higher then the testimonies by you produced out of Calvin
and Whitaker on this very subject, in the beginning of his discourse of the
resolution of Faith. It is God himself, says he, in the first place, which
must convince and persuade the minds of men of the truth of the Christian
Doctrine, Et vero Deus ipse imprimis est qui Christianam doctrinam, atque adeo
Scripturam sacram veram esse, voce revelationis suae, and intern^ quodam
instinctu and impulsu humanis mentibus contestatur atque persuadet; ut in ea
ipsa scriptura multis in lo^is est expressum, and praeclare a Prospero
Aquitanico explicatur. De An^lysi fide^ l. 1. c. 1.
and consequently of the Sacred Scriptures, by some inward instinct and
impulse; as it appears from Scripture it self, and is fully explained by
Prosper. If you will then undertake to clear this inward instinct and impulse
upon the minds of men, whereby they are persuaded of the truth of Christianity
and Scripture, from Enthusiasm and a private spirit you may as easily do it for
the utmost which is said by Calvin, or Whitaker, or any other Protestant
Divine. This therefore is only an argument of your desire to cavil, and as such
I will pass it over. For what concerns the influence which the Spirit has in
the resolution of Faith, it will be enquired into afterward.

The last way mentioned in order to the resolution of Faith, is,. 11.
that of Reason, P. 74. n. 13.
which (his Lordship says) cannot be denied to have some place to come in, and
prove what it can. According to which (he tells us) no man can be hindered from
weighing the tradition of the Church, the inward motives in Scripture it self,
all testimonies within, which seem to bear witness to it; and in all this
(says he) there is no harm: the danger is, N. 14.
when a man will use no other scale but reason, or prefer reason before any
other scale. Reason then, can give no supernatural ground into which a man may
resolve his Faith, that the Scripture is the word of God infallibly; yet Reason
can go so high, as it can prove that Christian Religion, which rests upon the
authority of this Book, stands upon surer grounds of nature, reason, common
equity, and justice, then any thing in the world, which any Infidel, or mere
naturalist, has done, does, or can adhere unto, against it, in that which he
makes, accounts, or assumes as Religion to himself. This is the substance of
his Lordships discourse about the use of Reason; in which we observe,

1. That he does not make reason a means sufficient to ground an infallible
belief, that Scripture is the Word of God. And therefore you are guilty of
notorious oscitancy, or willful calumny, in telling us, That natural reason is
introduced by the Bishop for that end. By which we may guess at the truth of
what you say at the end of your interlocutory discourse between the Bishop and
the Heathen, that you have not wronged him, P. 72. l. 9, 1^.
P. 75. l. 5.
by either falsely imposing on him, or dissembling the force of his arguments,
wherein you are so guilty, that the only extenuation of your crime had been,
never to have professed the contrary. For you give us a hopeful specimen of
your fair dealings at your entrance on this subject.

2. Though reason cannot give a supernatural ground whereby to resolve Faith as
to the Scriptures being Gods Word Infallibly; yet reason may abundantly prove
to any one who questions it, the truth and reasonableness of Christian
Religion. By which if you please, you may take notice of a double resolution of
Faith: the one is, into the truth and reasonableness of the Doctrine of
Christianity considered in it self; and the other is, into the Infallible means
of the conveyance of that Doctrine to us, which is the Scripture. When
therefore his Lordship offers to deal with a Heathen, he does not as you,
either sillily or wilfully, would make him say, That he would prove Infallibly
to him, that the Bible is Gods Word, but that Christian Religion has so much
the advantage above all others, as to make it appear, that it stands upon surer
grounds of nature, reason, common equity and justice, then any thing in the
world, which any one who questions it does adhere unto. Which I think is a
thing that no one, who understands Christian Religion, would be afraid to
undertake against any Infidel of what sort or nature soever. These things being
premised, your grand piece of Sophistry in the dispute between the Heathen and
the Bishop, whom you so solemnly introduce at a Conference about Religion, does
evidently discover it self. Wherein, you bring in your learned Heathen, P. 72.
n. ^.
as one desiring satisfaction in matter of Religion; but being not verst in
Christian Principles, desires to be satisfied by the evidence of natural
reason; which when the Bishop has condescended to; your very next thing is,
that your Heathen understands by his Lordships Book, that the sole foundation
of our Faith is a Book called the Bible; which says he, you tell me must be
believed Infallibly with every part and parcel in it, to be the undoubted Word
of the true God, before I can believe any other point of Religion as it ought
to be believed. As to which, your Heathen sees no ground to assent that it is
Gods Word. But by this way of management of your dispute, we may easily discern
which way the issue of it is like to go. Does his Lordship any where undertake
to prove this in the first place Infallibly to a Heathen, That the Bible must
be Infallibly believed to be Gods Word? No, he offers to prove, first, the
excellency and the reasonableness of the Christian Religion considered in its
self. From whence you might easily conceive how the dispute ought to be
managed; showing first, that the precepts of Christianity are highly just and
reasonable, the Promises of it such as may induce any reasonable man to the
practice of those Precepts; and that the whole Doctrine is such, as may appear
to any considerative person to have been very wisely contrived: That there is
nothing vain or impertinent in it, but that it is designed for great and
excellent purposes, the bringing men off from the love of sin, to the love of
God; that it is impossible to imagine any Doctrine to be contrived with more
advantage for promoting these ends, because it represents to us the highest
expressions of the Kindness and Goodness of God to man, and that the Promises
made by God were confirmed to the world by the death of his only Son; That
since men's natures are now so degenerate, God has made a tender of Grace, and
divine assistance, whereby to enable men to perform the excellent duties of
this Religion. That those things which seem most hard to believe in this
Doctrine, are not such things as might have been spared out of it (as though
God did intend only to puzzle men's reason with them) but they are such
mysteries, as it is impossible the wit of man can conceive they should have
been discovered upon better reasons, or for more excellent ends; as, that a
Virgin should conceive by the immediate power of God, to bring him into the
world, who should be the Savior of it; That there should be a resurrection of
bodies, in order to a complete felicity of them who obey this Doctrine; and so
for others of a like nature: that supposing it possible such things should be,
it is impossible to conceive they should be done upon better grounds, or for
better purposes than they are in Christian Religion. This being now a short
draught or Idea of Christianity, is the first thing which I suppose any learned
or inquisitive Heathen or Infidel should be acquainted with; if he finds fault
with this, let him in any thing show the incongruity or unreasonableness of it.
If he acknowledge this model of the Doctrine reasonable, his next scruple is,
Whether this be truly the Model of it or no; for that end I tell him, We have a
Book among us, which is, and ever has been, by Christians, taken for granted,
to comprize in it the Principles of Christian Religion; I bid him take it, and
read it seriously, and see if that which I have given him as the Idea of
Christian Doctrine, do not perfectly agree with that Book. I do not bid him
presently absolutely and infallibly believe this Book to be God's Word, which
is a very preposterous way of proceeding; but only compare the Doctrine with
the Book, as he would do a body of Civil Law, with the Institutes of it; or the
Principles of any Science, with the most approved Authors of it. If after this
search, he be satisfied, that the representation I gave him of Christian
Religion, agrees with those Books we call the Bible; he yet further adds, that
he acknowledges the Principles of our Religion to be reasonable; but desires to
be satisfied of the Truth of them; I must further enquire, Whether he does
believe any thing else to be in the world, besides what he has seen and heard
himself? I may justly suppose his Answer affirmative; I then demand upon what
grounds? A. Upon the certain report of honest men, who have seen and heard
other things than ever he did. But why do you think honest men's reports to be
credible in such cases? A. Because, I see, they have no design or interest to
deceive me in it. Will you then believe the report of such men, whom, I can
make it appear, could have no interest in deceiving you? A. I can see no reason
to the contrary. Will you then believe such men, who lost their lives to make
it appear, that their Testimony was true? A. Yes. Will you believe such things,
wherein persons of several Ages, Professions, Nations, Religions, Interests,
are all agreed that they were so? A. Yes, if it be only to believe a matter of
fact on their Testimony; I can see no ground to question it. That is all I
desire of you, and therefore you must believe that there was in the world such
a person as Jesus Christ, who dyed, and rose again; and, while he lived,
wrought great miracles to confirm his Doctrine with; and that he sent out
Apostles to preach this Doctrine in the world, who likewise did work many
miracles, and that some of these persons the better to preserve and convey this
Doctrine, did write the substance of all that Christ either did, or spoke, and
withal penned several Epistles to those Churches which were planted by them.
These are all matters of fact, and therefore on your former Principle you are
to believe them. There are then but two Scruples left, Supposing all this true,
yet this does not prove the Doctrine Divine; nor the Scriptures, which convey
it, to be infallible. To which I answer, 1. Can you question, Whether that
Doctrine be Divine, when the person who declared it to the world, was so divine
and extraordinary a person, not only in his conversation, but in those frequent
and unparalleld Miracles which he wrought in the sight and face of his enemies,
who, after his death, did rise again, and converse with his Disciples, who gave
evidence of their fidelity in the Testimony they gave of it, by laying down
their lives to attest the Truth of it? Again, Can you question the Divinity of
that Doctrine, which tended so apparently to the destruction of sin and
wickedness, and the power of the evil Spirit in the world? For, we cannot think
he would quit his possession willingly out of the bodies and souls of men; that
therefore which threw him out of both, must be, not only a Doctrine directly
contrary to his interest, but infinitely exceeding him in power: And that can
be no less than Divine. But still, you will say, Is it not, besides all this,
necessary to believe these very Books, you call the Scripture, to be divinely
inspired; and how should I know that? To that I answer, 1. That which God
chiefly requires from you, is, the belief of the Truth and Divinity of the
Doctrine; for that is the Faith which will bring you to obedience, which is the
thing God aims at. 2. If you believe the Doctrine to be True and Divine, you
cannot reasonably question the Infallibility of the Scriptures. For, in that
you read, that not only Christ did miracles, but his Apostles too; and
therefore their Testimony, whether writing or speaking was equally infallible;
all that you want evidence for, is, that such persons writ these Books, and
that being a matter of fact, was sufficiently proved and acknowledged before.
Thus you see, if we take a right method, and not jumble things confusedly
together, as you do, what a satisfactory account may be given to any
inquisitive person; first, of the Reasonableness; next, of the Truth; and
lastly, of the Divinity, both of the Doctrine, and the Books containing it,
which we call the Scripture.

. 12.
Let us now again see, How you make the Bishop and Heathen dispute. The
substance of which, is, That you make your Heathen desire no less than
infallible evidence that the Bible is God's Word by conviction of natural
reason; whereas his Lordship attempts only to make the Authority of Scriptures
appear by such Arguments, as unbelievers themselves could not but think
reasonable, if they weighed them with indifferency. For, though, says he, this
Truth, That Scripture is the Word of God, is not so demonstratively evident a
priori, P. 77. n. 15.
as to enforce assent, yet it is strengthened so abundantly with probable
Arguments, both from the Light of Nature it self, and Humane Testimony, that he
must be very wilful and self-conceited, that shall dare to suspect it. And sure
any reasonable man in the world would think it sufficient to deal with an
adversary upon such terms. But, says your Heathen, A man cannot be infallibly
certain of what is strengthened with but probable Arguments, since that which
is but probably true, may also be said to be but probably false. Which being a
thing so often objected against us by your party, must be somewhat further
explained. How far Infallibility may be admitted in our belief, may partly be
perceived by what has been said already, and what shall be said more
afterward. That there is, and ought to be the highest degree of actual
Certainty; I assert as much as you: But, say you, The very Arguments being but
probable, destroy it: To which I answer, by explaining the meaning of probable
Arguments, in this case; whereby are not understood such kind of Probabilities,
which cannot raise a firm Assent, in which sense we say, That which is probable
to be, is probable not to be; but by Probabilities are only meant such kind of
rational Evidence, which may yield a sufficient foundation for a firm Assent,
but yet notwithstanding, which an obstinate person may deny Assent. As for
Instance, if you were to dispute with an Atheist concerning the Existence of a
Deity, which he denies, and should proceed with you just as your Heathen does
with the Bishop. Sir, All that Religion you talk of, is built only upon the
belief of a God, but I cannot be infallibly convinced by natural reason, that
there is such a one. You presently tell him, that there is so much evidence for
a Deity, from the works of nature, the consent of all people, etc. that he can
have no reason to question it. But still he replies, None of these are
demonstrations, for notwithstanding I have considered these, I believe the
contrary; but demonstrations would make me infallibly certain; these then are
no more but probable Arguments, and therefore since it is but probably true, it
may be probably false. How then will you satisfy such a person? Can you do it
any otherwise, than by saying, that we have as great Evidence as the nature of
the thing will bear, and it is unreasonable to require more? Unless you will
tell him, it is to no purpose to believe a God, unless he believe it
infallibly; and there being no infallible Arguments in nature, he must believe
it on the Infallibility of your Church. And do you not think, this were an
excellent way to confute Atheists? But when we speak of probable Arguments, we
mean not such as are apt to leave the mind in suspense, whether the thing be
true or no; but only such as are not proper and rigid demonstrations, or
infallible Testimony, but the highest Evidence which the nature of the thing
will bear, and therefore may cause an undoubted Certainty of Assent. As it is
in all matters of fact; for, Will you say, that it is as probable, that there
is not such a place as Rome, as that there is, because the only Argument you
have to be convinced of it, is but in it self a probability, which is the fame
and report of people. It is a piece therefore of great weakness of judgment,
to say, That there can be no certain Assent, where there is a mere possibility
of being deceived. For there is no kind of Assent in the humane understanding,
as to the existence of any thing, but there is a possibility of deception in
it. Will you say, because it is possible all men's senses may deceive them,
therefore there can be no certainty of any object of sense? And, as well may
you say it, as destroy any certainty of Assent in Religion, where you suppose a
possibility of being deceived. But, if I be not much deceived (though I suppose
you will account it a grand Paradox) an Assent may be as firm and certain upon
moral grounds, as upon a demonstration, that is, when the matter is capable of
no more than moral grounds. For, the reason why we suspend Assent, is the
unproportionateness of the evidence to the matter to be proved: So, when the
matter is capable of more evidence than is produced, and I know it to be so, my
understanding cannot firmly assent on such evidence; but when the matter is
capable of no more than moral evidence, and I know it, I may as firmly assent
to the Truth of such a thing, as to the Truth of a clearer thing, upon clearer
evidence. Thus I may as firmly assent, that there are such places as the East
and West Indies, upon the constant report of men, as that the three angles of a
triangle, are equal to two right angles: I say not, the evidence is the same,
but that the Assent may be as firm. You cannot then destroy the certainty of
Assent, which is required to Christian Religion, by telling men, that the
Arguments they rely on, are but moral Arguments: And by this, you may see,
there may be a degree far beyond probability in the Assent, where the Arguments
in themselves considered, may be called probable; or rather, that Moral
certainty may be a most firm, rational, and undoubted certainty. Your following
discourse between the Bishop and Heathen, P. 73.
run upon the former mistake, as though his intention were to prove first the
Bible to be God's Infallible Word, before he would prove Christian Religion to
be true, which I have already showed you, is a mistake, which appears
sufficiently by his own words, of proving the Christian Religion to stand upon
surer grounds than any other Religion; not only than that one which the Heathen
believed, but any other in the world: and therefore your Objection is answered,
that for all this, a third Religion may be truer than both. Your remaining
discourse proves nothing at all, but on the former Supposition; and therefore,
supposing his intention be to prove Christianity to be True and Divine, his
Argument from the power of it over the Devil, follows plainly enough. And when
he mentions the evidence of it out of Scripture, he does not suppose the belief
of it as an infallible Word of God, but only as of any other history, and
therefore is far from such a petitio principii, as you imagine. That which the
Bishop says, may reasonably be supposed, as a Principle in Divinity (as there
are postulata in other Sciences) is not the Infallibility of the Doctrine, or
Revelation, but the Credibility of both, in order to further Conviction
concerning their Infallibility; for, unless the Credibility of it be first
assumed as a Principle, men will not use the means in order to conviction of
its Infallibility. And in this sense he does not contradict himself, nor unsay
what he had said before; and that this was his sense, appears by the last words
of that discourse, That a mere natural man may be thus far convinced, that the
Text of God is a very credible Text. Thus we see, P. 80. n. 18.
how much, notwithstanding your protestation to the contrary, You have wronged
the Bishop, both by falsely imposing on him, and dissembling the force of his
Argument: And how unjust that imputation is, That if his Doctrine had been held
in the Primitive Church, it would have laid the world under an impossibility of
being converted to Christianity; whereas I have showed how consonant his way
is, as I explained it, both to reason, and the proceedings of the Primitive
Christians in the conversion of learned Heathens.

. 13.
But since, you will needs set the Bishop to convert a learned Heathen, I will
see what an excellent faculty you have according to your Principles of
satisfying an Atheist, or a Sceptick in Religion, whom, for your sake, I will
suppose more desirous of satisfaction, than commonly such persons are. Let us
see then how he accosts you.

Scept. Sir, I understand by a great Book of yours, that you have only taken
the right course to convince such persons as my self, who are a little doubtful
concerning the received Principles of Religion in the world; for the wisest I
have conversed with, of those who own those things, do offer only to prove them
by Reason and Arguments, which, I understand, you decry, as a way to make all
men such as I am: but that you have an excellent recipe for men under my
distemper; for you promise them no less then Infallible certainty in all things
you require them to believe, which is a thing I have been so long seeking for,
and have yet so unhappily mist of, that I cannot but rejoice in meeting with
such a healing Priest, who offers nothing short of Infallibility in all matters
of Religion.

T. C. Sir, I question not, but before you and I part, I shall cure those
distorted joints of your mind, and instead of being a Sceptick, make you a
sound Catholic. For indeed it is true, what you say, That those who would
convince you by reason, do but offer to make you more a Sceptick than you are,
at least, you can have no Divine Faith at all upon such principles; but if you
will follow my counsel, I doubt not but to make you Infallibly certain in the
things we require you to believe.

Scept. I see then there is hope of a cure for me; but I pray tell me what that
is I must be Infallibly certain of, and by what means I shall attain it. I
would therefore in the first place be Infallibly certain of the being of God,
and the immortality of souls, for these I take to be the principles of all
Religion.

T. C. You take a wrong method, you should first enquire after the means of
this Infallible certainty, for when once you have got that, it will make you
Infallibly certain of what ever you desire; but as long as you use still so
much reason, as to demand Infallible certainty in principles before
conclusions, there is little hopes of your being a true Roman Catholic. But I
must tell you, this is not the way: You must first believe the Church, and then
you may believe any thing.

Scept. But would you have me attain Infallible certainty, without any reason
that is Infallible? But because you quarrel with my method, I will yield to
yours, but let me desire to know first, What those things are which I must
believe upon this Infallibility? and then, Whether nothing short of this
Infallible certainty will serve in order to Faith? for if so, I must confess my
self not only a Sceptick but an Infidel.

T. C. All objects of Faith must be believed with Infallible certainty, and
nothing short of that can be true Faith, for true Divine Faith must rely on
Divine Authority, or some Word of God: now because you cannot rely on Gods
written Word for the Divine Authority of it self, you must rely on some Divine
unwritten Word; which can be no other but what is delivered by the Infallible
Testimony of the present Roman Church.

Scept. I was in hopes, you intended my cure, but now I perceive you aim at
making me worse; for I never heard so many things uttered in a breath with so
great confidence, and so little show of reason; that if I were not a Sceptick
already, I should commence one now. You tell me indeed very magisterially, that
I cannot believe without Infallibility, because Faith must rely on a Divine
Testimony; this Divine Testimony is not in Scripture (as you call it) but in
the Infallibility of your present Roman Church; I find my doubts so increase by
this discourse of yours, that they all crowd so to get out, I know not how to
propose them in order, but as well as I can. You tell me the ground why you
require Infallible certainty, is, because Faith must rest on Divine Authority,
and that this Authority must be that of your Church, which you say is
Infallible: these things therefore I desire of you, first, to show how your
Churches Authority comes to be Divine. 2. How her Testimony comes to be
Infallible. 3. How I may be Infallibly certain of this Infallibility. 4.
Supposing the Catholic Churches Testimony to be so, how such a Sceptick as I
am, should know your Roman Church to be that Catholic Church.

T. C. Your first question is, How our Churches Authority comes to be Divine? I
see there is little hopes of doing good on you, that ask such questions as
these are; you ought quietly to submit your Faith to the Church, and heartily
believe all these things without questioning them; for I must tell you, such
kind of questions have almost ruined us, and has made scrupulous men turn
Heretics, and others Atheists: but since I hope your questions may go no
further then my answers, nor be any better understood, I must tell you; That
though we say, that it is necessary that Divine Faith must rely on Divine
Authority because that seems to promise Infallibility; yet when we come to our
Churches Testimony, we dare not for fear of the Heretics call it Divine, but
Infallible and in a manner, and after a sort Divine, hoping they would never
take notice of any Contradiction in it, but still we say, As far as concerns
precise Infallibility, it is so truly supernatural and certain, that it comes
nothing short of the Divinest Testimony; but yet this is not Divine, though it
be by the Testimony of the Holy Ghost, and yet is no immediate revelation; but
still it is so much, as if the Church should err, Gods veracity may be called
in question as soon as the Churches.

Scept. I took you for a Priest before, but now I take you for an absolute
conjurer: but I confess, I like this discourse well, for I perceive your
Religion is built on such grounds, as you never intend should be understood,
wherein I commend your discretion; for these distinctions will doubtless do
your work among silly and ignorant people, which are a great part of mankind
and much the greatest of your Church. I am therefore infinitely satisfied with
this answer to my first question; answer but the rest so, and I promise you to
be less a Sceptick then ever I was.

T. C. to your second, How her Testimony comes to be Infallible; because I
perceive you are an understanding person, I will acquaint you with our way. The
Heretics trouble us with this question above all others: for they presently
cry out, If you know the Scripture to be Infallible by the Church, and the
Church Infallible by Scripture, we run into a Circle; and this we know as well
as they, but do not think fit to let the people know it, and therefore we tell
them of things being known in themselves and to us, between the formal object
and the Infallible witness, between the principal cause and a condition
prerequisite, between proving of it to Heretics and to our selves; but I see
some of my brethren of late have been much beholding to some things with
vizards upon them called Motives of credibility, and the generality are so
frighted with them, that they will rather say they are satisfied then ask any
more questions; but if they do, these do so little in truth belong to our
Church, that then we storm, and sweat, and cry out upon them as Atheists, and
that it is impossible they should believe any Religion who question them; and
if that does it not, then we patter over the former distinctions as we do our
prayers, and hope they are both in an unknown tongue.

Scept. Well, I see you are the man like to give me satisfaction; I pray to
your third question, How I may be Infallibly certain of this Infallibility?

T.C. that is a question never asked by Catholics, and if we find any
propounding it whom we hoped to proselyte, we give them hard words and leave
them; for because we offer to prove our Infallibility by only motives of
credibility, they presently ask us, Whether our Infallibility be an Article of
Faith? if it be, then they may believe an Article of Faith without Infallible
certainty, and then what need our Churches Infallibility? and then to what end
do we quarrel with their Faith for being built on greater motives of
credibility? which being such untoward questions we see there is no good to be
done on them and so leave them: but in our Books we are sure to cry out of the
fallibility and uncertainty of the Faith of Protestants, because they
acknowledge their Churches not Infallible, and cry up our Church because she
pretends to it; if they ask, How we prove it, we seek to confound the state of
the question, and run out into the necessity of an unwritten Word, or bring
such motives as hold only for the Primitive and Apostolical Church, and make
them serve ours too. If all this will not do, we have other shifts still, but
it is not yet fit to discover them.

Scept. To your fourth Question (and then I will tell you my judgment) How
your Church comes to be called or accounted the Catholic Church?

T. C. For this, though it seems strange to the Heretics, how a part should be
called or accountd the whole, yet to all true Catholics, who must wink hard
that they may see the better, we make no great difficulty of it: for we tell
them the Pope is Christ's Vicar, and it is the head which gives the
denomination, and so Catholic is nothing else but a name to denote persons who
are in our Church; and if they question this, they thereby are out of the
Church, and so under damnation; But for the sturdy Heretics who deride our
thunderbolts, we are put to a greater trouble, and are fain to gather all the
citations of the Fathers against the poor Donatists and apply them to the
Heretics, and what ever they say belongs to the Catholic Church we
confidently arrogate it to our selves, as though our Church now were the same
with the Catholic Church then: and chiefly we have the advantage of the
Protestants by this, that whatever corruptions they charge us with, they had
the good hap to be almost generally received at the time Luther appeared, and
upon this we thunder them with the succession and visibility of our Church; as
the Samaritans were much to blame they did not serve the Israelites so, after
their return from captivity; for they had a continual succession in the same
place, and a greater visibility than the Israelites under their bondage; but
yet we had the advantage of them by a larger spread, a longer prescription, and
a fairer show.

Scept. Sir, I am hugely taken with these discourses of yours, and easily
perceive (whatever they that believe Christian Religion to be true think) that
you are men of wit and parts; and understand your Interest, I mean your
Religion. I understand now thoroughly, to what intent it is you say, that Those
who build their Faith on rational grounds, go about to destroy Religion. I
confess, you have taken the only way to reclaim me from any thing of
Skepticism. I suppose you understand my meaning, as I do yours.

In this discourse I pretend not, as you did, to deliver his Lordships words,
and so wrong him by falsely imposing them on him in another sense then he
intended them, but collect from your former managery of this Controversy, what
your real sense and meaning is, and how excellent a way this is, instead of
reclaiming Atheists to make them so. If I have mistaken your meaning, I pray
speak more clearly, and then we shall think you mean honestly; but as long as
you walk so much in the dark, you will give us leave to suspect your design is
either upon our purses or our Religion. I now return to your Church-tradition.

You begin your sixth Section with a fair Supposition and carry it on
accordingly, which is of a Child brought up in your Church,. 14.
who is commanded to believe the Scriptures, P. 7. n. 6.
and all other Articles of Faith on the Authority of your Church, whom you
suppose to dye without once looking into the Scriptures: Your question is,
Whether he had saving Faith or no; if so, then the Churches Authority is a
sufficient ground for Infallible Faith; if not, then he had none at all, and
consequently could not be saved. I answer, We pry not into Divine secrets, on
which account we dare not pronounce of the final condition of such who through
ignorance cannot be acquainted with Gods written Word; we therefore say, that
an hearty assent to the Doctrine of the Gospel is the Faith which God requires,
and if this Faith lead men to obedience to Gods will, we assert the sufficiency
of it for salvation, and not otherwise; for Faith is not therefore saving,
because built on an Infallible ground, as you fondly seem to imagine; but when
it attains its end, when it brings men to a hearty obedience to the precepts of
the Gospel. And if some among you, may believe that which is in it self true,
but upon weak and insufficient grounds, as the advantages of education (which
are much rather the foundation of the Faith of such a one as you speak of, then
any Infallibility supposed by him in the Church) yet such and so great is the
goodness of God, that if a Faith standing on such grounds do attain its end,
that is, make such a one Universally holy, we deny not, but God may accept of
it for Salvation. But still we say, such a Faith is so far from being
Infallible, that it is not built on any sufficient or satisfactory ground, for
the motive of it is that, which may be false as well as true; for he that
assents to any thing on the Authority of any Church, before he does judge
whether her Authority be to be relied on absolutely or no, may believe a
falsehood as soon as truth upon that Authority; and the more he makes this his
foundation, the more he is in danger of being deceived. As suppose a Child
brought up in Turkey and instructed in that Religion; he is told that he must
without examination believe Mahomets Alcoran to be Divine; and he must neither
doubt of this, nor of any other Article of Faith, universally received among
Mahumetans: may not such a one as invincibly believe the Authority of the
Turkish Church (if we may call it so) as your Child does the Authority of your
Church? Where then lies the difference? you see plainly, it cannot be in the
Motive to Faith, for the Authority is supposed equally Infallible in both; but
it lies in the evidence of truth in one Religion above the other, and this
requires something more then the Authority of the Church, viz. judgment and
diligent examination. And then Faith is built on a sure ground. Remember then,
that we enquire not what abatements God makes for the prejudices of education
in believing or not believing any Religion; nor how God intends to deal with
them, who through age or other invincible prejudices are incapable of judging
the evidence of truth in any Religion; but what are the certain grounds of
Faith, which sober and understanding men may and ought to build their belief of
true Religion upon. But you proceed, and suppose your young Christian to live,
and apply himself to study, and becomes a learned man, and then upon the
Churches recommendation betakes himself to the reading the Scriptures, upon
which by the light he discovers in it he finds the Faith he had before, was but
a humane persuasion and not a Divine Faith, and consequently that he had no
saving Faith of any Article of Christian belief, and so was out of the state of
Salvation; from whence (you say) will spring gripes and torture of spirit among
Christians. And why so? What, because they discern greater reason to believe
then ever they did, must they find gripes and torture of spirit? I had thought,
the more light men had found, i. e. the more reason for believing, the more
peace and contentment they had in their minds. And so I verily believe it is:
but probably your meaning is, This Doctrine will cause gripes and torture of
spirit in those who have no other foundation of Faith, but your Churches
authority, and never enquire after more: If it does so, much good may they do
them; and I verily believe, Such doubts may tend more to their satisfaction at
last, than their present security; and a Doctrine which tends to convince the
world of the folly and unreasonableness of such a kind of implicit Faith, the
unsuitableness of it to the nature of Religion in general, but more especially
the Christian (whose great commendation is, that it puts men upon so much
searching and enquiry into the truth of it) would tend more to the good of the
Christian world, than any of those soft and easy principles which you seek to
keep men in obedience by, and that I am afraid more to your Church than to
Christ. Why then such a Doctrine should cause needless gripes and tortures of
spirit, I cannot imagine: it must certainly be a great confirmation to the mind
of any good man to see still further reason for his Faith, by which it grows
more radicated and confirmed. Or would you have a man disquiet himself, because
he is not still a Child? much such a kind of thing this is, that a man's mind
must be tortured, because his Faith grows stronger; for we assert that there
are degrees in Faith; which you who make all Faith Infallible cannot do, unless
you suppose an Infallible thing may grow more Infallible. And if all true Faith
be Infallible, how can men pray for the increase of Faith, unless they pray for
the increase of their Infallibility; which is a prayer, I suppose, not many in
your Church are allowed to make, for then what becomes of your Popes
prerogative, when not only every one among you is supposed to be Infallible,
but hopes as well as prays to be more Infallible, which is more then your Pope
or your Church dares pretend to.

But whether Doctrine tends more to inward gripes and tortures of spirit, yours
or ours, let any reasonable man judge; for we assert that true Faith is capable
of degrees of augmentation, but you assert that there is no Divine Faith but
what is Infallible; when therefore men by reflection upon themselves are so far
from finding such an Infallibility in their assent, that they combat with many
doubts and fears, as we see the Apostles did even after the resurrection of
Christ; you must pronounce that the Apostles when they questioned Christ's
resurrection from the dead had no Divine Faith at all: for it is plain they
were far from an Infallible assent to it, when Christ upbraided them with their
unbelief and hardness of heart, Mark 16* 14.
because they believed not them which had seen him after he was risen. Were
they Infallible in their assent then or no? I hope you will not contradict it
so much as to say so; or had they no Divine Faith then at all? what not S.
Peter, for whom Christ prayed that his Faith should not fail, and from the
indesectibility of whose Faith you derive that of the Pope (but here you may
see what a certain Foundation you have for it, when it is so apparent here,
that S. Peter's Faith did fail, and that as to so important an Article of
Faith, as Christ's own Resurrection; for certainly, S. Peter was one of the
eleven.) Nay, Does not Christ upbraid them for their unbelief, in not believing
them that had seen him after he was risen? We see then, Christ chides them for
not resolving their Faith into a humane and moral Testimony: If you had been
there, no doubt you must have told him, He was mistaken in the nature of Faith,
which could rest on nothing but an infallible Testimony; and unless he showed
you by sufficient Motives, that those persons who saw him risen, were
infallible, for all his haste you were not bound to believe him. But, whether
Christ or you be the more infallible, judge you. We see our Blessed Savior
requires no more Assent, than the nature of the thing will bear; nay, he
upbraids those who will not believe upon Moral and Humane Testimony; but you
say just the contrary, as though you were resolved to contradict him: But that
is sufficient Argument to all Christians, of the falsity and folly of your
Doctrine, which tends to no other end, but to make all considering men
Scepticks, or Atheists. For, when you lay it down as a certain Maxim, that no
Faith can be Divine, but what is infallible; and they find no such
Infallibility in the grounds or the nature of men's Assent, What then follows,
but those worst sort of gripes and tortures, such as argue an inward Convulsion
of mind, and bring men to a greater Question, Whether there be any such thing,
as that you call true Divine Faith, in the world. You go on with your
Catechumen's discourse, who must suppose, Either that the Church taught, that
he was to believe Scripture infallible, upon her own infallible Testimony, or
not; If so, then he reflects, that this Church has plainly deceived him, and
all others, who believed upon that Supposition, and so exposed them all to the
hazard of eternal damnation; and therefore was no True Church, but a deceiver.
P. 75* 76*
From whence (say you) he gathers, that her recommendation of Scripture, is as
much as nothing, and so at last, is left to the sole Letter of Scripture, and
so must gather from thence its Authority, or there can be no means left him on
the Bishop's own Principles, to believe infallibly that Scripture is Divine,
and the True Word of God. This discourse of yours consists of three
Absurdities, which will follow upon one of your Churches questioning her
Infallibity. 1. That then your Church will be guilty of Imposture. 2. Then the
Churches Testimony signifies nothing. 3. That then the sole Letter of Scripture
must assure men of its Divine Authority. For the first, I must confess him whom
before you supposed a Child, to be now grown to years of understanding, since
he does so wisely reflect on himself, as to your Churches gross Imposture, in
her pretense of Infallibility; and, no doubt, it is one of the greatest which
has been known in the Christian world, which you cannot your self deny,
supposing that it be not true that she is infallible. For, Can there be any
higher cheat in the world, than under a pretense of Infallibility, to impose
things upon men's Faith, which are contrary to the Sense and Reason of mankind,
to keep them from that inward satisfaction, which their souls might find from a
serious consideration of the excellent nature of Christian Religion, and a
diligent practice of it, to contradict thereby the very scope of Christianity,
which courts our esteem, by offering it self to the fairest trial; when, I say,
under this pretense Christian Religion is apparently dishonored, the welfare
of men's souls hindered, and the greatest corruptions obtruded, without
possibility of amendment of them, excuse your Church from Imposture if you can;
for my part, I cannot, nor any one else who thoroughly considers it. For the
second; it will follow indeed, that the Testimony of your Church is as much as
nothing, as to any infallible Foundation of Faith; but yet it may be of great
use for conveying Universal Tradition to us, and so by that delivering the
Scripture into our hands, as the infallible Rule of Faith. To the third; it by
no means follows, that there is nothing but the sole Letter of Scripture left
to convince us of the Divine Authority of Scripture; I hope the working
Miracles, fulfilling Prophecies, the nature and reasonableness of the Doctrine
of Scriptures, are all left besides the bare letter of Scripture; and these, we
say, are sufficient to make us believe, that the Scripture contains the
infallible Word of God.

Now your profound Christian begins to reflect on the Bishops way, which is
(say you) That the Testimony of the Church is humane and fallible,. 15.
and that the belief of the Scripture rests upon the Scripture it self. But, it
will be more to our purpose, to hear the Bishop deliver his own mind, than to
hear you so lamely deliver it; P. 83.
which, in short, he sums up thus. A man is probably led by the Authority of
the present Church, as by the first informing, inducing, persuading means, to
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God: But, when he has studied,
considered, and compared this Word with its self, and with other writings, with
the help of ordinary grace, and a mind morally induced, and reasonably
persuaded by the voice of the Church, the Scripture then gives greater, and
higher Reasons of Credibility to it self, than Tradition alone could give. And
then, he that believes, resolves his last and full Assent, that Scripture is of
Divine Authority, into internal Arguments found in the Letter it self, though
found by the help of Tradition without, and Grace within. This is the substance
of his Lordship's Opinion, against which we shall now consider what your
Discourser has to object.

P. 76.
1. The first, is from the case of ignorant and illiterate persons; such, who
either through want of learning could not read the Scripture, and examine, or
else made little use of it, because they supposed they might have infallible
Faith without it; What then becomes of millions of such souls, both in former
and present times? To that I answer; Although the Ignorance and carelessness of
men in a matter of so great consequence, be so great in all ages, as is not to
be justified, because all men ought to endeavor after the highest ways of
satisfaction, in a matter so nearly concerning them (and it is none of the
least things to be blamed in your Church, that she does so much countenance
this ignorance, and neglect of the Scripture) yet for such persons, who either
morally, or invincibly, are hindered from this capacity of examining Scripture,
there may be sufficient means for their Faith to be built upon. For, although
such illiterate persons cannot themselves see, and read the Scripture, yet, as
many as do believe, do receive the Doctrine of it, by that sense by which Faith
is conveyed, that is, Hearing; and by that means they have so great certainty,
as excludes all doubting, that such Doctrines, and such matters of fact, are
contained in these Books, by which they come to the understanding of the nature
of this Doctrine, and are capable of judging concerning the Divinity of it. For
the Light spoken of in Scripture, is not a Light to the eye, but to the mind;
now the mind is capable of this Light, as well by the ear, as by the eyes. The
case then of such honest illiterate persons, as are not capable of reading
Scripture, but diligently and devoutly hear it read to them, is much of the
same nature with those who heard the Apostles preach this Doctrine before it
was writ. For, whatever was an Argument to such to believe the Apostles in what
they spoke, becomes an Argument to such who hear the same things, which are
certainly conveyed to us, by an unquestionable Tradition: So that nothing
hinders, but such illiterate persons may resolve their Faith into the same
Doctrine and Motives which others do, only those are conveyed to them by the
ear, which are conveyed to others by the eyes. But, if you suppose persons so
rude and illiterate, as not to understand any thing, but that they are to
believe as the Church believes; do you, if you can, resolve their Faith for
them; for my part, I cannot, and am so far from it, that I have no reason to
believe they can have any.

2. The second thing objected by your discourser, is, That if the Churches
judgment be fallible, then much more ones own judgment is fallible. And
therefore, if, notwithstanding all the care and pains taken by the Doctors of
the Church, their persuasion was only humane and fallible; What reason has any
particular person to say, That he is divinely and infallibly certain by his
reading the Scripture, that it is Divine Truth. But, 1. Is there no difference
between the Churches Persuasion, and the Churches Tradition? Does the Bishop
deny, but the persuasion of the Doctors of the Church, is as infallible, as
that of any particular person? But this he denies, that they can derive that
Infallibility of the grounds of their Persuasion into their Tradition, so as
those who are to receive it on their Testimony, may be competent Judges of it.
May we not then suppose their Tradition to be humane and fallible, whose
persuasion of what they deliver, is established on infallible grounds? As a
Mathematician is demonstratively convinced himself of the Truth of any
particular Problem; but, if he bids another believe it on his Testimony, the
other thereby has no demonstrative evidence of the Truth of it, but only so
great moral evidence, as the Testimony of that person carries along with it.
The case is the same here: Suppose those persons in the Church in every Age of
it, have to themselves infallible evidence of the Divinity of the Scripture,
yet when they are to deliver this to be believed by others, unless their
Testimony has infallible evidence in it, men can never have more than humane
or moral certainty of it. 2. It does not at all follow, that if the Testimony
of the Church be fallible, no particular person can be infallibly assured of
the Divinity of the Scripture, unless this assurance did wholly depend upon
that Testimony; indeed, if it did so, the Argument would hold, but otherwise it
does not at all. Now, you know, the Bishop denies that the Faith of any
particular person does rest upon the judgment of the Church; only he says,
This may be a Motive and Inducement to men, to consider further; but that which
they rely upon, is, that rational evidence which appears in the Scripture it
self.

3. He goes on, and argues against this use of Tradition, thus, If the Light of
the Scripture be insufficient to show it self, unless it be introduced by the
recommendation of the Church; How came Luther, Calvin, Zuinglius, Husse, etc.
to discover this Light in it, seeing they rejected the Authority of all visible
Churches in the world, etc?

Sure your Discourser was not very profound in this, that could not distinguish
between the Authority of Universal Tradition, and the Authority of the present
visible Church, or between the Testimony of the Church, and the Authority of
it. Show us where Luther, Calvin, etc. did ever reject the Authority of an
uncontrouled Universal Tradition, such as that here mentioned concerning the
Scriptures being the Word of God: Show us where they deny that Use of the
Testimony of those Churches, whose Authority in imposing matters of Faith they
denied, which his Lordship asserts, viz. to be a means to introduce men to the
knowledge and belief of the Scritures; and, unless you show this, you do
nothing.

4. He argues against that Light in Scripture, because it is not sufficient to
distinguish Canonical Books from such as are not so; For (says he) Had not the
Ancient Primitive Fathers in the first three hundred years, as much reason and
ability to find this Light in Scripture, as any particular person? Yet many
Books which do appear to us to be God's Word, by their Light, did not appear to
be so to them by it, till they were declared such by the Catholic Church. I
answer, 1. Where does his Lordship ever say, or pretend, that any person, by
the Light contained in the Books, can distinguish Books that are Canonical,
from such as are not? All that can be discovered, as to particular Books in
question, is, the examination of the Doctrine contained in them by the series
of that, which is in the unquestionable Books; for, we know, that God can never
speak contradictions: but still this will only serve to exclude such Books as
contain things contrary, but not to admit all which have no Doctrine contrary
to Scripture. 2. The reason why the Primitive Fathers questioned any Books that
we do not, was not because they could not discover that Light in them, which we
do; for neither can we discover so much Light in any particular Book, as merely
from thence to say, It is Canonical; but there was not sufficient evidence then
appearing to them, that those Copies did proceed from Apostolical persons; and
this was therefore only an Argument of that commendable care and caution which
was in them, lest any Book should pass for Canonical, which was not really so.
3. When the Catholic Church declared any controverted Book to be Canonical;
Did not the Church then see as much Light in it as we do? but that Light which
both the Church and we discover, is not a discriminating Internal Light, but an
External Evidence from the sufficiency, and validity of Testimony. And such we
have for the Canonical Books of the Old Testament; and therefore you have no
cause to quarrel with us, for receiving them from the Jewish Synagogue; For
who, I pray, are so competent witnesses of what is delivered, as they who
received it? and the Apostle tells us, That to the Jews were committed the
Oracles of God.

5. Hence your discoursing Christian argues, That if one take up the Scripture
on the account of Tradition, then, if one should deny S. Matthew 's Gospel to
be the written Word of God, he could not be accounted an Heretic, because it
was not sufficiently propounded to him to be God's Word. Whether such a person
may be accounted a Heretic in your sense, or no, I am sure he is in S. Paul's,
because (...), self-condemned, and that for the very contrary reason to what
you give, because this is sufficiently propounded to him. I pray, tell me, What
way you would have such a thing sufficiently propounded as a matter to be
believed, that this is not propounded in? Would you have an unquestionable
evidence, that this was writ by one of Christ's Apostles, called S. Matthew? so
you have. Would you have all the Churches of Christ agreed in this Testimony in
all Ages from the Apostles times? so you have. Would you have it delivered to
you by the Testimony of the present Church? so you have. What then is, or can
be wanting, in order to a Proposition of it to be believed? Why, forsooth, some
infallible, authoritative sentence of the present Church, which shall make this
an Object of Faith. See what a different mould some men's minds are of from
others! For my part, should I see, or hear any Church in the world, undertaking
such an office as that, I should be so far from thinking it more sufficiently
propounded by it, that I should not scruple to charge it with the greatest
presumption and arrogance that may be. For, on what account can it possibly be
a thing credible to me, that S. Matthew's Gospel contains God's written Word
any further, than it is evident that the person who wrote it, was one chosen by
Christ, to deliver the sum of his proceedings, as an Apostle, to the world?
And therefore I have no reason to think, he would deceive men in what he spoke
or writ: The only Question then is, How I should know this is no counterfeit
name, but that S. Matthew writ it? Let us consider, what possible means there
are to be assured of it. I cannot imagine any but these two; Either that God
should immediately reveal it either to my self, or to some Church to propound
it to me; or else, that I am to believe those persons who first received those
Copies from his hands, by whose means they were dispersed abroad in the world,
from whence they are conveyed by an unquestionable Tradition down to us. Of
these two, choose whether you please: if the first, then particular immediate
Revelations are necessary to particular persons, to have such an Object of
Faith sufficiently propounded to them, and then the Church cannot
authoritatively pronounce any Books of Scripture to be Canonical, without
immediate Revelation to her, that this Book was written by such a person, who
was divinely assisted in the writing of it. And this you have denied before to
belong to the Church. If you take up with the second, the unquestionable
Testimony of all Ages, since the Apostles; then judge you whether S. Matthew's
Gospel be not sufficiently propounded to be believed; and consequently, Whether
any one who should question or deny it, be not guilty of the greatest
peevishness and obstinacy imaginable. From hence we may see, with what
superfluity of discretion the next words came from you; Nay, hence it follows,
that even our blessed Savior, P. 77.
who is Wisdom it self, would have been esteemed by all the world, not a wise
Lawgiver, but a mere Ignoramus and Impostor. For shame, man, forbear such
insolent expressions for the future, and repent of these. For, Must Christ's
Wisdom be called in question, and he liable to be accounted an Ignoramus and
Impostor; if he does not make your Church infallible? I have told you often
before, how much your Doctrine of Infallibility tends to Atheism, and now you
speak out. For the meaning of your words plainly, is, If God has not entrusted
your Church with a full and absolute power to declare what is his will, and
what not, Christ was an Ignoramus and Impostor. For that is the substance of
your next words. For, had he not framed, think you, a strange and Chimerical
Commonwealth, were it alone destitute of a full and absolute power, to give an
authentical and unquestionable declaration, which is the true and genuine Law.
Now, it is evident from all your discourse foregoing, you only plead for this
full and absolute power in your Church; and judge you then what the consequence
is (to all those who cannot see any shadow of reason for this your pretended
Infallibility) neither more nor less, than that Christ is liable to be
accounted by all the world an Ignoramus and Impostor: Nay, that they are fools,
who account him not so, if they do not believe this present Infallibility of
your Church; for it is apparent (say you) that he has ordered his
Commonwealth worse than ever any one did. And now let any that consider what
pitiful silly proofs you have produced for this present Infallibility, (nay,
such, that I am confident, that you cannot think your self you have in the
least measure proved it) then judge, what thoughts of Christ you are forced to
entertain your self upon your own Argument, viz. as of an Ignoramus and
Impostor. Has not your Infallibility lead you now a fine dance? Is not this
the way to make Faith certain, and to reclaim Atheists? I had thought it had
been enough for your Canonists, to have charged Christ with indiscretion, if he
had not left a Vicar on earth; but now, it seems, the profound Philosophers,
learned Divines, and expert Historians (for such a one, you told us, your
discoursing Christian was supposed by you to be in whose name these words are
spoken) do charge Christ with folly and imposture, if he has not made your
Church infallible. For, shift it off, as you can, you cannot deny but that must
be the aim of these words: for you are proving the necessity of an infallible
Declaration by the present Church, in order to a sufficient Proposition of the
Scripture to be believed; and it is notorious you never pretend that any Church
has any share in this Infallibility, but your own; And therefore the
consequence unavoidably follows, that since there can be no sufficient
Proposition, that the Scripture is to be believed without this infallible
Testimony; since no Church pretends to this Infallibility, but yours; since,
without such provision for the Church, Christ would have been esteemed by all
the world not a wise Lawgiver, but a mere Ignoramus and Impostor; What then
follows, but that if your Church be not infallible, He must be accounted so?
And if you dread not these consequences; I hope all Christians do, and have
never the better thoughts of your Infallibility for them.

6. Let us see, how he comes closer to the matter it self; and examines how
this Light should be Infallible, and Divine, supposing the Churches Testimony
to be humane and fallible. P. 77.
The substance of which, is this, If the Church may err, we may suppose she
has erred in testifying some Books to be God's Word; in that case, Books that
were not God's Word, would be equally recommended with those that were: And
that it would be impossible for any particular person, by reading them, to
distinguish the one from the other. To which I answer 1. It is all one with you
to suppose a Church fallible, and suppose that she has erred. To put a case of
a like nature. The Testimony of all mankind is fallible; May you therefore
suppose that all mankind has erred in something they are agreed in? The
Testimony of all those persons who have seen Rome, is fallible; May I therefore
question whether they were not all deceived? But of this, afterward. 2. When
you speak of the Church erring, Do you mean the Church in every Age since
Christ's Coming, concerning all the Books of Scripture? or, the present Church,
concerning only some Books of Scripture? If you suppose, the Church of all Ages
should be deceived, you must suppose some, who were infallible, should be
deceived; those were the Apostles in writing and delivering their Books to the
Churches of their time, or else you must suppose all the Apostolical Churches
deceived in taking those Books to have come from the Apostles, which did not;
And is not this a congruous Supposition? Well then, if it be unreasonable to
suppose the Apostolical Churches deceived, and impossible to imagine the
Apostles deceived, in saying, They writ what they did not: Where then must such
an universal-errour as this, come in? Or, Is it not equally unreasonable to
suppose all the Christian Churches in the world should be deceived, without any
questioning of such a deceit, supposing but the goodness and common providence
of God in preserving such records, and the moral industry used by Christians,
in a matter of such importance? It is therefore a very absurd and unreasonable
thing to imagine, That all the Churches of Christ, in all Ages, should err in
receiving all the Books of Scripture. Let us then see, as to the present
Churches erring, as to particular Books? 1. Either the Records of former Ages
are left to judge by, or no? If they be, as certainly they are, we thereby see
a way to correct the error of the present Church, by appealing to these
records of the Church in former times? if they be not left, how could any of
these Books be derived from Apostolical Tradition, when we have no means to
trace such a Tradition by? 2. Supposing only some Books questioned, or that the
present Church erres only in some particular Books; then it appears that there
remains a far greater number of such Books, whose Authority we have no reason
at all to question, and by comparing the other with these we may easily prevent
any very dangerous error; for if they contain any Doctrine contrary to the
former, we have no reason to believe them; if they do not, there can be no very
dangerous error in admitting them. Thus you see how easily this error is
prevented supposing the Churches testimony not only fallible, but that it also
should actually err in delivering some Books for Canonical, which are not so:
but supposing a Church pretends to be Infallible and is believed to be so, and
yet does actually err in delivering the Canon of Scripture, what remedy is
there then? for while we look on the Churches testimony as fallible, there is
scope and liberty left for enquiry and further satisfaction, but if it be
looked on as Infallible, all that believe it to be so are left under an
impossibility of escaping that error which she is guilty of. And the more
dangerous such an error is, the worse the condition is of all such who believe
the Churches Testimony Infallible. Now this is that we justly charge your
Church with, that while she pretends to Infallibility, she has actually erred
in delivering such Books for Canonical which are not so, as has been
abundantly manifested by the worthies of our Church. The remainder of this
discourse of yours concerning knowing Canonical Books by the light in them, is
vacated by our present answer; and so is the other concerning Apostolical
traditions by our former, upon that subject. As to that Scruple, How the light
should be Infallible and Divine, when the Churches Testimony is humane and
fallible, it signifies nothing unless the light be only supposed to rise from
the Testimony, which his Lordship denies.

7. The judgment of the Fathers is inquired into concerning the present
subject; out of whom only Irenaeus and St. Augustine are produced,. 16.
as affirming in many places, That the Tradition of the Church is sufficient to
found Christian Faith even without Scripture, and that for some hundreds of
years after the Canon of Scripture was written. But must we stand only to the
judgment of these two concerning the sense of the Primitive Church in this
present Controversy? We may easily know the judgment of the Fathers, if two
such lame Citations as these are, are sufficient to discover it. But your
unhappiness is great in whatever you undertake: If you meddle with reason, you
soon find how little it becomes you: if you fly to the Fathers, they prove the
greatest witnesses against you; as will appear in this debate, if we first
examine the citations you produce, and then show how fully and clearly these
very persons whom you have picked out of all the Chorus do deliver themselves
against you. Iren. l. 3. c. 4.
The first citation is that known one, out of Irenaeus, Quid autem, si neque
Apostoli quidem scripturas reliquissent nobis, nonne oportebat ordinem sequi
traditionis, quam tradiderunt iis quibus committebant Ecclesias? Cui
ordinationi assentiunt multae gentes barbarorum, qui in Christum credunt, sine
charta and atramento scriptam habentes salutem, and veterem traditionem
custodientes.
concerning those barbarous nations who believed without the Scriptures,
adhering to the Tradition of the Apostles, having salvation written without
Paper and Ink. But what it is you would hence infer, I cannot imagine, unless
it be one of these two things; 1. That if we had no Scriptures left us, it
would be necessary for us to believe on the account of Apostolical Tradition;
that is* that the grounds of our Faith were so clear and evident of themselves,
that though they had never been written, yet if they had been conveyed by an
unquestionable Tradition from the Apostles, there had lain an obligation on us
to believe the Doctrine of Christ. But, is this our case? has not God
infinitely better provided for us, when (as your other witness St. Augustine
speaks) Whatever our Savior would have us read of his actions or speeches,
Quicquid Servator de suis factis and dictis nos legere voluit, hoc scribendum
illis tanquam suis manibus imperavit. De Consens. Evang, l. 1. c. ult.
he commanded his Apostles and Disciples as his hands to write. Christian
Religion is now no Cabala to us, God has consigned his will over to us, by
Codicills of his own appointing; and must we then be now in the like case, as
if his Will had never been written at all? 2. But what if the barbarous Nations
did believe without the Books of Scripture; what does that prove, but only
this; that there may be sufficient reason to believe in Christ where the
Scriptures are not known? Is that contrary to us who say, The last resolution
of Faith is into the Doctrine of Christ as attested by God: now if that
attestation be sufficiently conveyed, there is an obligation to believe; but
withal we say, that to us who enjoy the Scriptures as delivered down to us,
the only certain and infallible conveyance of Gods Word to us is by them. So
that the whole Christian world is obliged to you for your civil comparison of
them, with those Barbarians who either enjoyed not the Scriptures, or in
probability were not able to make use of them, as being probably ignorant of
the use of letters. 3. Does Irenaeus in these words say, that even these
Barbarians did believe upon the Infallible Testimony of the present Church? No;
he mentions no such thing, but that they believed that Tradition of Doctrine
which was delivered them from the Apostles. I ask you then; Suppose at that
time some honest but fallible persons should have gone into Scythia, or some
such barbarous places, and delivered the Doctrine of the Gospel, and attesting
the matters of fact as being eyewitnesses of Christ's Miracles, Death, and
Resurrection, whether would these Barbarians have been bound to believe or no?
If not, then for all I know, Infidelity is a very excusable sin; If they were,
I pray tell me what it was their Faith was resolved into; was it an infallible
testimony of fallible men? And the same case is, of such who should preach the
same Doctrine from these eyewitnesses in another Generation, and so on; for
although there might be no reason to question their testimony, yet I suppose
you will not say, It is Infallible? so that still this makes nothing for your
purpose. 4. Who better understood Irenaeus his mind, than himself? let us
therefore see what he elsewhere tells us is the foundation and pillar of our
Faith who have received the Scriptures. Non per alios dispositionem salutis
nostrae cognovimas, quam per eos, per quos evangelium pervenit ad nos; quod
quidem tunc praeconiave^unt, postea vero per Dei voluntatem in Scripturis nobis
tradiderunt, f^ndamentum and columnam fidei nostrae ^uturum. Iren. l. 3. cap. 1.
Does not he tell us, but three Chapters before this, That we have received the
method or Doctrine of our Salvation, from those persons who preached it; which
by Gods command they after delivered in the Scriptures, which were to be the
foundation and pilla^ of our Faith. Could any thing be more fully spoken to our
purpose than this is? Whereby he shows us, now the Scriptures are consigned
unto us, what that is which our Faith must stand upon: not the Infallibility of
the Church, but that Word of God which is delivered to us. This therefore he
elsewhere calls the Immovable Canon of our Faith, Irenaeus lib. 4. cap. 69.
Augustine. 2. cont. Donat. cap. 7.
as S. Augustine calls it Divinam stateram, the Divine balance we must weigh
the grounds of our Belief in.

By which we may guess, what little relief you are like to have from your
second witness St. Augustine. Two citations you produce out of him; and, I
question not, but to make it appear, that neither of those Testimonies do make
for you; and those very Books afford us sufficient against you.

The first is out of his Books of Christian Doctrine, which lest we should
think not pertinent, you care not to produce it; but we must. A man who
strengthens himself with Faith, Hope, and Charity, and retains them unshaken,
needs not the Scriptures, Homo itaque fide, spe, and charitate subnixus, eaque
inconcusse retine^s, non indiget scripturis nisi ad alios instruendos. Itaque
multi per haec tria, etiam in solitudine sine codicibus vivunt. De Doctr.
Christiana l. 1. cap 39.
but only to instruct others: for by these three, many live without Books in a
desert. His meaning is, that he who has a principle of Divine life within him,
which discovers it self in the exercise of those three Graces, needs not so
much the external precepts, because that inward principle will carry him to
actions suitable to it; only, for convincing or instructing others, these Books
are continually useful; but for themselves, those good men who first through
the fury of their persecution were driven, and after others, who, in imitation
of that piety they showed there, did withdraw into remote places, did live in
the exercise of their Religion without them. But what is there in all this to
infer, that not the Scriptures but the Infallibility of the Church is the
foundation of Faith? Does St. Augustine suppose that men may have Faith, Hope,
and Charity, without believing: or that men may believe without the Scriptures,
when in the precedent Chapter he has this remarkable expression concerning
Faith, That it will soon stumble, Titubab^t autem fides, s^ divinarum
scripturarum vacillat auctoritas. De Doctr. Christ. l. 1. c 38.
if the Authority of the sacred Scriptures be weakened: and does not this imply
that Faith stands on the Authority of the Scriptures as its proper foundation?
But this were pardonable, if the very design of all that Treatise did not so
evidently refute all your pretensions, as nothing can do it more effectually.
For can you possibly persuade any reasonable man to think, that St. Augustine
dreamt of any such thing, as the Infallible Testimony of the present Church to
be the ground of Faith, who when he purposely discourses concerning the
Christian Doctrine, the principles of it, and the best means to understand it,
never so much as mentions any such thing; but on the contrary directs to no
other but those you call Moral and Fallible means. For understanding the
principles of Christian Doctrine, he shows us the several natures of things,
some to be enjoyed, some to be used, and others both: that the main thing we
are to enjoy is God, and therefore begins with him as our last end in whom our
happiness lies, and then shows the means to come to this enjoyment of God, by
explaining the principles of Faith and the efficacy of it. In his second Book
he shows how we may come to the sense of Scripture, and first discovers the
nature of signs which represent things, and of letters which are signs of
words, and since there are diversities of tongues, how necessary the
translation of Scripture is into them (a good citation for you to justify your
Bibles and Prayers in an unknown language with) and then shows what great
reason there was, why there should be some doubtful and obscure places left in
Scripture, to conquer our pride by industry, and to keep the understanding from
nauseating, Ad edomandam labor superbiam, and intellectam a fastidio
revocandum, cui facile investigata plerumque vilescunt. l. 2. c. 6.
which commonly slights things that are easily understood. Then shows what
preparation and disposition of soul is requisite for Divine wisdom, and so
comes to the understanding the Scriptures: for which, first is requisite a
serious and diligent reading of them; in order to which he must carefully
distinguish such as are Canonical from such as are not; and for judging of
these, he never so much as mentions, much less sends us to the Infallible
Testimony of the Roman Church, but bids us follow the Authority of the most
Catholic Churches among which those are, In Canonicis autem scripturis
ecclesiarum catholica^um q^amplurium au^toritatem sequa^ur, inter quas sane
illae sunt, quae Apostoli (...) seeds habere, and epistolas accipere
^^eruerunt. l. 2. c. 8.
which are worthy to be called Apostolical See's, and had Epistles sent to
them. What Authority then had the Church of Rome to judge of Canonical
Scriptures, more then Ephesus, Philippi, Thessalonica, etc. To be sure then,
St. Augustine was not of our Discourser's mind, as to the judgment of Canonical
Books: and why should he send men to those Churches which received the
Epistles, but that there they were like to meet with greater satisfaction as to
the authenticalness of the Copies of those Epistles? After this, he gives
directions for understanding hard places, First by diligent reading and
remembering the plainest places; In iis enim quae apert^ posita in Scripture
sunt, inveniuntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem, moresque vivendi. l. 2. c.
9.
for in them (says he) are found all those things which contain matters of
Faith and Practice. An excellent citation for you for several purposes,
especially when you would prove the obscurity of Scripture, the necessity of an
Infallible Judge, or your Doctrine of Fundamentals out of St. Augustine. And
then bids them compare obscure and easy places together, to understand the
proprieties of words, to get knowledge in the Tongues, to compare Versions,
Antecedents and Consequents, to be skilled in all humane Arts and Sciences,
these and several other instructions to the same purpose are the scope of his
following Books. Would any one now, but T. C. have ventured so unluckily upon
this Treatise of St. Augustine above all others, to prove the Infallibility of
the Churches Testimony as necessary to Faith by? Could any Protestant have
delivered his mind more punctually and plainly than he does? And can you, or
any one else that does but look into that Book, imagine that St. Augustine ever
imagined, that any such thing should ever be thought of in the world, as that
the Testimony of the Church of Rome must be owned as the Infallible foundation
of Faith, and the Infallible Interpreter of Scripture? But this it is, to
converse with the Fathers only by retail, as they are delivered out in parcels
to you with directions upon them what use they are for, by Bellarmin and such
Artists as himself. This is, instead of quoting the Fathers, to challenge them;
and you see they are not afraid to appear, though to your shame and confusion.

But for all this you have a Reserve in St. Augustine still: let us see what
quotation that is, which lies so in Ambuscado behind the hedges, and is so
loath to come out. There is good reason for so much reservedness; for when we
come to search, we find only bushes instead of Soldiers. I have thoroughly
examined the place you referr us to, and cannot meet any thing the least
pertinent to your purpose, unless the question of the Lawfulness of Heretics
Baptism, De Baptism. c. Donatist. l 5. c. 24.
prove your Churches Testimony to be Infallible. But it may be, it is but a
venial mistake of a Chapter or two, forward or backward, and there we may find
it. Which when I look into, I cannot but suspect that some Protestant had
trepanned you into this Book and place of St. Augustine; there being scarce any
Book or place in him more begirt with Arguments against you than this is. I was
at first fearful you had quoted Fathers at a peradventure; but upon my further
considering the place, I soon rectified that mistake. I will therefore reckon
you up some of the most probable Citations out of St. Augustins Books of
Baptism against the Donatists, and choose which of them you please to prove the
necessity of an Infallible Testimony of the present Church as a foundation of
Faith by? I suppose, that you intended is in the Chapter but one following,
where St. Augustine Cites that passage of Cyprian, That we ought to recurre to
the fountain, Quod autem nos admonet, ut ad fontem recurramus, i. e. ad
Apostolicam traditionem, and inde canalem in nostra tempora dirigamus, optimum
est, and sine d^bitatione faciendum. l 5. c. 26.
i. e. to Apostolical Tradition, and thence derive the channel into our own
times; this, says St. Augustine, is the best, and without doubt to be done. No
doubt you think you owe me great thanks for finding out so apposite a place for
you, so near that you intended; but, before we have done with it, you will see
what little reason you have to thank me for it: The place you see is cited by
St. Augustine out of Cyprian in whose Epistle it is, to Pompeius against
Stephanus Bishop of Rome: we therefore consider, Cypr. ep. 74.
that it was Stephen who pleaded custom and tradition, to which Cyprian
replies, Whence comes this Tradition, Vnde traditio haec, utrumne de Dominic^
authoritate descendens, an de Apostolorum mandatis and epistolis veniens? Ea
enim esse facienda quae scripta sunt testatur, etc.

Si in Evangelio pr^cipitur, aut in Apostolorum epistolis aut Actibus
invenitur, observetur etiam sancta haec traditio.


does it descend from the Lords Authority, or from the Commands and Epistles of
the Apostles, for those things are to be done which are there written? And
again, If it be commanded in the Gospel, or the Epistles, and Acts of the
Apostles, then let this holy Tradition be observed. We see then what St.
Cyprian meant by his Apostolical Tradition, not one Infallibly attested by the
present Church, but that is clearly derived from Scripture as its fountain: and
therefore brings in the foregoing words on purpose to correct the errors of
Traditions, that, As when channels are diverted to a wrong course, we must have
recourse to the fountain; so we must in all pretended Traditions of the Church,
run up to the Scriptures as the fountainhead. And whereas Bellarmins only shift
to avoid this place of Cyprian, is, by saying that Cyprian argued more
errantium, i. e. could not defend one error but by another; see how different
the judgments of St. Augustine and Bellarmin are about it: for St. Augustine is
so far from blaming it in him, that he says, Optimum est and sine dubitatione
faciendum, i. e. It was the best and most prudent course to prevent errors.
And in another place where he mentions that saying of Cyprian, It is in vain
for them to object Custom, who are overcome by Reason, Proinde, inquit, frustra
quidam qui ratione vincuntur, Consuetudinem nobis objiciunt, q^asi consuetudo
major sit veritate; aut non id sit in spiritualibus sequend^m quod in melius
suerit a Spirit^ Sancto revelatum. Hoc plane verum est, quia ratio and veritas
consu^tudini p^aeponenda est Aug. de baptism. c. Donat. l. 4. c. 5.
as though custom were greater than truth; or as though that were not to be
followed in spiritual things, which is revealed by the Holy Ghost. This, says
St. Augustine, is evidently true, because reason and truth is to be preferred
before custom. He does not charge these sayings on him as Bellarmin does, as
part of his errors, but acknowledges them and disputes against his opinion
out of those principles. And when before, the Donatists objected the authority
of St. Cyprian in the point of Rebaptization, What kind of answer does St.
Augustine give them? the very same that any Protestant would give. Who knows
not that the sacred Canonical Scripture of the Old and New Testament is
contained within certain bounds; Quis a^tem nesciat Sanctam Scripturam
Canonicam, tam Veteris quam Novi Testamenti certis suis terminis co^^tineri,
eamque omnibus p^sterioribus Episcoporum literis ita praeponi, ut de illa
omnino dubitari and disceptari non possit, utrum verum, vel utrum rectum sit;
quicquid in ea^ scriptum esse constiterit. l. 2* de bapt. c. Donat. cap. 3.
and ought so far to be preferred before the succeeding writings of Bishops,
that of that alone we are not to doubt or call in question any thing therein
written, whether it be true and right or no. But, as he says in the following
words, All the writings since the confirmation of the Canon of Scripture are
liable to dispute, and even Councils themselves to be examined and amended by
Councils. Think you then, that St. Augustine ever thought of a present
Infallibility in the Church? or if he did, he expressed it in as odd a manner
as ever I read: How easily might he have stopped the mouths of the Donatists with
that one pretense of Infallibility? How impertinently does he dispute through
all those Books, if he had believed any such thing? It were easy to multiply
the Citations out of other Books of St. Austin, to show how much he attributed
to Scripture, as the only rule of Faith; and consequently, how far from
believing your Doctrine of Infallibility. But these may suffice to show, how
unhappily you light on these Books of St. Augustine for the proof of your
opinion out of the Fathers.

The last thing your Discourser objects against his Lordships way, is, If the
Church be fallible in the Tradition of Scripture,. 18.
how can I ever be Infallibly certain, that she has not erred de facto, and
defined some Book to be the Word of God, which really is not his Word? To which
I answer. If you mean by Infallible certainty, such a certainty as must have
some Infallible Testimony for the ground of it, you beg the question: for I
deny any such Infallible Testimony to be at all requisite for our believing the
Canon of Scripture, and therefore you object that as an inconvenience, which I
apprehend to be none at all. For I do not think it any absurdity to say, that I
cannot believe upon some Infallible Testimony, that the Church has not erred
in defining the Canon of Scripture. If by Infallible certainty you mean such a
certainty as absolutely excludes a possibility of deception; you would do well,
first to show how congruous this is to humane nature in this present state,
before you make such a certainty so necessary for any act of humane
understanding. But, if by Infallible certainty you mean only such as excludes
all possibility of reasonable doubting upon the consideration of the validity
and sufficiency of that Testimony I am to believe the Canon of Scripture upon;
then I assert, that upon making the Churches Testimony to be fallible, it does
not at all follow, but that I may have so great a certainty as excludes the
possibility of all reasonable doubting concerning the Canon of Scripture. For
when I suppose the Churches Testimony fallible, I do not thereby understand, as
though there were as great reason to suspect her deceived, as not, (nay, I say
there can be no reason to suspect her deceived); but by that I understand only
this, that the Church has not any supernatural Infallibility given her in
delivering such a Testimony, or that such Infallibility must be the foundation
of believing the thing so delivered. For whether I suppose your particular
Church of Rome, or the Catholic Church to be supernaturally Infallible in her
Traditions, there will be the same difficulty returning, and an equal
impossibility of vindicating our Faith from the entanglements of a Circle. For
still the question unavoidably returns, From whence I believe such a
supernatural Infallibility in the Church? For in that it is supernatural it
must suppose some promise on which it depends, that promise must be somewhere
extant, and that can be no where but in Scripture; therefore when I am asked,
Why I believe the Canon of the Scripture to be true; if I answer, Because the
Tradition of the Catholic Church is Infallible, the question presently
returns, Since humane nature is in it self fallible, whence comes the Church to
have this Infallibility? If I answer, By the assistance of Gods spirit, I am
presently asked, Since no man by the light of nature and mere reason can be
assured of this; how know you that you are not deceived in believing such an
assistance? If to this I answer, Because God who is Infallible has made this
promise in his Word, I am driven again to the first question, How I know this
to be Gods Word, and must answer it as before, Upon the infallible Testimony of
the Catholic Church. Thus we see, how impossible it is to avoid a Circle in
the supposition of a supernatural Infallibility in the Churches Tradition. But,
if no more be meant but a kind of rational Infallibility (though those terms be
not very proper) i. e. so great evidence, as, if I question it, I may, upon
equal grounds, question every thing which mankind yields the firmest Assent to,
because I cannot imagine, that so great a part of the wisest, and most
considerative part of the world should be so grossly deceived in a matter of
such moment (especially supposing a Divine Providence) then I freely and
heartily assert, We have such a kind of rational Infallibility; or rather the
highest degree of actual Certainty concerning the Truth of the Canon of
Scripture; and that the Catholic Church has not de facto, erred in defining
it. Thus I have followed your discoursing Christian through all his doubts and
perplexities, and upon the result, can find no ground at all either of doubting
concerning the Scripture, or of believing the Testimony of your Church, or any,
to be an infallible ground of Faith. Your next passage, is, to tell us how his
Lordships Dedalian windings (as you finely call them) are disintricated: A
happy man you are at squaring Circles, and getting out of Labyrinths. P. 78.
And thus it appears in the present case. For when his Lordship had said, That
the Tradition of the Church is too weak, because that is not absolutely Divine;
you repeat over your already exploded Proposition, that there may be an
infallible Testimony which is not absolutely Divine; which, when I have your
faculty of writing things, which neither you, nor any one else can understand I
may admit of; but till then, I must humbly beg your pardon, as not being able
to assent to any thing which I cannot understand, and have no reason to
believe. And withal, contrary to your second Answer, it appears, That if the
Testimony of the Primitive, were absolutely Divine, because infallible, the
Testimony of the present Church, must be absolutely Divine, if it be infallible.

The rest of this Chapter is spent in the examining some by-citations of men of
your own side chiefly,. 19.
and therefore it is very little material as to the truth or falsehood of the
present Controversy; yet, because you seem to triumph so much as soon as you
are off the main business, I shall briefly return an Answer to the substance of
what you say. His Lordship having asserted the Tradition of the Primitive
Apostolical Church to be Divine, P. 81. n. 20.
and that the Church of England does embrace that as much as any Church
whatsoever, withal adds, That when S. Augustine said, I would not believe the
Gospel, Ego vero Evangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae Ecclesiae
commoveret authoritas. Aug. l. 1. c. ep. fund. c. 5.
unless the Authority of the Catholic Church moved me; some of your own will
not endure should be understood, save of the Church in the time of the Apostles
only; and some, of the Church in general, not excluding after Ages: but sure to
include Christ and his Apostles. In your Answer to this, you insult strangely
over his Lordship in two things. First, That he should say Some, and mention
but one in his Margent. 2. That that One does not say, what he cites out of
him. To the first I answer, you might easily observe, the use his Lordship
makes of his Margent, Ibid. n 7.
is not so much to bring clear and distinct proofs of what he writes in his
Book, but what has some reference to what he there says; and therefore it was
no absurdity for him to say in his Book indefinitely some, and yet in his
Margent only to mention Occham. For, when his Lordship writ that, no doubt his
mind was upon others, who asserted the same thing, though he did not load his
Margent with them. And, that you may see, I have reason for what I say, I hope
you will not suppose his Lordship unacquainted with the Testimonies of those of
your side, who do in terms assert this. That I may therefore free you from all
kind of suspicion; What think you of Gerson, when, speaking of the greater
Authority of the Primitive Church than of the present: he adds. And by this
means we come to understand, Et sic aperitur modus intelligendi illud
Augustini, Evangelio non crederem, nisi me authoritas Ecclesiae compulisset.
Ibidem enim Ecclesiam sumit, pro primitiva congregatione fidelium eorum, qui
Christum viderunt, audierunt, and sui testes fuerunt Gerson. lect. 2. de vita
spirituali a^. Coroll. 7.
what S. Augustine said, I would not believe the Gospel, etc. For there, says
he, he takes the Church for the Primitive Congregation of Believers, who saw
and heard Christ, and were witnesses of what he did. Is not this Testimony
plain enough for you? But, besides this, we have another as evident, in whom
are those very words, which his Lordship, by a lapse of memory, attributes to
Occham: For Durandus plainly says, That for what concerns the approbation of
Scripture by the Church, it is understood only of the Church which was in the
Apostles times, Hoc autem quod dictum est de approbatione Scripture per
Ecclesiam, intelligitur solum de Ecclesia quae fuit tempore Apostolorum, qui
fuerunt repleti Spiritu Sancto, and nihilominus viderunt miracula Christi and
audierunt ejus Doctrinam. and ob hoc fuerunt convenientes testes omnium quae
Christus fecit aut d^cuit, ut per eorum testimonium Scriptura, continens facta
and dicta Christi, approbaretur. Durand. l. 3. did. 24. q. 1. sect. 9.
who were filled with the Holy Spirit, and withal, saw the Miracles of Christ,
and heard his Doctrine; and on that account were convenient witnesses of all
which Christ did, or taught, that by their Testimony, the Scripture containing
the actions and speeches of Christ, might receive approbation. Do you yet
desire a Testimony more express and full, than this is, of one who does
understand the Church exclusively of all successive to the Apostles, when he
had, just before, produced that known Testimony of S. Augustine? You see then,
the Bishop had some reason to say, Some of your Church asserted this to be S.
Augustine 's meaning; and therefore your Instances of some, where but one is
meant, are both impertinent and scurrilous. For, where it is evidently known,
there was but one, it were a Soloecism to say some; as to say, that some of the
Apostles betrayed Christ, when it is known, that none but Judas did it. But, if
I should say, that some Jesuits had writ for the killing of Kings, and in the
Margent should cite Mariana, no person conversant in their writings, would
think it a Soloecism; for, though I produce him for a remarkable Instance, yet
that does not imply, that I have none else to produce, but only that the
mentioning of one, might show I was not without proof of what I said. For your
impudent oblique slander on the memory of that excellent Prelate Archbishop
Cranmer, when you say, If a Catholic to disgrace the Protestant Primacy of
Canterbury, should say, Some of them carried a holy Sister locked up in a Chest
about with them, and name Cranmer only in the Margent; His memory is infinitely
above your slyest detractions; and withal, when you are about such a piece of
Criticism, I pray, tell me, what does some of them relate to. Is Primacy the
name of some men? Just as if one should disgrace the Sea of Rome, and say, Some
of them have been Atheists, Magicians, debauched, etc. Though, I confess, it
were a great injury in this case, to cite but one in the Margent, unless in
pity to the Reader; yet, you may sooner vindicate some of them from a Soloecism
in Language, when the Sea of Rome went before, than any of them from those
Soloecisms in manners, which your own Authors have complained of.

But, say you, What if this singular-plural say no such thing, as the words
alleged by the Bishop signify? P. 79.
I have already granted it to have been a very venial mistake of memory in his
Lordship of Occham for Durandus; in whom those very words are which are in the
Margent of his Lordships Book, as appears in the Testimony already produced. I
acknowledge therefore, that Occham in that place of his Dialogues, does speak
of the Catholic Church of all Ages, comprehending the Apostles and Evangelists
in it; and in this sense he says, that place of S. Augustine is to be
understood. But, what advantage this is to your cause, I cannot imagine. For,
what if the Catholic Church be taken in that comprehensive sense, to include
not only the Apostles, but the Church successively from their times? Does it
hence follow, That it is not day though the Sun shines? Or rather, Does it not
follow, That you are not so quick-sighted as you would seem to be? And, Whether
his Lordship or you come nearer the meaning of Occham's words, let any one
judge. For they who speak of the Church in that comprehensive sense, do only
suppose the Infallibility to have been in the Primitive Apostolical Church, but
the successive Church to be only the chanel of conveyance of that Testimony
down to us, and so they say no more than we do. Thus Driedo expounds that place
of S. Augustine; who understands it of the Catholic Church, which was from the
beginning of the Christian Faith, Augustinus cum dicit, ego Evangelio etc.
intelligit de Ecclesia Catholica quae fuit ab initio Christianae fidei,
secundum seriem successionis Episcoporum crescens ad haec usque tempora, quae
san^* Ecclesia complectitur Collegium Apostolorum. Driedo. Tom, 1. l. 4. cap. 4.
increasing according to the course of succession of Bishops to these times,
which Church comprehends in it the College of Apostles. Do you think that
these men did believe a present Infallibility in the Church? If so, To what end
are they so careful to carry it so high as the Apostles? Whereas, on your
Principle we can have no Assurance concerning any thing that the Apostles did
or said but only for the Infallibility of the present Church. You must
therefore understand the present Church exclusively of the Apostolical Church;
and therefore if S. Augustine be understood in their sense, he is far enough
from serving your purposes. But, say you, It is evident, that S. Augustine must
speak of the Church in his time, because he speaks of that Church which said to
him, Noli credere Manichaeo, which was not true of the Apostolical Church? But,
Why might not the Apostolical Church be a reason to S. Augustine, not to
believe Manichaeus, because he found no footsteps of his Doctrine in the
Records of that Church? Again, suppose he means the present Church, Does he
mean the infallible Testimony of the present Church? Might not the Testimony of
the Church, supposing it fallible, be sufficient for what S. Augustine says of
it? I doubt it not: And, you seem to have no great confidence in this Testimony
your self, when you add, That though it be a point of Faith to believe that the
Church is infallible, in delivering Scripture to us, yet it is not a point of
Faith, that her Infallibility is proved out of the cited place of S. Augustine.
But, when you say, it is sufficient that it be clear and manifest out of the
Text it self, what Text do you mean? S. Augustines, or the Scriptures? If S.
Augustines, you would do well to show, by what engines you force Infallibility
out of his words; if the Scriptures, What becomes of our good Motives of
Credibility?

When his Lordship objects, That according to your Principles,. 20.
the Tradition of the present Church must be as infallible as that of the
Primitive, P. 81. n. 21.
you very learnedly distinguish, That if he means, the one must be as truly and
really infallible, quoad substantiam, as the other, you grant it: But if he
mean, P. 80.
the one must be as highly and perfectly infallible, as the other, quoad modum,
you deny it. Very good still! It seems there are higher and lower degrees in
Infallibility. I pray tell us, What that is which is more than infallible? The
present Church (you say) is infallible, but not so highly and perfectly
infallible, therefore there must be degrees in Infallibility; and since the
lowest degree is infallible, that which is highly infallible, must be more than
infallible. Again, What difference is there between the substance and the mode
in Infallibility; I had thought, the substance of Infallibility had layn in the
mode; and I should rather think Infallibility it self to be a mode of
Apprehension* then talk of substances and modes in it. But, it may be, you mean
such kind of modes of Infallibility, as absolute and hypothetical. If you do
so, explain your self by them; and that we may better understand your meaning,
show us whether the Church be at all capable of absolute Infallibility; if not*
What difference there is in degrees between the hypothetical Infallibility of
the present and Primitive Church, supposing both infallible in delivering their
Testimony, and no otherwise. For you yet again add, Of the Churches Testimony
being infallible, but not simply Divine, but it is the infallible Testimony of
a desperate cause, to have but one bad shift, and to use it so often.

Because you would be apt to say, That upon his Lordships rejecting the
Infallibility of Tradition, he left no use at all of it; He therefore tells
you, P. 82.
Notwithstanding that, it is serviceable for very good ends, that it induces
Infidels to the reading and consideration of Scripture, and that it instructs
novices, and doubters in the Faith; which two ends (you say) fall short of the
end of Tradition; For (say you) it founds and establishes Believers, even the
greatest Doctors of the Church; for which you cite again this same place of S.
Augustine. But did not his Lordship tell you, that some of your own understood
that very place, either of Novices or Infidels: For which, besides the
Testimony of some of your own party, he adds this reason, because the words
immediately before are, If thou find one qui Evangelio nondum credit, which did
not yet believe the Gospel, What would thou do to make him believe? Ego vero
non, etc. To which you very prudently say nothing.

Concerning Jacobus Almayn's Opinion, That we are first, and more, bound to
believe the Church than the Scripture; you would seem in terms to disavow it,
though very faintly; it is not altogether true; and hope to salve it by a
distinction of priority of time and nature: and you acknowledge, That in
priority of nature we are first bound to believe the Church, and, I suppose, in
priority of time too, if we believe the Scripture for the Churches sake: Yet,
you would not have it said, That we are more bound to believe the Church than
Scripture; but it is not what you would have properly said, but what follows
from that antecedent, which Jacobus Almayn puts. It is certain, says he, that
we are bound to believe all things contained in the Sacred Canon, upon that
account alone, because the Church believes them; therefore we are first, and
more, bound to believe the Church than the Scripture, which is so evident a
consequence, that nothing but shame would make you deny it.

Touching Almayn's and Gerson's reading compelleret for commoveret, his
Lordship says, That Almayn falsifies the Text notoriously; you say, No; but
you had rather charitably think, they both read it so in some Copies; his
Lordship produces a very ancient M.S. for the common reading, you none at all
for that, but only the concurrent Testimonies of some Schoolmen, who must be
confessed to be excellent Critics, and well versed in ancient M.SS. unless
where they met with a little Greek, or some hard Latin words; and among whom,
the mistake of one would pass current for want of examining Copies, let the
Reader therefore judge, whether Judgment be more probable: But, I think it not
worth while to say more about it.

In your vindication of the Authority of Canus, you make use of a very silly
piece of Sophistry; for, say you, Though he make Infidels and Novices in the
Faith, to be convinced by the Authority of the Church; yet, you say, It does
not follow, that he makes the said Authority a fallible, but a certain and sure
way to make them believe it. But, 1. The Question is, Whether Canus does
understand that place of S. Augustine, of Infidels and Novices or no? 2.
Suppose he says, It is a sure way, Does it therefore follow, that it is an
infallible way? Is nothing certain but what is infallible? I hope you are
certain that the Church of Rome is the Cacholick Church; but, Are you
infallible that she is so? If you advance all certainty to Infallibility, or
bring down all Infallibility to Certainty, every Christian is as infallible as
your Church is: For, I make no question, but that every good Christian is
certain of the Grounds and Principles of his Religion. The same thing you
return upon again (after to little purpose you multiply words about Canus and
Stapleton's Testimonies.) For, say you, because S. Augustine speaks of a sure
way, therefore he must mean an infallible way, as though what was not
supernaturally infallible, was presently unsure. I pray, tell me, Are you sure
that two and two make four? Yet, I hope you will not say, You are
supernaturally infallible that they do so. I hope, you are sure, there is a
Pope at Rome, and a goodly College of Cardinals there; but, Are you infallible
in this? It is not then certainly the same, to deny a thing to be infallible,
and to make it unsure: And, you are either very weak, or very wilful, in saying
so. In what sense this so much controverted place of S. Augustine, is to be
understood, will be afterward discussed; and whether it be intended wholly for
Infidels or no: only I shall take notice now, how, in the last words of this
Chapter, you would again infer Infallibility from undoubted certainty. For,
say you, the Church, in S. Augustine's time, esteemed her self undoubtedly
certain, that the Gospel was the infallible Word of God; for otherwise she
might be deceived her self, and deceive others in commanding them to believe
that to be God's Word, which was only the word of man: But, What is it you
would infer from all this? For we believe the Church as undoubtedly certain,
as may be, that the Scriptures are God's Word; yet we are far enough from
believing that her Testimony now is supernaturally infallible.

CHAP. VII. The Protestant Way of resolving Faith.
Several Principles premised in order to it. The distinct Questions set down,
and their several Resolution given. The Truth of matters of fact, the Divinity
of the Doctrine, and of the Books of Scripture, distinctly resolved into their
proper grounds. Moral Certainty a sufficient Foundation for Faith, and yet
Christian Religion proved to be infallibly True. How Apostolical Tradition made
by his Lordship a Foundation of Faith. Of the certainty we have of the Copies
of Scripture, and the Authority of them. S. Augustine's Testimony concerning
Church Authority, largely discussed and vindicated. Of the private Spirit, and
the necessity of Grace. His Lordship's Way of resolving Faith vindicated. How
far Scripture may be said to be known by its own Light. The several Testimonies
of Bellarmine, Brierly, and Hooker, cleared.

. 1.
HAving thus far followed you through all your intricacies and windings, and
showed, with what diligence and subtilty you would juggle men out of their
Faith, under a pretense of Infallibility; it will be necessary for the
vindicating our Doctrine, and the clearing this important Controversy with all
evidence and perspicuity, to lay down those certain grounds which we build our
Faith upon. And, although it be one of the greatest of your Modern Artifices to
persuade the world, that Protestants have no certain grounds of Faith at all,
yet I doubt not but to make it evident, that the way taken by the most
judicious and considerative Protestants, is as satisfactory and reasonable, as
I have already made it appear, that yours is unreasonable and ridiculous. Which
I shall the rather do, because, through the want of a clear and distinct
apprehension of the true way of resolving Faith, no Controversy in Religion
has been more obscure and involved, than this has been. Therefore for our
more distinct method of proceeding, I shall first endeavor to prevent
misunderstanding, by premising several things which are necessary for a through
opening the state of the Controversy, and then come to the resolution of it.
The things then I would premise, are these following:

1. That we enquire not after the reason, why we assent to what is divinely
revealed, but after the reason why we believe any thing to be a Divine
Revelation. Therefore when men speak of the last resolution of Faith into the
Veracity of God revealing, they speak that which is undoubtedly true, but it
reaches not our present enquiry. I freely grant, that the ultimate reason why
any thing is believed, is upon the Testimony of him from whom it comes; and the
greater the knowledge and fidelity is, of him whose Testimony I believe, the
stronger my Assent is, supposing I have sufficient evidence that it is his
Testimony. But that is our present Question, for it being taken for granted
among all Christians, that God's Testimony is absolutely infallible, there can
no dispute arise concerning the ground of resolving Faith, supposing God's
Revelation to be sufficiently known. For no one questions but God's Veracity
however discovered, is a sufficient ground for Faith; but all the Question is,
How we come to know wherein this Veracity of God does discover it self; or what
those things are which are immediately revealed by him. Therefore to tell us,
that the resolution of Faith is into Gods Infallible Testimony, without showing
on what account this testimony is to be believed to be from God, is, to tell us
that which no one doubts of, and to escape that which is the main question. For
in case Isaac should have denied submission to his Fathers will when he went to
be sacrificed, till he could be satisfied concerning the lawfulness of that
action which his Father went about; Do you think it had been satisfactory to
him, if Abraham had told him, that God had power to relax his own Laws, and
therefore he need not question the lawfulness of the action; might not Isaac
have presently answered, That he did not question, that what God commanded was
lawful, but that he desired, was, some evidence that he had a revelation for
what he did. And the answer to this had been only pertinent and satisfactory.
So that he might have no reason to question it, although he did not believe any
thing more then common fidelity in his Fathers testimony. For God never (when
revelations were most common) thought it necessary to multiply revelations so
far, as to make one necessary to attest another; but that revelation which was
communicated to one was obligatory to all concerned in it, though they could
have nothing but Moral certainty for it. By this it appears, that when we now
speak of the resolution of Faith, though the utmost reason of our assent, is,
that Infallibility which is supposed in Divine Testimony, yet the nearest and
most proper resolution of it, is, into the grounds inducing us to believe that
such a Testimony is truly Divine, and the resolution of this cannot be into any
Divine Testimony without a process in infinitum.

2. That when we speak of the resolution of Faith, by Faith we understand a
rational and discursive act of the mind. For Faith being an assent upon
evidence, or reason inducing the mind to assent, it must be a rational and
discursive act; and such a one that one may be able to give an account of to
another. And this account which men are able to give why they do believe, or on
what ground they do it, is that which we call resolving Faith. And by this it
appears, that whatever resolves Faith into its efficient cause, (which some
improperly call the Testimony of the spirit) though it may be true, yet comes
not home to the question. For if by the Testimony of the spirit be meant that
operation of the spirit whereby saving Faith is wrought in us, then it gives no
account from the thing to be believed, why we assent to it, but only shows how
Faith is wrought in us by way of efficiency; which is rather resolving the
question about the necessity of Grace than the grounds of Faith. Our question
is not then, concerning the necessity of infused habits of Grace, but of those
rational inducements which do incline the mind to a firm assent. For Faith in
us, however it is wrought, being a persuasion of the mind, it is not
conceivable how there should be any discursive act of the mind, without some
reason causing the mind to assent to what is propounded to it. For without
this, Faith would be an unaccountable thing, and the spirit of revelation would
not be the spirit of wisdom; and Religion would be exposed to the contempt of
all unbelievers, if we were able to give no other account of Faith, then that
it is wrought in us by the Spirit of God. When we speak therefore of the
resolving Faith, we mean, what are the rational inducements to believe, or what
evidence there is in the object propounded to make us firmly assent to it.

3. According to the different acts of Faith, there must be assigned a
different resolution of Faith. For every act being rational and discursive,
must have its proper grounds belonging to it; unless we suppose that act
elicited without any reason for it, which is incongruous with the nature of the
humane understanding.

. 2.
There are then in the question of resolution of Faith, these three questions to
be resolved. First, Why I believe those things to be true which are contained
in the Book called the Scripture? 2. Why I believe the Doctrine contained in
that Book to be Divine? 3. Why I believe the Books themselves to be of Divine
revelation? Now every one of these questions admits of a different way of
resolution; as will appear by the handling each of them distinctly.

1. If I be asked, On what grounds I believe the things to be true which are
contained in Scripture? my answer must be, From the greatest evidence of truth,
which things of that nature are capable of. If therefore the persons who are
supposed to have writ these things, were such who were fully acquainted with
what they writ of; if they were such persons who cannot be suspected of any
design to deceive men by their writings; and if I be certain that these which
go under the name of their writings, are undoubtedly theirs; I must have
sufficient grounds to believe the truth of them. Now that the writers of these
things cannot be suspected of ignorance, appears by the time and age they writ
in, when the story of these things was new, and such multitudes were willing
enough to have contradicted it, if any thing had beeen amiss: besides, some of
the writers had been intimately conversant with the person and actions of him
whom they writ most of. That they could have no intent to deceive, appears from
the simplicity and candor both of their actions and writings, from their
contempt of the world, and exposing themselves to the greatest hazards to bear
witness to them. That these are the very same writings, appears by all the
evidence can be desired; For we have as great, if not much greater reason to
believe them to be the Authors of the Books under their Names, than any other
writers of any Books whatsoever, both because the matters are of greater
moment, and therefore men might be supposed more inquisitive about them; and
that they have been unanimously received for (...) from the very time of their
being first written, (except some very few, which upon strict examination were
admitted too) and we find these very Books cited by the learned Christians
under these Names in that time, when it had been no difficulty to have found
out several of the Original Copy's themselves. When therefore they were
universally received by Christians, never doubted of by Jews, or Heathen
Philosophers: we have as great evidence for this first act of Faith, as it is
capable of. And he is unreasonable who desires more.

2. If I be asked, why I believe the Doctrine contained in these Books to be
Divine? I must give in two things for answer. 1. That in the Age when the
Doctrine was delivered, there was sufficient reason to believe it Divine. 2.
That if there was sufficient reason then, we have sufficient reason now.

1. That in the Age when the Doctrine was delivered, there was sufficient
reason to believe it Divine; Supposing then, that we already believe upon the
former answer, that all the matters of fact be true, I answer, that if Christ
did such unparalle^d miracles, and rose from the dead, they who heard his
Doctrine had reason to believe it to be of God: and this I suppose the greatest
Infidel would not deny, if himself had been one of the witnesses of his actions
and resurection.

2. That if they had reason then, we have so now; because tradition to us does
only supply the want of our senses, as to what Christ did and spoke; i. e. That
tradition is a kind of derivative and perpetuated sensation to us; it being of
the same use to us now which our eyes and ears had been, if we had been
actually present when Christ delivered his Doctrine and wrought his Miracles.
Which that we may better understand, we may consider what the use of our senses
had been, if we had been then present; and consequently what the use of
tradition is now to us. Now it is apparent, that the use of the senses, to
those who saw the Miracles and heard the Doctrine of Christ, was not to give
any credibility to either of them, but only to be the means of conveying to
them those things which might induce them to believe; the same does tradition
now to us, it does not in it self make the Doctrine more credible, but supplies
the use of our senses in a certain conveyance of those things to us which were
the motives to believe then. For the motives to Faith both to them and us are
the same, only the manner of conveyance is different; but our case is much the
same with those who lived in the same Age, but by reason of distance of place
could not be personally present at what Christ did or said; now if those
persons were obliged to believe, and had sufficient reason for Faith, who by
reason of distance of place could not exercise their senses about Christ's
Doctrine and Miracles, the same reason and obligation have we, who cannot do it
by reason of distance of time. And if there be any advantage on either side, it
is on ours, because though the tradition does not in it self give any
credibility to the Doctrine, yet there are such circumstances accompanying this
tradition, which may much facilitate our belief above theirs: because by such a
continued tradition we have an evidence of the efficacy of this Doctrine, which
had so continual a power as to engage so many in all ages since its first
appearance to be the propagators and defenders of it. And therefore this has
very much the advantage of the report of any credible persons in that age, who
might report to any at distance the Miracles and Doctrine of Christ. And this
is the way of resolution of Faith, which the Scripture it self directs us to.
How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation, which at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord, Heb. 2.3, 4.
and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him: God also bearing them
witness both with signs and wonders, and with diverse miracles and gifts of the
Holy Ghost, according to his own will? Where we plainly see, the resolution of
Faith as to the Divinity of the Doctrine was into the Miracles wrought for the
confirmation of it (which was the proper witness or testimony of the Holy
Ghost) but the means of conveyance was by the tradition of those who were eye
and ear-witnesses of what Christ said or did. As therefore it was not supposed
necessary for them who saw the miracles of Christ, either to have some inward
Testimony of the Spirit, or some external Infallible Testimony of the Church,
to assure them that these miracles were really done by Christ, but God left
them to the judgment of sense; so proportionably neither of those two is now
necessary for the resolution of our Faith, but God instead of the judgment of
sense leaves us to the evidence of Tradition.

Object. But all this is (you say) no more then Moral certainty, which being
fallible,. 3.
we cannot from thence be assured that Christian Religion is Infallibly true?
Answ. This being the great bugbear wherewith you would fright men out of their
Religion, I shall in this place show, that it serves only to scare fools and
children with. For, 1. What greater certainty had they who lived in the time of
Christ and his Apostles, and did not see their Miracles? Had they, or could
they have, any more than this you call moral Certainty? and, Do you really
think, that all such could not be sufficiently assured, that Christian Religion
was infallibly true? 2. Moral Certainty may be a sufficient Foundation for the
most firm Assent; and therefore, if the matter to be believed be the infallible
Truth of a Doctrine upon suitable evidence, though we have now but moral
Certainty of that evidence, the Assent may be firm to such a Doctrine as
infallible. And therefore the grand mistake lies here, as though our Faith were
resolved finally into this moral Certainty; or, as if the Faith of those who
saw Christ's Miracles, were resolved into their eyes, and not into the
Miracles; for as their eyes were but the means of conveyance of that evidence
which was infallible, so is that Tradition to us by which we have our Certainty
of those evidences of the infallible Truth of Christian Religion. And we are
further to consider that the nature of Certainty is not so much to be taken
from the matters themselves, as from the grounds inducing the Assent; that is,
Whether the things be Mathematical, Physical, or Moral; if there be no reason
to question the grounds of belief, the case is all one as to the nature of the
Assent. So that moral Certainty may be as great as Mathematical and Physical,
supposing as little reason to doubt in moral things as to their natures, as in
Mathematical and Physical as to theirs. Therefore this great quarrel about
moral Certainty is very unreasonable; unless it be proved, that there is no
cause of firm Assent upon moral grounds; now, if the cause of the Assent may
be, as equal and proportionable to their nature in moral things, as in
Mathematical; there may be as firm an Assent in the One, as in the Other, as I
have already showed. For which, this reason is plain and evident, that
Certainty implies the taking away all suspicion of doubt: But there can be no
taking away all suspicion of doubt in Mathematical things, without Mathematical
evidence; but in moral things, all suspicion of doubt is removed upon moral
evidence, and therefore the Certainty may be as great in the Assent to one as
the other. Thus, we see, how unjustly, and how much to the dishonor of
Religion you quarrel with moral evidence, as an uncertain thing. But, I answer
yet further, 3. That the greatest assurance we can desire, that any Religion is
infallibly True, is from moral Certainty; and that upon these three grounds. 1.
Because the grounds of all Religion are capable of no more. 2. Because the
highest evidence of any Religion must depend upon it. 3. Because this, in it
self, may evidently demonstrate, that Christian Religion is infallibly True.

1. There can be no greater than this moral Certainty of the main Foundations
of all Religion, which are, The Being of God, and Immortality of souls; without
the supposition of which, there can be no such thing as Infallibility in the
world; and therefore from thence I may easily prove, that there can be no more
than moral Certainty of the existence of a Deity. For, if the very notion of
Infallibility does suppose a God, then you cannot infallibly prove that there
is One (in your sense of Infallibility) for then you must beg the Question, and
suppose that already to be, which you are proving the existence of: Now that,
Infallibility in us does suppose the existence of God, appears most evidently,
because, man's understanding being of it self fallible, it cannot be supposed in
any thing infallible, without the supernatural Assistance of a being
Infallible, which can be nothing else but God. But, if you think you have
infallible proofs, produce them, and convince the world of Atheists by them: We
acknowledge we have as great evidence and certainty, as humane nature is
capable of, of a Being of such a Nature as God is, from the consideration of
his works; but all this still is moral Certainty; for the grounds are neither
Mathematically demonstrative, nor supernaturally infallible. What folly and
madness then is it for your party to cry out so much against moral Certainty in
Religion, when the Foundation of all Religion is capable of no more; And may
not this justly increase our suspicion, that under moral Certainty you strike
at the Foundation of all Religion?

2. Suppose God gives the most infallible evidence of any Religion, it is not
possible, but that some who are bound to believe that Religion, can have any
more than moral Certainty of it. And, for all that, I know the greatest
Physical Certainty is as liable to question as moral; there being as great a
possibility of Deception in that, as a suspicion of doubt in this, and
oft-times greater. What advantage then had those who stood by, and saw the
miracles of Moses and Christ, above those who did not, but had the report of
them conveyed to them in an unquestionable manner? Besides, it is apparent,
God's great aim in any Religion, is most at the good of those who can have only
a moral Certainty of the great evidences of the Truth of that Religion; because
it being God's intention, that the Religion delivered by Him, should be not
merely for the benefit of those very few persons who could be present at such
things, but for the advantage of those incomparably greater numbers, who, by
reason of distance of place and age, could not be present; it would argue a
strange want of provision for men's Faith, unless moral Certainty were
sufficient. Only you indeed will suppose that which God himself never thought
necessary, viz. an infallible Testimony of the present Church; but to what good
purposes you have introduced this, has largely appeared already.

3. Moral Certainty yields us sufficient Assurance, that Christian Religion is
infallibly true: And that I prove, because moral Certainty may evidently show
us the Credibility of the Christian Religion, which you deny not, nor any else;
and, that from the Credibility of it, the infallible Truth of it may be proved,
will appear by these two things:

1. That where there is evident Credibility in the matter propounded, there
does arise upon men an obligation to believe: And that is proved both by your
own confession (as to the Churches Infallibility being believed on the Motives
of Credibility) and from Gods intention, in giving such Motives, which was, to
persuade them to believe, as appears by multitudes of places of Scripture; and
withal, though the mere Credibility of the Motives might at first suppose some
doubts concerning the Infallibility of the Doctrine, yet it is not consistent
with any doubt, as to the Infallibility of the obligation to believe; because
there can be no other reason assigned of these Motives of Credibility, than the
inducing on men an obligation to Faith.

2. That where there is such an obligation to believe, we have the greatest
assurance, that the matter to be believed is infallibly True: Which depends
upon this manifest proof, That God cannot oblige men to believe a lie; it being
repugnant to all our conceptions of the Veracity and Goodness of God, to
imagine, that God should require from men (on the pain of eternal damnation,
for not believing) to believe something as infallibly True, which is really
false. Thus, you see, what a clear and pregnant demonstration we have of the
infallible Truth of Christian Religion from moral Certainty; How injurious then
have those of your party been, who have charged this opinion of believing upon
moral Certainty, with betraying Religion, and denying Christian Religion to be
infallibly True. Thus much for this grand Objection; I now come to the last
Question considerable in the Resolution.

. 4.
3. On what account do I believe these particular Books of Scripture to be Gods
Word? Which may admit of a double sense: 1. On what account I do believe the
Doctrine contained in these Books to be Gods Word? 2. On what account I do
believe the Books containing this Doctrine to be Gods Word? As to the first, I
have answered already, viz. Upon the same rational evidence which God gave,
that the Testimony of those who delivered, was a Divine and infallible
Testimony: To the second, I answer in these two Propositions:

1. That the last Resolution of Faith is not into the Infallibility of the
Instrument of conveyance, but into the Infallibility of that Doctrine, which is
thereby conveyed to us. For the writing of this Doctrine is only the condition
by which this Revelation is made manifest to us; it being evident from the
nature of the thing, that the writing of a Divine Revelation, is not necessary
for the ground and reason of Faith, as to that Revelation: because men may
believe a Divine Revelation without it; as is not only evident in the case of
the Patriarchs, but of all those, who in the time of Christ, and the Apostles,
did believe the truth of the Doctrine of Christ before it was written. If
therefore the writing be only the condition of the manifestation of the Object
in a certain way to us, the ground and reason of Faith, is not to be resolved
into that which is only the mode of our knowledge of the Object to be believed;
but into that which is properly the ground and reason why we believe that
Doctrine or Revelation to be Divine, which is contained in those Books. And
this is still the case of all illiterate persons, who cannot resolve their
Faith properly into the Scripture, but into the Doctrine delivered them out of
Scripture. Hence we may discern the difference between the Formal Object, and
the Rule of Faith; the Formal Object is that evidence which is given of the
Infallibility of the Testimony of those who delivered the Doctrine; the
infallible Rule of Faith to us, is the Scripture, viz. that which limits and
bounds the material Objects of Faith, which we are bound to believe; and this
does therefore discover to us what those things are, which on the account of
the Formal Object, we are obliged to believe.

2. Those who believe the Doctrine of Scripture to be Divine, have no reason to
question the infallible conveyance of that Doctrine to us, in those Books we
call the Scripture. Therefore, whatever things we are to believe in order to
salvation, we have as great evidence as we can desire, that they are infallibly
conveyed to us.

1. If the Doctrine of Christ be True and Divine, then all the Promises be made
were accomplished: Now, that was one of the greatest, That his Spirit should
lead his Apostles into all Truth; Joh. 16.^3.
Can we then reasonably think, that if the Apostles had such an infallible
Assistance of the Spirit of God with them, in what they spoke in a transitory
way to them who heard them, that they should want it in the delivering those
Records to the Church, which were to be the standing monuments of this Doctrine
to all Ages and Generations. If Christ's Doctrine therefore be True, the
Apostles had an infallible Assistance of God's Spirit; if they had so in
delivering the Doctrine of Christ by preaching, nothing can be more
unreasonable, than to imagine such should want it, who were employed to give an
account to the world of the nature of this Doctrine, and of the Miracles which
accompanied Christ and his Apostles. So that it will appear an absurd thing to
assert, that the Doctrine of Christ is Divine, and to question, whether we have
the infallible Records of it. It is not pertinent to our Question, in what way
the Spirit of God assisted them that wrote, Whether by immediate suggestion of
all such things which might be sufficiently known without it; and whether in
some things which were not of concernment, it might not leave them to their own
judgment; (as in that place, Joh. 6.19.
When they had rowed about five and twenty or thirty furlongs, when, no doubt,
God's Spirit knew infallibly whether it was, but thought not fit to reveal it)
whether in some lighter circumstances the Writers were subject to any
inadvertencies (the negative of which is more piously credible) whether mere
historical passages needed the same infallible Assistance, that Prophetical and
Doctrinal; these things, I say, are not necessary to be resolved, it being
sufficient in order to Faith, that the Doctrine we are to believe, as it was
infallibly delivered to the world, by the preaching of Christ and his Apostles,
so it is infallibly conveyed to us in the Books of Scripture.

2. Because these Books were owned for Divine by those Persons and Ages, who
were most competent Judges, Whether they were so or no. For the Age of the
Apostles was sufficiently able to judge, whether those things which are said to
be spoken by Christ, or written by the Apostles, were really so or no. And we
can have no reason at all to question, but what was delivered by them, was
infallibly true. Now, from that first Age we derive our knowledge concerning
the Authority of these Books, which being conveyed to us in the most
unquestionable and universal Tradition, we can have no reason in the world to
doubt, and therefore the greatest reason firmly to assent, that the Books we
call the Scripture, are the infallible Records of the Word of God. And thus
much may suffice in general concerning the Protestant Way of resolving Faith: I
now return to the examination of what you give us by way of answer to his
Lordship's discourse.

The first Assault you make upon his Lordship, is, for making Apostolical
Tradition a ground of Faith,. 5.
but because your peculiar excellency lies in the involving plain things; the
best service I can do, is to lay things open as they are; by which means we
shall easily discern where the truth lies. I shall therefore first show, how
far his Lordship makes Apostolical Tradition a ground of Faith, and then
consider what you have to object against it. In that Section which your Margent
referrs to, all that he says of it, is, Sect. 16. n. 20.
That the Voice and Tradition of that Church which included in it Apostles,
Disciples, and such as had immediate Revelation from Heaven, was Divine, and
the Word of God from them is of like validity written or delivered. And, as to
this Tradition (he says) there is abundance of Certainty in it self, but how
far it is evident to us, shall after appear. P. 84.
At the end of the next n. 21. he says, That there is double Authority, and
both Divine, that confirms Scripture to be the Word of God. Tradition of the
Apostles delivering it, and the internal worth and argument in the Scripture,
obvious to a soul prepared by the present Churches Tradition, and Gods Grace.
But, n. 23. he says, That this Apostolical Tradition is not the sole and only
means to prove Scripture Divine, P. 85.
but the moral persuasion, reason, and force of the present Church, is ground
enough for any one to read the Scripture, and esteem reverently of it. And this
once done, the Scripture has then In and home-arguments enough to put a soul
that has but ordinary Grace, out of doubt, that the Scripture is the Word of
God, infallible and Divine. I suppose his Lordships meaning may be comprised in
these particulars. 1. That to those who lived in the Apostolical times the
Tradition of Scripture, by those who had an infallible Testimony, was a
sufficient ground of their believing it infallibly true. 2. That though the
conveyance of that Tradition to us be not infallible, yet it may be sufficient
to raise in us a high esteem and veneration for the Scripture. 3. That those
who have this esteem for the Scripture, by a through studying and consideration
of it may undoubtedly believe that Scripture is the Divine and Infallible Word
of God. This I take to be the substance of his Lordships discourse. We now come
to examine what you object against him. Your first demand is, How comes
Apostolical Primitive Tradition to work upon us, if the present Church be
fallible? Which I shall answer by another, How come the decrees of Councils to
work upon you, P. 82.
if the reporters of those Decrees be fallible? If you say, It is sufficient
that the Decree it self be infallible, but it is not necessary that the
reporter of those Decrees should be so; The same I say concerning the
Apostolical Tradition of Scripture, though it were infallible in their
Testimony, yet it is not necessary that the conveyance of it to us should be
infallible. And if you think your self bound to believe the Decrees of General
Councils as infallible, though fallibly conveyed to you; Why may not we say the
same concerning Apostolical Tradition? Whereby you may see, though Tradition be
fallible, yet the matter conveyed by it, may have its proper effect upon us.
Your next Inquiry (if I understand it) is to this sense, Whether Apostolical
Tradition be not then as credible as the Scriptures? I answer freely (supposing
it equally evident) what was delivered by the Apostles to the Church by word or
writing, has equal Credibility? You attempt to prove, That there is equal
evidence, because the Scripture is only known by the Tradition of the Church,
to be the same that was recommended by the Apostolical Church, which you have
likewise for Apostolical Tradition. But, 1. Do you mean the same Apostolical
Tradition here or no, which the Archbishop speaks of, i. e. that act of the
Apostles, whereby they delivered the Doctrine of Christ upon their Testimony to
the world. If you mean this Tradition, for my part, I do not understand it as
any thing really distinct from the Tradition of the Scripture it self. For,
although I grant, that the Apostles did deliver that Doctrine by Word as well
as Writing, yet if that Tradition by Word had been judged sufficient, I much
question whether we had ever had any written Records at all. But, because of
the speedy decay of an oral Tradition, if there had been no standing Records,
it pleased God in his infinite Wisdom and Goodness, to stir up some fit persons
to digest those things summarily into writing, which otherwise would have been
exposed to several corruptions in a short time. For we see presently in the
Church, notwithstanding this, how suddenly the Gnostics, Valentinians,
Manichees and others, did pretend some secret Tradition of Christ or his
Apostles distinct from their writings. When therefore you can produce as
certain evidence any Apostolical Tradition distinct from Scripture, as we can
do, that the Books of Scripture were delivered by the Apostles to the Church,
you may then be hearkened to, but not be before. 2. We have other ways to
judge of the Identity of the Copies of Scripture (which we have) with those
delivered by the Primitive Church, besides the Testimony of the present Church.
And the judgment of the present Church considered merely as such can be no
argument to secure any man concerning the integrity and incorruption of the
Books of Scripture. We do therefore justly appeal to the ancient Copies, and M.
SS. which confirm the incorruption of ours. But, say you, What infallible
Certainty have we of them, besides Church Tradition? P. 8^.
Very wisely said in several respects, as though no Certainty less than
infallible, could serve men's turn as to ancient Copies of Scripture, and as
though your Church could give men Infallible certainty which Copy's were
ancient and which were not. But for our parts, we should not be at all nearer
any certainty much less Infallibility concerning the authenticalness of any
ancient Copy's, because your Church declared it self for them; neither can we
imagine it at all necessary in the examination of ancient Copy's to have any
Infallible certainty at all of them. For as well you may pretend it as to any
other Authors, when all that we look after in such Copy's is only that
evidence which things of that nature are capable of. But you make his Lordship
give as wise an answer to this question of yours; They may be examined and
approved by the authentical Autographa's of the very Apostles. Where is it that
this answer is given by his Lordship? If you may be allowed to make questions
and answers too, no doubt, the one will be as wise as the other. But I suppose
you thought, nothing could be said pertinent in this case, but what you make
his Lordship say: and then by the unreasonableness of that answer, because none
of these Autographa's are supposed extant, and because if they were so, all men
could not be Infallibly certain of them, you think you have sufficient
advantage against your adversary, because thereby it would appear there can be
no certainty of Scripture but from the authority of your Church. To which
because it may seem to carry on your great design of rendering Religion
uncertain, I shall return a particular answer.

1. Supposing we could have no certainty concerning the Copy's of Scripture but
from Tradition, this does not at all advantage your cause,. 6.
unless you could prove, that no other Tradition but that of your Church can
give us any certainty of it. Give me leave then to make this supposition, That
God might not have given this supernatural assistance to your Church, which you
pretend makes it Infallible, Whether men through the Universal consent of
persons of the Christian Church in all Ages, might not have been undoubtedly
certain, That the Scripture we have, was the same delivered by the Apostles? i.
e. Whether a matter of fact, in which the whole Christian world was so deeply
engaged, that not only their credit, but their interest was highly concerned in
it, could not be attested by them in a credible manner? Which is as much as to
ask, Whether the whole Christian world was not at once besotted and infatuated
in ^he grossest manner, so as to suffer the records of those things which
concerned their eternal welfare, to be imbezeled, falsified, or corrupted, so
as to mistake them for Apostolical writings, which were nothing so. If it be
not then credible, that the Christian world should be so monstrously imposed
upon, and so grossly deceived, then certainly the Universal Tradition of the
Society may yield unquestionable evidence to any inquisitive person, as to the
integrity and incorruption of the body of Scriptures. And if it may yield such
evidence, why does it not so? when we see this was the very case of the
Christian world in all Ages. Some writings were delivered to the Church of the
Age they lived in, by the Apostles; these writings were so delivered, as that
the Christians understood they were of things of more concernment to them than
the whole world was; these writings were then received, embraced, and publicly
read; these writings were preserved by them so sacred and inviolable, that it
was accounted a crime of the highest nature to deliver the Copy's of them into
the hands of the Heathen persecutors; these writings were still owned by them
as Divine, and the rule and standard of Faith, these were appealed to in all
disputes among them, these were preserved from the attempts of Heretics,
vindicated from the assaults of the most learned Infidels, transcribed into the
Books of the most diligent Christians, transmitted from one Generation to
another, as the most sacred depositum of Heaven; And yet is it possible, to
suppose that these writings should be extorted out of their hands by violence,
abused under their eyes by fraud, or suffered to be lost by negligence. Yet no
other way can be imagined, why any should suspect the Books of Scripture which
we have are not the same with those delivered by the Apostles. All which are
such unreasonable suppositions, that they could hardly enter into any head but
yours, or such whose cause you manage in these disputes; the most profligate
Atheists, or most unreasonable Scepticks. If then we entertain but mean and
ordinary thoughts of the Christians of all Ages, if we look upon them as silly
men abused into a Religion by fraud and imposture; yet we cannot doubt, but
that these persons were careful to preserve the records of that Religion,
because they were so diligent in the study of it, so venturous for it, such
enemies to the corrupters of it, so industrious in propagating the knowledge of
it to their friends and Posterity. Do you think our Nation did ever want an
Infallible Testimony to preserve the Magna Charta, supposing no authentic
record of it kept in the Public Archives of the Nation? Would not men's
interest make them careful to preserve it inviolable, especially considering
the frequency of causes whose decision depends upon it, and the dispersion of
the Copy's abroad, and the diligence of such whose profession leads them to
look to such things. And will not the same reasons hold in a greater measure
for the integrity and incorruption of Scriptures? Do not the eternal Concerns
of all Christians depend upon those sacred records, that, if those be not true,
they were of all men most miserable? Were not innumerable Copy's of these
writings suddenly dispersed abroad, and all Christians accounted it a part of
their Religion to search and enquire into them? Has there not always been a
succession of diligent and faithful persons, whose office and profession it
has been to read, interpret, and vindicate these Books? and who have left
excellent monuments of their endeavors in this nature? Is it then possible to
suppose all those Copy's at once imbezeled, all those Christians in one age
deceived, all those Divines so secure and negligent that there should be any
considerable alteration, much less any total depravation of these writings?
When once I see a whole Corporation consent to burn their public Charter, and
substitute a new one in the place of it, and this not be suspected or
discovered; When I shall see a Magna Charta foisted, and neither King nor
people be sensible of such a Cheat; When all the world shall conspire to
deceive themselves and their children: I may then suspect such an imposture as
to the Scripture; but not before. And will not all this persuade you, that
there is no necessity of making your Church Infallible in order to our
certainty, that we have the same books of Scripture which were delivered by the
Apostles? If not, the next news I shall expect to hear from you, will be, That
we can have no certainty of the Being of God, or the Foundation of all
Religion, but from your Churches Infallibility; there being every jot as much
reason to say, that all mankind should be deceived into the belief of a Deity
by some cunning Politicians, as that all Christians should be deceived as to
the belief of such Books to be Scripture which were universally corrupted; and
if you understood Consequences you would have urged one as soon as the other.
But still remember, into what precipices this good doctrine of Infallibility
leads you.

. 7.
But it may be your meaning is more gentle and easy, than to suppose there
could be no certainty as to all the Books being the same, but only that we
cannot have any Infallible certainty that there are no corruptions crept into
these Books which we have, but from your Churches Testimony. To which I answer,
1. That there is no reason to suppose this should be your meaning. 2. Supposing
it were your meaning, there is no reason in the thing.

1. There is no reason to suppose this should be your meaning; for you are
speaking of such things which are necessary to be believed, and therefore are
properly objects of Faith, but that there are no kind of corruptions crept into
the Copy's of Scripture, cannot with you be an object of Faith. For those of
your party do some of them confess and others contend, that there are many
corruptions crept into the Hebrew Text of the Old Testament, and the Greek of
the New; and that there are abundance of corruptions in your Vulgar Latin is
not only abundantly proved by our Writers, but acknowledged by the learned of
your own, and irrefragably demonstrated by the different editions of Sixtus and
Clement.

Suppose this were your meaning, there were no reason in the thing; For, 1.
Your Church cannot Infallibly assure us, there are no corruptions. 2. We may be
sufficiently assured of it without the Testimony of your Church.

1. Your Church cannot assure us at all, much less Infallibly that there are no
such corruptions. For what reason can there be, Why we should rely on the
judgment of only a part of the whole Society of Christians, and that part at
great opposition with many other considerable Churches; must we then believe
your Church where it agrees with, or it differs from the rest? If only where it
agrees with the rest, then it is not the testimony of your Church we rely on,
but the Universal consent of all: If where it differs, show us some reason, why
we should believe your Church in opposition to all others. Especially, 1. When
we consider what contradiction there has been in the testimony of your Church
about this very thing: as appears not only by the great difference among your
writers concerning the authentic Copy's, some still defending the Hebrew and
Greek Texts, and others standing up for that great Diana of Rome the Vulgar
Latin. Considering then, that by the decree of the Council of Trent the Vulgar
Latin is looked on by you as the most authentic Copy of the Scripture, let any
one judge whether ever this could be judged more authentic, than when the Pope
himself in Cathedra does revise any edition of it, and use all possible care
for the setting of it forth, not only comparing it with the best ancient MS S.
but taking the pains to correct it with his own hand both before and after the
press, and all this was done by Sixtus 5. as himself declares in the Preface to
his edition of the Vulgar Latin, A.D. 1590. Yet within little more then two
years after comes out the edition of Clement 8. which, as appears by the
computation of such who have taken the pains to compare them, differs from the
other in some thousands of places. Now I pray tell me what Infallible certainty
are we like to have concerning the Copy's of Scripture, being the same with
those delivered by the Apostles, from the Infallibility of your Church, when
this testimony of your Church does so finely contradict it self within little
more then two years time. Nay when Sixtus 5. his care was so great and
extraordinary in his edition, that an Inscription was made in the Vatican, in
perpetuam rei memoriam, which is in letters of Gold in these words, SACRAM
PAGINAM EX CONCILII TRIDENTINI PRAESCRIPTO QVAM EMENDATISSIMAM DIVVLGARI
MANDAVIT.

Biblioth. Vatican. p. 229.
Which Inscription, as Angelus Roccha tells us, was purposely made to set forth
that infinite care and pains which the Pope took in that edition, Which were so
great (says he) that it is impossible that any should recount them, and for
his own part he stood astonished when he saw them: for he not only carefully
corrected the Copy before the Impression, but reviewed it sheet by sheet after,
that the edition might be the more faithful. And shall we after all this
believe that Sixtus 5. never lived to see this edition complete, which is the
miserable shift some of your party have to avoid this evident contradiction: Or
shall we think, what others pretend, That he never lived to authorize this
Edition of his, whereas his Brieve does in terms declare this to be the
authentic vulgar Latin, which the Decree of the Council of Trent had respect
to; but this Brieve, others say, though provided was never proclaimed; It seems
then the Popes Infallibility depends upon Proclamation, but was not this Bull
sufficiently proclaimed which is extant in those editions of Sixtus 5? with an
injunction that this Bible be read in all Churches ne minima quidem particula,
mutata, addita, vel detracta, without any the least alteration. Now then when
the Vulgar Latin is owned by the Council of Trent for the authentic Copy of
Scripture; when the Pope whose testimony must be supposed Infallible takes
great pains in prosecution of the decree of that Council to declare and set
forth the true authentic edition of this Vulgar Latin, When should we ever, if
not now, expect some Infallible certainty of the true Copy of the Scripture?
yet so far are we from it, that not long after men are forbidden the use of
that edition under the penalty of the greater Excommunication. And all this,
forsooth, under the pretense of Typographical faults, and what then must we
think of that Pope who took such incessant pains to correct them? Thus we see
how far we are from any certainty at all, much more from any Infallible
certainty concerning the true Copy's of Scripture from the authority of your
Church. 2. The authenticalness of those Copy's set forth by the appointment of
the Council of Trent and the approbation of the Pope, has no greater evidence
of certainty than any other Copy's of Scripture, if they have so much. For all
that Sixtus 5. pretends for the authenticalness of that Copy, is, the agreement
of it with the ancient and approved Copy's both Printed and MSS. which he had
caused to be diligently searched in Libraries, Than which, (says he) there can
be no more firm or certain argument of the true and genuine text. In hac autem
germani textus pervestigatione, satis perspicue inter omnes constat, nullum
argumentum esse certius ac firmius, quam antiquorum probatorumque Codicum
Latinorum fidem, quos tam impressos, quam MSS. ex bibliothecis variis
conquirendos curavimus. Sixtus 5. Praefat.
Well said however in this! But if the Latin Copy's be so sure a rule to judge
of the authenticalness of the Text by, shall not much more the ancient Copy's
of the Original Hebrew and Greek; especially when we consider, that the vast
difference of the Clementine and Sixtine Bibles lay in this, that Clement the
8. did correct the Vulgar Latin according to the original in above two thousand
places, when the contrary reading was established by Sixtus. For the Pope where
he pleased took the Marginal Annotations in the Lovain Bibles and inserted them
into the text; which Marginal Annotations contain the different readings which
were observed from the comparing the Vulgar Latin with the Originals, as
appears by the Preface to the Lovain Bibles. And although the Pope ex
Apostolicae potestatis plenitudine (as Sixtus 5. phraseth it in the Bull before
his Bibles) did take and leave where he pleased himself, yet it is evident from
those who have compared them, that above two thousand places are reformed
according to the Originals; and more then twice as many more might have been if
his Holiness had thought good. For our industrious Dr. James, who had taken the
pains accurately to compare not only the Sixtine Clementine Bibles, but the
Clementine edition with the Lovain Annotations, does in the defense of his
Bellum Papale challenge Gretser the Jesuit to join issue with him if he dared
on the point, Page 49.
viz. of making it appear that there were 10000. differences in the Lovain
Annotations from the Vulgar Latin, and that these differences arise from the
comparing it with the Hebrew, Greek, and Chaldee. Are we not then at a fine
pass for our Infallible certainty concerning the Copies of Scripture, if the
judgment of your Church must be relied on? Was that sufficient ground for Pope
Clement to reform two thousand places, and would it not serve for all the rest?
If those were truer because they agreed more with the Originals, were not the
rest so too? And have not we the greatest reason to rely on the Originals when
the Pope himself appeals to them, and reforms by them? According then to the
judgment of your pretended Infallible Church we have as great certainty as
they, for certainly the Hebrew and Greek are as obvious to us as them; and I
never yet heard that your Popes did challenge to themselves among other
Apostolical prerogatives the gift of tongues.

2. We may be sufficiently assured that there are no material corruptions in
the Books of Scripture without your Churches testimony, not that we pretend the
Apostles Autographa are still extant for us to compare our Copies with
(although some of your side tell us among other rarities of the Vatican,
Bailius Contr. Catech. q. 15^ tr. 1. Huntl. Controv. 1. c. 13. sect. 9.
that the true ancient Greek text is there extant, which the Pope would do well
to oblige the world with) but we whose eyes are not blessed with such noble
sights as are there locked up from all such who have not a good dose of
implicit Faith about them, pretend to no such thing: but by the diligent
comparing the present Copies with the most ancient MSS. by the observation of
what Citations of Scripture are produced by those of the Fathers who lived when
some of these Autographa were extant (as it is apparent some were in
Tertullians time, and some tell us that the authentic Apocalypse was preserved
in the Church of Ephesus in Honorius his time) by the diligence of the
primitive writers in taking notice of the least attempt for falsification or
corruption of the text; For when Marcion began to clip and falsify the text,
Iren. l. 1. c. 29. Tertul. c. Marcion. l. 5. Epiph. haeres. 42.
Irenaeus presently takes notice of it and gives him a sufficient rebuke for
it: and so does Tertullian afterward, and Epiphanius particularly takes notice
of all those places which had violent hands laid upon them and rescues them
from those impure attempts, so that we still enjoy them in their integrity. So
that whatever endeavors were made, they were presently discovered, as that of
the Arrians by St. Ambrose, Ambros. de Sp. S. l. 3. c. 11. Theodoret. de
haeret. Fab. l. 1. Bellar. l. 2. de V. D. c. 7.
that of Tatianus his Monotessaron by Theodoret. In so much, that Bellarmin
himself confesses; Etsi multa depravare conati sunt haeretici, tamen nunquam
defuerunt Catholici, qui little corruptelas detexerint, and non permiserint
libros sacros corrumpi. That the Catholics were as vigilant as the Heretics
malicious, and therefore could never effect their design in corrupting the
Scripture. Besides, it is observable, that among those multitudes of various
lections in the New Testament, of which R. Stephen made a collection out of
sixteen MSS. of 2384. (which probably were occasioned by the general dispersion
of Copies, and the multitudes of transcriptions by such as were either ignorant
or careless) yet there are none which are material, so as to entrench upon the
integrity and authority of the Copies as a rule of Faith and Manners; they are
therefore but racings of the skin, but no wounds of any vital part. Abating
therefore only what must necessarily be supposed in the multitudes of Copies
transcribed, there is so great integrity and incorruption in those Copies we
have, that we cannot but therein take notice of a peculiar hand of Divine
Providence in preserving these authentic records of our Religion so safe to
our days. But it is time now to return to you.

You would therefore persuade us, That we have no ground of certainty as to the
Copies of Scripture, but comparing them with the Apostles Autographa; but I
hope our former discourse has given you a sufficient account of our certainty
without seeing the Apostles own hands. But I pray what certainty then had the
Jews after the Captivity, of their Copies of the Law? yet I cannot think you
will deny them any ground of certainty in the time of Christ that they had the
true Copies both of the Law and the Prophets; and I hope you will not make the
Sanhedrin, which condemned our Savior to death, to have given them their only
Infallible certainty concerning it. If therefore the Jews might be certain
without Infallibility, why may not we? for if the Oracles of God were committed
to the Jews then, they are to the Christians now.

. 8.
You yet further urge, That there can be no certainty concerning the
Autographa's of the Apostles, but by tradition: And may not every universal
tradition be carried up as clearly at least to the Apostles times, Page 83.
as the Scriptures, by most credible Authors, who wrote in their respective
succeeding ages? I answer, We grant there can be no certainty as to the Copies
of Scripture but from tradition, and if you can name any of those great things
in Controversy between us, which you will undertake to prove to be as
universal a tradition; as that of the Scriptures; you and I shall not differ as
to the belief of it. But think not to fob us off with the tradition of the
present Church instead of the Church of all ages, with the tradition of your
Church instead of the Catholic, with the ambiguous testimonies of two or three
of the Fathers, instead of the universal consent of the Church since the
Apostles times. If I should once see you prove the Infallibility of your
Church, the Popes Supremacy, Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images, the
necessity of Coelibate in the Clergy, a punitive Purgatory, the lawfulness of
communicating in one kind, the expediency of the Scriptures and Prayers being
in an unknown tongue, the sacrifice of the Mass, Transubstantiation (to name no
mo^e) by as unquestionable and universal a tradition as that whereby we receive
the Scriptures, I shall extol you for the only person that ever did any thing
considerable on your side, and I shall willingly yield my self up as a Trophey
to your brave attempts. Either then for ever forbear to mention any such
things, as Universal Tradition among you as to any things, besides Scriptures,
which carry a necessity with them of being believed or practiced; or once for
all undertake this task, and manifest it as to the things in Controversy
between us. Your next Paragraph (besides what has been already discussed in
this Chapter concerning Apostolical tradition of Scripture) empties it self
into the old mare mortuum of the formal object and Infallible application of
Faith, which I cannot think my self so much at leisure to follow you into, so
often as you fall into it. When once you bring any thing that has but the
least resemblance of reason more than before, I shall afresh consider it, but
not till then. What next follows concerning resolving Faith into prime
Apostolical Tradition infallibly, without the Infallibility of the present
Church, has been already prevented by telling you, that his Lordship does not
say, That the infallible Resolution of Faith is into that Apostolical
Tradition, but into the Doctrine which is conveyed in the Books of Scripture
from the Apostles times down to us, Page 84.
by an unquestionable Tradition. Your stale Objection, That then we should want
Divine Certainty, has been over and over answered; and so has your next
Paragraph, That if the Church be not infallible, we cannot be infallibly
certain, that Scripture is Gods Word: and so the remainder concerning Canonical
Books. It is an easy matter to write great Books after that rate, to swell up
your discourses with needless repetitions; but it is the misery that attends a
bad cause, and a bad stomach, to have unconcocted things brought up so often,
till we nauseate them.

Your next offer is at the Vindication of the noted place of S. Austin, I would
not believe the Gospel,. 9.
etc. which (you say) cannot rationally be understood of Novices, Weaklings,
and Doubters in the Faith. This being then the place at every turn objected by
you, and having before reserved the discussion of it to this place, I shall
here particularly and thoroughly consider the meaning of it. In order to which,
three things must be enquired into.

1. What the Controversy was which St. Austin was there discussing of?

2. What that Church was which St. Austin was moved by the Authority of?

3. In what way and manner that Churches Authority did persuade him?

1. Nothing seems more necessary for understanding the meaning of this place,
than a true state of the Controversy, which S. Austin was disputing of; and
yet nothing less spoke to on either side, than this has been. We are therefore
to consider, that when Manes or Manichaeus began to appear in the world, to
broach that strange and absurd Doctrine of his in the Christian world, which he
had received from Terebinthus or Buddas, as he from Scythianus (who, if we
believe Epiphanius, Epiph. haeres. 66.
went to Jerusalem in the Apostles times, to enquire into the Doctrine of
Christianity, and dispute with the Christians about his Opinions) but easily
foreseeing what little entertainment so strange a complexion of absurdities
would find in the Christian world, as long as the writings of the Apostles and
Evangelists were received every where with that esteem and veneration: Two
ways he, or his more cunning Disciples, bethought themselves of, whereby to
lessen the authority of those writings, and so make way for the Doctrine of
Manichaeus. One was to disparage the Credulity of Christians, because the
Catholic Church insisted so much on the necessity of Faith, whereas they
pretended they would desire men to believe nothing but what they gave them
sufficient reason for. But all this while, since the Christians thought they
had evident reason for believing the Scriptures, and consequently none to
believe the Doctrine which did oppose them; therefore they found it necessary
to go further, and to charge those Copies of Scripture with falsifications and
corruptions, which were generally received among Christians. But these are
fully delivered by S. Austin in his Book de utilitate credendi, as will appear
to any one who looks into it; but the latter is that which I aim at; this he
therefore taxes them for, That with a great deal of impudence, or, to speak
mildly, with much weakness, Nihil mihi videtur ab iis im^udentius dici, vel ut
mitius loqua^, incuriosias and imbecillius, quam Scripturas divinas esse
corruptas, cum id n^ll^, in tam recenti memo^ia, extantibus exempla^^bus
possint convincere. D. August. de Utilit. cred. c. 3.
they charged the Scriptures to be corrupted; and yet could not at so small a
distance of time prove any corruption by any Copies which were extant. For,
says he, if they should say, They would not embrace their writings, because
they were written by such who were not careful of writing Truth, their evasion
would be more s^y, and their error more pardonable. But thus, it seems, they
did by the Acts of the Apostles, utterly denying them to contain matter of
Truth in them; and the reason was very obvious for it, because that Book gives
so clear an account of the sending the Spirit upon the Apostles, which the
Manichees pretended was to be only accomplished in the person of Manichaeus.
And both before and after, S. Austin mentions it as their common speech, Quam
multa soleant dicere immixta esse scripturis divinis, a nescio quibus
co^ruptoribus veritatis.

Volunt enim nescio quos corruptores divinorum librorum ante ipsius Manichaei
tempora fuisse. Id. ib.

Corrupisse autem illos, qui Judaeorum legem Evangelio miscere capiebant.


That before the time of Manichaeus, there had been corrupters of the sacred
Books, who had mixed several things of their own with what was written by the
Apostles. And this they laid upon the Judaizing Christians, because their great
pique was against the Old Testament, and probably some further reason might be
from the Nazarene Gospel; wherein many things were inserted by such as did
Judaize. The same thing St. Austin charge them with, when he gives an account
of their Heresy. And this likewise appears by the management of the dispute
between S. Austin and Faustus, Ipsiusque Novi Testamenti-Scripturas tanquam
infalsatas ita legunt, ut quod voluerint inde accipiant quod nolunt rejiciant.
Aug. haeres. 46.

Evangilium quid^m a praedicatione Christi and esse caepit and numinari: at
vero Genealogia adeo non est Evangelium, ut nec ipse ejus scriptor ausus fuerit
eam Evangelium nominare. Faustus apud August. c. Faustum. l. 2. init. l. 3.
init. l. 5. init.

Ubi si^ man^festa veritate isti praefocantur ut obs^ssi d lu^idis verbis
Sanctarum Scripturarum, exitum in iis sall^ci^ suae reperire non possint;
d^test monium, quod prolatum est, salsum esse res^ondent. c. Faustum. l. 11. c.
2.


who was much the subtillest man among them. Faustus acknowledged no more to be
Gospel, than what contained the Doctrine delivered by our Savior, and
therefore denied the Genealogies to be any part of the Gospel; and afterward
disputes against it, both in S. Matthew, and S. Luke. And after this S. Austin
notes it as their usual custom, when they could not avoid a Testimony of
Scripture, to deny it. Thus we see, what kind of persons these were, and what
their pretenses were which S. Austin disputes against, They embraced so much of
Scripture, as pleased them, and no more. To this therefore S. Austin returns
these very substantial Answers, Quae autoritas literarum aperiri, quis sacer
liber evolvi, quod documentum cujuslibet Scripturae ad convincendos errores
exeri potest, si h^c vox admittitur, si alicujus ponderis aestimatur? Id. ib.
That if such proceedings might be admitted, the Divine Authority of any Books
could signify nothing at all for the convincing of errors. That it was much
more reasonable, either with the Pagans, to deny the whole Bible, or with the
Jews, to deny the New Testament, than thus to acknowledge in general the Books
Divine, and to quarrel with such particular passages as pinched them most, that
if there were any suspicion of corruption, they ought to produce more true
Copies, and more ancient Books than theirs, or else be judged by the Original
Languages, with many other things to the same purpose. To apply this now to the
present place in dispute, S. Austin in that Book against the Epistle of
Manichaeus, begins with the Preface to it, which is made in imitation of the
Apostles strain, and begins thus, Manichaeus Apostolus Jesu Christi,
providentia Dei Patris, etc. To this S. Austin says, he believes no such
thing, as that Manichaeus was an Apostle of Jesus Christ, and hopes they will
not be angry with him for it; for he had learned of them not to believe without
reason. And therefore desires them to prove it: It may be (says he) one of you
may read me the Gospel, and thence persuade me to believe it. But, Si ergo
invenires aliquem, qui Evangelio nondum credit, quid faceres dicenti tibi, Non
credo? Ego vero evangelio non crederem, nisi me Catholicae ecclesiae commoveret
auctoritas. Quibus ergo obtemperavi dicentibus, credit Evangelio, car eis non
obtemperem dicentibus mihi, Noli credere Manichaeo? c. ep. Fundam. c. 5.
what if you should meet with one, who, when you read the Gospel, should say to
you, I do not believe it. But, I should not believe the Gospel, if the
Authority of the Church did not move me: Whom therefore I obey in saying
Believe the Gospel, should I not obey in saying, Believe not Manichaeus. The
Question, we see, is concerning the proving the Apostleship of Manichaeus,
which cannot in it self be proved, but from some Records, which must specify
such an Apostleship of his; and to any one who should question the
authenticalness of those Records, it can only be proved by the testimony and
consent of the Catholic Church, without which S. Austin professes, he should
never have believed the Gospel, i. e. that these were the only true and
undoubted Records, which are left us of the Doctrine and actions of Christ. And
he had very good reason to say so; for otherwise the authority of those Books
should be questioned every time any one, such as Manichaeus, should pretend
himself an Apostle: which Controversies there can be no other way of deciding,
but by the Testimony of the Church, which has received and embraced these
Copies from the time of their first publishing. And that this was S. Austin's
meaning, will appear by several parallel places in his disputes against the
Manichees. For in the same chapter, speaking concerning the Acts of the
Apostles, Which Book (says he) I must believe, Cui libro necesse est me
credere, si credo Evangelio; quoniam utramque Scripturam similiter mihi
Catholica commendat authoritas. Ib.
as well as the Gospel, because the same Catholic Authority commends both; i.
e. The same Testimony of the Universal Church, which delivers the Gospel as the
authentic writings of the Evangelists, does likewise deliver the Acts of the
Apostles for an authentic writing of one of the same Evangelists: So that
there can be no reason to believe the one, and not the other. So when he
disputes against Faustus, who denied the truth of some things in S. Paul's
Epistles; he bids him show a truer Copy than that the Catholic Church
received, which Copy, if he should produce, he desires to know how he would
prove it to be truer to one that should deny it. What would you do? (says he)
Whither would you turn your self? Quid ages? quo te convertes? quam libri a te
prolati originem, quam vetustatem, quam seriem successionis testem citabis?
Aug. c. Faustum. l. 11. c, 2.
What Original of your Book could you show? What Antiquity, what Testimony of a
succession of persons from the time of the writing of it? But on the contrary,
What huge advantage the Catholics have, who, Et vides in hac re quid Ecclesiae
Catholicae valeat authoritas, quae ab ipsis fundatissimis sedibus Apostolorum
usque ad hodiernum diem succedentium sibimet Episcoporum serie, and tot
populorum consensione firmatur. Id. ib.
by a constant succession of Bishops in the Apostolical Sees, and by the
consent of so many people, have the Authority of the Church confirmed to them
for the clearing the validity of its Testimony concerning the Records of
Scripture. And after lays down Rules for the trying of Copies, where there
appears any difference between them, viz. by comparing them with the Copies of
other Countries, Ita si de side exemplarium quaestio verteretur sicut in
nonnullis, quae and paucae sunt, and Sacrarum Literarum studiosis notissimae
sententiarum varietates, vel ex aliorum Regionum codicibus, unde ipsa Doctrina
commeavit, nostra dubitatio dijudicaretur: vel, si ibi quoque codices
variarent, plures paucioribus, aut vetustatiores recentioribus praeferrentur:
and si adhuc incerta varietas, praecedens lingua unde illud interpretatum est
consuleretur Id. ib.
from whence the Doctrine originally came; and if those Copies vary too, the
more Copies should be preferred before the fewer, the ancienter before the
latter: If yet any uncertainty remains, the original Language must be
consulted. This is, in case a Question arises among the acknowledged
authentical Copies of the Catholic Church, (in which case we see, he never
sends men to the infallible Testimony of the Church, for certainty as to the
Truth of the Copies) but if the Question be, Whether any writing it self be
authentical or no, then it stands to the greatest reason, that the Testimony of
the Catholic Church should be relied on, which, by reason of its large spread,
and continual Succession from the very time of those writings, cannot but give
the most indubitable Testimony concerning the authenticalness of the writings
of the Apostles and Evangelists. And were it not for this Testimony, S. Austin
might justly say, He should not believe the Gospel; i. e. Suppose those
writings which contain the Gospel in them (for it is plain he speaks of them,
and not the Doctrine abstractly considered) should have wanted that consent of
the Catholic Church, that it had not been delivered down by a constant
succession of all Ages from the Apostles, and were not received among the
Christian Churches, but started out from a few persons who differ from all
Christian Churches, as this Apostleship of Manichaeus did; he might justly
question the Truth of them. And this I take to be truest and most natural
account of these so much controverted words of S. Austin; by which sense the
other two Questions are easily answered: for it is plain, S. Austin means not
the judgment of the present Church, but of the Catholic Church, in the most
comprehensive sense, as taking in all ages and places, or in Vincentius his
words, Succession, Universality, and Consent; and it further appears, that the
influence which this Authority has, is sufficient to induce Assent to the
thing attested in all persons who consider it, in what age, capacity, or
condition soever. And therefore, if in this sense you extend it beyond Novices
and Weaklings, I shall not oppose you in it; but it cannot be denied, that it
is intended chiefly for doubters in the Faith, because the design of it is to
give men satisfaction as to the reason why they ought to believe. But neither
you, nor any of those you call Catholic Authors, will ever be able to prove,
that S. Austin by these words ever dreamt of any infallible Authority in the
present Church, as might be abundantly proved from the chapter foregoing, where
he gives an account of his being in the Catholic Church, from the Consent of
People and Nations from that Authority which was begun by miracles, nourished
by hope, increased by charity, confirmed by continuance, which certainly are
not the expressions of one who resolved his Faith into the infallible Testimony
of the present Church. And the whole scope and design of his Book de utilitate
credendi, does evidently refute any such apprehension, as might be easily
manifested, were it not too large a subject for this place, where we only
examine the meaning of S. Austin in another Book. The substance of which, is,
that That speech of his does not contain a resolution of his Faith, as to the
Divinity of Christ's Doctrine; but the resolution of it, as to the Truth and
authenticalness of the writings of the Apostles and Evangelists, which we
acknowledge to be into the Testimony of the Catholic Church, in the most large
and comprehensive sense.

The next thing we come to consider, is, an Absurdity you charge on his
Lordship,. 10.
viz. That if the infallible Authority of the Church be not admitted in the
Resolution, P. 85. n. 3.
he must have recourse to the private Spirit, which (you say) though he would
seem to exclude from the state of the Question, yet he falls into it under the
specious title of Grace; so that he only changes the words, but admits the
same thing, for which you cite p. 83, 84. That therein his Lordship should
averr, that where others used to say, They were infallibly resolved that
Scripture was Gods Word, by the Testimony of the Spirit within them, that he
has the same assurance by Grace. Whether you be not herein guilty of abusing
his Lordship by a plain perverting of his meaning, will be best seen by
producing his words. P. 83.
A man (says he) is probably led by the Authority of the present Church, as by
the first informing, inducing, persuading means, to believe the Scripture to be
the Word of God: But, when he has studied, considered, and compared this Word
with it self, and with other writings, with the help of ordinary Grace, and a
mind morally induced, and reasonably persuaded by the Voice of the Church, the
Scripture then gives greater and higher reasons of Credibility to it self, than
Tradition alone could give. And then he that believes, resolves his last and
full assent, that Scripture is of Divine Authority, into internal arguments
found in the letter it self, though found by the help and direction of
Tradition without, and Grace within. Had you not a great mind to calumniate,
who could pick out of these words, That the Bishop resolved his Faith into
Grace? Can any thing be more plain, than the contrary is from them, when in the
most perspicuous terms he says, that the last Resolution of Faith is into
internal arguments, and only supposes Tradition and Grace as necessary helps
for the finding them? Might you not then as well have said, That his Lordship,
notwithstanding his zeal against the Infallibility of Tradition, is fain to
resolve his Faith into it at last, as well as say, that he does it into Grace;
for he joins these two together? But, Is it not possible to assert the Use and
Necessity of Grace, in order to Faith, but the last Resolution of it must be
into it? Do not all your Divines, as well as ours, suppose and prove the
Necessity of Grace, in order to believing; and, Are they not equally guilty of
having recourse to the private Spirit? Do you really think your self, that
there is any thing of Divine Grace in Faith or no? If there be, free your Self
then from the private Spirit, and you do his Lordship. For shame then forbear
such pitiful calumnies; which, if they have any truth in them, You are as much
concerned as Your adversary in it. You would next persuade us, That the Relator
never comes near the main difficulty, which (say you) is, if the Church be
supposed fallible in the Tradition of Scripture, how it shall be certainly
known, whether de facto, she now errs not in her delivery of it? If this be
your grand difficulty, it is sufficiently assoiled already, having largely
answered this Question in terminis, in the preceding Chapter.

You ask further, What they are to do who are unresolved which is the true
Church; as though it were necessary for men to know which is the true Church,
before they can believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God? but when we
assert the tradition of the Church to be necessary for believing the
Scriptures, we do not thereby understand the particular Tradition of any
particular Church whose judgment they must rely on, but the Universal
Tradition of all Christians though this must be first made known in some
particular Society, by the means of some particular persons, though their
authority does not oblige us to believe, but only are the means whereby men
come acquainted with that Universal Tradition. And therefore your following
discourse concerning the knowing the true Church by its motives is superseded;
for we mean no other Church than the Community of Christians in this
Controversy; and, if you ask me, By what motives I come to be certain which is
a Community of Christians, and which of Mahumetans, and how one should be known
from another, I can soon resolve you: But we are so far from making it
necessary to know which particular society of Christians in opposition to
others, is the true Church for resolving this question, that we look on it as a
great argument of the Credibility as well as Universality of this Tradition,
that all these differing Societies consent in it. And not only they, but the
greatest opposers of Christianity, Jews, or Philosophers, could never see any
reason to call in question such a Tradition.

His Lordship the better to represent the use of Tradition in the last
resolution of Faith makes use of this illustration, That as the knowledge of
Grammar and Logic is necessary in order to the making a Demonstration, yet the
knowledge of the Conclusion is not resolved into Grammar or Logic, but into
the immediate principles out of which it is deduced: So a man's first
preparative to Faith is the Churches Tradition, but his full and last assent is
resolved into the internal arguments of Scripture. This you quarrel with, and
tell us, There is not the same Analogy between Logic and Church Tradition;
Page 86.
your meaning, I suppose is, because Logic does Physically by enlarging the
understanding fit men for demonstrations, but Church-Tradition cannot enable
men to understand the Scripture. But cannot you easily discern that Analogy
which his Lordship brought this illustration for, which is, that some things
may be necessary preparatives for knowledge, which that knowledge is not
resolved into. Is not this plain in Logic, and is it not as plain between
Tradition and Scripture? For though Tradition does not open our eyes to see
this light, yet it presents the object to us to be seen, and that in an
unquestionable manner. But for all this, say you, a man must either receive it
on the sole authority of Church-Tradition, or be as much in the dark as ever.
Why so? Is there any repugnancy in the thing, that Scripture should be received
first upon the account of Tradition, and yet afterward men resolve their Faith
into the Scripture it self? May not a man very probably believe that a Diamond
is sent him from a Friend upon the testimony of the Messenger who brings it,
and yet be firmly persuaded of it, by discerning the Sparklings of it? But, say
you further, The Scriptures themselves appear no more to be the Word of God,
then the Stars to be of a certain determinate number, P. 86. l. 33, 34.
or the distinction of colors to a blind man. If this approach not to the
highest blasphemy against the Scripture, I know not what does. He that shall
compare this saying of yours, with that in the precedent Chapter, That if
Christ had not left the Church Infallible, he might be accounted an Impostor
and Deceiver, may easily guess how much of Religion you believe in your heart,
when on so small occasions you do so openly disparage both Christ and the
Scriptures. It is well yet, your Churches Infallibility can stand on no better
terms than these are, which will be sufficient to keep any who have any true
sense of the truth and excellency of Christ and the Scriptures from hearkening
to it. But are you in good earnest when you say, that Scriptures themselves
appear no more to be the Word of God, than the distinction of colors to a
blind man, which is as much as nothing at all? Is there nothing at all in the
excellency of the Doctrine and Precepts contained in the Scriptures, nothing in
those clear discoveries of God and our selves, nothing in all those
transactions between God and men, nothing in that Covenant of Redemption
between God and man through Christ, nothing in the clear accomplishment and
fulfilling of Prophesies, nothing in that admirable strain and style which is
in the writings, nothing in that harmonious consent which is discovered in
writers of several ages, interests, places, and conditions, nothing in that
admirable efficacy which the Doctrine of it has upon the souls of men to
persuade them to renounce sin, the world, and themselves for the sake of it; is
there nothing more (I say) in all these, which makes the Scripture appear to be
the Word of God, than the distinction of colors to a blind man? Could you
as soon think to account the stars as discern any thing of Divinity from these
things in the Scriptures? If your eyes were as blind as your understanding,
could you as soon distinguish white from black, as the Scripture from the
Alcoran, if they were both presented to you to read, and judge of them
according to the evidence you found in them? Is it possible a man that owns
himself a Christian, should utter such opprobrious language of the Scripture?
You had been before speaking what honor you give to the Scripture,
notwithstanding you pretend your Church Infallible, and I had mentioned some of
those passages which occurr in your writers in disparagement of them: but I
must needs say they all fall short of this; the Nose of Wax, the Inky Divinity,
the Lesbian rule, are Courtlike expressions to this of yours; for this puts no
difference in the world between the Scripture and the Alcoran, if your Church
should propound the one as well as the other. For you could not possibly say
worse of the Alcoran, then that of it self it appeared no more to be the Word
of God, than distinction of colors to a blind man. I might here send you to be
chastised for this insolent Atheistical expression to the Primitive Fathers,
who speak so much in admiration of the excellency of Scriptures, who did
vindicate them from all assaults of the Heathen Philosophers. I might send you
to those of your own party, who if they have any love or tenderness for
Christian Religion will not suffer such passages to pass without the most
severe rebukes: I might sufficiently prove the contrary from the arguments used
against Atheists by Bellarmine and others; but I shall content my self with
that noble and Christian confession of your Gregory de Valentia, from whom you
might learn more piety and modesty toward the Sacred Scriptures. There being
many things in the Doctrine of Christianity it self, Cum multa sint in ipsa
Doctrina Christiana quae ipsa per se fidem ill and autoritatem conciliare
possint, tamen mihi maximum illud esse videtur, (ut a Clement. Alex. and a
Lactant. and ab aliis est observatum) quod sua nescio qua admirabili vi, divine
prorsus hominum animos afficit, atque ad virtutem impellit. Est scripta verbis
simplicibus, and caret fere artificio orationis and ornamentis; nibilominus ita
vehementer lectoris mentem commovet, ut nulla alia doctrina. Quod argumento
est, illius autoritatem omnino Divinam esse, and non humanam; haec enim sine
verborum art, and orationis quasi lenociniis, ad efficiendum a^imorum motum
non valet. Greg de Valentia. Analys. fidei. l. 1 c. 25.
which of themselves may conciliate belief and authority, yet that seems the
greatest to me (as has been observed by Clement of Alexandria, Lactantius and
others) that I know not with what admirable force, but most divine, it affects
the hearts of men, and stirs them up to virtue. It is written with great
simplicity, and without almost any artifice or ornament of speech; which is an
argument that its authority is not humane but Divine, for no humane writing
has any power on the minds of men without a great deal of art and eloquence.
How many things are there in this ingenuous and pious confession of this
learned Jesuit, which might, if you have any shame left, make you sensible of
the Blasphemy of your former expression. For, 1. He says, there are many
things in the doctrine of Christianity which for themselves may conciliate our
belief, and manifest their authority: If for themselves, then certainly the
Scriptures of themselves have a great deal more evidence, that they are the
Word of God, than the distinction of colors to a blind man. 2. That the
peculiar strain and genius of Scripture argues something Divine in it, because,
notwithstanding its simplicity it has so great power and efficacy on the minds
of men; far beyond any humane art or Rhetoric. 3. That this may be discerned
in the very Books of Scripture without the supposition of the authority of any
Church; for he mentions the Doctrine merely as written, and what may be found
by the reading of it. Go then, and learn some piety and ingenuity (where it is
so seldom to be learned) from a Jesuit, and think not that we shall ever have
the meaner thoughts of the Scripture for such bold expressions; but, we can
easily see, that the Infallibility of the Church, and the Honor of Scripture
cannot possibly stand together.

Your subsequent discourse consists of some rare pieces of subtilty, which may
be resolved into these consequences; If your Church of Rome has erred as to
the number of Canonical Books, then the Catholic Church, ever since Christ's
time, has erred; if the Church may err, then we cannot be certain but she
has erred; if we can have no infallible certainty, then we can have none at
all; These consequences your discourse to n. 5. may be resolved into; and make
good ever a one of them, I will say you have proved something; which is more
than you have done yet.

N. 5. You object against his Lordship, That he requires so many things in
order to the resolution of Faith,. 11.
that he makes none capable of it, but men of extraordinary parts and learning.
P. 87.
To which I answer, that his Lordship is not undertaking to give an account of
the Faith of rude or illiterate persons, but such a one as may satisfy men of
parts and learning, i. e. he endeavored to lay down the true rational account
of it, and not to enquire how far God obliges every man that comes to Heaven,
to a critical Resolution of his Faith. And therefore for the generality of such
persons who heartily believe the Truth of Scriptures, but are not able to give
a clear and satisfactory account of it to others; I answer, as S. Austin did in
the same case, Aug c. ep. Fund. c. 4.
Caeteram quippe turbam non intelligendi vivacitas, sed credendi simplicitas
tutissimam facit: That God requires not from the common sort of believers, the
subtilty of Speculation, but the simplicity of Faith; which may be very firm
even in them from the reading of Scriptures, and hearing the Doctrine of it
plainly delivered to them, though they are not able to give such accounts of
their Faith, which may be satisfactory to any but themselves. So we say, That
the way is so plain, that mean capacities may not err therein. But, I wonder
at you, of all men, that you should charge our way with intricacy, who lead men
into such perplexities and difficulties, before they can be satisfied that they
ought to believe; for to this end you make the infallible Testimony of the
Church necessary; and, how many insuperable difficulties are there before one
can be assured of that? first, he must know your Church to be the True Church,
and this must be proved by a continual succession of Pastors in your Church,
and by a conformity of your Doctrine with the Ancients; and, Do you think these
two are not very easy introductions to Faith, like the taking Rome in ones
way, to go from York to London; but, though a man should pull down a House to
find a Key to open it, and after he had searched in all the rubbish of
antiquity, find enough to persuade him yours may be a True Church, yet he is as
far from believing as ever, unless he finds a way through another Trapdoor for
his Faith, which is, that yours, though a particular Church, is yet the only
Catholic Church, i. e. that the first room he comes in, is infallibly the
whole house, and therefore he never needs look further. But, supposing this,
yet if he does not believe this Church to be infallible in all it says, he had
as good never come into it; and therefore he must believe strenuously, That
whatever it says, is infallibly True, which being so hard a task (as for a man
that sees a house half down before his eyes, to believe it can never fall) it
had need have some good buttresses to support it, and at last finds nothing but
some feeble Motives of Credibility, which signify nothing as to the Church,
but might have been strong enough, if set in the right place, viz. not to
support the Church, but to prove the truth of Christian Doctrine. These, and
many other intrigues, which I have formerly discovered, do unavoidably attend
the resolution of your Faith, among all persons who profess to believe on the
account of your Churches Infallibility.

What follows next concerning Grace, is already answered: What certainty we
have that Scripture is of Divine Revelation, and consequently what obligation
lies upon men to believe it, are things largely discoursed on in the beginning
of this Chapter; and I shall suppose sufficiently cleared, till you show me
reason to the contrary: By which it will appear (contrary to what follows n.
6.) that we have the highest reasons or motives of Credibility, to assent to
the Truth, and Divine Authority of the Scriptures.

But you proceed to an attempt of something new; which is,. 12.
in a long harangue to disprove his Lordships Opinion of resolving Faith into
that Divine Light which appears in Scripture. This you insist on from n. 6. to
n. 8. the substance of all which discourse, I suppose, may be reduced to these
three things. 1. That though the Scripture be called a Light, yet that is to be
understood only of those who own its authority. 2. That the Scripture cannot
show it self to be an Infallible Light. 3. That if there were such Light in
Scriture, all others would see it as well as he. Before I come to a particular
handling of each of these, it will be necessary to consider, What it is which
his Lordship means by this Divine Light in Scripture; for, there is nothing
causes more confusion in the discourses and apprehensions of men, than the
applying Metaphors taken from the sense to the acts of the Understanding: For,
by this means, we are apt to judge of our intellectual acts in a way wholly
suitable to those of sense. We are not therefore to conceive, there can be any
thing in Divine Truths, which so immediately does discover it self to the mind,
as light does to the eye. But that only which bears proportion to the light in
the mind, is reason; for men's minds being discursive, and not intuitive, they
do not behold the truth of things by immediate intuition, but by such reason
and arguments as do induce and persuade to assent. We are not therefore to
imagine any such Light in Scripture, that does as immediately work upon the
understanding, as the Light of the Sun does on the organs of sight; and
therefore that common speech, that Light does discover it self as well as other
things, is in this sense improperly applied to the Understanding; for, whatever
is discovered to the mind in a discursive manner, as all Objects of Faith are,
must have some antecedent evidence to it self, which must be the ground of the
act of assent. That therefore which is called the Divine Light of Scripture,
is, I suppose that rational evidence which is contained in the Books of
Scripture, whereby any reasonable man may be persuaded that these Books are of
Divine Authority. Now that herein I say nothing beyond or besides his Lordships
meaning and intention, will appear by his own discourse on this subject. For 1.
His Lordship designedly disproves that Opinion that Scripture should be fully
and sufficiently known as by Divine and Infallible Testimony, lumine proprio,
P. 69. sect. 16. n. 10.
by the resplendency of that Light which it has in it self only, and by the
witness that it can so give to it self. Because, as there is no place in
Scripture that tells us such Books containing such and such particulars, are
the Canon and Infallible Will of God; so, if there were any such place, that
could be no sufficient proof; for, a man may justly ask another Book to bear
witness to that, and so in infinitum. Again, this inbred Light of Scripture is
a thing coincident with Scripture it self, and so the Principles and the
Conclusion in this kind of proof should be entirely the same, which cannot be.
Besides, if this inward Light were so clear, how could there have been any
variety among the ancient Believers, touching the authority of S. James, and S.
Judes Epistles, and the Apocalypse, etc. For certainly the Light which is in
the Scripture, was the same then which now it is. On these reasons then, we
see, his Lordship not only disclaims, but disproves such knowing the Scripture
merely by the Light within. Two things then I hence infer, which will be very
necessary to clear his Lordships meaning. 1. That he no where attributes such
an inward Light to Scripture, that by it self it can discover that these Books
are from God. 2. That where his Lordship mentions this Light most, he supposes
Tradition antecedent to it, as appears by his whole discourse. From whence I
gather this to have been the plainest account of his way of resolving Faith, as
I have already intimated, viz. that the resolution of Faith may be considered
two ways; into the Books, and into the Doctrine contained in them. The
resolution into the Books, must, of necessity, suppose Tradition, and rely upon
it; and this kind of resolution of Faith, cannot be into any self-evidence, or
internal Light: but, supposing the Books owned on the account of Tradition, if
the Question be concerning the Divinity of the Doctrine, then he asserts, that
the resolution of this is into the Divine Light of Scripture, i. e. into that
rational evidence which we find of the Divinity of it, in these Books which are
owned on the account of Tradition.

And that this is his Lordships meaning, appears 2. By his own Testimony, P.
101. n. 32.
who was best able to explain himself; for, when he goes about to confirm his
Opinion by the Testimonies of the Fathers, he tells us, This was the way which
the ancient Church ever used, namely, Tradition, or Ecclesiastical Authority
first, and then all other arguments, but especially internal, from the
Scripture it self. And, for this first, instanceth in S. Augustine, who (says
he) gives four proofs all internal to the Scripture it self, which are, First,
The Miracles. Secondly, That there is nothing carnal in the Doctrine. Thirdly,
Fulfilling of Prophecies. Fourthly, The efficacy of it for conversion of the
world. All these we see he instanceth in, as internal arguments, and therefore
make up that which he calls Divine Light. So that all that he means by this
Light of Scripture, is only that rational evidence of the Divinity of the
Doctrine, which may be discovered in it, or deduced from it.

Having thus explained his Lordships meaning, it will be no matter of
difficulty to return an Answer to the particulars by you alleged.

1. You say, That when Scripture is said to be a Light by the Royal Prophet, it
is to be understood in this sense, Because, after we have once received it from
the infallible Authority of the Church, it teaches what we are to do and
believe. But, 1. Does not the Scripture sufficiently teach what we are to do
and believe, supposing it not received on the infallible Authority of the
Church? does that add any thing to the Light of Scripture? Or, do you suppose
the necessity of infallibly believing it on the Churches Authority, before one
can discern what it teaches us to do and believe?

2. What ground have you, in the least, to imagine, that David ever believed
the Scripture on the infallible authority of the Church: That he does suppose
it to be Gods Word, when he says, It is a Light to his feet, I deny not; but
that he should suppose it to be so, because the Church did infallibly tell him
it was so, is a most ungrounded Assertion. Had he not sufficient evidence that
the Law was from God, by those many unquestionable and stupendous Miracles,
which attended the delivery of it? Was not the whole constitution and
government of the Jewish Nation, an impregnable argument that those things were
true, which were recorded in their Books? Did ever the Jewish Sanhedrin, High
Priest, or others, arrogate to themselves any infallible Testimony, in
delivering the Books of Moses to the people? The most you can suppose of a
ground of certainty among them, was from that Sacred Record of the Book of the
Law, which was kept in the Ark: And how could they know that was Authentic,
but from the same Tradition, which conveyed the Miracles of Moses to them? So
that nothing like any infallible Authority of a Church was looked on by them as
necessary to believe the Law to have been from God. 3. Supposing it from
tradition unquestionable, that the Law was from God, those incomparable
directions which were in it might be a great confirmation to David's Faith,
that it was his Word. Which is that he intends, in these words, Thy Word is a
light to my feet, etc. to show that excellency and perspicuity which was in his
Word, that it gave him the best directions for ordering his conversation. And
this is all which his Lordship means, that to those, who, by the advantage of
Tradition, have already venerable thoughts of Scripture; the serious conversing
with it, does highly advance them, and establish their belief of it, as that
Faith is thereby clinched which was driven in by education. And therefore, when
he says, That Light discovers its self as well as other things, he presently
adds, not till there has been a preparing instruction what Light it is. Thus
(he says) the Tradition of the Church is the first moral motive to belief: But
the belief it self, that Scripture is the Word of God, rests upon Scripture, P.
84.
when a man finds it to answer and exceed that which the Church gave in
Testimony. For this his Lordship cites Origin, who, though much nearer the
prime Tradition than we are, yet being to prove that the Scriptures were
inspired from God, he says, De hoc assignabimus ex ipsis Scripturis Divinis,
Orig. (...). l. 4. c. 1.
quae nos competenter moverint, etc. We will mention those things out of the
sacred Scriptures, which have persuaded us, etc. To this you answer, Though
Origin prove by the Scriptures themselves, that they were inspired from God; P.
88.
yet does he never avow, that this could be proved out of them, unless they
were received by the infallible Authority of the Church. Which Answer is very
unreasonable. For 1. It might be justly expected that his Lordship had produced
an express Testimony to his purpose out of Origin, you should have brought some
other as clear for his believing Scripture on the Churches Infallibility, which
you are so far from, that you would put us to prove a Negative: But, if you
will deal fairly, and as you ought to do, produce your Testimonies out of him,
and the rest of the Fathers concerning your Churches Infallibility. Till then,
excuse us if we take their express words, and leave you to gather Infallibility
out of their latent meanings. 2. What does your Infallibility conduce to the
believing Scriptures for themselves? For, you say, The Scriptures cannot be
proved by themselves to be Gods Word, unless they were received by the
infallible Authority of the Church; it seems then, if they be so received, they
may be proved by themselves to be Gods Word. Are those proofs by themselves
sufficient for Faith or no? If not, they are very slender proofs: if they be,
What need your Churches Infallibility? Unless you will suppose, no man can
discern those proofs without your Churches Testimony; and then they are not
proofs by themselves, but from your Churches Infallibility; which may serve for
one accession more to the heap of your Contradictions. His Lordship asserting
the last resolution of Faith to be into simply Divine Authority, cites that
speech of Henr. a Gandavo, That in the Primitive Church, when the Apostles
themselves spoke, they did believe principally for the sake of God, and not the
Apostles; from whence he inferrs, If, where the Apostles themselves spoke, the
last resolution of Faith was into God, and not into themselves on their own
account; much more shall it now be into God, and not the present Church, and
into the writings of the Apostles, than into the words of their successors made
up into Tradition. All that you answer, is, That this argument must be solved
by the Bishop, as well as you, because he has granted the authority of the
Apostles was Divine as well as you. Ibid.
Was there ever a more senseless Answer! Does Gandavo deny the Apostles
authority to have been Divine? Nay, Does he not imply it, when he says, Men
did not believe for the Apostles sakes, but for Gods, who spoke by them. As S.
Paul said, You received our word, not as the word of men, but as it is indeed
the Word of God. How the Bishop should be concerned to answer this, is beyond
my skill to imagine. If Origin speaks to such as believed the Scriptures to be
the Word of God; so does the Bishop too, viz. on the account of Tradition and
Education. If Origin endeavored by those proofs to confirm and settle their
Faith, that is all the Bishop aims at, that a Faith taken up on the Churches
Tradition, may be settled and confirmed by the internal arguments of Scripture.
But, how you should from this discourse assert, That the Authority of the
Church must be infallible in delivering the Scripture, is again beyond my
reach, neither can I possibly think what should bear the face of Premises to
such a Conclusion. Unless it be, if Origin assert, That the Scriptures may be
believed for themselves, if Gandavo says, That the resolution of Faith must be
into God himself, then the Churches Authority must be infallible; but it
appears already, that the premises are true, and what then remains but
therefore, etc. which may indeed be listed among your rare argumentations for
Infallibility.

2. That Scripture cannot manifest it self to be an infallible Light; the proof
of which is the design of your following discourse.. 13.
Wherein you first quarrel with the Bishop for his arguing from the Scriptures
being a Light; for thence (you say) it will only follow, that the Scripture
manifests it self to be a Light, which you grant, but that it should manifest
it self to be an infallible Light you deny; P. 88, 89.
for (say you) unless he could show that there are no other Lights, save the
Word of God, and such as are infallible, he can never make good his
consequence. For in Seneca, Plutarch, Aristotle, you read many Lights, and
those manifest themselves to be Lights; but they do not therefore manifest
themselves to be infallible Lights. The substance of your argument lies in
this, The Scripture discovers the Being of God; so does the Talmud and Alcoran,
as well as it; the Scripture delivers abundance of moral instructions, but
these may be found in multitudes of other Books, both of Christians, and Jews,
and Heathens; and as we do not thence infer, that these Books are infallible,
so neither can we that the Scriptures are. This is the utmost of sense or
reason, which I can extract out of your discourse; which reduced into Form,
will come to this. If the Scriptures contain nothing in them, but what may be
found in other Books that are not infallible, then the Scriptures cannot show
themselves to be infallible; but the antecedent is true, and therefore the
consequent. I could wish you would have taken a little more pains in proving
that which must be your assumption, viz. That Scripture contains nothing in it
but what may be seen in Seneca, Plutarch, Aristotle, the Talmud, Alcoran, and
other Books of Jews and Heathens. These are rare things to assert among
Christians, without offering at any more proof of them than you do, which lies
in this Syllogism. If Scripture contain some things which may be seen in these
Books, then it contains nothing but what may be seen in these Books; but the
Scripture contains some things which may be seen in other Books, viz. the
existence of God, and moral instructions; therefore it contains nothing but
what is in them. And, Do you really think that you have now proved, that there
is nothing in Scripture that can show it self to be infallible, because some
things are common to other writings. Would you not take it very ill that any
should say that you had no more brains than a Horse, or a creature of a like
nature, because they have sense and motion, as well as you? Yet this is the
very same argument whereby you would prove that the Scriptures cannot show
themselves to be Divine, because the Talmud, Alcoran, and Philosophers, have
some things in them which the Scripture has. But, Can you prove that the
Scripture has nothing else in it, but what may be found in any, or all of
these Books? Will you undertake to show any where such representations of the
Being and Attributes of God, so suitable to the conceptions which naturally
flow from the Idea of a Supreme and Infinite Being, and yet those Attributes
discovered in such contrivances for man's Good, which the wit of man could never
have reached to; above all, in the reconciliation of the world to himself by
the death of his Son? Will you find out so exact a Rule of Piety, consisting of
such excellent Precepts, such encouraging Promises as are in Scripture, in any
other writings whatsoever? Can you discover any where such an unexpressible
energy and force in a writing of so great simplicity and plainness as the
Scripture is? Is there any thing unbecoming that Authority, which it awes the
consciences of men with? Is there any thing mean, trivial, fabulous, and
impertinent in it? Are not all things written with that infinite decorum and
suitableness, as do highly express the Majesty of him from whom it comes, but
in the most sweet, affable, and condescending manner? Are there any such
arguments in the writings of Seneca, Plutarch, Aristotle, for the Being of God,
and Immortality of souls, as there are in Scripture? Are there any moral
instructions built on such good grounds, carried on to so high a degree,
written with that life and vigor in any of the Heathen Philosophers, as are in
the Scriptures? How infinitely do the highest of them fall short of the
Scripture in those very things, which they seem most to have in common with it?
As, were it here a fit place, might be at large discovered. But, besides, and
beyond all these, Are there not other things which evidence the Divine
Revelation of the Doctrine contained in Scripture, which none of the writings
you mention, can in the least pretend to, viz. the accurate accomplishment of
Prophecies, and the abundance of Miracles wrought for the confirmation of the
Divine Testimony of those who delivered this Doctrine to the world. And these
very things now to us are internal to the Scripture, the motives of Faith being
delivered to us in the same Books that the Doctrine of Faith is: In which sense
the Scriptures may well be said to be proved Divine by themselves, and that
they appear infallible by the Light which is in them, notwithstanding you most
pitifully pretend to the contrary. And, if your Church will again pardon you
for such opprobrious language of Scripture, as not only to compare the writings
of Seneca, Plutarch, and Aristotle with it, which yet are commendable in their
kind, for moral Virtue, and natural Knowledge; but those wretched and notorious
impostures of the Alcoran, and the fabulous relations of the Talmud; if, I say,
your Church will pardon such expressions as these, because they tend to inhance
her Infallibility, well fare that Pope, who said Heu quam minimo regitur mundus!

As for your following instance of a Candle lighted in a room, which shows that
it is a light, but not who lighted it; so the sentences in Scripture are
lights, and show themselves to be such, but they cannot show themselves to be
such infallible lights which are produced by none but God himself: I answer;
That I commend your discretion in making choice of a Candle rather than of the
light of the Sun to set forth the Scripture by. For a Candle yields but a dim
uncertain light, may be put into a dark lanthorn, and snuffed at pleasure; so
would your Church fain pretend of the Scripture, that its light is very weak
and uncertain, that your Church must open the sides of the Lanthorn that it may
give light, and make use of some Apostolical Snuffers of the Popes keeping, to
make it shine the clearer, though they often endanger the almost extinguishing
of it; at least as to the generation of those who should enjoy the benefit of
it. But because that poor light of a Candle cannot show who lighted it, Will
not the light of the Sun manifest it self to be no greater than that of a
Candle? Cannot any one infer from the vast extent of that light, from the
vanishing of it upon the Suns setting, and its dispersing it self at his
rising, that this light can proceed only from that great luminous body which is
in the Heavens? And may we not proportionably infer, from the clearness,
greatness, majesty, coherency of those truths revealed in Scripture, that they
must certainly come from none but God; especially being joined with those
impregnable evidences which himself by the persons who delivered them that they
were employed by himself for that end? But because this is a matter of great
consequence give me leave to propound these questions to you, and after you
have considered them seriously, return me a rational answer to them. 1. Does it
imply any repugnancy at all in the nature of the thing, or to the nature of
God, that he should reveal his mind to the world. 2. If it does not, as I
suppose you will grant that, Whether is it possible that God should make it
evident to the world that such a Revelation is from himself? 3. If this be not
impossible, Is it not necessary that it should be so, supposing that God should
require the belief of a Doctrine so revealed on pain of eternal damnation for
not believing it? 4. Whether God may not give as great evidence of a Revelation
that he makes of his mind to the world, as he does of his Being, from the
Wisdom, Goodness, and Power, which may be seen in the works of Creation? 5.
Whether any other way be conceivable that it should be evident that a Doctrine
comes from God, but that it contains things highly suitable to the Divine
nature, things above the finding out of humane reason, things only tending to
advance Holiness and Goodness in the world, and this doctrine to be delivered
by persons who wrought unparalleld miracles? 6. Whether all these be not in the
most evident manner imaginable contained in the Doctrine of Christianity, and
in the Books of Scripture? which I leave any man that has common sense to
judge of? 7. Whether then it be not the highest disparagement of this Divine
doctrine to make it stand in need of an Infallible testimony of any company who
shall take the boldness to call themselves the Catholic Church, in order to
the believing of it; and whether there can be any greater dishonor done it,
then to say it has no more light to discover it self Divine, than the Writings
of Philosophers, not to add of Jews and Mahumetans? These things I leave you
and the reader to consider of, and proceed. What follows concerning the Fathers
and others proving the Scriptures to be the Word of God by themselves, after
they have believed them infallibly on other grounds, is gratis dictum, unless
you can prove from the Fathers, that they did believe the Scriptures infallibly
on other grounds. Which when you shall think fit to attempt I make no question
to answer, but in the mean time to a crude assertion it is enough to oppose a
bare denial. Your following absurdities concerning the private Spirit,
infallible assurance, Apostolical tradition, have been frequently examined
already. Only what you say, that you read, esteem, nay very highly reverence,
the Scripture; Page 9^.
is but Protestatio contra factum, as may appear by your former expressions,
and therefore can have no force at all with wise men, who judge by things and
not by bare words.

3. You say,. 14*
That if there were such sufficient light in Scripture to show it self, you
should see it as well as we; seeing you read it as diligently, and esteem it as
highly as we do. What! You esteem the Scripture as highly as we, Ibid. n. 7.
who say, that the Scripture appears no more of it self to be Gods Word, than
distinction of colors to a blind man! You, who but in the page before had
said, there was no more light in Scripture to discover it self, than in Seneca,
Plutarch, Aristotle, nay as to some things than the Talmud and Alcoran! You,
who say that, notwithstanding the Scriptures, Christ would have been esteemed
an Ignoramus and Impostor, if your Church be not Infallible; Are you the man,
who esteem as highly of the Scriptures as we do? May we not therefore justly
return you your own language; and say, that if you do not see this light in
Scripture, it is because your eyes are perverse, your understanding
unsanctified, which instead of discovering such Divine light in Scripture as to
make you love and adore it, can have the confidence to utter such expressions
which tend so highly to the disparagement of it. But did not his Lordship give
before a sufficient answer to this objection, by saying, 1. That the light is
sufficient in it self, Page 86.
but it does not follow that it must be evident to every one that looks into
it; for the blindness or perverseness of men's minds may keep them from the
discovery of it. 2. He says, This light is not so full a light as that of the
first Principles, as, that the whole is greater than the part, that the same
thing cannot be, and not be, at the same time. And yet such is your sincerity,
you would seem at first to persuade the Reader of the contrary in your next
Paragraph; but at last you grant that he denies it to be evidently known as one
of the Principles of the first sort. (For you with your wonted subtilty
distinguish Principles known of themselves, into such as are either evidently,
and such as are probably known of themselves, i. e. Principles known of
themselves, are either such as are known of themselves, or such as are not; for
what is but probably known, is not certainly known of it self, but by that
probable argument which causes assent to it). But when you deny that the
Scripture is so much as one of the second sort of principles, and say expressly,
That of it self it appears not so much as probably to be more the Word of God,
than some other Book that is not truly such; were you not so used to
Contradictions, I would desire you to reconcile this expression, with what you
said a little before of your high Esteem and Reverence of the Scriptures.

3. The Bishop says, That when he speaks of this light in Scripture, he only
means it of such a light as is of force to breed Faith, that it is the Word of
God; not to make a perfect knowledge. Now Faith, of whatsoever it is, this or
other principle, is an evidence, as well as knowledge; and the belief is firmer
than any knowledge can be, because it rests upon Divine authority, which cannot
deceive; whereas knowledge (or at least he that thinks he knows) is not ever
certain in deductions from Principles; but the Evidence is not so clear. Now
God does not require a full demonstrative knowledge in us that the Scripture is
his Word, and therefore in his Providence has kindled in it no light for that,
but he requires our Faith of it, and such a certain demonstration as may fit
that. Now what answer do you return to all this? Why, forsooth, We must have
certainty, nay an Infallible certainty, nay such an Infallible certainty as is
built on the Infallible Authority of the Church, yet such an Infallible
Authority as can be proved only by motives of credibility; which is a new kind
of Climax in Rhetoric, viz. a ladder standing with both ends upon ground at
the same time. All the answer I shall therefore now give it, is, that your
Faith then is certain, Infallibly certain, and yet built on but probable
motives, and therefore on your own principles must be also uncertain, very
uncertain, nay undoubtedly and Infallibly uncertain. What again follows
concerning Canonical Books and the private Spirit, I must send them, as
Constables do vagrants, to the place from whence they came, and there they
shall meet with a sufficient Answer.

The remainder of this Chapter consists of a tedious vindication of Bellarmine
and Brierely,. 15.
which being of little consequence to the main business, P. 91. etc. n. 8, 9.
I shall return the shorter answer. I shall not quarrel much with you about the
interpretation of those words of Bellarmine in the sense you give them, De
Eccles. l. 3. c. 14.
viz. if they be understood of absolute necessity, not of all Christians, and
only in rare cases, that it is not necessary to believe that there is
Scripture, on supposition that the Doctrine of Scripture could be sufficiently
conveyed to the minds of any without it, as in the case of the Barbarous
Nations mentioned by Irenaeus. But for you who make the tradition of the
present Church Infallible, and at the least the Infallible conveyer of the
formal object of Faith; I do not see how you can avoid making it as absolutely
necessary to be believed as any other object of Faith: unless your Church has
some other way of conveying objects of Faith, than by propounding the Scripture
infallibly to us. If therefore men are bound to believe things absolutely
necessary to salvation, because contained in that Book, which the Church
delivers to be the Infallible Word of God; I cannot possibly see, but the
belief of the Scripture on the Churches Infallible Testimony must be as
necessary necessitate medii as any thing contained in it. As for the Citation
of Hooker by Brierely, Whether it be falsified or no will best be seen by
producing the scope and design of that worthy Author in the Testimonies, cited
out of him. Upon an impartial view of which in the several places referred to,
I cannot but say, that if Brierely's design was to show that Hooker made the
authority of the Church that into which Faith is lastly resolved, he does
evidently contradict Mr. Hookers design, and is therefore guilty of unfaithful
representing his meaning. For where he does most fully and largely express
himself he uses these words, which for clearing his meaning must be fully
produced. Scripture teaches all supernaturally revealed truth, L. 3 sect. 8
without the knowledge whereof salvation cannot be attained. The main principle
whereon the belief of all things therein contained depends, is, that the
Scriptures are the Oracles of God himself. This in it self we cannot say is
evident. For then all men that hear it would acknowledge it in heart, as they
do when they hear that every whole is more than any part of that whole, because
this in it self is evident. The other we know that all do not acknowledge it
when they hear it. There must be therefore some former knowledge presupposed,
which does herein assure the hearts of all believers. Scripture teaches us
that saving truth which God has discovered to the world by Revelation, and it
presumes us taught otherwise, that it self is Divine and Sacred. The question
then being by what means we are taught this; some answer, That to learn it we
have no other way then only Tradition: As namely that so we believe, because
both we from our predecessors, and they from theirs have so received. But is
this enough? That which all men's experience teaches them, may not in any wise
be denied. And by experience we all know, that the first Motive leading men so
to esteem of the Scripture is the Authority of Gods Church. For when we know
the whole Church of God, has that opinion of the Scripture, we judge it even
at the first an impudent thing for any man bred and brought up in the Church to
be of a contrary mind without cause. Afterward the more we bestow our labor
in reading or hearing the mysteries thereof, the more we find that the thing it
self does answer our received opinion concerning it. So that the former
inducement prevailing somewhat with us before, does now much more prevail, when
the very thing has ministered farther reason. Can any thing be more plain (if
men's meaning may be gathered from their words, especially when purposely they
treat of a subject) than that Hooker makes the Authority of the Church the
primary inducement to Faith, and that rational evidence which discovers it self
in the Doctrine revealed to be that which it is finally resolved into? For, as
his Lordship says on this very place of Hooker, The resolution of Faith ever
settles upon the farthest reason it can, not upon the first inducement. P. 90.
By this place then where this worthy Author most clearly and fully delivers
his judgment, we ought in reason to interpret all other occasional and
incidental passages on the same subject. So in that other place. For whatsoever
we believe concerning salvation by Christ although the Scripture be therein the
ground of our belief, yet the authority of man is, L. 2. sect. 7.
if we mark it, the key which opens the door of entrance into the knowledge
of the Scriptures. I will not dispute, whether here he speaks concerning the
knowledge of Scripture to be Scripture, or concerning the natural sense and
meaning of Scripture: suppose I should grant you the latter, it would make
little for your purpose; for when he adds, The Scripture does not teach us the
things that are of God, unless we did credit men who have taught us that the
words of Scripture do signify those things. You need not here bid us stay a
while: For his sense is plain and obvious, viz. that men cannot come to the
natural sense and importance of the words used in Scripture, unless they rely
on the authority of men for the signification of those words. He speaks not
here then at all concerning Church-Tradition properly taken, but merely of the
authority of man, which he contends must in many cases be relied on,
particularly in that of the sense and meaning of the words which occurr in
Scripture. Therefore with his Lordships leave and yours too, I do not think
that in this place Hooker by the authority of man does understand
Church-Tradition, but if I may so call it Humane-Tradition, viz. that which
acquainteth us with the force and signification of words in use. When therefore
you prove that it is Tradition only, which is all the ground he puts of
believing Scripture to be the Word of God, from those words of his, That
utterly to infringe the force and strength of man's testimony, were to shake the
very Fortress of Gods truth. Now (say you) How can that Fortress (the
Scripture) be shaken, were not that authority esteemed by him the ground of
that Fortress. That may very easily be shown, viz. by calling in question the
truth of humane testimony in general; for he plainly speaks of such a kind of
humane testimony as that is, whereby we know there is such a City as Rome, that
such and such were Popes of Rome, wherein the ground of our persuasion can be
nothing else but humane testimony; now take away the credit and validity of
this testimony, the very Fortress of truth must needs be shaken; for we could
never be certain that there were such persons, as Moses, the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles in the world, we could never be certain of the meaning of any
thing written by them. But how far is this from the final resolution of Faith
into Church-Tradition? But the place you lay the greatest force on, is that
which you first cite out of him, Finally we all believe that the Scriptures of
God are sacred, L. 2. sect. 4.
and that they have proceeded from God; our selves we assure, that we do right
well in so believing. We have for this a demonstration sound and Infallible.
But it is not the Word of God which does or can possibly assure us, that we do
well to think it his Word. From hence you infer, That either he must settle no
Infallible ground at all, or must say that the Tradition of the Church is that
ground. No Infallible ground in your sense, I grant it, but well enough in his
own; for all the difficulty lies in understanding what he means by Infallible;
which he takes not in your sense for a supernatural, but only for a rational
Infallibility; not such a one as excludes possibility of deception, but all
reasonable doubting. In which sense he says of such things as are capable only
of moral certainty, That the Testimony of man will stand as a ground of
Infallible assurance; L. 2. sect. 8.
and presently instanceth in these, That there is such a City of Rome, that
Pius 5. was Pope there, etc. So afterward, he says, That the mind of man
desires evermore to know the truth according to the most Infallible certainty
which the nature of things can yield: by which it is plain, that the utmost
certainty which things are capable of is with him Infallible certainty; and so
a sound and Infallible ground of Faith is a certain ground, which we all assert
may be had without your Churches Infallible Testimony. Whether therefore
Brierely and you are not guilty, if not of falsifying Hookers words, yet of
perverting his meaning, let the Impartial Reader judge.

CHAP.VIII. The Churches Infallibility not proved from Scripture.
Some general considerations from the design of proving the Churches
Infallibility from Scripture. No Infallibility in the High Priest and his
Clergy under the Law; if there had been, no necessity there should be under the
Gospel. Of St. Basils Testimony concerning Traditions. Scripture less liable to
corruption than Traditions. The great uncertainty of judging Traditions when
Apostolical, when not. The Churches perpetuity being promised in Scripture
proves not its Infallibility. His Lordship does not falsify A. C's words, but
T. C. does his meaning. Producing the Jesuits words no traducing their Order.
T. C's. miserable Apology for them. The particular texts produced for the
Churches Infallibility, examined. No such Infallibility necessary in the
Apostles Successors as in Themselves. The similitude of Scripture and
Tradition to an Ambassador and his Credentials, rightly stated.

THE main design of this Chapter being to prove the Infallibility of the Church
from the Testimonies of Scripture;. 1.
before I come to a particular discussion of the matters contained in it, I
shall make some general Observations on the scope and design of it, which may
give more light to the particulars to be handled in it. 1. That the
Infallibility you challenge to the Church, is such as must suppose a promise
extant of it in Scripture: Which is evident from the words of A. C. (which you
own) to his Lordship, That if he would consider the Tradition of the Church,
not only as it is the Tradition of a company of fallible men, in which sense
the Authority of it is humane and fallible, but as the Tradition of a company
of men assisted by Christ and his Holy Spirit; in that sense he might easily
find it more than an Introduction, indeed as much as would amount to an
Infallible Motive. Whence I infer, that in order to the Churches Testimony
being an Infallible Motive to Faith, it must be believed that this company of
men which make the Church, are assisted by Christ and his Holy Spirit; Now I
demand, Supposing there were no Scripture extant, (the belief of which you said
before in defense of Bellarmine, was not necessary to salvation) by what means
could you prove such an Infallible Assistance of the Holy Spirit in the
Catholic Church in order to the persuading an Infidel to believe? Could you to
one that neither believes Christ, nor the Holy Ghost, prove evidently that your
Church had an assistance of both these? You tell him that he cannot believe
that there is a Christ or a Holy Ghost* unless he believes first your Church to
be Infallible, and yet he cannot believe your Church to be Infallible, unless
he believes there are such things as Christ and the Holy Ghost; for that
Infallibility, by your own confession, does suppose the peculiar assistance of
both these. And can any one believe their assistance, before he believes they
are? If you say, as you do, By the motives of credibility you will prove your
Church Infallible. But (setting aside the absurdity of that which I have fully
discovered already) Is it possible for you to prove your Church Infallible,
unless antecedently to the belief of your Churches Infallibility, You can prove
to an Infidel the truth of these things?

1. That the names of Christ and the Holy Ghost, are no Chimerical Fancies and
Ideas, but that they do import something real: otherwise an Infidel would
speedily tell you, these names imported nothing but some kind of Magical spells
which could keep men from error, as long as they carried them about with them.
That as well might Mahomet, or any other Impostor, pretend an infallible
assistance from some Tutelar Angels, with hard Arabic names, as you of Christ,
and the Holy Ghost unless you can make it appear to him, that really there are
such Beings as Christ and the Holy Ghost; and when you have proved it to him,
and he be upon your proof inclinable to believe it, you are bound to tell him
by your Doctrine, that for all these proofs, he can only fancy there are such
Beings, but he cannot really believe them, unless he first believes your Church
infallible. And when he tells you, He cannot, according to your own Doctrine,
believe that Infallibility, unless he believes the other first, Would he not
cry out upon you, as either lamentable Fools, that did not understand what you
said, or egregious Impostors, that play fast and loose with him, bidding him
believe first one thing, and then another, till at last he may justly tell you,
that in this manner he cannot be persuaded to believe any thing at all. 2.
Supposing he should get through this, and believe that there were such Beings
as Christ and the Holy Ghost, he may justly ask you, 1. Whether they be nothing
else but such a kind of Intellectus Agens, as the Arabic Philosophers
imagined, some kind of Being which did assist the understanding in conception?
You answer him No, but they are real distinct personalities of the same nature
and essence with God himself; then he asks, 2. Whence does this appear? for
these being such grand difficulties, you had need of some very clear evidence
of them: If you send him to Scripture, he asks you, To what end? for the belief
of that must suppose the Truth of the thing in Question, that your Church is
infallible in delivery of this Scripture for Divine Revelation. But he further
demands, 3. Whence comes that Church which you call Infallible to have this
Assistance of both these? Do they assist all kind of men to make them
infallible? You answer, No. But, Do they assist, though not all men separately,
yet all societies of men conjunctly? You answer, No. Do they assist all men
only in Religious actions, of what Religion soever they are of? Still you
answer, No. Do they assist then all men of the Christian Religion in their
societies? No. Do they assist all those among the Christians, who say, they
have this Assistance? No. Do they thus assist all Churches to keep them from
error? No. Whom is it then that they do thus infallibly assist? You answer,
The Church. But what Church do you mean? The Catholic Church. But, which is
this Catholic Church (for, I hear, there are as great Controversies about
that, as any thing.) You must answer confidently, That Church which is in the
Roman Communion, is the true Catholic Church. Have then all in that Communion
this Infallible Assistance? No. Have all the Bishops in this Communion, it? No.
Have all these Bishops this Assistance, when they meet together? Yes, say you,
undoubtedly, if the Pope be their Head, and confirm their Acts. Then it should
seem to me, that this Infallible Assistance is in the Pope, and he it is whom
you call the Catholic Church: But surely he is a very big man then, is he not?
But, say you, These are Controversies which are not necessary for you to know,
it suffices that the Catholic Church is the subject of Infallibility. But, I
had thought nothing could have been more necessary than to have known this: But
I proceed then, How comes this Catholic Church to have this Infallible
Assistance? Cannot I suppose that Christ and the Holy Spirit may exist without
giving this Assistance? cannot I suppose that Christian Religion may be in the
world, without such an Infallibility? Is this Assistance therefore a necessary,
or a free Act? A free Act. If a free Act, then, for all you know, Your
Catholic Church may not be so assisted: No, (you reply) you are sure it is so
assisted. But, Whence can you be sure of an arbitrary thing, unless the
Authors of this Assistance have engaged themselves by Promise, to give your
Catholic Church that Infallible Assistance? Yes, that they have (you reply)
and then produce Luke 10.16. Mat. 28.20. Joh. 14.16. But, although our Infidel
might ask some untoward Questions still; as, How you are sure these are Divine
Promises, when the knowledge that they are Divine must suppose the thing to be
true, which you would prove out of them, viz. that your Church is infallible?
Supposing them Divine, how are you sure, That, and no other, is the meaning of
them, when from such places you prove, that your Church is the only Infallible
Interpreter of Scripture? But, I let pass these, and other Questions, and
satisfy my self with this, That it is impossible for you to prove such an
Infallible Assistance of Christ and the Holy Spirit, unless you produce some
express Promise for it.

2. This being impossible, it necessarily follows, That the only Motives of
Credibility, which can prove your Church Infallible, must be such as do
antecedently prove these Promises to be Divine. This is so plain and evident a
Consectary from the former, that it were an affront upon humane understanding,
to go about to prove it: For, if the Infallibility does depend upon the
Promise, nothing can prove that Infallibility, but what does prove that Promise
to be True and Divine: True, or else not to be believed; Divine, or else not to
be relied on for such an Assistance; none else being able to make a promise of
it, but the Author of it. As therefore my right to an estate as given by Will,
depends wholly upon the Truth and Validity of that Will, which I must first
prove, before I can challenge any right to it; So your pretense of
Infallibility must solely depend upon the Promises which you challenge it by.
By which it appears, that your attempting to prove the Infallibility of your
Church, by Motives of Credibility, antecedent to, and independent on the
Scripture, is vain, ridiculous, and destructive to that very Infallibility
which you pretend to. Which, being by a free Assistance of Christ and his
Spirit, must wholly depend on the proof of the Promise made of it. For, if you
prove no Promise, all your Motives of Credibility prove nothing at all, as I
have at large demonstrated before, and shall not follow you in needless
repetitions.

3. No right to any privilege can be challenged, by virtue of a free Promise
made to particular persons, unless it be evident that the intention of the
Promiser was, that it should equally extend to them and others. For the Promise
being free, and the Privilege such as carries no necessity at all along with
it, in order to the great ends of Christian Religion; it is intolerable
Arrogance and Presumption to challenge it, without manifest evidence, that the
design of it was for them, as well as the persons to whom it was made. Indeed,
in such Promises which are built on common and general grounds, containing
things agreeable to all Christians, it is but reasonable to infer the
universal extent of that Promise to all such as are in the like condition.
Hence the Apostle inferrs, from the particular Promise made to Joshua, I will
never leave thee, nor forsake thee; the effect of it upon all believers.
Although, had not the Apostle done it before us, it may seem questionable on
what ground we could have done it, unless from the general reason of of it, and
the unbounded nature of Divine Goodness, in things necessary for the Good of
his People. But in things arbitrary, and such as contain special Privilege in
them, to challenge a right to a Promise of the same Privilege, without equal
evidence of the descent of it, as the first Grant, is great presumption, and a
challenge of the Promisor for partiality, if he does not make it good. Because
the pretense of the right of the Privilege goes upon this ground, that it is
as much due to the Successor, as to the Original Grantee.

4. Nothing can be more unreasonable, than to challenge a right to a
Privilege, by virtue of such a Promise which was granted upon quite different
considerations from the grounds on which that right is challenged. Thus I shall
after make it evident, that the Promise of an Infallible Assistance of the Holy
Ghost, had a peculiar respect to the Apostles present employment, and the first
state of the Church, that it was not made upon reasons common to all ages, viz.
for the Government of the Church, deciding Controversies, Foundation of Faith,
all which Ends may be sufficiently attained without them. But, above all, it
seems very unreasonable, that a Promise made to persons in one office, must be
applied in the same manner to persons in a quite different office; that a
Promise made to each of them separate, must be equally applied to others only
as in Council; that a Promise made implying Divine Assistance, must be equally
applied to such, who dare not say, that Assistance is Divine (but infallible,
and after a sort Divine) that a Promise made of immediate Divine Revelation,
and enabling the persons who enjoyed the Privilege of it, to work miracles to
attest their Testimony to be infallible, should be equally applied to such as
dare not challenge a Divine Revelation, nor ever did work a miracle to attest
such an Infallible Assistance. Yet all this is done by you in your endeavor of
fetching the Infallibility of your Church, out of those Promises of the
assistance of Christ and his Spirit, which were made to the Apostles. These
general Considerations, do sufficiently enervate the force of your whole
Chapter, which yet I come particularly to consider.

His Lordship tells A. C. That in the second sense of Church-Tradition, he
cannot find that the Tradition of the present Church is of Divine and
Infallible Authority,. 2. Sect. 16. n. 26.
till A. C. can prove that this company of men (the Roman Prelates and Clergy
he means) are so fully, so clearly, so permanently assisted by Christ, and his
Spirit, as may reach to Infallibility, much less to a Divine Infallibilility,
in this or any other Principle which they teach. In answer to this, you tell
us, P. 98. n. 1.
That the Bishop declines the Question by withdrawing his Reader from the
thesis, to the hypothesis; from the Church, to the Church of Rome. But, Is it
not sufficiently known to all persons who deal in this Controversy, what you
mean by the Catholic Church in this Controversy, that it shall not be lawful
for his Lordship in a Parenthesis, to show where you place this Infallibility,
but he must be charged with declining the Question? This only shows a desire to
cavil at little things, when you were unable to answer greater. Besides, in the
way you take of proving the Churches Infallibility by the Motives of
Credibility, there is a necessity even in this Controversy, of declaring what
that Catholic Church is, which must be known by these Motives; and therefore
you have no cause to look upon this as running away from the Question. That A.
C. after a long and silent attention, did merely, through the heat of his zeal,
become earnest in this business, to do his Adversary good. I must believe it,
because you tell me so, though I see no great Motive of Credibility for it. And
on that account did desire him, to consider the Tradition of the Church, as of
a Company of men infallibly assisted. For such assistance (you say) is
necessary as well to have sufficient assurance of the true Canon of Holy
Scripture, as to come to the true meaning and interpretation thereof. But this
is as easily denied as said. We wait therefore for your proofs.

That which only seems here intended for that end, is, That when the Relator
had said, The Prophets under the Old Testament, P. 91. n. 26.
and the Apostles under the New, had such an Infallible Divine Assistance; but
neither the High Priest with his Clergy in the Old, nor any Company of Prelates
or Priests in the New, since the Apostles, ever had it. To this you reply, That
the like assistance (with the Prophets and Apostles) the High Priest with his
Clergy had in the Old Testament, as we gather out of Deuteronomy. 17.8, etc. P. 97. n.
1.
Where in doubts the people were bound, not only to have recourse to the High
Priest and his Clergy, but to submit and stand to their judgment. Much more
then ought we to think, that there is such an obligation in the New Testament;
which could not stand without Infallibility. Witness the infinite dissentions
and divisions in Points of Faith, amongst all the different Christians that
deny it.

Two things the force of this argument lies in. 1. That there was Infallibility
in the High Priest and his Clergy under the Law. 2. That if there were so then,
there ought to be so now. Both these must be considered.

1. That there was Infallibility in the High Priest and his Clergy under the
Law, which you prove from Deuteronomy. 17.8. Because there the people were not only to
have recourse to them, but to submit and stand to their judgment. This
argument in form, is this. Where there is to be not only a recourse, but an
obligation to submission, there must be Infallibility; but there were both
these among the Jews, as to the High Priest and his Clergy; ergo. You may see
how forcible this argument is in a like case: Where there is to be not only a
recourse in matters of difficulty, but an obligation to submit and stand to
their judgment, there must be Infallibility; but to the Parliament of England
there ought to be not only a recourse in matters of difficulty, but a
submission to their judgment; therefore the Parliament of England is as
infallible as the High Priest and Clergy under the Law, by the very argument by
you produced. The same will hold for all Courts of Justice. But, Can you by no
means distinguish between an obligation to submission, and an obligation in
conscience to assent to what is determined as infallibly true? Is every person
in all judiciary Cases, where submission is required, bound to believe the
Judges sentence infallible? If so, we need not go over the Alps for
Infallibility, we may have it much cheaper at home: But, I suppose you will
reply, The case is very different, because in the Text by you produced, 1. Not
Civil Matters, but Religious are spoken of. 2. That not any Civil Magistrates,
but the High Priest and his Clergy are the Judges mentioned. 3. That not every
kind of Judgment, but an Infallible Judgment is there set down. But, if every
one of these be false, you will see, what little advantage comes to your cause
by this Testimony; which I shall in order demonstrate.

1. That this place speaks not of Religious Causes, as such; but of Civil
Causes, i. e. not of matters of Doctrine to be decided as true or false, but
matters of Justice to be determined as to right and wrong. Not but that some
things concerning the Ecclesiastical Polity of the Nation might be there
decided; for it was impossible in a Nation, whose Laws depended on their
Religion, to separate the one from the other: But, that the Judgment given
there, did not determine the truth and falsehood of things, so as to oblige men's
consciences to believe them; but did so peremptorily decide them, that the
persons concerned were bound to acquiesce in that determination. For the proof
of this, one would think, the very reading of the place were sufficient. Deuteronomy.
17.8.
If there arise a matter too hard for thee in Judgment, between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, and between stroke and stroke, being matters of
controversies within thy gates, then shall thou arise and get thee up into the
place which the Lord thy God shall choose, etc. Which words are so generally
expressed, on purpose to take in all manner of controversies which might rise
among them, whether civil, criminal, or ceremonial. And herein God makes
provision against any rupture which might be among them upon any emergent
Controversy, by establishing a Court of Appeals, to which all such causes
should be brought, in which the lesser Courts could not agree. For that seems
to be the main scope of the words, by the following expression of Controversies
within thy gates, by which it seems evident, that the Controversies were such
as could come to no resolution in those inferior Courts which sat in the
Gates of the Cities; by which it appears, that these could be no momentous
Controversies of Religion, which never came under the cognizance of those
inferior and subordinate Courts. By these words then God does erect a Supreme
Court of Judicature among them, to which they might appeal, not only in case of
injury, but in case of difficulty; and those lesser Courts, as well as
particular persons, were to submit to the Decree of the great Sanhedrin,
sitting in the place which God should choose, which was Shilo first, and
Jerusalem after. And thence Maimonides so often says, That the establishment
and coagmentation of all the Israelites, did depend upon this place; for hereby
God set up such a Tribunal, to which the last Resort should be made, and from
whose determinations there should remain no further appeal. And according to
the Tradition of the Jews, these appeals were to be gradual, i. e. in case any
Priest should be to seek as to any Ceremonial Cause, as that of Leprosy,
brought before him, he was to take advice of the Court of the Triumvirate where
he lived; if that did not agree, then he was to appeal to the lesser Sanhedrin
of 23. in the Neighbor-city, if there it could not be ended to the Sanhedrin
of 23. at the entrance of the Mount of the Temple; if not there neither, then
appeal was made to the Great Sanhedrin, whose sentence was final and
peremptory, and was instead of a Law in the Case.

2. You are greatly mistaken in supposing that all this is spoken of the High
Priest and his Clergy: I deny not but express mention is made of the Priests
and Levites, as those who were supposed most acquainted with all matters of
difference which should happen among them; and therefore were probably the
greatest part of the great Sanhedrin (for it is a groundless fancy to suppose
two distinct Courts, the one Civil, and the other Ecclesiastical among the
Jews.) Nay the High Priest himself was so far from being the constant President
of this Court, that, if we believe the Tradition of the Jews, he was not
admitted to sit there, without the same previous examination and trial which
others underwent. Indeed, in the decay of the Jewish Polity, in the time of the
Assomanean Family, the chief Civil Power was in the hands of the High Priest,
on which account he might then preside in the Sanhedrin, but that is nothing to
this place, where mention is made verse. 9. of the Priests and Levites, and then
of the Judge, which is, in case God should raise up among them an extraordinary
person, who should be Judge over Israel, then the appeals might be to him; but
otherwise v. 10. they were to do according to the sentence, which they of that
place which the Lord shall choose, shall show thee, which was the great
Sanhedrin. According therefore to the sentence of this Court, whether
pronounced by a Priest, or other, they were to act; and they that refused were
punished with death.

3. Whoever the persons were, who gave this Sentence, yet it was not looked on
as Infallible; for it is not said, Whosoever does not believe the judgment
given, to be infallibly true; but, whosoever acts contumaciously in opposition
to it. And the man that will do presumptuously, Deuteronomy. 17.12.
and will not hearken unto the Priest, or unto the Judge, even that man shall
dye. Besides, we are so far from reading of any promise of Infallibility made
to the High Priest and his Clergy, or to the Sanhedrin, that God himself does
suppose a possibility of error in the whole Congregation of Israel, Levit.
4.15. And all along the Books of the Prophets, we see how much God charge the
Priests with Ignorance, and forsaking his way. And, I pray, Where was that
Infallibility of the High Priest and his Clergy, not only when our blessed
Savior was condemned by him, and the Sanhedrin both; but in that time, when
Israel for a long season had been without the True God, 2 Chronicles. 15.3.
and without a Teaching Priest, and without Law. So that we see what very
little relief you have out of this place for the Infallibility of the High
Priest and his Clergy. But, suppose we should grant them Infallible, and that
Infallibility proved from this place, What is that to us? Might not you as well
challenge the Oracular Responses by Vrim and Thummim to belong to you, as the
High Priests Infallibility, supposing he had any? If God thought it fit to make
them Infallible, and gave such express command concerning obedience and
submission to their judgment, Is it not very reasonable to think, that under
the Gospel there should be express mention made of the subject of this
Infallibility, the place whither we should resort for final judgments, as
there is here? Nay, had it not been far more necessary to have specified and
determined these circumstances, since they are of such vast importance for the
peace of the Christian world? How easily had all our debates been ended, if God
had said any where in the New Testament, When any Controversy of Faith
arises, go to the place which I shall choose, viz. Rome, and there enquire the
Judgment of the Bishop that shall sit there, and whatever he determines, that
believe as infallibly true; if we had met with any thing so express, nay, that
had any seeming tendency this way, How readily should we submit our
Controversies to his determination? But, when there is so little ground or
foundation for it there, that you are fain to deduce your Infallibility, from
Gods settling a Court of Appeals among the Jews; Can you think that we are
presumptuous, and deserve to be cut off, if we do not believe? For, for all
that I know, you may challenge the sanction of the Law, as well as the
Privilege of it; and your former practices would persuade us, that you believe
the Sanction to be as valid as the other.

But (say you) the infinite dissentions and divisions among those that deny it,
make this necessary. 1. I pray, Does your pretense of Infallibility put an end
to all your divisions? Nay, Are there not many among your selves, raised merely
on the account of this Infallibility? Have not many among you, grown so weary
of it, that they have wished the name had never been mentioned? Are not others
so ashamed of the threadbare impertinent places of Scripture, commonly
produced, that they have ventured the censure of your Church for disowning
them, and have sheltered themselves under the Infallibility of Universal
Tradition? Have not some ingenuously confessed, that there is no avoiding the
circle on the common grounds? Are those no differences at all concerning the
subject of Infallibility, and the Superiority of Pope and Council? Happy men!
that have so many coincident distinctions, and such agreeing differences! 2.
Were there not dissentions and divisions in the Apostles times? And, had it not
been, think you, much better for the Apostle, instead of saying, There must be
heresies or divisions among you, that they which are approved, may be made
manifest, have told them, There must be an Infallible Judge among you, that
there may be no heresies or divisions? If you had been at his Elbow, what
prudent advise you would have given S. Paul for ending all the divisions in the
Corinthian, Colossian, Galatian Churches, etc! You must have told him, that it
was to very little purpose to woo them by the many arguments he uses to
exhort them so often to unity, and chide them as carnal, while they had
dissentions, when one word of an Infallible Judge had ended all of them. But,
poor S. Paul knew of no such thing, which made him give as good counsels, as
the Spirit of God directed him to; but alas, they were but sorry things in
comparison of an Infallible Judge. Give us leave therefore to reckon our selves
among those Primitive Christians, who knew no more than we of any such way to
end differences, as Infallibility in a constant Judge, for all they had
dissentions and divisions among them as well as we.

But you are very angry with his Lordship for taxing this pretense of
Infallibility with Insolency, P. ^7.
and a design to lord it over the Faith of Christendom. And therefore tell him,
You go no further than Christ himself leads you by Promises made of this
Infallibility; That is the thing in question, and must not be taken upon the
trust of your Infallibility, in interpreting the places by you alleged. When
you can prove the Pastors of your Church, to be as Infallible as the Apostles
were, and to have the same Spirit which they had, I shall as little suspect
them of Lording it over others as the Apostles: but if it appear quite
otherwise as to the Pastors of your Church; name, if you can, a greater
Insolency, than to usurp a power of prescribing to the Faith of the Christian
world. As to what follows concerning your Churches Testimony, being again
Infallible by the assistance of Christ and his Spirit, and yet not Divinely
Infallible, it is so subtle and Scholastical a distinction, that I now begin,
not to admire Your so often using it; for I see plainly, if that wedge, how
blunt soever, does not rive asunder the knot, it is like to remain for any
thing you have to say to it.

His Lordship having given one Instance of the Insolency of your pretense of
Infallibility,. 3.
by the dangerous errors which your Church does hold, particularly in
equalling the Tradition of the present Church to the written Word of God, which
(says he) is a Doctrine unknown to the Primitive Church, and which frets upon
the very Foundation it self, P. 92.
by justling with it. But, being well acquainted with the Arts of your party in
making a great noise with the Fathers, and particularly in this Controversy,
with a citation out of S. Basils Books de Spirit* Sanct. ad Amphilochium, and
especially those words, parem vim habent ad pictatem, speaking of Traditions;
he therefore in his Margent so far takes notice of them, as to return this
threefold Answer to to them. 1. That he speaks of Apostolical Tradition, and
not the Tradition of the present Church. 2. That exceptions are taken at this
Book as corrupted. 3. That S. Basil makes Scripture the Touchstone of
Tradition. To this you return a Threefold Answer. P 97.
1. That it is true, he speaks of Apostolical Traditions, but of such as were
come down to their present times. 2. That the Exceptions against the Book are
unreasonable. 3. That S. Basil does not make the Scripture so to be the
touchstone of Tradition, as that Scripture must needs therefore be of greater
force and superior dignity than that of Tradition. Because therefore this is
the chief place in Antiquity which is produced on your side in behalf of
Traditions, it will deserve a more careful examination in the particulars by
you mentioned.

1. You acknowledge that he speaks of Apostolical Traditions, and such as the
present Church judged Apostolical; now you say that the present Church is
infallible in judging Apostolical Traditions, and what Traditions are so judged
are necessary to be practiced. Now I pray consider what difficulties and
self-contradictions you have brought your self into, by acknowledging these
Traditions to have been judged Apostolical by the present Church. For either
that Church at that time was not infallible in judging Traditions, and so the
present Church of every age is not Infallible; or if that was infallible, yours
is not; for your Church differs from the Church in St. Basils time about these
very Traditions by him mentioned, your Church not judging them Apostolical.
Which will appear by an inspection into those things which are here accounted
Traditions by him. Among which he not only mentions signing believers with the
sign of the Cross, praying toward the East, the oil and the abrenunciation used
in Baptism, S. Basil. de Sp. S. c. 27. Tom. 1.
but the consecration of the person to be Baptized, the standing at prayers
until Pentecost, and above all, the trine immersion in Baptism, all which he
says come (...), Out of a secret and unpublished Tradition, which our Fathers
preserved in a quiet and silent manner. Are these three last then acknowledged
by your Church now for Apostolical Traditions or no? Nay does not your Roman
Catechism absolutely pronounce the trine immersion to be unnecessary for
baptism. How can that become unnecessary, Catechism. Romans de baptis.
which was once infallibly judged to be an Apostolical Tradition? Either the
Church then was out in her judgment, or your Church out in hers? and choose
whether of those you have the more mind to? either of them will help you to
contradict your self.

2. There want not sufficient reasons of suspecting that Book to be corrupted.
You say Erasmus was the first who suspected it. Not the first who suspected
corruption in St. Basils writings. For Marcus Ephesius in the Florentine
Council charged some Latinizing Greeks with corrupting his books against
Eunomius, Council. Florent* Act. 20.
protesting that in Constantinople there were but four Copies to above one
thousand which had the passages in them, which were produced by the Latins. But
suppose Erasmus were the first: was he not so in discovering the genuine and
supposititious writings of several others of the Fathers. We must therefore
enquire into the reason which Erasmus had of this suspicion; Who tells us in
his Epistle to John Dantiscus the Poland Ambassador, that by that time he had
gone through half this work, he discerned a palpable inequality in the style,
sometimes swelling to a Tragical height, and then sinking into a vulgar
flatness, having much more of ostentation, impertinent digressions,
repetitions, than any of St. Basils own writings which had always a great deal
of vigor, simplicity and candor, with great evenness and equality, etc. And
although this argument to all that know the worth of that excellent person,
especially in his judgment of the writings of the Fathers will seem by no
means contemptible, yet we have much greater reason for our suspicion than this
merely from the style. For if you believe St. Basil was a man who knew how to
speak consistencies, that he would not utter palpable and evident
contradictions in his writings; you will have no reason to applaud your self in
this as a genuine piece of St. Basils, at least for the latter part of it. For
whereas you make this the force of his words, That unwritten Traditions have
equal force to stir up piety, with the written Word: You could hardly have
named so many words which bear a greater face of contradiction to a multitude
of testimonies in his unquestionably genuine writings. For, is it not St. Basil
who says, That it is a manifest falling from the Faith, (...). Basil. de vera
ac pia fide. Tom 20. p. gr. lat. p. 386. (...). Hom. 29 de Trinit. Tom. 1.
(...). In Ethicis. Reg. 16 v. Tom. 2. (...). Ib. reg. 80. c. 22.
and an argument of arrogance, either to reject any point of those things that
are written, or to bring in any of those things that are not written? Is it not
St. Basil who bids a man Believe the things that are written, and seek not the
things that are not written? Is it not the same St. Basil, who says, That
every word and action ought to be confirmed by the testimony of Holy Scripture,
for confirmation of the Faith of the good, and confusion of the evil? Is it not
he who urges that very place to this purpose, Whatsoever is not of Faith is
sin; then whatsoever is without the Holy Scripture, being not of Faith, is sin.
Which at least must be understood of such things which men have an opinion of
piety and necessity in the doing of. These and many other places may be
produced out of his genuine writings attesting the clean contrary to what you
produce this place for. What then must we think of him? Must we say of him as
he did of Gregory Thaumaturgus, that he spoke some things not (...) but (...),
Basil. ep. 64.
not as though he believed them; but for disputation sake, because they served
his purpose well? Or rather, have we not much greater reason considering the
contrariety of ^he Doctrine, as well as inequality of style, to follow Erasmus
his judgment concerning this Book? Especially considering that Bellarmin
himself, L. 4. de V.D. c. 7. De Amiss. Great. l. 1. c. 13.
who slights Erasmus his judgment herein; yet, when he is pinched with a
citation out of his Asceticks, calls the sincerity of that Book into question,
because he does not therein seem to admit of unwritten Traditions, which (says
he) ad Amphilochium he does strenuously defend. If therefore he may question
another Book for not agreeing with this, we may more justly question this for
disagreeing with so many others. Thus you see, it is not merely the style, and
that only on the judgment of Erasmus, which makes this Book suspicious. And
from those citations produced out of other writings of St. Basil, the (3.)
thing evidently appears, viz. That he so makes the Scripture the touchstone of
all Traditions, as that Scripture must be incomparably of greater force and
superior dignity, than any unwritten Tradition whatsoever. But Whether
Stapleton in his testimony meant primarily Apostolical Traditions, or others,
is not worth the enquiring.

Concerning what follows, as to the sincerity and agreement of ancient Copies
of Scripture,. 4.
and the means to be assured of the integrity of them, I have sufficiently
expressed my self already. Only what you add concerning the integrity of
Traditions above the Scripture, being new, deserves to be considered. For, (say
you) universal Traditions are recorded in Authors of every succeeding age:
Ib^d. n. 2.
and it seems much more incident to have errors s^ip into writings of so great
bulk as is the Bible, which in their Editions pass only through the hands of
particular men, then that there should be errors in public, universal, and
immemorial Traditions, which are openly practiced throughout Christendom, and
taken notice of by every one in all ages. And from hence you instance in St.
John's Epistle, or St. Lukes Gospel, which being originally written to
particular persons, must be at first received as authentical upon their credit:
but, on the other side, Apostolical Traditions (for which you instance in the
Observation of the Lords day, Infant Baptism, use of Altars, etc.) in their
prime Institution and practice being publicly practiced and owned by the
Apostles; it was incomparably harder, morally speaking, to doubt in the
beginning of these Traditions, then whether St. John's Epistle, or St. Lukes
Gospel were really theirs or no. Whence we see some Books that were written by
Apostles were questioned for some time, but these and such like Traditions,
were always owned, as truly and really descending from the Apostles. To which
I answer, 1. If you prove not some Tradition thus universally owned and
received which we have no record of, or ground for the observation of from
Scripture, you speak nothing at all to the purpose; but two of those you
instance in, Observation of the Lords day, and Paedobaptism, we have as much as
is requisite for the Churches practice from Scripture it self; for the other,
Of the Use of Altars, it were a work becoming you to deduce the History of them
from the Apostolical times, beginning at the (...), or upper room where the
Apostles met after Christ's Ascension, and so tracing them through all the
private houses and Synagogues in which the Christians in the Apostles times had
their solemn Assemblies for Divine worship; thence bringing down the History of
them carefully through all the persecutions, and producing evidences to that
purpose, out of Tertullian, Origin, Minutius Felix, and Arnobius, only blotting
out non where they speak of Altars and Temples among Christians, and telling us
that some Protestants had corrupted their Books; that where they utterly disown
them, they did highly magnify them; that where they seemed to speak most
against them, it was not to let the Heathens know that they had them: By this
means indeed you are like to acquaint us with some Universal Tradition less
liable to corruption and alteration than the Scriptures. For this of Altars is
the only thing by you mentioned, which seems any thing to your purpose, the
other two being sufficiently proved from Scripture; which acquaints us so much
with Apostolical practice, as to yield abundant reason for the practice of
following Ages. You do well therefore to wrap up all other such Traditions as
might vye with the Scriptures for integrity, with a prudent etc. For you cannot
but know that this game of Tradition is quite spoiled, if we offer to come to
particulars. But it is a fine thing in general to talk of the impossibility of
corrupting such a Tradition as had its rise from the practice of the Apostles,
and was by them delivered to succeeding ages, and so was universally practiced
by all Christians as derived from the Apostles; but when we put but that sullen
demand, that such a thing as has no evidence in Scripture may be named which
was so universally received and owned as the Scriptures are, how many put
off's, and etc.'s. do we meet with all? For fear of being evidently disproved
in the particular instanced in. 2. If there be so much greater evidence for
Tradition than Scripture, whence came the very next ages to the Apostles to be
so doubtful as to Traditions, which yet were agreed in receiving the Scripture?
I speak not of such things, which we have not the least evidence the Apostles
ever thought of, much less universally practiced, (such as we contend the
things in controversy between you and us are) but in such things which
undoubtedly the Apostles did practice, so as that the Christians of that Age
could not but know such a practice of theirs. As in that Controversy which
soon rise in the Church, about the day of the Observation of Easter; what
contests soon grew between the Asian and Roman Christians about this, both
equally pretending Apostolical Tradition, and that at the least distance
imaginable from the Apostolical times? For Polycarpe professed to receive his
Tradition from St. John, as those at Rome from St. Peter. If then Traditions be
so incapable of falsification and corruption, how came they to be so much to
seek, as to what the Apostolical Tradition was in the very next age succeeding
the Apostles? What, Could not those who lived in St. John's and St. Peter's time
know what they did? Could they be deceived themselves, or had they an intent to
deceive their posterity? If some of them did falsify Tradition so soon, we see
what little certainty there is in the deriving a Tradition from the Apostles:
if neither falsified, then it should seem there was no universal practice of
the Apostles concerning it, but they looked on it as a matter of indifferency,
and some might practice one way, and some another. If so, then we are yet
further to seek for an Universal Tradition of the Apostles, binding succeeding
Ages. For can you possibly think the Apostles did intend to bind unalterably
succeeding Ages in such things which they used a Liberty in themselves? If then
it be granted, that in matters of an indifferent nature the Apostles might
practice severally as they saw occasion, How then can we be certain of the
Apostles universal practice in matters of an indifferent nature? If we cannot
so, we can have no evidence of an Universal Tradition of the Apostles, but in
some things which they judged necessary. But whence shall we have this
unquestionable evidence, first that they did such things, and secondly, that
they did them with an apprehension of the necessity of them, and with an
intention to oblige posterity by their actions? By what rule or measure must we
judge of this necessity? By their Universal practice? but that brings us into a
plain Circle; for we must judge of the necessity of it by their Universal
practice, and we must prove that Universal practice by the necessity of the
thing. For, if the thing were not judged necessary, the Apostles might differ
in their practice from one another. Whence then shall we prove any practice
necessary, unless built on some unal^erable ground of reason, and then it is
not formally an Apostolical Tradition, but the use of that common reason and
prudence in matters of a religious nature: or else by some positive Law and
Institution of theirs; and this, supposing it unwritten, must be evidenced from
something distinct from their practice, or else you must assert, that whatever
the Apostles did, they made an unalterable Law for; or lastly, you must quit
all Unwritten Traditions as Universal, and must first infer the necessity, and
then the Universality of their practice from some record extant in Scripture,
and then you can be no further certain of any Universal practice of the
Apostles, then you are of the Scriptures: by which it will certainly appear
that the Scripture is far more evident and credible, then any Universal
unwritten Tradition.

A clear and evident Instance of the uncertainty of knowing Apostolical
Traditions in things not defined in Scripture is one of those you instance in
your self, viz. that of Rebaptizing Heretics which came to be so great a
Controversy, so soon after the Apostolical Age. For though this Controversy
rose to its height in St. Cyprians time, which was about A. D. 250. yet it was
begun some competent time before that. For St. Cyprian, in his Epistle to
Jubaianus, where he gives an account of the General Council of the Provinces of
Africa and Numidia consisting of seventy one Bishops, endeavors to remove all
suspicion of Novelty from their opinion, For (says he) it is no new or sudden
thing among us to judge that those ought to be baptized, who come to the Church
from Heretics; for now many years are past, and a long time, since, under
Agrippinus, Apud nos autem, non nova ant repentina res est, ut baptiza^dos
censeamus ^os qui ab haereticis ad Ecclesiam veniunt; quando multi jam anni
sunt, and longa aetas, ex quo sub Agrippin^ convenientes in unum Episcopi
plurimi hoc statuerint, atque exinde in hodiern^m diem tot millia haereticorum,
etc. Cyprian. ep. 73.
the Bishops meeting together did determine it in Council, and thousands of
Heretics have voluntarily submitted to it. How far off could that be from the
Apostolical times, which was done so long before Cyprians? And, although S.
Augustine (as it was his interest so to do) would make this to have been but a
few years; De baptism. C Donat. l. 4.
yet we have greater evidence both of the greater antiquity, and larger spread
of this Opinion. Whereby we may see, how little the judgment of Vincentius
Lyrinensis is to relied on as to Traditions, who gives Agrippinus such hard
words, for being the first who, against Scripture, Agrippinus omnium mortalium
primus contra Divinum Canonem, contra universalis Ecclesiae regulam, contra
sensum omnium consacerdotum, contra morem atque instituta majorum, baptizandos
eos qui ab haereticis ad Ecclesi^m venirent, censuisse. Commonit. l. 1. cap. 9.
the Rule of the Universal Church, the judgment of all his Fellow-Priests, the
custom of his Ancestors, did assert the rebaptization of Heretics. How little
Truth there is in what Vincentius here says, and consequently, how little
certainty in his way of finding out Traditions, will appear from the words of
Dionysius of Alexandria, in his Epistle to Philemon and Dionysius concerning
this subject. For therein he asserts, That long before that custom obtained in
Africa, the same was practiced and decreed in the most famous Churches both at
Iconium, Synada, and other places. (...), etc. Ap^d Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 7.
c. 7.
On which account this great person professes, that he durst not condemn their
Opinion who held so. Whether this Synod at Iconium were the same with that
mentioned by Firmilian, is not so certain, but, if it were, that can be no
argument against the Antiquity of it. For, although Firmilian say, That we long
ago, meeting in Iconium, from Galatia, Cilicia, and the neighbor Regions have
confirmed the same, Quod totum nos jam pridem in Iconio qui Phrygiae locus est
collecti, in unum convenientibus ex Galatia and Cilicia, and caeteris proximis
regionibus confirmavimus. Cypr. ep 75. Ubi pronomen Nos non de ipsius
Firmiliani personaa, sed potius de ejus decessoribus accipiendum est. Vales.
not. in Eusebius. l. 7. c. 7.
viz. that Heretics should be baptized; yet, as the learned Valesius observes,
the pronoune We, is not to be understood of Firmilian's person, but of his
predecessors; and therefore checks both Baronius and Binius for placing that
Synod, A. D. 258. We see therefore, this Opinion was so largely spread, Verum
etiam omnes sere (Ecclesiae) quae in Orient magno numero Christianam pietatem
profitebantur. Rigalt. not. in Cyprian. p. 145.
that not only the Churches in Africa, Numidia, and Mauritania favored it, but
almost all the Eastern Christians. For Dionysius in an Epistle to Xystus, who
succeeded Stephanus at Rome, wherein he pleads for Moderation as to this
Controversy, and desires him more thoroughly to consider the weight of the
business, and not proceed so rashly as Stephanus had done; he tells him in
conclusion, that he writ not this of himself, but at the request of the several
Bishops of Antioch, Caesarea, Aelia, Tire, Laodicea, Tarsus, etc. Nay, and as
it appears by Firmilians Epistle, they made no question but this custom of
theirs descended from Christ and his Apostles: For telling Cyprian, that in
such places where the other custom had been used, they did well to oppose truth
to custom; Caterum nos veritati and consuetudinem jungimus, and consuetudini
Romanorum, consuetudinem sed veritatis opponimus; ab initio hoc tenentes, quod
a Christo and ab Apostolo traditum est. ep. 75. Cypr. p. 164. ed. Rigalt. V.
etiam Basil. ep. prima Canon. ad Amphilochium. Tom. 2. p. 759.
But we (says he) join truth and custom together, and to the custom of the
Romans, we oppose the custom of truth, holding that from the beginning, which
was delivered by Christ and his Apostles. And therefore adds, Neither do we
remember when this practice began, seeing it was always observed among us. And
thence charges the Church of Rome, in that Epistle, with violating that, and
several other Traditions of the Apostles. But Vincentius Lyrinensis still takes
Stephens part; and all that he has to say, is, That that is the property of
Christian modesty and gravity, Idque esse proprium Christianae modestiae and
gravitatis, non sua posteris t^a^ere, sed a majoribus accepta servare. Ibid.
not to deliver their own Opinions to their posterity, but to retain the
Tradition of their Forefathers. As though the other side could not say the
same things, and with as much confidence as they did: but all the Question was,
What that Tradition was which they were to retain? The one said one thing, and
the other another. But, as Rigaltius well observes, Vincentius speaks very
truly and prudently, Quae san^ sunt a Vincentio verissime ac prudentissime
pron^nciata, si non alia si^t a majoribus tradita, quam quae majores ab
Apostolis susceperant: Caeterum, sub nomine ac persona majorum, per fatuos aut
Sophist^s, asinina aut Sophistica pro. Apostolicis traderentur. Rigalt. observe.
in Cyprian. p. 147.
if nothing were delivered by our Ancestors, but what they had from the
Apostles; but, under the pretense of our Ancestors, silly or counterfeit things
may by fools or knaves be delivered us for Apostolical Traditions. And whether
this does not often come to pass, let the world judge. Now therefore, when
these persons on both sides had incomparably greater advantages of knowing what
the Universal Apostolical Practice was than we can have, and yet so
irreconcilably differ about it, what likelihood or probability is there, that
we may have greater certainty of Apostolical Tradition, than of the Writings of
the Apostles? Especially in such matters as these are, in which it is very
questionable, Whether the Apostles had any occasion ministered to them, to
determine any thing in them. And therefore when Stephen at Rome, and those of
his party pleaded custom, and consequently, as they thought, Apostolical
Tradition; it was not irrationally answered on the other side by Cyprian and
Firmilian, Cypr. ep. 74, 75
that that might be, Because the Apostles had not occasion given them to
declare their minds in it, because either the Heresies were not of such a
nature as those of Marcion and Cerdon, or else there might not be such
returnings from those Heresies in the Apostolical times to the Church; which
being of so black a nature, as to carry in them such malignity, by corrupting
the lives of men by vicious practices, there was less probability either of the
true Christians Apostatizing into them, or the recovery of such who were fallen
into them. To this purpose Firmilian speaks, Quantum ad id perti^eat quod
Stephanus dixit, quasi Aposto^i eos qui ab haeresi veniant, baptiz^ri prob
buer^nt, and hoc custodiendum posteris tradiderint, plenissime vos
respondistis; Neminem tam stultum esse, qui hoc credat Apostolos trad^d^sse*
quando etiam ipsas b^reses constet execrabiles ac detestandas post^a extitisse.
Firmil. ep. Cypr. 75.
That the Apostles could not be supposed to prohibit the baptizing of such
which came from the Heretics, because no man would be so silly, as to suppose
the Apostles did prohibit that which came not in question till afterward. And
therefore S. Augustine, who concerned himself the most in this Controversy,
when he saw such ill use made of it by the Donatists, does ingenuously confess,
That the Apostles did determine nothing at all in it; Apostoli autem nihil
quidem exinde praeceperant sed consu^tudo illa quae opponebatur (...), ab little
traditione exordium sumpsisse credenda est: sicut sunt multa quae un^v^rsa
tenet Ecclesia, and ob hoc ab Apostol^s praecepta been creduntur, quanqu^m
scripta non rep^riantur. Aug. c. Donat. l. 5 c. 23.
but however (says he) that custom which is opposed to Cyprian, is to be
believed to have its rise from the Apostles Tradition; as there are many other
things observed in the Church, and on that account are believed to have been
commanded by the Apostles, although they are no where found written. But, what
cogent argument does S. Austin use to persuade them this was an Apostolical
Tradition? He grants, they determined nothing in it, yet would needs have it
believed, that an Universal Practice of succeeding ages, should imply such a
determination, though unwritten. But, 1. The Universal Practice we have seen
already, was far from being evident, when not only the African, but the Eastern
Church did practice otherwise, and that on the account of an Apostolical
Tradition too. 2. Supposing such an Universal Practice, How does it thence
follow, that it must be derived from the Apostles; unless it be first proved,
that the Church could never consent in the use of any thing, but what the
Apostles commanded them? Which is a very unreasonable supposition, considering
the different emergencies which might be in the Churches of Apostolical and
succeeding times, and the different reasons of practice attending upon them,
with that great desire which crept into the Church of representing the things
conveyed by the Gospel in an external symbolical manner, whence, in the second
Century, came the use of many baptismal Ceremonies, the praegustatio mellis and
lactis, as Tertullian calls it, and several of a like nature, which, by
degrees, came into the Church: Must we now derive these, and many other customs
of the Church necessarily from the Apostles, when, even in S. Austins time,
several customs were supposed to be grounded on Apostolical Tradition, which
yet are otherwise believed now. As in that known Instance of Infants
Participation of the Eucharist, which is otherwise determined by the Council of
Trent; and, for all that I know, the arguments used against this Tradition by
some men, may as well hold against Infant Baptism; for there is an equal
incapacity as to the exercise of all acts of reason and understanding in both:
and, as the Scripture seems to suppose such acts of grace in one as have their
foundation in the use of reason, it does likewise in the other, and I cannot
see sufficient evidence to the contrary; but if that place, Except a man be
born of water, and of the Spirit, he shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Joh. 3.5.
taken in the sense of the Fathers, does imply a necessity of Baptism for all,
and consequently of Children; that other place, Verily, verily, I say unto you,
Joh. 6.53.
Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no
life in you, taken likewise in the sense of the Fathers, will import the
necessity of a participation of the Eucharist by Infants as well as others. I
speak not this with an intention to plead either for this, or for the
rebaptizing Heretics, but to show the great uncertainty of knowing Apostolical
Traditions; some things having been taken for such, which we believe were not
so, and others which could not be known whether so or no, by the ages next
succeeding the Apostles. And therefore let any reasonable person judge what
probability there is in what you drive at, that Apostolical Traditions may be
more easily known than Apostolical Writings.

By which it appears, (3.) How vain and insufficient your reasons are,. 5.
Why Traditions should not be so liable to corruption as the Scriptures. 1. You
say, Universal Traditions are recorded in Authors of every succeeding age; and
it seems more incident to have the Bible corrupted than them, because of its
bulk and passing through the hands of particular men; whereas universal and
immemorial Traditions, are openly practiced and taken notice of by every one in
all ages. To which I answer, 1. That you give no sufficient reason why the
Bible should be corrupted. 2. And as little why Traditions should be more
preserved than that. Two Accounts you give why the Bible might be corrupted by
errors, because of its bulk, and passing through the hands of particular men.
But, Do you think it a thing impossible, or at least unreasonable, to suppose
that a Book of no greater bulk than the Bible, should, by the care and
vigilance of men, through the assistance of Divine Providence, be preserved
from any material corruptions or alterations? Surely, if you think so, you have
mean thoughts of the Christians in all ages, and meaner of Divine Providence:
For, you must suppose God to take no care at all for the preservation of a
Monument of unspeakable concernment to the good of mankind; and you must
conceive the Christians, in all ages, to be stupendiously careless and
negligent, either in transcribing, or reading the Scriptures, which could
suffer errors to slip into them, without discovery of them. Do you think that
the Christians had no higher esteem of the Scriptures, than of the Use of
Altars, or any other of your immemorial Traditions; but, say you, The one were
public, and the other passed through the hands of particular men. It should
seem then, their Altars were upon high places, but the Scriptures were only
read in corners, never any such thing being publicly read as the Bible, so
that any alteration might be there, and no notice at all taken of it. The poor
African Bishop found the contrary to his sorrow, who was in such danger from
the people, for altering but one word according to S. Hieroms Translation, as
S. Austin reports the story. But, suppose it passed through the hands of
particular men, Was it therefore more liable to be corrupted? I should think
just the contrary; unless you could suppose all those particular men to agree
in corrupting it, which, considering the difference of opinions, capacities,
and interests, is a most unreasonable supposition; that some verbal and literal
mistakes might slip in, you might rationally imagine, but that therefore any
great corruptions should creep into it, argues your mean thoughts both of Gods
Providence, and the care of the Christian world. Well, but still it is
impossible to corrupt your Traditions. It were a much harder matter to free
your Traditions from being corruptions themselves of the purity of the
Christian Church. And why so hard for them to be corrupted? Because recorded in
Authors of every succeeding age. I had thought, all Books of equal, or much
bigger bulk than the Scripture, had been as liable to corruption as that; but
it seems not. If a Book be written of Traditions, the very Traditions will
preserve it pure, though as big as that Livy, Quem mea vix totum bibliotheca
capit: But that is not all, it seems, these Traditions are recorded in Authors
of every succeeding age: Unhappy men we, that cannot find them there! I wish,
instead of writing Controversies, you would write the history of these
Traditions; but, be sure to deduce them through the Authors of every
succeeding age; and, I suppose, you mean, ever since the Apostles. I shall then
indeed believe Popish Traditions to be no Novelties, but not before. But, let
us grant this: Were not the Scriptures attested by the same Authors? No, It
seems, they were agreed about all Traditions, but not so about the Scripture.
And the reason is, Because the Scriptures were first delivered to private men,
as S. John 's Epistle, and S. Luke 's Gospel; but Traditions had an universal
practice. But, Can you suppose it otherwise, but that particular Books must be
first delivered to private men? Would you have them delivered only to General
Councils, or the Pope and his Cardinals? It seems, S. John was to blame for not
directing his Epistle to the Pope, instead of Gaius; and S. Luke his Gospel to
a General Council, instead of Theophilus; for then we might have had Infallible
Certainty of them; but now it is a plain case, we can have no more than Moral
Certainty that ever they were theirs. But, for this trick, it seems, they fared
the worse; for some Books were doubted of, for many years, in particular
Churches. It is well yet, they were not discarded by your Catholic Church,
because the Apostles did not put their Books into your hands to recommend them.
But what if some Books, by some men, were for some time doubted of, which yet
were afterward universally received upon sufficient evidence? Why then (say
you) Tradition has much advantage of Scripture? How so? Was no Tradition,
which would be accounted universal, doubted of by any men at any time? No (say
you) it is impossible it should, for universal Traditions were universally
practiced at all times. Now you speak home; and nothing wants to the proof of
it, but only to let us know, What these Universal Traditions are, which were so
universally practiced in all ages, containing things different from Scripture,
which are recorded in the Authors of every succeeding Age. Your offer is so
fair, that my request shall be very short; name them, and prove them, and I
will believe you, but not before. So much for this, which, though a digression
in this Chapter, yet is not from the design of this discourse.

Setting aside therefore your discourse about A.C 's. Pen being troubled,. 6.
in which is nothing worth our notice; I come to the main dispute of this
Chapter, which is, Whether the Promises of Infallibility made to the Apostles,
are to be restrained to their own times, or to be extended to the present
Church in all ages? We assert the former, and you the latter. For which you
produce this argument, That from these very places, Christians do infer, that
the Church shall never fall away and perish. P. 99. n. 3.
For if the assistance be not to preserve the succeeding Church, at least from
some kind of errors infallibly; it may, notwithstanding all the assistance he
allows it here, fall into all kind of errors one after another, and so by
degrees, the whole Church might fall into a general Apostasy, and thereby
perish. There must therefore be some kind of infallible assistance in the
Apostles successors, by virtue of these Promises. But, 1. Is it all one to say,
There shall always be a Church, and to say, That Church shall always be
infallible? Those, who from the places in question, do prove, that the Church
shall never quite fall away, do not dream of a present Infallibility in your
sense, but that there always shall be a number of men professing Christianity
in the world: And, Cannot you possibly conceive, that there should be such a
number of men professing Christianity without Infallibility? To help therefore
your understanding a little; suppose that all the members of the Roman Church
should in one age be destroyed (and, according to your former Principle, that
if a Church may err, we cannot be certain but that it does err; because this
may be, we cannot be certain but that it is) but we only make the supposition:
Do not you think that there would be still a number remaining, who profess
Christianity, of the Greek and Protestant Churches? yet, I hope, you will not
say, that these were infallible. There may be then a number of Christians, who
are not infallible; and that is all which is meant by saying, That the present
Church is infallible in Fundamentals, viz. that there shall always be a
Church, for that which makes them a Church, is the belief of Fundamentals; and
if they believe not them, they cease to be so. That therefore which being
supposed, a Church is, and being destroyed, it cease to be, is the formal
constitution of it; but thus it is as to the Church, the belief of Fundamentals
makes it a Church, and the not belief of them makes them cease to be a
Christian Church; I speak of an Essential, and not of an Organical Church; and,
I know not who those persons are, who, out of those places, do infer the
perpetuity of an Organical Church; nor, if they did, does it thence follow,
they must suppose an Infallible Assistance, beyond an Essential to make it an
Organical Church. For I cannot imagine what necessity can be supposed of
Infallibility, in order to that which may be sufficiently constituted without
it. 2. I answer, the perpetuity of the Church does rather argue the
Infallibility of the Promise then of the Church. Which if you did consider, you
would not certainly infer Infallibility from a promise of Perpetuity. For all
the Infallibility supposable in this case is an Infallibility of Accomplishment
of the Promise made. As in a clear and parallel Instance of that Promise, Genesis
49.10.
The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come. Taking it in the most received Interpretation among
Christians, that the Jewish Polity should remain till the days of the Messiah;
does this infer, that there should be a continual Infallibility in the Jewish
Polity, because there was a Promise made of its perpetuity? When God says, In
Jerusalem have I set my name for ever, does it follow that Jerusalem should be
always Infallible? But how would you triumph beyond all reason, if you had but
any thing like such a promise for Rome, as that is for Jerusalem? Supposing
then that the Promises by you insisted on, should be so far extended, as to
imply a perpetuity of a Christian Church what does that argue, but only this,
that to make it appear that Promise is Infallibly true, there shall always be
a succession of Christians in the world. 3. Suppose I should grant that the
being of a Christian Church does suppose the assistance of Gods Spirit, is
there no assistance, but what is Infallible? If not, no one can be a Christian
without Infallibility; For we speak of no other assistance, but what is
necessary to make men Christians; for, what makes them such severally, take
them conjunctly makes them a Church. But if you, besides what assistance is
requisite to make them Christians, do suppose somewhat more to make them a
Church, I pray name what it is; and whatever it be, it will not be owned by
such who infer a perpetuity of a Church out of these places. But if in order
to that no more be meant, (as no more can be meant) then what is necessary to
make men Christians then Infallibility will grow so cheap and common, it will
not be worth challenging by you for your Church. 4. Suppose I grant this
assistance to be Infallible, does all Infallible assistance make an Infallible
Testimony? I am sure not in their sense, who say the Church is infallible in
Fundamentals, for they never offer to assert that the present Church is
Infallible in defining what are Fundamentals, and what not. And this is the
only Infallibility in question, viz. Such a one as makes the Testimony of those
who have it Infallible. For such a kind of assistance was that of the Apostles,
which is only the thing enquired after. If you can therefore prove such an
Infallibility in your Churches Testimony, as the Apostles had, you do
something; but what is short of this, is nothing at all to the purpose. 5.
Suppose I should grant the Testimony of the Catholic Church to be Infallible,
yet all these concessions were nothing for your advantage, unless you could as
evidently prove that your Church is the only Catholic Church. Which that you
can never do, will appear when we come to that question. 6. Suppose I should
yield the Catholic Churches Testimony to be Infallible, and your Church to be
the Catholic Church; yet all this is far from proving Pope, or Council, or
both to be Infallible. For, By what means come they to claim the Infallibility
as belonging to them which is given to the Church? by what deeds are the
conveyances settled of the privileges of the Church to them? Where is it ever
said in Scripture, or in the least intimated, that the Promises made to the
Church are to be understood of the representative Church? The Apostles had this
Promise in their personal capacities made to them, and not in a representative;
how comes then the Promise to be understood of a representation afterward?
Thus you see, that you are at least six removes from any title to claim this
Infallibility from these Promises by: and therefore you have little hopes that
your claim should be admitted upon so slender a title.

From this therefore at present you fly off, to the vindicating A. C. from
asserting Infallibility belonging to all the Doctors and Pastors of the
Church;. 7.
which yet is a very good design to vindicate a man from his own words. For are
they not as express as may be, viz. That there is the Promise of Christ, and
his Holy Spirits continual presence, Luke 10.16. Matthew. 28.19, 20. Joh. 14.16.
not only to the Apostles, but to their Successors also, the lawfully sent
Pastors and Doctors of the Church in all Ages. To which his Lordship says,
Here Is a deal of Infallibility indeed, and yet error store. You presently cry
out, Page 94. Page 99.
But what shall we say to an Adversary that forges what Chimerical doctrine he
pleases, and then fights against it. What Chimerical Doctrine is that which he
forges? does he not relate A. C's. words? and do you, or can you, deny them to
be his words? But say you, This was not his meaning. I suppose you mean, That
his words as they are, are not defensible, and therefore you must have a (...)
for them: which is, That he did not understand these words of every Doctor
apart, but of Pastors and Doctors lawfully assembled in Ecumenical Councils.
But, 1. Are Pastors and Doctors never lawfully sent, but when they are in
Ecumenical Councils? for it is plain A. C. speaks of them as lawfully sent. 2.
Have Pastors and Doctors met in Ecumenical Councils in all Ages? I would you
could prove a truly Ecumenical Council in any Age; but sure you never pretend
to it in all Ages, yet if A. C's. words have any sense in them, they speak of
such an Infallibility, as belongs to the Church in all Ages. And therefore this
plaster is a great deal too narrow to cover the sore. But say you, Every
Author is to be understood to mean by his words, what they will properly bear;
and is consonant with the meaning of his other words. I most freely grant you
this and all that follows, if you will prove it impossible for any man to speak
nonsense, or contradictions; But I can more easily prove it very possible for
a man to speak things which contradict one the other, which I have sufficiently
proved from your own dear self in this very Discourse of Infallibility. What
follows concerning the Jesuits pretense of Infallibility to themselves (proved
by his Lordship, from the words of the Apologist, to whom Casaubon replies in
his Epistle to Fronto Ducaeus, which are these, Let day and night -- life and
death be joined together, and then there will be some hope that Heresy may
fall upon the person of a Jesuit) is very well worth the observing, were it
only for that rare and incomparable answer, which you make to them. In which,
it is hard to guess whether your ingenuity or your wit surpass the other. Rabbi
Casaubon, (...), must help him out. Page 100.
An Apologist says Casaubon averres, it is impossible for a Jesuit to err. Who
is this Anonymus Apologist? A Jesuit or a Minister? for an Apologist and a
Jesuit, are no more convertible terms, than a Jesuit and a Minister. How
shall we know then, whether this nameless Apologist was a Jesuit, or a
Minister personating a Jesuit? The Gospel will tell us: Ex fructibus eorum
cognoscetis eos. O rare Drollery! does this pass for wit at Rome? or must we
think you speak these words in good earnest? If so, your Ignorance is more then
ordinary in these matters. For to pass by your unworthy reflection on that
excellent person Isaac Casaubon, whose memory is as far above your detraction,
as his learning beyond your reach; and, to let go your scurrilous Greek
Proverb, (...) (which some will tell you was Greek for a Jesuit) are you
really so Ignorant, that you did not know whether the Apologist, whose words
are cited, were a Jesuit or a Minister? What not he, who professedly
undertakes the Vindication of the Jesuits? not he, who was so seriously
recommended by Fronto Ducaeus a Jesuit himself? not he, who industriously
vindicates Ribadeneira, Scribanius, Emanuel Sa, Bellarmin, and others, in their
doctrine which does most reflect on the Power and Authority of Princes? not he,
who extolls Father Garnet who was executed in England for the
Gunpowder-treason, yet for all this not he known to be a Jesuit? Are you yet
to seek? Apply but your own rule of the Gospel to what is said already, and by
those fruits you cannot but know him to be a Jesuit.

. 8.
But now, notwithstanding the sufficient answers which have been so often given
to the places produced for the proof of the Churches Infallibility out of
Scripture, You thought it no needless trouble in A. C. to mention them, and
much less in your self to vindicate them from the Bishops Interpretation: The
places are Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, and he that despises
you despises me. Matthew. 28.20. I am with you always to the end of the world.
Joh. 14.16. The Comforter the Holy Ghost shall abide with you for ever. That
which you would infer from these places, is, That an Infallible assistance is
promised to the Church in all ages, not in its diffusive sense but
representative, viz. in the Pastors and Doctors assembled in Council. The
substance of his Lordships answer to these places, is in these words; These
promises were made of continual presence and assistance, that I grant; P. 93.
n. 28.
and they were made to the Apostles and their Successors, that I grant too, but
in a different degree. For it was of continual and Infallible assistance to the
Apostles, but to their Successors of continual and fitting assistance, but not
Infallible. To this you return no answer in general, but endeavor to evince
the contrary from the particular places, by disproving his Interpretations of
them. To the first therefore Luke 10.16. He that hears you hears me, etc.
His Lordship answers, That this was absolutely true in the Apostles, who kept
themselves to that which was revealed by Christ; but it was to be but
conditionally true in their Successors, i. e. so long and so far as you speak
my words and not your own. For where the command is for Preaching, Matthew. 28.20.
the Restraint is added. Go, says Christ, and teach all Nations: but you may
not Preach all things that you please, but all things which I have commanded
you. The publication is yours, the Doctrine is mine; and where the Doctrine is
not mine, there your publication is beyond, or short of your commission. Page
101.
To this you reply, That this is rather to pervert our Saviors words, than to
Interpret them, is manifest. And the reason you give, is, Because a Sectary,
who denies the Apostles Infallibility as well as the Churches, might apply this
restraint to the Apostles themselves, as well as he now applies it to their
Successors. But they are strange kind of Sectaries indeed who deny the Apostles
Infallibility, and my memory does not serve me with any such who asserted
Christ's Infallibility and denied the Apostles; but if there be any such
Sectaries, let us know them, that we may then say, There are some in the world
who believe great absurdities as well as you. However let us for the present,
take this for a supposition, that any men might do so; whether then they might
not say, the Apostles were only Infallible when they spoke Christ's words and
not their own, i. e. delivered his Doctrine and not any other. No doubt they
might, and said very well in it too. And if these be the Sectaries you mean, I
am one of them my self; For I believe, the Apostles were no further Infallible
then as they delivered Christ's Doctrine to the world, and I suppose there are
many such Sectaries besides my self. But all the difference then between the
Apostles and their Successors was this, that those who heard the Apostles
Doctrine had ground to believe them Infallible in what they delivered for
Christ's Doctrine; but we have no ground to believe so of any Church since the
Apostles times, that it is Infallible in delivering the Doctrine of Christ to
others. The promise then of Infallible assistance as made to the Apostles does
imply that Gods Spirit would be so with them, that they should deliver nothing
for the revealed will of God or the Doctrine of Christ, but what was really and
truly so. And if you can from this or any other place prove such an Infallible
assistance to the Church of all ages, you do something, but not otherwise. But
for this particular place, He that hears you hears me; I have something
more yet to say, which may manifest how wholly impertinent it is to your
purpose. 1. It seems to me very questionable, whether any such thing as
Infallibility be at all employed in this place: and then certainly from hence
you cannot infer a successive Infallibility in the Church. And the reasons why
I question it, are, 1. The Apostles themselves had not that continual
Infallible assistance of the Spirit of God till after Christ's Ascension, when
the promise of Christ's sending his Spirit upon them was remarkably
accomplished, Will you say then they had Infallible assistance by the Spirit,
before the promise of that Infallible assistance was made to them? If then the
Apostles themselves had not such a continual Infallible assistance, much less
the LXX. Disciples who are here spoken of. 2. The message they were sent upon
did not at all require any Infallible assistance, for it was only a preparative
message, they not being sent to deliver fully the Doctrine of Christ, but to
tell them, The Kingdom of God is at hand, or nigh unto you, ver. 9, 11. i. e.
that blessed state of things under the Messiah is now ready to be revealed to
you: the whole design therefore of that commission of the LXX. Disciples and
the Apostles, when they were first sent abroad, was of the same nature with
John Baptist's, viz. to prepare people for the reception and entertainment of
that Doctrine which Christ should deliver to them. Now what Infallible
assistance can be supposed necessary in order to this? 3. The words imply
nothing of Infallible assistance in them. For when Christ says, He that
hears you hears me, and he that despises you despises me, and he that
despises me despises him that sent me: the plain meaning is no more than
this, They which hearken to your message, and believe the truth of what you
say, do therein manifest their readiness to hearken to me, and consequently
will receive my Doctrine, when it is delivered to them; but they who despise
this message of yours, the affront they offer you, reflects most on me who sent
you; and they shall find to their sorrow, that in rejecting me they reject God
too, who will punish them severely for it: which, that it is the meaning of the
words, will very easily appear to any one that considers the scope and design
of the place. Now is it not possible for any to declare their respect to Christ
by receiving his Messengers, without believing those Messengers to be
Infallibl^* If that be possible, then what kind of Infallibility can you hence
infer? 2. Suppose I should grant these LXX Infallible in what they delivered,
yet nothing can be hence drawn for the Churches continual Infallibility,
because of the different reason of one from the other, and that will appear in
these things. 1. These were immediately sent abroad by Christ himself, when
there were no Infallible writings containing this Doctrine, made by himself or
his Apostles. And was there not then much more reason for such an Infallibility
then there can be now? 2. These had sufficient evidences to attest that
Infallibility, by that power of Miracles, which they had in curing diseases and
casting out of Devils, ver. 9. -- 17. And therefore those they were sent to had
sufficient inducement to believe such an Infallibility, if they had pretended
to it; when therefore you can prove the like of your lawfully sent Doctors and
Pastors, either apart or in a General Council, you may then from hence argue
some thing toward that Infallibility, but not before.

In your following words you acknowledge a difference in applying this text to
the Apostles and their Successors, For it was true in every one of the Apostles
apart, but it is not so in every one of the succeeding Pastors; and for this
you give these Reasons, 1. Your adversaries and you are agreed in it, viz. That
the Pastors apart are fallible. 2. It Is manifest by experience, that many
eminent Pastors have not only been erroneous, but heretical. 3. There is
universal Tradition for it. 4. Plain Scripture for it, that even from
themselves there should arise some that should speak perverse things. These
reasons I acknowledge to be so true, that, if you had expressed the Pope
himself in them, you could not have proved his fallibility better, then by
Experience, Consent, and Scripture. But yet you have two Reserves in a Corner,
which mar all the rest, viz. that from these places you make General Councils
infallible, and, according to your most received persuasion, the Pope too. Do
you so indeed? and from these places? and both of them Infallible, whether they
agree or not? But if our reasons be not stronger against any such Infallibility
deducible from these places, than yours are for it (for I have not seen any) I
am content to blind my understanding so much, if I can, as to believe what you
say, That to give reasons against your exposition is impossible. Page 102.
But as your reason in all other things is weak, so in this it appears, that
either your ignorance or your confidence is intolerable.

. 9.
The next place, is, Matthew. 28.20. I am with you always, even unto the end of
the world. To which his Lordship says, Yes most certain it is, present by his
spirit; Page 96.
for else in bodily presence, he continued not with his Apostles but during his
abode on earth. And this promise of his spiritual presence was to their
Successors; else why to the end of the world? The Apostles did not, could not
live so long; But then to the Successors, the Promise goes no further, than, I
am with you always, which reaches to continual assistance, but not to Divine
and Infallible. What say you now to this? Why forsooth, It is the same answer
as before, and therefore deserves no further refutation. But does it not
deserve some further proof of your Infallibility from this place? Or are you
content to let it go, because you cannot but see, that a spiritual presence and
not infallible is hereby promised, either to the Apostles or their Successors,
although from other places it appears, that the spiritual presence of Christ
with his Apostles did extend to so high a degree, as to make them infallible in
what they delivered for the Doctrine of Christ, but no place of Scripture does
assert so much of the Churches infallibility. It is well then that you grant,
that St. Gregory did not believe any infallible assistance in the Pastors of
the Church; but (you say) he understood it of them apart, to make which
probable, you must produce some other places, where he says otherwise of them
in Council. But how a gracious presence of Christ with his Church, which you
grant Rhabanus Maurus meant by this place, should suppose a conjunctive
infallibility of the Pastors as a necessary foundation and support of the
Church diffusive, I confess is beyond my understanding; but at least you say,
it denies it not: neither does it deny that you or I are infallible; but does
it therefore follow that we are so? What places you produce (or rather bid us
go seek for out of the Fathers) to prove that they, in effect, (it seems then,
not evidently) do attribute infallibility to the Church (but by no means Divine
infallibility, for this is more than the third time that you have forbid the
Banes between those two words Divine and Infallible) will to any that reads
them appear to be capable of proving no more than the Perpetuity of a Church in
the world; but if any of them can do any better service, I doubt not, but we
shall again meet with them, and therefore shall adjourn their consideration to
a more convenient place. To prove that any of the Fathers have denied this
place to extend to infallibility, is a very unreasonable thing which you put
the Bishop and his party upon, because they only deliver what they conceive the
meaning of places to be, without reflections on any Heresies, but such as were
most prevalent in their own times. And if your Church had in their time
challenged Infallibility from such places, you might have heard of their
Negative, which at present you put us unreasonably to prove.

Your answer to John 14.16. only is,. 10.
that it must be understood in some absolute sense; and does not his Lordship
say so too, viz. in regard of Consolation and Grace. But if you say, there can
be no other absolute sense, but an infallible assistance, you would do well to
prove it and not barely to suppose it: and so likewise, what follows as to John
16.13. (which his Lordship justly restrains to the Apostles alone) you tell us,
That you contend, that in whatsoever sense all truth is to be understood in
respect of each Apostle apart, it is also to be understood in relation to their
Successors, assembled in a full Representative of the whole Church. That you
contend, we grant; but we say, it is without sense or reason. And therefore
come to examine what you produce for it. Your first reason, P. 103. n. 5.
Because the Representative of the Church in General Council, and the Bishop of
Rome as Pastor of the whole Church, have equal power to oblige the Church to
believe what they deliver, as each Apostle had, is utterly denied, and must be
more then barely supposed as it is here. Your second, which you call the
Fundamental reason of this Exposition is, in short, N. 6.
That the preservation of the Church requires infallibility in future ages of
the Church, as well as in the Apostles times, which is again utterly denied;
And the next time you write, I pray prove your reasons well; and think not your
confident producing things you know are denied by us, will serve for reasons
against us. Before you can sufficiently prove that any rite of the Church, not
mentioned in Scripture, had the Holy Ghost for its Author, especially when
contrary to a custom expressed in Scripture, you must do more then produce a
single testimony of St. Augustine for it; who was apt to suppose the Holy Ghost
might be pleased with such things, which the Church, though not therein
infallible, might consent in the practice of. Which certainly is far from
supposing the Church to have infallible assistance with it, in delivering
Doctrines of Faith; because some things might be used in the Church which the
Holy Ghost might be supposed not displeased with, which is the utmost can be
made of your citation out of St. Austin.

It seems you were aware of that disparity between the Apostles times and ours,
as to the pretense of Infallibility, because the Apostles were first to deliver
this Doctrine to the world, and after to consign it by writing to future ages;
from whence it were easy to infer, there could not be that necessity of a
Continual Infallible Assistance in the Church, because the Doctrine infallibly
delivered by them is preserved in the Church by the Infallible Records of it.
But to this your answer is considerable. What wise man (say you) would go about
to raise a stately building for many ages, P. 104. n. 7.
and satisfy himself with laying a Foundation to last but for a few years? Our
Savior the wisest of Architects, is not to be thought to have founded this
incomparable building of the Church upon sand; which must infallibly have
happened, had he not intended to afford his continual assistance also to the
succeeding Pastors of the Church, to lead them, when assembled in a General
Council, into all those truths wherein he first settled the Apostles. Whether
you call this arguing for the Churches infallibility, or libelling against our
blessed Savior if he has not done what you would have him, is hard to
determine. I am sure, it is arguing ab absurdo with a witness; for if he has
not done, just as you fancy he should have done; he must venture to be
accounted an Ignoramus and Impostor before, and here to do that which no wise
man would have done, viz. build a stately Fabric, the Church, upon the Sands.
So it seems you account the Prophets and the Apostles: for if the Apostle may
be credited, Ephesians. 2.20.
we are built on the Foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ
himself being the chief Cornerstone. And this is it you must mean by being
built on the sand; for herein it is plain, the Church is built on these, viz.
that Infallible doctrine which was delivered by them, but here is not one word
or the least intimation of an inherent infallibility in the Church which was to
be its foundation so as to secure it from all error. And this (you say) must
infallibly happen, if there be not the same infallibility in General Councils
which was in the Apostles; for that I suppose must be the meaning of your last
words, if they be to the purpose. But how groundless your pretense of the
Infallibility of General Councils is, will appear when we come to that subject;
but have you so little of common sense and reason with you, as to suppose the
Church presently notwithstanding the Divine Revelation of the Doctrine of
Christianity in Scripture to be built on Sand, if General Councils be not
infallible? Is there not sufficient ground to rely on the Doctrine of
Christianity, supposing there never had been any General Council in the world?
What was the Church built on before the Nicene Council, only on Sand? surely
the Wind and Billows of persecutions would then have easily overturned it. What
if through civil combustions in the Empire there could never have been any
Assembly's of the Bishops afterward, must the Church needs have fallen to the
ground for want of General Councils? But why, I pray, must the Infallibility of
the Apostles be compared only to a foundation that can last but for few years?
Do you suppose that these Apostles never did commit their Doctrine infallibly
to writing; or that these writings of theirs did last but for a few years?
without one of these, it is hard to find out your meaning by those expressions.
If you deny either of them, I shall readily prove them: but if you affirm both
these, (as if you are heartily a Christian you must do) with what face can you
say that Christ, in making the Apostles infallible, did lay a Foundation but
for a few years. But thanks be to God, although perverse and unreasonable men
are always quarrelling with the methods of Divine wisdom and goodness, this
Foundation of the Lord stands sure still; and, as long as the Infallible
Doctrine of the Gospel continues, the Church will be built on a steadfast and
unmovable Rock, which will prove a much surer Foundation than the seven Hills
of Infallibility. But this is your grand and fundamental mistake, to suppose a
Church cannot continue without a vital inherent Principle of Infallibility in
her self, which must be discovered by Infallible Directions from the Head of
it: whereas we grant the necessity of an Infallible Foundation of Faith, but
cannot discern either from Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity, that there must be
a living and standing Infallible Judge, which must deliver and interpret those
Infallible Records to us. We grant then Infallibility in the Foundation of
Faith, we assert the highest Certainty of the Infallibility of that Foundation,
we declare that the owning of that Infallible Foundation is that which makes
men Christians (the body of whom we call a Church) we further grant, that
Christ has left in his Church sufficient means for the preservation of it in
Truth and Unity; but we deny that ever he promised such an Infallibility to be
constantly resident in that Church, as was in the Prophets and Apostles; and
that neither any intention of Christ, or any reason in the thing can be
manifested, why such an Infallibility should be so necessary for the Churches
preservation, that without it the Wisdom of Christ must be questioned, and the
Church built on a sandy Foundation. Your citation of Vincentius Lyrinensis
proves nothing but the Churches constancy in adhering to that Doctrine of
Faith, which was delivered from the beginning; but how that should prove a
Constant Infallibility, I cannot understand, unless it is impossible that there
should be any Truth, where there is no inherent Infallibility. Thus we see,
what very little success you have in the attempt of proving the Churches
continual Infallibility from Scripture.

From hence you proceed to the consideration of the way,. 11.
How Scripture and Tradition do mutually confirm each other. His Lordship
grants, That they do mutually, but not equally, confirm the authority either of
other. P. 98. n. 3 ^
For Scripture does infallibly confirm the authority of Church-Traditions,
truly so called: but Tradition does but morally and probably confirm the
authority of the Scripture. This (you say) is apparently false, but endeavor
not to make it evident, that it is so: Only you say, P. 105.
A. C. refused already to grant it. Et quid tum postea? Must every thing be
false which A. C. refuses to grant? But let us see, whether his Similitude
makes it out. For (says he) it is as a Kings Ambassadors word of mouth, and
his Kings Letters bear mutual witness to each other. Just so indeed (says his
Lordship) For his Kings Letters of Credence under hand and Seal, confirm the
Ambassadors authority infallibly to all that know his Seal and hand: But the
Ambassadors word of mouth confirms his Kings Letters, but only probably. For
else, Why are they called Letters of Credence, if they give not him more
credit, than he gives them? To which you make a large Reply. 1. That the Kings
hand and Seal cannot confirm infallibly to a Foreign King, who neither knows
hand nor Seal, the Ambassadors authority; and therefore this reaches not the
business, How we should know infallibly, that the Scripture is Gods Word. 2.
That the primary reason, Why the Ambassador is admitted, is his own credit, to
which correspond the motives of Credibility of the Church, by which the Letters
of Credence are admitted. 3. That none can give authority to the Letters of
Credence, or be infallibly certain of them, but such as infallibly know that
hand and Seal. 4. That none can infallibly know that hand and Seal, but such as
are certain of the Ambassadors sincerity. But, Does all this disprove what his
Lordship says, That though there be a mutual Testimony, yet it is not equal;
for, although the Letters of Credence might be the sooner read and admitted of,
on the Ambassadors Reputation and Sincerity, yet still those Letters
themselves, upon the delivery of them, may further, and in a higher degree,
confirm the Prince he is sent to, of his authority to act as Ambassador.
Supposing then, that there be a sufficient Testimony, that these Letters were
sealed by the Secretary of State, who did manifest his Sincerity in the highest
manner in the sealing of them; though a Foreign Prince might not know the hand
and Seal, yet upon such a creditable Testimony, he may be assured that they
were sealed by the Prince himself. But then withal, if the Ambassador, to
assure the Prince, offers his own life to attest the truth of his Credentials,
and the Prince by reading the Letters, find something in them which could not
be written by any other than that Prince, he then has the highest certainty he
can desire. This is the case between Tradition and Scripture; General Tradition
at first makes way for the first admission of Scripture, as the general repute
of an Ambassadors coming does for his access to the Prince; the particular
Tradition of the Church, is like the Ambassadors affirming to the Prince, that
he has Letters of Credence with him; but then, when he enquires into the
Certainty of those Letters, those Motives of Credibility (not which relate to
the person of the Ambassador) but which evidently prove the sealing of those
Letters (as the constant Testimony of such who were present at it, the
Secretaries and Ambassadors venturing their lives upon it) must confirm him in
that; and lastly, his own reading the Credentials, give him the highest
Confirmation, i. e. The testimony of those who saw the miracles of Christ and
his Apostles, and confirmed the Truth of their Testimony, by their dying for
it, are the highest inducement to our believing that the Scriptures were sealed
by God himself in the miracles wrought, and written by his own hand, his Spirit
infallibly assisting the Apostle; but still, after all this, when in these very
Scriptures we read such things as we cannot reasonably suppose could come from
any but God himself; this does in the highest degree settle and confirm our
Faith. Therefore, as to the main scope for which this Similitude was used by
his Lordship, it holds still; but your mistake lies, in supposing that the
Ambassadors reception depended wholly on his own single Testimony, and that
was enough to make any Prince infallibly certain that his Letters of Credence
are true, which cannot be, unless he knows beforehand that Ambassador to be
infallibly true, which is impossible to be supposed at his first reception. Yet
this is plainly your case, that the Scriptures are to be infallibly believed on
the single Testimony of the present Church, which is, to make the Ambassador
himself give authority to his Letters of Credence, and set hand and seal to
them. Whereas the contrary is most evident to be true. But then, supposing
these Credentials admitted, the Prince transacts with the Ambassador,
according to that power which is conveyed to him therein. And thus it is in the
present case: Not as though a Prince treated every Envoy with equal respect to
an Ambassador, no more ought any Pastors of the Church be received, but
according to that power and authority which their Credentials, viz. the
Scriptures do convey to them. We own therefore the Apostles as Gods immediate
Ambassadors, whose miracles did attest their commission from Heaven to all
they came to; and no persons could pretend ignorance, that this is Gods hand
and Seal; but all other Pastors of the Church we look on only as Agents settled
to hold correspondency between God and Us, but no extraordinary Ambassadors,
who must be looked on as immediately transacting by the Infallible Commission
of Heaven. When therefore the Pastor or Pastors of your Church shall bring new
Credentials from Heaven, attested with the same Broad-seal of Heaven, which the
Apostles had, viz. Miracles, we shall then receive them in the same capacity as
Apostles, viz. acting by an Infallible Commission, but not till then. By which
I have given a sufficient Answer to what follows, concerning the credit which
is given to Christ's Legates as to himself; for hereby it appears they are to
have no greater authority than their Commission gives them. Produce therefore
an Infallible Commission for your Pastors Infallibility, either apart, or
conjunctly, and we shall receive it; but not else. Whether A.C. in the words
following, does in terms attribute Divine and Infallible authority to the
Church, supposing it infallibly assisted by the Holy Ghost, is very little
material; for, Whether he owns it or no, it is sufficient that it necessarily
follows from his Doctrine of Infallibility. For, How can the Church be
infallible by virtue of those Promises, wherein Divine Infallibility, you say,
is promised, and by virtue of which the Apostles had Divine Infallibility, and
yet the Church not to be divinely Infallible? The remainder of this Chapter,
which concerns the sense of the Fathers in this Controversy, will particularly
be considered in the next, which is purposely designed for it.

CHAP. IX. The Sense of the Fathers in this Controversy.
The Judgment of Antiquity enquired into, especially of the three first
Centuries; and the reasons for it. The several Testimonies of Justin Martyr,
Athenagoras, Tatianus, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, and all the Fathers who
writ in vindication of Christian Religion, manifested to concur fully with our
way of resolving Faith. T. C's. Answers to Vincentius Lyrinensis, a Gandavo,
and the Fathers produced by his Lordship, pitifully weak. The particulars of
his 9th. Chapter examined. S. Augustine's Testimony vindicated. T. C's.
nauseous Repetitions sent as Vagrants to their several homes. His Lordships
Considerations found too heavy for T. C's. Answers. In what sense the Scripture
may be called a Praecognitum. What way the Jews resolved their Faith. This
Controversy, and the first Part, concluded.

HAving thus largely considered, whatever you could pretend to,. 1.
for the advantage of your own cause, or the prejudice of ours, from Reason and
Scripture; nothing can be supposed to remain considerable, but the judgment of
the Primitive Church in this present Controversy. And next to Scripture and
Reason, I attribute so much to the sense of the Christian Church in the ages
next succeeding the Apostles, that it is no mean confirmation to me of the
truth of the Protestant Way of resolving Faith, and of the falsity of yours,
that I see the one so exactly concurring, and the other so apparently contrary
to the unanimous Consent of Antiquity. For, though you love to make a great
noise with Antiquity, among persons meanly conversant in it; yet those who do
seriously and impartially enquire into the sense of the Primitive Church, and
not guess at it by the shreds of Citations to your hands in your own writers
(which is generally your way) will scarce in any thing more palpably discern
your juggling and impostures then in your pretense to Antiquity. I shall not
here enquire into the corruptions crept into your Church under that disguise,
but, as occasion is ministered to me, in the following discourse, shall
endeavor to pluck it off, but shall keep close to the matter in question.
Three things then I design in this Chapter.

1. To show the concurrence of Antiquity with us in the resolution of Faith.

2. Examine what you produce from thence, either to assert your own way, or
enervate ours.

3. Consider what remains of this Controversy in your Book.

1. For the manifesting the concurrence of Antiquity with us; I shall confine
my present discourse to the most pure and genuine Antiquity, keeping within the
compass of the three first Centuries, or at least, of those who have purposely
writ in vindication of the Christian Faith. Not that I do in the least distrust
the consent of the succeeding Writers of the Primitive Church, but upon these
Reasons. 1. Because it would be too large a task at present to undertake, since
no necessity from what you object, but only my desire to clear the Truth, and
rectify the mistakes of such, who are led blindfold under the pretense of
Antiquity, has led me to this discourse. 2. Because in reason they could not
but understand best the ways and methods used by the Apostles for the
persuading men to the Christian Faith; and if they had mentioned any such thing
as an Infallibility always to continue in the Charch, those Pastors certainly
who received the care of the Church from the Apostles hands, could not but have
heard of it: And were strangely to blame if they did not discover and make use
of it. Whatever therefore of truly Apostolical Tradition, is to be relied on in
such cases, must be conveyed to us from those persons who were the Apostles
immediate Successors; and if it can be made manifest that they heard not of any
such thing, in that, when occasion was offered, they are so far from mentioning
it, that they take such different ways of satisfying men, which do manifestly
suppose that they did not believe it. I know some of the greatest Patrons of
the Church of Rome, and such who know best how to manage things with best
advantage for the interest of that Church, have made little account of the
three first ages, and confined themselves within the compass of the four first
Councils, upon this pretense, because the Books and Writers are so rare before,
and that those persons who lived then, had no occasion to write of the matters
in Controversy between them and us. But if the ground why those other things
which are not determined in Scripture, are to be believed by us, and practiced
as necessary, be, that they were Apostolical Traditions, Who can be more
competent Judges what was so, and what not, then those who lived nearest the
Apostolical times? and those certainly (if they writ of any thing) could not
write of any thing of more concernment to the Christian world, than the
knowledge of such things would be; or at least we cannot imagine but that we
should find express intimations of them, where so many, so wise, and learned
persons do industriously give an account of themselves, and their solemn
actions to their Heathen persecutors. But however silent they may be in other
things, which they neither heard, nor thought of, as in the Customs
controverted between the Papists and us (which, no doubt, is the true reason
why the three first ages are declined by Cardinal Perrone) yet there is not the
least shadow of pretense, why they should be silent in this present
Controversy, since the great business of their writings was to vindicate the
Christian Faith, to persuade the Heathens to believe it, and to manifest the
grounds on which they were induced to believe themselves. If therefore in this
they do unanimously concur with that resolution of Faith I have already laid
down, nothing can be desired more for the evidence and confirmation of the
truth of our way, than that it is not only most consonant to Scripture, but
built on the truest Reason, and was the very same which the Primitive
Christians used when they gave an account of their Faith: Which I shall do, not
by some mangled citations, but deducing it from the scope and design of their
writings, and drawing it successively down from the first after the Apostles,
who appeared in Vindication of the Christian Faith.

I begin with Justin Martyr, who, as Photius says of him, was (...),. 2. Phot.
biblioth. Cod. 234.
not far from the Apostles either in time or virtue; and who being a professed
Philosopher before he became a Christian, we may in reason think, that he was
more inquisitive into the grounds of Christian Faith, before he believed, and
the more able to give an account of them, when he did. Whether therefore we
consider those arguments which first induced him to believe, or those whereby
he endeavors to persuade others to it, we shall find how consonant and
agreeable he is to our grounds of Faith, how far from any imagination of the
Churches Infallibility. In the beginning of his excellent Dialogue with Trypho,
where (if I may conjecture) he represents the manner of his conversion in a
Platonical way, introducing a solemn conference between himself, and an ancient
person of great gravity, and a venerable aspect in a solitary place, whither he
was retired for his meditations. Pet. Halloix is much troubled who this person
should be, Pet. Halliox in vit. Just. Mart. c^p. 2. in not.

Medulla Patr. p. 9.


Whether an Angel in humane shape, or a man immediately conveyed by an Angel to
discover Christianity to him, which, when he had done, he was as suddenly
carried back again. Scultetus (I suppose from this story) asserts Justin Martyr
to be converted by Divine Revelation. But, if I be not much mistaken, this
whole Conference is no more than the setting forth the grounds of his becoming
a Christian in the Platonical mode, by way of Dialogue (and probably the whole
Disputation with Trypho, may be nothing else) but, however that be, it is
apparent Trypho looked on him as a Platonist, by his Pallium, and Justin Martyr
owns himself to have been so, and therefore it was very congruous for him to
discourse after the Academick manner. In which discourse, when Justin Martyr
had stood up in vindication of the Platonic Philosophy, and the other Person
endeavors to convince him of the impossibility of attaining true happiness by
any Philosophy. For when Justin had said, That by Philosophy he came to the
Knowledge of God; the other person demanded, How they could know God, who had
never seen him, nor heard him? He replied, That the (...) was (...), God was
only intelligible by our minds, as Plato said: He again asks, Whether there
were such a faculty in the minds of men, as to be able to see God without a
Divine Power and Spirit assisting it? Justin answers, that, according to Plato,
the eye of the understanding was sufficient to discover that there is such a
Being, which is the cause of all things, but the nature of it is ineffable and
incomprehensible. Upon which he proceeds to enquire, What relation there was
between God and the Souls of men, and what means to come to the participation
of him; after a great deal of discourse on which subject between them, Justin
comes at last to enquire, if there were no truth and certainty in Philosophy?
By whose instruction, or by what means he should come to it? To which that
person returns this excellent Answer, That there had been, a long time since,
several persons much elder than the reputed Philosophers, (...). Justin.
Martyr. Dialog c. Tryph. p. 224, 225 ed Paris 1636.
blessed men, just, and lovers of God, speaking by the inspiration of the
Divine Spirit, foretelling things which have come to pass since, whom they call
Prophets. These only saw the Truth, and declared it to men; neither flattering,
nor fearing any, nor conquered with the love of honor: But they only spoke the
things which they heard and saw, being filled with the Holy Spirit. Whose Books
are still extant; which, whosoever reads, and assents to, will find himself
much improved in the principles and ends of things, and whatever becomes a
Philosopher to know. For, they write not by way of argument or demonstration,
but, that which is above it, they are most faithful witnesses of Truth. For the
things which have, and do come to pass, do enforce men to believe the Truth of
what they spoke: And not only so, but they are most worthy to be believed, for
the Miracles which they wrought. Moreover, they extol the Maker of the World,
God and the Father, and declare to the World his Son Christ: which the false
Prophets, who are acted by a seducing and impure spirit, neither have done, nor
yet do do; but they attempt to show some tricks for the amazement of men, and
cry up the evil and deceiving spirits. But, do thou, above all things, pray,
that the gates of light may be opened to thee. For these things are not seen
nor understood by all, but only by them to whom God and Christ, shall grant the
knowledge of them. A most signal and remarkable Testimony (as any is extant in
all Antiquity) for acquainting us with the true grounds and reasons of Faith,
which therefore I have at large produced. The very reading of which is
sufficient to tell us, How true a Protestant this, whether Angel or Man was.
When Justin asked him, What Teachers he should have to lead him to Truth; He
tells him, There had been long before Philosophers, excellent persons in the
world, called Prophets, men every way good, who did nothing for fear or favor,
or love of themselves. But Justin might further ask, How he should come to be
instructed by them? He tells him, Their Writings were still extant, wherein
were contained such things as might hugely satisfy a Philosophical mind
concerning the Origin and Principles of things. He might still enquire,
Whether those things were demonstrated or no, in them? No, he replies; but they
deserve assent as much, if not beyond any demonstration; because they manifest
themselves to be from God, by two things, the exact accomplishment of the
Prophecies made by them, and the unparalleld Miracles which were wrought by
them. But, might not the evil spirits work such things? No: For, although their
false Prophets ^ay do several things to amaze men, yet they can do no such
Miracles as (...) did; besides, all which they do, tends to advance these evil
spirits in the world; but the design of the true Prophets, is to declare the
True God, and his Son Christ. But, May then any one, by the innate power of his
mind, yield a divine assent to these things? No: but, pray earnestly to God to
enlighten your mind; for this is the effect of Divine Grace, in and through
Christ. What part is there now of our resolution of Faith, which is not herein
asserted? If you ask, Why you believe there were such men in the World as these
Prophets? The continuance of their Books and common Fame sufficiently attest
it. If you ask, Why you should believe them to be True Prophets? The excellency
of their Doctrine, joined with the fulfilling Prophecies, and working Miracles,
abundantly prove it. But if you lastly ask, Whether, besides objective
evidence, there be not some higher efficient requisite to produce a Divine
Faith; The Answer is, That depends upon the Grace of God in Christ: So that
here we have most evidently all those things concurring, which his Lordship
asserts in the resolution of Faith; Moral inducement preparing the mind,
rational evidence from the thing into which Faith is resolved, and Divine Grace
requisite in the nature of an efficient cause. But, Where is there the least
intimation of any Churches Infallibility requisite to make men believe with a
firm and Divine Faith? No doubt that was a Divine Faith, which Justin was bid
to pray so heartily for, and which was only in those to whom it was given; and
yet even this Faith had no other assurance to build it self upon, but that
rational evidence which is before discovered. That Divine Person never thought
of men's believing with their Wills, much less that the Books of Scripture had
no more evidence of themselves, than distinction of colors to a blind man; he
did not think Christ an Ignoramus or Impostor, because he left no Church
infallible, nor that God by the Prophets laid a Foundation upon sand, or that
would last but a few years, because he did not continue such an Infallible
Assistance as the Prophets had to the Church in all ages; yet these are all
brave assertions of yours; which, doubtless, you would be ashamed of, and
recant, if you had not, as Casaubon says of the Person whom you could not tell
whether he was a Jesuit or no (but by that character you might guess it) that
he had frontem ferream, and cor involutum; a brow of steel, and a heartfull of
Meanders (to use your own fine expression.) Upon this, Justin tells us, a
divine ardour was raised in his mind, and a love of the Prophets and such as
were the Friends of Christ, and, upon further consideration, (...) I found this
the only certain and profitable Philosophy; and thereupon commends the Doctrine
of Christ to Trypho and his Company for something which was certainly innate to
it, that it had a kind of awe and majesty in it, and is excellent at terrifying
and persuading those who were out of the right way, and brings the sweetest
tranquillity to such as are conversant in it. And afterward undertakes to
demonstrate the truth of our Religion from the reasonableness of it, (...). Id.
p. 226.
that we have not yielded our assent to vain and empty Fables, nor to
assertions incapable of evidence and demonstration; but to such as are filled
with a Divine Spirit, overflowing with Power, and flourishing with Grace. And
accordingly manageth his discourse quite through, showing the insufficiency of
the Ceremonial Law, and the Truth and Excellency both of the Person and
Doctrine of Christ. But what need all this, if he had believed your Doctrine?
It had been but proving the Church Infallible by Motives of Credibility; and
then, to be sure, whatever was propounded to be believed by it, was infallibly
true. But older and wiser, it seems, must hold here to; Justin, though so near
the Apostles times, went a much further way about: but it was well for him he
lived so long ago, else he might have been accused of Heresy, or making Faith
uncertain, if he had lived in our times, and such Doctrine of his might have
merited an Index Expurgatorius.

. 3.
But, it seems, he was not afraid of it then, for he often elsewhere speaks to
the same purpose. For, in his Paraenesis to the Greeks, he makes it his
business, first to show the unreasonableness of believing those who were the
great Authors of all their superstitions; for the Poets were manifestly
ridiculous, the Philosophers at continual dissentions among themselves, so that
there was no relying on them for the finding out of Truth, or the redress of
the miseries of humane nature; and then comes to the Authors of our Religion,
Paraenes. p. 9.
who were both much elder than any of theirs, and did not teach any thing of
their own heads, nor dissented from one another in what they delivered, or
sought to confute each other as the Philosophers did, but (...), without all
jarring and contention, they delivered to men the Doctrine which they received
from God. For, (says he) it was not possible for them to know such great and
divine things by nature, (...). Id. ib.
or humane wit, but by a heavenly gift descending from above upon holy men. It
seems, Justin believed there was such evidence in the matters contained in
Scripture, which might persuade men to believe that they came from God; that
they were but as instruments to that (...) (as he expresses it) to that Divine
Spirit which did strike upon them; whence, with one consent and harmony they
sound forth the Doctrine of God, the worlds Creation and Man's, the Immortality
of the soul, Judgment to come, and all things else which are necessary for us
to know, which they unanimously deliver to us, though at great distances from
each other, both in regard of time and place. And so proves the Antiquity of
the Writings of Moses above all the Wise men of the Greeks, by the testimony of
their own Authors, Polemon, Appion, Ptolomaeus Mendesius, and many others, and
concludes his discourse with this speech, That it is impossible for us to know
any thing certainly concerning God or Religion, but from Divine Inspiration,
which alone was in the Prophets. In his first Apology for the Christians, he
tells us what it was, while he was a Platonist, which brought him to a good
Opinion of Christianity, which was, Apolog. 1. p. 50^
the observing the power and efficacy that Doctrine had upon the Christians to
undergo with so much courage what was accounted most terrible to humane nature
(which are, death and torments.) From whence he reasoned with himself, that
although the Christians were so much calumniated, yet certainly they could not
be vicious persons, who were so little fearful of those great Bug-bears of
humane nature. For, Who is there, that is a lover of pleasure, (...). Id. ib.
or intemperate, or cruel, that can cheerfully embrace death, so as thereby to
be deprived of all his goods? And when he speaks of the Doctrine it self of
Christianity, he says, It is suitable to whatever was rational among the
Platonists or other Philosophers, but far more agreeable to it self, and
containing much more excellent things than ever they could attain to the
knowledge of. P. ^1, 52.
In his second Apology for the Christians to the Emperor Antoninus Pius, he
insists much on the excellency of the Do^trine of Christianity from the
Precepts of it, P. 61, 6^, etc.
chastity, love of enemies, liberality* P. ^3.
submission to authority, worship of God, etc. Afterward he proves the truth
and certainty of all we believe concerning Christ from the exact accomplishment
of the Prophecies made concerning him in the Old Testament, which discourse he
ends with this saying. So many and so great things being seen, are sufficient
to persuade men to believe the truth of them, who are lovers of truth, (...).
Apol. 2. p. 89.
and not seekers of applause, and under the command of passions. Thus we see,
in all his discourses, where he had the most occasion administered to him, to
discover the most certain grounds of Christian Faith, he resolves all into the
rational evidence of the truth, excellency, and divinity of the Doctrine which
was contained in the Scriptures. For in his second Oration to the Greeks, after
he had spoken highly in commendation of the Scripture, calling it, The best
expeller of all turbulent passions, and the surest extinguisher of those
preternatural heats in the souls of men; (...). Orat. 2. p. 4^.
which (says he) makes men not Poets, nor Philosophers, nor Orators, but it
makes (...), dying men immortal, and mortals become gods; and transferrs them
from the earth, (...), to such places whose confines are far above Olympus;
therefore, O ye Greeks, come and be instructed; be ye as I am, for I was as you
are. And these were the things which prevailed with me, (...). Id. ib.
the divine power and efficacy of the Doctrine. What was it then, I pray, that
Justin Martyr, of a Philosopher becoming a Christian, resolved his Faith into?
If we may believe himself, it was into the evidence of the Doctrine of
Christianity, and not into the Infallibility of any Church. The Testimony of
this person, I have the more largely insisted on, both because he was so great
a Philosopher, as well as Christian, and lived so near the Apostolical times.
Next him we produce Athenagoras as a Philosopher too, as well as Christian, who
flourished under Antoninus and Commodus, to whom he made his Apology in behalf
of the Christians, in which he first undertakes to manifest the reasonableness
of the Doctrine which they owned, the Foundation of it being the same with that
which the best Philosophers acknowledged, the existence and unity of the Deity.
But (says he) if we had nothing but such reasons as he had produced, our
persuasion could only be humane; but the words of the Prophets are they which
establish our minds. -- who being carried beyond themselves, (...). Athenag.
Apol. p. 9.
by the impulse of the Divine Spirit, spoke that which they were moved to, when
the Spirit used them as Instruments through which he spoke. Is not here a plain
resolution of Faith into that Divine Authority by which the Prophets spoke? and
that not as testified by any Infallible Church, but as it was discernable by
those persons he spoke to, for he appeals to the Emperors themselves
concerning it; which had been a fond and absurd thing for him to do, if the
knowledge of that Divine Inspiration did depend merely on the testimony of
Christians as such, and were not to be discovered by some common Principles to
them and others. Much to the same purpose Tatianus speaks in that eloquent
Oration of his against the Greeks, who was Justin Martyrs Scholar; and we shall
see, how agreeably he speaks to him, in the account he gives, how he became a
Christian. After (says he) he had abundantly discovered the vanity of the
Theology, and Superstitions of the Greeks, he fell to the reading some strange
Books, much elder and more Divine than the Writings of the Greek Philosophers.
And to these (says he) I yielded up my Faith, for the great simplicity and
plainness of the style, and the freedom from affectation which was in the
writers; (...). Tatianus. p. 165.
and that evidence and perspicuity which was in all they writ; and because they
foretold things to come, made excellent promises, and manifestly declared the
Monarchy of the World. What Protestant could speak higher of the Scripture, and
of those internal arguments which are the grounds of Faith than Tatianus in
these words does? Yet we see, these were the arguments which made him
relinquish the Greek learning of which he was a Professor at Rome, and betake
himself to the profession of Christianity; though he was sure to undergo not
only contempt from the world, but to be in continual hazard of his life by it.
That innate simplicity of the writings of the Scripture joined with the
perspicuity of it (if at least those words be rightly translated (...) by sermo
nusquam obscurus, and it does not rather relate to the account of the worlds
creation, which I conjecture it may do) but however, the certainty of the
predictions, the excellency of the promises, and the reasonableness of the
Doctrine were the things, which by the reading of the Books he was persuaded to
believe them by. But all this while we hear no news of any Churches
Infallibility in order to Faith.

. 4. C. Valentin. cap. 5.
We come therefore to Irenaeus, who was omnium doctrinarum curio^^ssimus
explorator as Tertullian speaks of him, a great searcher into all kind of
learning, and therefore surely not to seek as to the true account of his Faith.
Whose judgment herein, although we have had occasion to enquire into before,
yet we have testimonies enough beside to manifest his consent with them. And
although Irenaeus of all the ancient Fathers be looked on as the most
favorable to Tradition, and is most cited to that purpose in these disputes;
yet I doubt not but to make it appear, that where he speaks most concerning
Tradition, he makes the resolution of Faith to be wholly and entirely into the
Scripture: and they who apprehend otherwise do either take the citations out of
him upon trust, or else only search him for the words of those citations, and
never take the pains to enquire into the scope and design of his discourse. For
clearing which, we must consider, what the subject was which he writ of, what
the plea's of the adverse party were, what way Irenaeus takes to confute them,
and to establish the Faith of Christians as to the matter which was in
Controversy. The matter in dispute was this: Valentinus and his Scholars, not
being contented with the simplicity of the Doctrine of the Gospel, and in
probability the better to suit their opinions to the Heathen Mythology, had
invented a strange Pedigree of Gods, the better as they pretended to give an
account of the production of things, and the various dispensations which had
been in the world: but knowing that the Christians did with the greatest
resolution adhere to that Doctrine which was delivered by Christ and his
Apostles, they could not suppose that they should embrace these figments unless
they could some way or other father them upon them. Upon which they pretended
that these very things which they delivered were really intended by Christ and
the Apostles in their writings, but because so few were capable of them, they
gave only some intimations of them there, but delivered these great mysteries
privately only to those who were perfect; and that this was St. Paul's meaning
when he said, I speak wisdom among them that are perfect. This Irenaeus gives
us an account of, in the beginning of all his discourse: Iren. l. 1. c. 1. p.
4. ed. Erasm.
but is more fully expressed in the original Greek of Irenaeus preserved by
Epiphanius in the heresy of the Valentinians. On which account alone, as
Petavius says, Epiphanius has well deserved of Posterity, Petav. not. in
Epiph. in hares. Valent.
for preserving entire those original Fragments of Irenaeus; his Greek therein
being much more intelligible and smooth than the old harsh Latin version of
him. His words are: All which things, are not expressly declared, (...). Iren.
apud Epiph. haeres. 31. sect. 14.
in as much as all are not fit to understand them; but are mysteriously couched
by our Savior in parables, for such who are able to understand them. Thus they
said, the 30. Aeones were represented by the 30. years in which our Savior did
not appear publicly, and by the parable of the works in the vineyard in which
the 1, 3, 6, 9, 11, hours, making up 30. did again denote their Aeones; and
that St. Paul did most expressly signify them, when he used so often (...). The
Duodecad of Aeons by the 12 years at which our Savior appeared disputing with
the Doctors. The raising of Jairus his daughter of 12 years, represented
Achamoth being brought to light, whose passions were set forth by those words
of our Savior, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me, in which were three
passions of Achamoth, Sorrow, Fear, and Despair. With many things of a like
nature; but hereby we sufficiently see what their pretense was, viz. That there
were deep mysteries but obscurely represented in Scripture, but whose full
knowledge was delivered down by an Oral Cabala from Christ and his Apostles.
Now we must consider, what course Irenaeus takes to confute these pretensions
of theirs. L. 1. c. 2.
First he gives an account what that Faith was, which the Church dispersed up
and down the world, received from the Apostles and their Disciples, viz. that
thereby, they believed in one God, the Father Almighty, who made Heaven and
Earth, the Sea and all in them, and in one Jesus Christ the Son of God, etc.
which was directly contrary to the Valentinian Heresies, who supposed the
Supreme God and Demiurgus to be different, and so Christus and Salvator, and so
in others. This Faith which the Church has received, it unanimously keeps, L.
1. c. 3.
though dispersed through the whole world; for although the languages be
different, yet the Tradition is the same among them; whether they live in
Germany, France, Spain, the East, Egypt, Libya, or elsewhere. And after in the
first Book he has showed the many different opinions of the several broods of
these Heretics; and in the second discovered the fondness and ridiculousness
of them; in his third Book, he undertakes from Scripture to show the falseness
of them. And begins with that excellent expression before cited. For we have
not known the disposition (or economy) of our Salvation by others than by
those, by whom the Gospel came to us, which they then first preached, L. 3. c.
1.
and after by the will of God, delivered to us in writings to be the Foundation
and Pillar of our Faith. Which being laid down by him at his entrance as the
grand principle, on which he goes, will lead us to an easy understanding of
all that follows. This therefore, he not only asserts, but proves; for whereas
some of the Adversaries pretended, that the Apostles preached before they fully
understood all they were to know, he shows how false that was, because after
Christ's Resurrection from the grave, they were endued with the Spirit of God
descending from on high upon them; and were furnished with a perfect knowledge
by which they went up and down preaching the Gospel, which all and each of them
had the knowledge of. Thus Matthew in the Hebrew tongue set forth his Gospel,
when Peter and Paul at Rome preached the Gospel and founded a Church; and after
their departure Mark, the Disciple and Interpreter of Peter, writ those things
which were preached. Afterward John published his Gospel at Ephesus in Asia.
And all these (says he) delivered to us one God maker of Heaven and Earth, and
one Christ his Son. To whom if one does not assent, Quibus si quis non
assentit, spernit quidem participes Domini, spernit autem and ipsum Christum
Dominum, spernit vero and Patrem, and est a seipso damnatus, resistens and
repug^ans saluti suae, quod faciunt omnes haeretici. Iren. l. 3. c. 1.
he despises those who were our Lords companions, and therefore despises our
Lord Christ, and likewise despises the Father, and is condemned of himself,
resisting and opposing his own salvation which all Heretics do. Can any thing
be more plain, than that Irenaeus makes it his design to resolve Faith into the
writings of Christ and his Apostles, and says, That these writings were
delivered as a Foundation of Faith, that the reason why the Christians believed
but one God and one Christ, was, because they read of no more in the Gospels
published by them, That he that despises them who were our Lords companions,
despise himself and God, and condemn themselves. He does not say, he that
despises the lawfully sent Pastors of the Church meeting in General Councils,
nor them who have power to oblige the Church to believe as well as the Apostles
had, as you say, but evidently makes the obligation to believe, to depend upon
that revelation of Gods will, which was made by the Apostles, and is by their
writings conveyed down to us. Would not the Valentinians have thought
themselves presently run down by such ways of confutation as yours are, that
they must believe the present Church infallible in whatever is delivered to be
believed to the world?

But does not Irenaeus himself make use of the Churches Tradition as the great
argument to confute them by?. 5.
I grant he does so, and it is on that very account that he might confute them,
and not lay down the only sure Foundation of Christian Faith. For he gives that
reason of his doing so in the beginning of the very next Chapter. For, (says
he) when we dispute against them out of the Scripture, Cum enim ex Scripturis
arguuntur in accusationem convertuntur ipsarum Scriptu^arum, quasi non recte
habeant, neque si^t ex authoritate, and quia vari^ si^t dicta, and quia no^
possit ex hi^ inveniri veritas ab his qui nesciant traditionem. Iren. l. 3. c 2.
they are turned presently to an accusing of the Scriptures as though they were
not in all things right, and wanted Authority, and because of their ambiguity,
and for that truth cannot be found out by them without the help of Tradition. I
need not say, that Irenaeus prophesied of you in this saying of his, but it is
as true of you as if he had. Your pretenses being the very same, against the
Scriptures being the rule of Faith, with those of the Valentinians; only that
you deny not the truth of what is therein contained, for otherwise the want of
Authority in themselves, the ambiguity of them, the impossibility of knowing
the sense of them without Tradition, are the very same arguments which with the
greatest pomp and ostentation are produced by you against the Scriptures, being
the Rule whereby to judge of Controversies. Which we have no more cause to
wonder at, than Irenaeus had in the Valentinians, because from them we produce
our greatest arguments against your fond opinions. Now when the Valentinians
pretended their great rule was on oral Tradition, which was conveyed from the
Apostles down to them; to this Irenaeus opposes the constant Tradition of the
Apostolical Churches, which in a continued succession was preserved from the
Apostles times, which was the same every where among all the Churches, which
every one who desired it, might easily be satisfied about; because they could
number them, who by the Apostles were appointed Bishops in Churches, and their
successors, unto our own times, who taught no such thing, nor ever knew any
such thing as they madly fancy to themselves. Et habemus annumerare eos, qui ab
Apostolis instituti sunt Episcopi in Eccles^is and successores eorum usque ad
nos, qui nihil tale docuerunt, neque cognoverunt, quale ab his deliratur. L. 3.
c. 3.
We see then his appeal to Tradition was only in a matter of fact, Whether ever
any such thing as their opinion which was not contained in Scripture, was
delivered to them by the Apostles or no, i. e. Whether the Apostles left any
oral Traditions in the Churches which should be the rule to interpret
Scriptures by, or no? And the whole design of Irenaeus is to prove the
contrary, by an appeal to all the Apostolical Churches, and particularly by
appealing to the Roman Church, because of its due fame and celebrity in that
Age wherein Irenaeus lived. So that Irenaeus appealed to the then Roman Church,
even when he speaks highest in the honor of it, for somewhat which is
fundamentally contrary to the pretensions of the now Roman Church. He then
appealed to it, for an evidence against such oral Traditions which were
pretended to be left by the Apostles as a rule to understand Scripture by; and,
were it not for this same pretense now, what will become of the Authority of
the present Roman Church.

After he has thus manifested by recourse to the Apostolical Churches that
there was no such Tradition left among them, it was very reasonable to infer
that there was none such at all; for they could not imagine, if the Apostles
had designed any such Tradition, but they would have communicated it to those
famous Churches which were planted by them, and it was absurd to suppose that
those Churches who could so easily derive their succession from the Apostles
should in so short a time have lost the memory of so rich a treasure deposited
with them, as that was pretended to be; from whence he sufficiently refutes
that unreasonable imagination of the Valentinians. Which having done, he
proceeds to settle those firm grounds on which the Christians believed in one
God the Father, and in one Lord Jesus Christ, which he does by removing the
only Objection which the Adversaries had against them. For when the Christians
declared, the main reason into which they resolved their Faith as to these
principles, was, Because no other God or Christ were revealed in Scripture, but
them whom they believed, the Valentinians answered, this could not be a
sufficient foundation for their Faith on this account, because many things were
delivered in Scripture, not according to the truth of the things, but the
judgment and opinion of the persons they were spoken to. This therefore being
such a pretense as would destroy any firm resolution of Faith into Scripture,
and must necessarily place it in Tradition; Irenaeus concerns himself much to
demonstrate the contrary, by an ostension (as he calls it) that Christ and the
Apostles did all along speak according to truth, and not according to the
opinion of their auditors, which is the entire subject of the fifth Chapter of
his third Book. Which he proves first of Christ, because he was Truth it self,
and it would be very contrary to his nature to speak of things, otherwise then
they were, when the very design of his coming was to direct men in the way of
Truth. The Apostles were persons who professed to declare truth to the world,
and as light cannot communicate with darkness, so neither could truth be
blended with so much falsehood as that opinion supposes in them. And therefore
neither our Lord nor his Apostles could be supposed to mean any other God or
Christ then whom they declared. For this (says he) were rather to increase
their ignorance and confirm them in it, then to cure them of it; and therefore
that Law was true which pronounced a curse on every one who led a blind man out
of his way. And the Apostles being sent for the recovery of the lost sight of
the blind, cannot be supposed to speak to men according to their present
opinion, but according to the manifestation of truth. For, what Physician
intending to cure a Patient, will do according to his Patients desire, and not
rather what will be best for him? From whence he concludes, Since the design of
Christ and his Apostles was not to flatter but to cure men's souls; it follows,
that they did not speak to them, according to their former opinion, but
according to truth without all hypocrisy and dissimulation. From whence it
follows, that if Christ and his Apostles did speak according to truth, there is
then need of no Oral Tradition for our understanding Scripture, and
consequently the resolution of our Faith as to God and Christ, and
proportionably as to other objects to be believed, is not into any Tradition
pretending to be derived from the Apostles, but into the Scriptures themselves;
which by this discourse evidently appears to have been the judgment of
Irenaeus.

. 6. Hieron. ep. ad Magnum.
The next which follows, is Clemens of Alexandria who flourished A. D. 196. whom
St. Hierome accounted the most learned of all the writers of the Church: and
therefore cannot be supposed ignorant in so necessary a part of the Christian
Doctrine as the Resolution of Faith is. And if his judgment may be taken, the
Scriptures are the only certain Foundation of Faith; for in his Admonition to
the Gentiles after he has with a great deal of excellent learning derided the
Heathen Superstitions, when he comes to give an account of the Christians
Faith, he begins it with this pregnant Testimony to our purpose. For (says he)
the Sacred Oracles affording us the most manifest grounds of Divine worship,
(...). Clem. Alex. (...). p. 50. ed. Paris.
are the Foundation of Truth* And so goes on in a high commendation of the
Scripture, as the most compendious directions for happiness, the best
Institutions for government of life, the most free from all vain ornaments,
that they raise men's souls up out of wickedness, yielding the most excellent
remedies, dissuading from the greatest deceit, and most clearly encouraging to
a foreseen happiness; with more of the same nature. And when after he persuades
men with so much Rhetoric and earnestness to embrace the Scriptures (...) with
the greatest readiness, he gives this as the reason of it, that so they might
(...) entertain God in chaste souls. For the Word is that light to men, (...).
p. 55.
by which we see God: and soon after speaking that the design of Religion is to
make men like to God as much as possible, he adds, That truly they are the
Sacred Scriptures which make men Holy and Deifie men, (...). p. 56.
i. e. by Assimilation. And in that large and eloquent Paraenesis which
follows, wherein he persuades men to the forsaking their old customs and
embracing Christianity, all the arguments he uses are drawn from the
Scriptures, and not so much as the least mention of any Infallible Ensurancer
of their truth and authority, but supposes the evidence he produces,
sufficient to persuade them to the belief and love of them. In the first of his
Stromata, he proves the truth of the Scriptures by the much greater antiquity
of them then any of the Greek learning. (...). Strom. 2. p. 362.
In the second, where he particularly enquires into the nature and grounds of
Faith, he has this expression, He therefore that believes the Sacred
Scriptures, having a firm judgment does receive the voice of God who gave the
Scriptures, as an impregnable demonstration. (Although the text be commonly
printed without the comma between (...) and (...), yet the sense and context
makes it evident that it ought to be there, and accordingly Sylburgius gives
intimation of it in his notes, and Gentian Hervet in the translation as revised
by Heinsius applies the demonstration to what follows, but very weakly joins
(...) with (...) and not with (...), and so renders it firmum habens judicium
cui contradici nequit, whereas it is plain that there he intends to give an
account what that foundation is, which Faith does stand on.) And after having
made a large discourse concerning the nature of Faith comparing the judgment
of Philosophers concerning it, he concludes with this saying, That it is an
absurd thing for the followers of Pythagoras to suppose that his ipse dixit was
instead of a demonstration to them; and yet those who are the lovers of truth
not to believe the sure testimony of our only Savior and God, (...). p. 369.
but to exact proofs of him of what he spoke. Wherein he discovers that
Christianity requires from men no unreasonable thing in expecting assent where
no such kind of proofs as those used by Philosophers are; but if the Epicureans
did suppose some kind of anticipation necessary to knowledge, if the
Pythagoreans relied on Authority, if Heraclitus quarreled with such as could
neither hear nor speak, i. e. such as neither had Authority themselves, and yet
would rely on none; it could not be judged any absurd thing that Christianity
did require such an assent to what Christ delivered, especially considering
that he was (...), i. e. that he discovered sufficient reason why he was to be
believed in whatever he spoke. And thence elsewhere he says, That Faith is a
sure demonstration, (...). Strom. 6. p. 649.
because truth follows whatever is delivered from God. And when he gives an
account what that true knowledge is which the Christian has, he shows what
things are requisite to it; two things Knowledge supposes (...), enquiry and
discovery; the Enquiry (says he) is an impulse of the mind for the finding out
of something by some signs which are proper to it; Discovery, is the end and
rest of enquiry, which lies in the comprehension of the thing, which is
properly Knowledge. Now the signs by which things are discovered, are either
precedent, concomitant, or subsequent. All these he thus applies to the
Scriptures. The discovery, as the end of our enquiry after God, is, (...).
Strom. 6. p. 674.
the Doctrine delivered by his Son; but the signs whereby we know that he was
the Son of God, precedent, are the Prophesies declaring his coming;
concomitant, were the Testimonies concerning his birth; subsequent, are those
Miracles, which were published, and manifestly showed to the world after his
Ascension. Therefore the peculiar evidence that the truth is with us, is, that
the Son of God himself has taught us. A place not so clear in it self, as
miserably involved through the oscitancy of the Latin Interpreter, in which it
is plain, that Clemens does exactly, according to all rational principles of
knowledge, give an account of the grounds of Christian Faith; the main
principle of which, is, the doctrine delivered by Christ; which, that it ought
to be assented to, appears by a full concurrence of all those signs which are
necessary in enquiries; here are the greatest precedent signs (Prophesies, made
so long before, exactly accomplished in him) the fullest concomitant signs (in
the many wonderful things which happened at his coming into the world) and the
clearest subsequent signs by those great and uncontrouled miracles, which were
wrought in the world after his Ascension; all which put together do evidently
prove that he was the Son of God who delivered this doctrine to us, and
therefore deserves our most firm assent in what ever appears to be his Word.
Can any thing then be more apparent then his resolution of Faith into the
rational evidence of Christ's being the Son of God, which is manifested to us
not by the Infallible testimony of any Church, but by the Infallibl^ ^^gns of
it which were precedent to, attendant on, and consequent to his appearance in
the world. If therefore (says he) according to Plato, (...). p. 675.
truth can only be learned, either from God, or those who are come from him, we
may justly boast that we learn the truth from the Son of God, taking the
Testimonies out of those Sacred Oracles, which were first Prophesied and then
fully declared, viz. by accomplishment. The main ground of Faith then, is such
as the wisest Philosophers did admit of, viz. that whatsoever God said is true,
and none can deliver truth but such as come from him, on which account there is
nothing left, but evidence that he in whom we believe was the Son of God, which
is abundantly manifested by the accomplishment of those Prophesies in him which
were made so long before. After which he disputes against the same sort of
Heretics which Irenaeus did, P. 676, 678, etc.
and upon the same principles, viz. that whatever God or Christ thought
necessary for us to know or believe, is consigned to us in the writings of the
Prophets and Apostles; and thence he cites that out of Peter's (...) (a Book I
suppose then extant under that name) (...) nothing without the written word,
where was the unwritten word then? And in the end of that Book discovers the
weakness of Philosophy, because it came from mere men: but men, as men, are no
sufficient teachers when they speak concerning God. For (says he) man cannot
speak (...) things becoming God; (...). p. 697.
for being weak and mortal he cannot speak as he ought of a Being infinite and
immortal, nor he that is the work of him who made it; besides he that cannot
speak truth concerning Himself* how much less is he to be believed concerning
God? For as much as man wants of Divine power, so much must his speech fall
short of God, when he discourses of him. For man's speech is naturally weak and
unable to express God; (...). Id. ib.
not only as to his essence, but as to his power and works; thence he concludes
a necessity that God by his Spirit must discover himself to men, which
revelation he proves to be only extant among Christians, because of the many
Divine testimonies that Christ was the Son of God, because the knowledge that
came by him was so remarkably dispersed abroad in the world, and did prevail,
notwithstanding all opposition and persecution. For (says he) the Greek
Philosophy if any ordinary Magistrate forbid it did presently sink; but our
doctrine has been forbid from its first publishing, by the Kings and
Potentates of the earth, who have used their utmost industry to destroy both us
and that together, but still it flourishes, and the more for its being
persecuted; for it dies not like a humane doctrine, nor perishes like a weak
gift. (...). p. 698.
Thus we see that he insists on rational evidence as the great and sufficient
testimony into which our Faith is resolved as to the being of a Divine
Revelation. In his next Book he answers some objections of the Heathens against
believing Christianity, of which the chiefest was, the dissension among the
Christians, wherein (if ever) he had an opportunity to declare what the certain
rule of Faith is, and what power God has left his Church for determining
matters to be believed by us. But for want of understanding this necessary
foundation of Faith, viz. the Churches infallibility, he is fain to answer this
objection just as a Protestant would do. 1. If this were an argument against
truth, P. 753, etc*
the objectors had none themselves, for both Jews and Greeks had heresies among
them. 2. The very coming of heresies was an argument of the truth of Scripture,
because that had expressly foretold them. 3. This argument does not hold any
where else, therefore it should not in reason here, viz. where there is any
dissent there can be no certainty; for though Physicians differ much from one
another, yet Patients are not thereby discouraged from seeking to them for
cure. 4. This should only make men use more care and diligence in the search
and enquiry after truth; for they will find abundant recompense for their
search in the pleasure of finding truth. Would any one say, because two apples
are offered to him, the one a real fruit, the other made of wax, that therefore
he will meddle with neither; but rather that he ought to use more care to
distinguish the one from the other? If there be but one high way and many
bypath which lead to precipices, rivers, or the Sea, Will he not go in the
highway because there are such false ones? but rather go in it with the more
care, and get the exactest knowledge of it he can. Does a Gardener cast off the
care of his Garden because weeds grow up with his herbs? or rather, does he not
use the more diligence to distinguish one from the other? So ought we to do in
discerning truth. 5. That all those who seriously enquire after truth may
receive satisfaction. For either man's mind is capable of evidence, or it is
not; if not, it is to no purpose to trouble ourselves with any thing of
knowledge at all; if it be, then we must descend to particular questions, by
which we may demonstratively learn from the Scriptures how the heresies fell
off from them: (...), etc. p. 755.
and that the most exact knowledge is preserved in truth alone, and the ancient
Church. If then Heresies must be demonstratively confuted out of Scriptures,
what then does he make to be the rule to judge of Controversies, but only them?
For what he speaks of the ancient Church, he speaks of it as in conjunction
with truth and in opposition to those novel Heresies of the Basilidians and
Valentinians. For, that he does not at all appeal to the judgment of any
Church much less the present, as having any infallibility whereon men ought to
rely in matters of Faith, appears likewise by his following words. But those
(says he) who are willing to employ themselves in the most excellent things,
(...). Id. ib.
will never give over the search of truth, till they have received a
demonstration of it from the Scriptures themselves. Here we see, the last
resolution of Assent, is into the Scriptures themselves, without any the least
mention or intimation of any Infallibility in the Church, either to deliver, or
interpret those Scriptures to us: And after, gives the true account of
Heresies, viz. men's not adhering to the Scriptures. For (says he) they must
necessarily be deceived in the greatest things who undertake them, (...). Id.
p. 756.
unless they hold fast the Rule of Truth, which they received from Truth it
self. And in this following discourse he goes as high as any Protestants
whatever (even such who suppose the Scripture to be principium indemonstrabile,
by any thing but it self) for he makes the Doctrine delivered by Christ, to be
the Principle of our Faith, and we make use of it (says he) to be our (...) to
find out other things by. But, whatever is judged, is not believed till it be
judged, (...). Strom. 7. p. 757.
therefore that can be no Principle which stands in need of being judged.
Justly therefore when we have by Faith received that indemonstrable Principle,
and from the Principle it self used demonstrations concerning it self, we are
by the voice of our Lord instructed in the knowledge of Truth. Nothing can be
more plain in what he says, than that, if there were a higher (...) than
Scripture (as there must be, if we are to receive it on the account of the
Churches Infallible Testimony) the Scripture could not be called the Principle
of our Faith, but when we receive the Scripture, the evidence we have that it
is our Principle must be fetched from it self; and therefore he does here in
terms (as express as may be) resolve the belief of Scripture into internal
arguments, and makes it as much a Principle supposed as ever his Lordship does.
And immediately after, when he proposes that very Question, How this should be
proved to others, We expect not (says he) any proof from men, but we prove the
thing sought for by the Word of God, (...). Ibid.
which is more worthy belief than any demonstration, or rather which is the
only demonstration, by the knowledge of which, those who have tasted of the
Scripture alone become believers. Can any one who reads these words ever
imagine, that this man speaks like one, that said, That the Scriptures of
themselves appear no more to be Gods Word, than distinction of colors to a
blind man? How much beyond the Valentinians, and Basilidians would Clemens have
accounted so great a madness? who so plainly asserts the Scriptures to be
proved by themselves, and that not casually, or in the heat of argument; But
lest we should not thoroughly apprehend his meaning repeats it again in the same
page, (...), perfectly demonstrating the Scriptures by themselves. And are not
all these Testimonies of such persons so near the Apostolical times, sufficient
to acquaint us what the grounds of the Resolution of Faith were in the
Christian Church? when all of them do so unanimously fix on the Scripture, and
not so much as mention the Infallible Testimonies of any Church, much less the
Roman. Much more might be cited out of this excellent Author to the same
purpose, particularly where he refutes the Valentinians, who deserted the
Scriptures, and pleaded Tradition: but the Testimonies already produced are so
plain, that it will be to no purpose to produce any more.

. 7.
It were easy to continue an account of the same grounds of Faith, through the
succeeding Writers of the Christian Church, who have designedly writ on that
subject, in vindication of Christian Religion, which they unanimously prove to
be Divine, chiefly by these Arguments; from the undoubted Miracles which were
wrought by Christ, and his Apostles, from the exact fulfilling of Prophecies,
and the admirable propagation of the Christian Doctrine; all which are
particularly insisted on by Origin against Celsus; by Tertullian, in his
Apologetick, adversus Scapulam, and elsewhere; by Minucius Felix, Arnobius, and
Lactantius; not to mention Eusebius in his Books of preparation and
demonstration Evangelical; Cyril's Answer to Julian and others. Origines
sacrae. l. 2. c. 7, 8, 9, 10.
(But, having elsewhere more fully and largely considered that subject, I
rather choose to referr the Reader to what has been there handled already, than
to tire his patience with either repeating the same, or adding more Testimonies
to the same purpose.) Only that which is most pertinent to our present purpose,
I shall here add, Whether is it credible that those persons who fully
understood the Doctrine of Christianity, who were themselves rational and
inquisitive men, and writ for the satisfaction not only of subtle adversaries,
but of doubting and staggering Christians, should so unanimously agree in
insisting on the evidence of matter of fact, for the truth of the thing
delivered in Scripture, and the forementioned Arguments for the Divinity of
the Doctrine therein delivered, had it not been the judgment of the Church
they lived in, that the resolution of Faith was into those grounds on which
they insisted? And is it again credible, that any of them should believe the
Testimony of the Church to be necessary as infallible, in order to a Divine
Faith, and that without it, the Scriptures could not be believed as Divine, and
yet in all their disputes with the Gentiles concerning the Doctrine of
Christianity, and with several Heretics (as the Marcionists, etc.) concerning
the Books of Scripture, upon no occasion should mention this grand Palladium of
Faith, viz. the Infallibility of the present Church? And lastly, Is it
credible, that when in our modern Controversies men do evidently maintain
faction and interest, more than the common Principles of Christianity (that he
must be blinder than one that can see no distinction of colors, that does not
discern on what account this Infallibility is now pretended) Is it, I say,
credible* that a Doctrine pretended so necessary for our believing Scriptures
with Divine Faith, should be so concealed; when it ought, for the honor and
interest of Christianity to have been most divulged? Which now only in these
last and worst times is challenged by an usurping party in the Church as left
by Christ himself (when no other evidence can be given of it, but what was
common to all ages of the Church) as belonging to such a party under the
pretense of the Catholic Church, which does so apparently use it only to
uphold her pretended Authority, and so makes it serve to the worst ends, and
the most unworthy designs.

Having thus far considered what the judgment of those Fathers was concerning
the resolution of Faith, who lived nearest the Apostolical times;. 8.
I should now come to consider what you can produce out of Antiquity, for your
Churches Infallibility, or more generally, for any infallible Testimony
supposed in the Catholic Church (whatever that be) in order to a Foundation
for Divine Faith: But you very prudently avoid the Testimonies of Antiquity in
so necessary a subject as this is; for, those Testimonies mentioned in the
foregoing Chapter, in explication of Matthew. 28.20. taking them, as you have in
so loose and careless a manner produced them, make nothing at all for the
Churches Infallible Testimony; but only assert that which is not denied, that
there shall always be a Christian Church in the world. Our only remaining task
then, as to this, is, to examine in what way you seek to enervate the
Testimonies produced by his Lordship out of Antiquity, which you do in the
latter part of Chap. 8. His Lordship had truly said, P. 10. n. 3^.
That this method and manner of proving the Scripture to be the Word of God,
which he uses, is the same which the ancient Church ever held, namely
Tradition, or Ecclesiastical Authority first, and then all other arguments, but
especially internal from the Scripture it self. For which he cites, first, The
Church in S. Augustine 's time. He was no enemy to Church-Tradition (says his
Lorship) yet when he would prove that the Author of the Scripture (and so of
the whole knowledge of Divinity, as it is supernatural) is God in Christ, he
takes this as the all-sufficient way, and gives four proofs all internal to the
Scripture. 1. The Miracles. 2. That there is nothing carnal in the Doctrine. 3.
That there has been such performance of it. 4. That by such a Doctrine of
Humility, the whole world almost has been converted. And whereas ad muniendam
fidem, for the defending of the Faith, and keeping it entire, there are two
things requisite, Scripture and Church-Tradition; Vincent. Lyrinens. places
authority of Scriptures first, and then Tradition. And since it is apparent,
that Tradition is first in order of time, it must necessarily follow; that
Scripture is first in order of nature, that is the chief upon which Faith rests
and resolves it self. To this, (after you have needlessly explained his
Lordships opinion in this Controversy) you begin to answer thus; P. 108.
He cites first Vincentius Lyrinensis, l. 1. c. 1. who makes our Faith to be
confirmed both by Scripture and Tradition of the Catholic Church. But, Are not
you like to be trusted in citing Fathers who doubly falsify a Testimony of
your adversaries, when you may be so easily disproved? For 1. You tell us, he
cites that first, which he produces last. 2. You cite that as produced by him
for the Foundation of Faith, which he expressly cites for the preservation of
the Doctrine of Faith; so he tells you ad muniendam fidem, etc. Can any thing
be more plain and obvious to any one who looks into that discourse of
Vincentius, than that he makes it not his business to give an account of the
general Foundations of Faith as to the Scriptures being Gods Word, but of the
particular Doctrines of Faith, in opposition to the Heresies which arise in the
Church. So that all that he speaks concerning Scripture, is not about the
authority, but the sense and interpretation of it. If therefore I should grant
you, that he speaks of Christian and Divine Faith, What is this to your
purpose, unless you could prove that he speaks of that Divine Faith, whereby we
believe the Scripture to be the Word of God. But yet your argument is very good
to prove, that he speaks not of any humane fallible persuasion, but true
Christian Divine Faith; for he opposes it to Heresy, and calls it sound Faith,
and his Faith. It seems then, whatever Faith is sound for the matter of it, is
presently Christian, Divine, and Infallible; and so, whosoever believes any
thing which is materially true, in opposition to Heresies, needs never fear as
long as he does so, for according to you he has Christian and Infallible
Faith; but, what if the Devils Faith be as sound as any Catholicks', Must it
therefore be Divine Faith? No (it may be you will answer) because he wants the
formal object of Faith, and does not believe on the account of your Churches
Infallibility; I verily believe you; for he knows the jugglings of it too much
to believe it infallible. But, take Vincentius in what sense you please, that
is evident in him which his Lordship produced him for, that, for the preserving
Faith entire, he places authority of Scripture first, and then Tradition
(unless you will serve his Testimony, as you do his Lordships, because it makes
for your purpose, say, He mentions Tradition first, and then Scripture) but,
say you, He says Tradition does as truly confirm Divine Faith, as Scripture,
though Scripture does it in a higher manner. If you did but consider, either
what kind of Tradition, or what kind of Faith Vincentius insists on, you could
not possibly think his words any thing to your purpose. For he speaks not of
any Tradition infallibly attested to us, without which you pretend there can be
no Divine Faith, but of such an Universal Tradition which depends wholly upon
Antiquity, Universality, and Consent, and never so much as mentions, much less
pretends to any thing of Infallibility: So that if you grant such a kind of
Tradition, does as truly confirm Faith as the Scripture,, then you must grant
no necessity of an Infallible Testimony to assure us of that Tradition, for
Vincentius speaks of such a kind of Tradition, as has no connection with
Infallibility. For if Vincentius had ever in the least, thought of any such
thing, so great and zealous an opposer of Heresies would not have left out that
which had been more to his purpose, than all that he had said, For wise men,
who have thoroughly considered of Vincentius his way, though in general they
cannot but approve of it so far as to think it highly improbable, that there
should be Antiquity, Universality, and Consent against the true and genuine
sense of Scripture, yet when they consider this way of Vincentius, with all
those cautions, restrictions, and limitations set down by him (^. 1. c. 39.)
they are apt to think, that he has put men to a wild-goose-chase to find out
any thing according to his Rules; and that S. Augustine spoke a great deal more
to the purpose, when he spoke concerning all the Writers of the Church; That
although they had never so much learning and sanctity, he did not think it
true, because they thought so, Ali^s (...) ita lego, ut quanta^libet
sanctitate, doctrin^que praepolleant, non ideo verum putem, qui ipsi ita
sens^runt, sed quia mihi, vel per illos authors C^nonicos, vel probabili
ratione, quod a vero non abhorreat, persuadere potuerunt. August. ep. 19.
but because they persuaded him to believe it true, either from the Authority
of Scripture, or some probable Reason. If therefore S. Austin's Authority be
not sunk so low as that of the Monk of Lerins, we have very little reason to
think that Tradition can as truly confirm Faith to us as the Scriptures,
supposing that to have been the meaning of Vincentius. Which yet is not
reasonable to imagine, since Vincentius himself grants, that in case of
inveterate Heresy or Schism, either the sole Authority of Scripture is to be
used, or at most the determinations of General Councils; nay, Lib. 1. c. 39.
and in all cases does suppose, that the Canon of Scripture is perfect, Quum
^it perfectus Scripturarum Canon, sibique ad omnia satis superque sufficiat,
etc. l. 1. c. 2.
and is abundantly sufficient of it self for all things. Can you yet therefore
suppose, that Vincentius did think that Tradition did as truly confirm our
Faith as the Scripture? Which is your assertion, and the only thing whereby you
pretend that the Bishop has misconstrued Vincentius; but whether be more
guilty of it, I leave to impartial judgment.

The next Testimony you consider, is, that of Henricus a Gandavo.. 9.
For his Lordship had said, That the School had confessed, this was the way
ever. For which he cites the Testimony of that Schoolman, That daily with them
that are without Christ enters by the woman, i. e. the Church, Sic quotidie
apud illos qui foris sunt intrat Christus per mulierem, in Ecclesiam, and
credunt per istam famam, etc. Hen. a Gand. sum. p. 2. A. 10. q. 1.
and they believe by that fame which she gives (alluding to the story of the
woman of Samaria.) But when they come to hear Christ himself, they believe His
words before the words of the woman: For when they have once found Christ, Plus
verbis Christi in Scriptura credit, quam Ecclesiae testificanti: quia propter
illam jam credit Ecclesiae. Et, si ipsa quidem contraria Scripturae diceret,
ipsi no^ crederet. Id.
they do more believe his words in Scripture, than they do the Church, which
testifies of him; because then propter illam, for the Scripture they believe
the Church. And if the Church should speak contrary to the Scripture, they
would not believe it. Thus (says his Lordship) the School taught then. No,
that did it not (say you.) But let us see, how rarely you prove it: For (you
say) he speaks all this of a supernatural and Divine Faith to be given, both to
the Scriptures, and the Church. Gandavensis certainly is much obliged to you,
who venture to speak such great Absurdities for his sake; for if he be
understood in both places of Divine and Infallible Faith, these rare
consequences follow. 1. That the first beginning of Faith is equal to the
highest degree of it; for when he speaks of the Church, he speaks of Christ's
entering by that, which can be meant of nothing else but the first step to
Faith, as is plain in the parallel case of the woman of Samaria; but if this
were Divine and Infallible, it must be equal to the highest degree, for that I
suppose can be but Divine and Infallible, unless you can find out degrees in
Infallibility. By this Rule, you make him that is but over the threshold, as
much in the house, as he that is sat down to the Table; a plant at its first
peeping out of the earth, to be as tall as at its full growth; and the
Samaritans as firmly to believe in Christ at the first mention of him by the
Woman, as when they saw and heard him. 2. By this you make an Infallible Faith
to be built on a Fallible Testimony; for to what purpose else was the
Similitude of the Woman of Samaria insisted on, but to parallel the Testimony
of the Church with that of the Woman, and consequently the Faith built on the
Churches Testimony to be like that which the Samaritans had of Christ upon the
Woman's Testimony; and if you believe that Faith Infallible, you must assert, an
Infal^^ble Faith to be built on a fallible Testimony, and yet to be as
infallible, as that which is built on an Infallible Testimony: And then, I
pray, tell me, To what end would you make your Churches Testimony Infallible,
if Faith may be infallible without it?

But, it may be, though these seem hard things, yet you prove them invincibly:
P. 108.
No doubt of it; for, you say, That Christ enters by that Faith, but Christ
cannot enter into a soul by a mere humane fallible persuasion, but by Divine
Faith only. Nay, when he says, That he more believes the Scripture, than the
Churches Testimony, he says, That he believes the Church; But how can he
believe without Faith? O the irresistible force of demonstrations! But what
silly people are we, that thought a man might enter into a house by the door,
though he met not with his hearty entertainment till afterward? But, Do you
really think, that Christ never enters into a soul, but by Divine and
Infallible Faith? For Christ enters by that which gives him his first
admission, but his full reception must be by a higher degree of Faith. Do you
think men believe as much at first as ever after? If not, May not Christ be
said to enter by that lower degree of Faith? I pray, What think you of the case
in hand, Did not the belief of Christ enter by the Woman of Samaria? and was
that, as Divine a Faith, as what they had afterward? Nay, take Christ's entering
(as improperly as you can imagine it) for his hearty reception in the soul, Can
that be no other ways but by an Infallible Faith? A Faith supposed to be built
on infallible grounds, I grant; but whether all, who do truly believe in
Christ, do build their Faith on grounds in themselves infallible, my charity to
some deluded souls in your Church (as well as honest, but ignorant persons
elsewhere) gives me just reason to question. But still there is a greater
subtilty behind, which is, if he believes the Scripture more than the Church,
then he must believe the Church equally with the Scripture; for that must be
the meaning of what you say, when he says, He believes the Scripture more than
the Church, he believes the Church; but how can he believe without Faith? Ergo,
this must be Divine Faith, or else all the rest come to nothing. So that if I
say, I believe the Scripture more than you, it follows, that I believe you as
much as the Scripture, by the very same consequence. But you have gotten such a
knack of contradicting your self, that poor Gandavo cannot fall into your
hands, but you must make him do so too. When you say, A man cannot believe
without Faith, I dare justify it to be one of the greatest truths in your
Book; but, if your meaning be, A man cannot believe without Divine Faith, I
hope we Protestants sufficiently confute that; for you dare not deny that we
believe at all, but (just as the Devils do) we must (according to you) believe
and tremble, because our Faith is not Divine and Infallible. But still your
subtilty works with you, for because Gandavensis says, That we must yield our
first Faith to the Scripture, but, secundam sub ista, a secondary Faith to the
definitions and customs of the Catholic Church: You cry out, Here Is prima and
secunda fides; but yet both of them are properly and truly Faith. But, Are both
of them properly and truly Divine Faith? If so, How comes the distinction of
the first and second, one subordinate to the other, if both be equally Divine
and Infallible? Nay, according to your Principles, the Faith given to the
Church must be the first Faith, and to the Scriptures the second under that;
because, for the sake of the Churches Testimony, we are to believe the
Scriptures. And, Do you really think, there may be no discovery of Infidelity
in rejecting a sufficient Testimony for Faith, where there is not an Infallible
Testimony? But, whatever you think, your great enemy, Reason, tells us the
contrary; and therefore what follows of believing the Church, sub poena
perfidiae, is to no more purpose than what went before. The strength therefore
of all that you say as to this Testimony of Gandavensis, lies in the proof of
this one thing; That no man can believe any thing without an Infallible Faith;
yet I verily believe that you have miserably perverted the Schoolmens words,
and think no more Infallible Testimony requisite for it, than your own words.

But, it may be, though you do so ill by the Schoolmen, you may use the Fathers
more civilly.. 10.
Three things therefore you have to answer to those Testimonies of the Fathers,
P. 109.
which seem most to make use of internal Arguments. 1. That they use them not
to such as had no Divine Faith, but to such as had. 2. That they do not use
them as Primary, Infallible and Divine proofs, but as secondary arguments,
persuasive only to such as believed Scripture to be Gods Word antecedently to
them. 3. That they do not use only such proofs as are wholly internal to the
Scripture it self. As to the two first conditions, you say it is evident, these
proofs were made by Christians, namely the Holy Fathers; and commonly to
Christians, who lived in their times. And as clear is it, that they never
pronounced them to be the Primary, Infallible, and Divine Motives of their
belief in that point, nor used they them as such. How false and absurd these
Answers are, may appear by our precedent discourse, wherein we manifested, that
the Christians insisted on those arguments there mentioned not for themselves
and other Christians, but chiefly to convince and persuade by them the Gentile
world to the belief of Christianity. And, Did they suppose these Heathens to
have a Divine Faith already? Or, Did they look on such arguments as only
secondary motives, when these were the chief, nay only arguments which they
used to persuade them; if they had other that were Primary, Divine, and
Infallible, and only made use of secondary, humane, probable motives, they were
guilty of the highest betraying the Christian Cause imaginable. And you make
them only to defend Christianity, as Vaninus did Divine Providence with such
silly and weak arguments, that by their overthrow, the belief of it might fall
with them. Indeed, if they had pretended the Infallible Testimony of the
Church, there might have been just reason for such a Suspicion, and any wise
men would have thought their design had been to make their Religion
contemptible, and expose it to the derision of Atheists, instead of better
establishing the Foundations of believing it. But those wise and holy men knew
better the interest of Christianity, than to offer to defend it by Principles
in themselves false, and much more liable to question than that was which they
were to prove by them: and therefore made choice of arguments in themselves
strong and evident, and built on Principles, common to themselves, and those
whom they disputed against, i. e. they urged them with the greatest strength of
Reason, and the clearest evidence of Divine Revelation, and never questioned
but that a Faith built on those grounds, if effectual for a holy Life, was a
true and Divine Faith. It seems then, your cause cannot be maintained, without
the most sharp and virulent reflections on those Primitive Christians, who
among all those arguments whereby they so successfully prevailed over the
Gentile world, never did so much as vouchsafe to mention the least pretense to
Infallibility; for which they are now accused of using only the blunter
weapons, of humane and fallible motives, and not those Primary and Divine
Motives of Infallibility. But this is not the first time we have seen, what
desperate shifts a bad cause puts men upon.

It may be yet, your strength may lie in your last condition, viz. That these
arguments used by them, were not internal. For, 1. You say, That of Miracles is
external; P. 109.
the Scriptures themselves work none, neither were ever any Miracles wrought to
confirm, that all the Books now in the Canon (and no more) are the Word of God.
I answer, 1. I have already told you of a double resolution of Faith, the one
as to the Divinity of the Doctrine, the other as to the Veracity of the Books
which contain it: when therefore Miracles are insisted on, it is not in order
to the latter of these which we have sufficient assurance of without them, as I
have already largely proved, both as to the Truth and Integrity of the Canon of
Scripture; but Miracles, we say, are the arguments to prove the Divinity of the
Doctrine by, because they attest the Divine Revelation of the persons, who
deliver this Doctrine to the world. 2. As to us who receive the report of those
Miracles, as conveyed to us by the Scripture, those may be said to be internal
arguments to the Scripture, which are there recorded in order to our believing
the Doctrine therein contained to be Divine. The Motives of Faith being
delivered to us now jointly with the Doctrine, although on different grounds we
believe the Veracity of the Books of Scripture, and the Infallibility of the
Doctrine contained in it. We believe that the Miracles were truly done, because
they are delivered to us by an unquestionable Tradition, in such Authentic
Writings as the Scriptures are; but we believe the Doctrine contained in the
Books to be Divine, because attested by such Miracles, and we believe the Books
of Scripture to be divinely inspired, because such persons cannot be supposed
to falsify to the world who wrought such great Miracles. 2. You say, The
conversion of so many People and Nations by the Doctrine contained in
Scripture, is also external to the Scripture. But still you suppose that these
arguments are brought to prove these Books to be divinely inspired, which is
denied; we say only, That the admirable propagation of the Doctrine of the
Gospel, is a great argument that it was from God. And therefore, when
afterward you say, That supposing all those arguments mentioned by the Bishop
out of S. Augustine, to be internal to the Scripture, yet they cannot
infallibly and divinely prove that Scripture is the Word of God. If by
Scripture, you mean the Writings, we pretend not to it; if by Scripture, you
mean the Doctrine of it, we assert it, and think it no argument at all against
that, which you add, That persuade they may, but convince they cannot; no doubt
if they persuade, they do much more than convince; But, I suppose, your meaning
is, they do it not effectually; if so, that is not the fault of the arguments,
but of the person, who by his obstinacy, will not hearken to the clearest
evidence of Reason. All that this can prove, is a necessity of Divine Grace to
go along with external evidence, which you dare not assert, for fear of running
into that private Spirit, which you objected to his Lordship on the same
account. But it is very pretty which follows: You say, Supposing that all those
arguments mentioned, of Miracles, nothing carnal in the Doctrine, P. 110*
performance of it, and conversion of the world by it, were all of them
internal to Scripture, yet they could not prove infallibly the Scripture to be
the Word of God; and to prove this, you tell us, concerning the third and
fourth, How can it ever be proved, that either the performance of this
Doctrine, or the conversion of Nations is internal to Scripture. But, Did you
not suppose them before to be internal to Scripture? and though they were so,
yet could not prove the Scriture, etc? and to prove that, you say they cannot
be proved internal to Scripture. Which is just as if I should say, If you were
Pope you would not be Infallible; and all the evidence I should give for it,
should be only to prove that you were not Pope.

You conclude this Chapter with a Wonder (I mean not any thing of Reason which
would really be so) But, say you, who can sufficiently wonder, that his
Lordship, for these four Motives, should so easily make the Scripture give
Divine Testimony to it self, upon which our Faith must rest, and yet deny the
same privilege to the Church. Seeing it cannot be denied, but that every one
of these Motives are much more immediately and clearly applied to the Church,
than to the Scripture. What? more immediately and clearly? and so clearly, that
it cannot be denied? Prove but any one of them as to that Church, whose
Infallibility is in question, viz. the present Roman-Church, and I will yield
you the rest. Produce but any one undoubted Miracle, to confirm the
Infallibility of your Church, or the Pastors of it, show your Doctrine (wherein
it differs from ours) not to be carnal, manifest the performance of the
Christian Doctrine, only in the members of your Church, prove that it is your
Church, as such, which has preached this Doctrine, and converted whole Nations
to the belief of it (in any other way than the Spaniards did the poor Indians)
and we may begin to hearken with somewhat more patience to your arrogant and
unreasonable pretense of Infallibility. Can any one then who has any grain of
reason left him, think that from these arguments, while his Lordship disputes
most eagerly against the present Churches Infallibility, he argues mainly for
it, as you very wisely conclude that Chapter. If this be arguing for your
Churches Infallibility, much good may such arguments do you.

And so I come to the last part of my task as to this Controversy, which is,
to examine your next Chapter,. 11.
which puts us in hopes of seeing an End of this tedious Controversy: But this
containing very little new in it (and therefore deserves not to be handled
apart) will on that account admit of a quicker dispatch. In which the first
Section begins with S. Austin's Testimony, which should have been considered
before, and now it comes out with the same Answer attending it, which was given
so lately concerning primary and infallible, and secondary and probable Motives
of Faith, the vanity of which is sufficiently discovered. Whereas in your
Margent, P. 111.
you bring an example of such a probable Motive, viz. when S. Austin says to
Faustus, Aug. c. Faustum. l. 28. c. 2*
That as constant Tradition was sufficient for him to believe that that Epistle
was Manichaeus his, which went under his name; so the same Tradition was
sufficient to him to prove the Gospel was S. Matthew 's, which was so
universally received for his, ever since the writing of it. I am so far from
thinking this a mere probable Motive, that it is the highest evidence the
matter is capable of, and so S. Austin thought. Your paralleling the saying of
Waldensis (That if the Church should speak any thing contrary to Scripture, he
would not believe her) with another which you pretend to be S. Austin's; If the
Scripture should speak any thing contrary to the Church, we could not believe
that neither; and then saying that both proceed on an impossible supposition,
must imply, that it is an equal impossibility for the Church to deliver any
thing contrary to the Doctrine of Scripture, as for the Scripture to contradict
it self; for to say, The Scripture should contradict the Church, signifies
nothing, because the Being of the Church is founded on the Doctrine of
Scripture. All that S. Austin says, in the place you referr us to, comes to no
more than this, If the Church were found deceived in the Writings of Scripture,
then there could be no ground of any firm assent to them. And, is this, I pray,
a fit parallel for that speech of Waldensis? Is this to say, If the Scripture
speak any thing against the Church, it is not to be believed?

In your next Sect. N. 2, 3. you fall from Parallels, to Circles, and
Semicircles (as you call them) in which you only show us your faculty of
mumbling the same things over and over, P. 111, 112.
concerning his Lordships mistating the Question, about Infallible and Divine
Faith, Apostolical Tradition, the formal Object of Faith, which I must, out of
charity to the Readers patience, beg him to look back for the several Answers,
if he thinks any thing needs it; for I am now quite tired with these
Repetitions, there being not one word added here, but what has been answered
already. But, lest th^se should not enough tire us, the next Sect. N. 4.
consists of the old puff-paste of ultimate Motive, and formal Object, of the
Infallibility which is not simply Divine, P. 113.
and others of a like nature, whose vanity has been detected in the very
entrance into this Controversy.

It seems you had a great mind to give the Bishop a blow, when you reach as
far, as from p. 103, to p. 115. to do it, and yet fall short of it at last;
for, though you charge him with a false citation of S. Austin, for these words,
fidei ultima resolutio est in Deum illuminantem, yet in that Chapter, though
not the words, yet the sense is there extant, when he gives that account of
Christian Faith, That it comes not by the authority of men, Non jam hominibus,
sed ipso Deo intrinsecus mentem nostram firmante and illuminante. Aug. c. ep.
Manich. c. 14.
but from God himself confirming and inlightening our mind. Is not here a plain
resolution of Faith in Deum illuminantem? And therefore your charge of false
citation, and your confident denial, That there is any such Text to be found
either there, or any where else in all S. Augustine, argue, you are not careful
what you say, so you may but throw dirt in your adversaries face, though we may
easily know from whence it comes, by the foulness of your fingers. And for your
other challenge, of producing any Testimony of the Fathers which says, That we
must resolve our Faith of Scripture into the Light of Scriptures; I hope the
Testimonies I have in this Chapter mentioned, may teach you a little more
modesty: and for the other part of it, That we cannot believe the Scripture
infallibly for the Churches authority, as far as a Negative can be proved, I
dare appeal to the judgment of any one. Whether it be possible to believe that
the Fathers judged, the Certainty, much less Infallibility of Christian Faith
did depend on the Churches Infallible Testimony, and yet never upon the most
just occasion do so much as mention it, but rather speak very much to the
contrary.

His Lordship having thus at large delivered his mind in this important
Controversy; to make what he had said the more portable,. 12.
sums up the substance of it in several Considerations. Which being only a
recapitulation of what has been fully discussed already, will need the shorter
Vindication, in some brief strictures, where you unjustly quarrel with them. To
his 1. That it seems reasonable, that since all Sciences suppose Principles;
Theology should be allowed some too; the chiefest of which is, That the
Scriptures are of Divine Authority; your Answer is considerable; P. 114.
viz. that he confounds Theology, a discoursive Science, with Faith, which is
an act of the Understanding, produced by an Impulse of the Will, etc. But not
to examine what has been already handled, of the power of the Will in the act
of Faith, it is plain when his Lordship speaks of Theology, he means Theology,
and not Faith; and the intent of this Consideration was to show, the
unreasonableness of starting this Question in a Theological Dispute about the
Church. In your Answer to the second, you say, That Fallible Motives cannot
produce Certainty, which if you would prove, you would do more to the purpose
than you have done yet, and by this argument, I could not be certain, whether
you had done it or no, unless you brought some Infallible Motives to prove it.
The third you pass over. The fourth you grant, though not very consistently
with what you elsewhere say: As to what you say in answer to the fifth,
concerning Miracles, P. 115.
I agree with you in it, having elsewhere sufficiently declared my self as to
them. For the sixth you referr to your former Answer, and so do I to the reply
to it. In the seventh, his Lordship proves the necessity of some revelation
from God rationally and strongly, and thence inferrs, That either there never
was any such Revelation, or that the Scripture is that Revelation, and that is
it we Christians labor to make good against all Atheism, Profaneness, and
Infidelity. To which you have two Exceptions. P. 116.
1. That this cannot be proved by the mere Light of Scripture, which His
Lordship never pretended to. 2. That he leaves out the Word, only, which was
the cause of the whole Controversy; What, between Christians and Atheists? For
of that Controversy, he there speaks; but since you are so fond of your
unwritten Revelations, pray prove the necessity of them as strongly against
Atheists, as his Lordship has done the necessity of a written one. In the last
Consideration he musters up all the several arguments whereby men may be
persuaded, that this Revelation is contained in those Books we call the
Scripture; as the Tradition of the Church, the Testimony of former Ages, the
consent of times, the Harmony of Prophets, and the Prophecies fulfilled, the
success of the Doctrine, the constancy of it, the spiritual nature and efficacy
of it, and lastly, the inward light and excellency of the Text it self; which,
with a great deal of Rhetoric, is there set forth. But to all this you say no
more than what has been abundantly disproved, viz. That all these only
justify our belief, Ibid.
when it is received as the ancients received it upon the Infallible Authority
of Church-Tradition, but never otherwise. Whereas we have proved, that the
ancients received it only on the same grounds, which are here mentioned, and
therefore certainly are sufficient not only to justify our Faith, but to
persuade us to believe.

Your argument against what his Lordship says of the necessity of the Spirit's
assistance with these Motives,. 13.
and the Light of Scripture for producing Divine Faith, will equally hold
against all those of your own side, who hold the necessity of Gods Spirit for
believing the Churches Infallibility, and against all such of both sides, who
hold any necessity of Divine Grace, for then you must say, that either that
Grace is not necessary in order to salvation, or that those who want it, are
neither truly Christians, nor capable of salvation. And how horridly soever
these consequences sound in the ears of the unlearned, they can sound no worse
than those multitudes of Scriptures do which tell men, That without true Divine
Faith, and real Grace, they are under eternal condemnation. But, it may be,
that the unlearned may not be affrighted with such sentences as those are, you
think it a great deal better to let them hear little or nothing of the
Scripture, and to let them be continually entertained with the sweet and
melodious voice of the Church. No doubt, you thought, your next argument had
done the business effectually; P. 116.
For (say you) to make them more sensible of the foulness of this error, viz.
the danger of such who do not savingly believe, Let them consider, that when
young and unlearned Christians are taught to say their Creed, and profess their
belief of the Articles contained in it, before they read Scripture, they are
taught to lie, and profess to do that, which they neither do, nor can do in his
Tenet. An excellent argument against making Children say their Creed! but, Will
not the same hold against all public using of the Creed, because it is
unquestionable but there are some who do not savingly or divinely believe it?
Nay, Will it not much more hold against any in your Church, saying their Creed
at all, unless they first believe your Church to be Infallible, which is very
well known that all do not. For then, according to you, they do but lie, and
profess to do that which they neither do, nor can do, without the Churches
Infallible Testimony: And therefore you must begin a new work of Catechizing
the members of your Church, to know whether they believe the Churches
Infallibility, before they can say their Creed. Unless you solve it among your
selves, by saying, It is not a formal lie, but only an aequivocation, which
many of you say, is lawful in case of danger, as you see apparently this is.
But if the aequivocation be said only to lie in the word Believe, you might
easily discern the weakness of your argument, through it. For if some may truly
believe what they do not savingly believe, there is no lie certainly told, in
saying, They do believe as far as they do; which is by a firm assent to the
Truth of all the Articles of Faith, by that which is called an historical, or
dogmatical Faith, where there may be no saving Faith. But that because Children
are taught (as a short systeme of the Articles of Faith) to say their Creed, we
must be convinced of the foulness of our error, is an apparent evidence, that
either you apprehended our understandings to be very weak, or that you
sufficiently discover your own to be so.

. 14.
The only quarrel which you have with his Lordships Synthetical way, is, P. 117.
n. 7.
That he confounds his Reader with multiplicity of arguments, and weakens the
authority of the Church, without which (if you may be believed) he might tire
himself and others, but never be able to make a clear resolution of Faith. How
clear an account you have given of Faith in your Analytical way, by the
Authority of the Church, has been sufficiently laid open to you; but I wonder
not that you quarrel with multiplicity of arguments, there being nothing which
does really weaken the authority of your Church so much as they do, and they
are men certainly of your temper, who will be soon tired with too much reason.
What follows concerning the captiousness of the Question as first propounded;
and the vicious Circle you would free your selves of, by the Motives of
Credibility; deserve no further answer. Only when you would make A. C. go your
way, and both together prove the Church Infallible independently on Scripture,
you did not certainly consider, that it is an Infallibility by Promise, which
you challenge, and, for that end, in the precedent Chapter, were those places
of Scripture produced by A. C. and urged by you. All that I shall return by way
of Answer to your tedious discourse concerning Scriptures being a Principle
supposed among Christians (the main of it depending on the circumstances of the
dispute between his Lordship and Mr. Fisher) shall be in these following
particulars. P. 118, etc. n. 8, 9, 10.
1. That in all Controversies among Christians, whose decision depends upon the
authority of Scripture, the Scripture must be supposed as granted to be of
Divine Authority by both parties. 2. That in that Question, Whether the
Scripture contains all necessary things of Faith, that necessity must be
supposed to relate to the things which depend upon Scripture, and therefore
implies it believed on other grounds, that this Scripture is of Divine
Revelation. For the Question is, Whether God has consigned his Will so fully
to us, in this Revelation of himself, that nothing necessary to be believed is
left out of it? For men then to say, That this is left out of it, viz. to
believe that this is a Divine Revelation, is an unreasonable Cavil, it being
supposed in the very Question, that it is so. 3. That in this sense the
Scripture may be said to be a supposed Principle, because it has a different
way of probation, from particular objects of Faith, revealed in Scripture. For
to a rational Enquirer, who seems to doubt of the Truth of Scriptures, it is
equally absurd to give him any one of these three Answers. 1. That it is a
Principle to be supposed: for, though it be supposed as to the particular
debate depending on Scripture; yet it is fond and absurd to say, It must be
supposed when it is the thing in question. 2. That it is known merely by its
own Light: for the person I have to deal with, supposing himself equally
capable to judge of Reason and Evidence, as my self, it does but betray the
weakness of my cause, or my inability to manage it, to pretend that to be
evident, which it is much more evident that he does not think so; and it is
only to tell him, my Understanding must rule his, and that whatever appears to
me to have Light in it self, ought likewise so appear to him. 3. It is as
absurd as either of the other two, to say, That you will prove to a rational
Enquirer, the Scripture to be Gods Word, by an unwritten Word of God. For, 1.
His Enquiry is, Whether there be any Word of God or no, you prove there is,
because there is; for that is all you prove by your unwritten Word. He denies,
or at least questions, Whether there be any, and particularly instanceth in
Scripture; you think to end the Question, by telling him, He must believe it to
be so, because there is another Word of God which attests it, which, instead of
ending the first Question, begets a great many more. For, 2. He will be more to
seek, concerning this unwritten Word than before; because he might use his
Reason in judging concerning the written Word, but cannot as to this unwritten;
it being only told him, There is such a thing, but he knows not what it is, how
far it extends, who must deliver it, what evidence this has beyond the other,
that it comes from God, that it must be used as an argument to prove it with.
If you send him to the Infallibility of the Church, you must either presume him
of a very weak Understanding, or else he would easily discern your perfect
juggling in this; the veins of which I have discovered throughout this
discourse. There remains nothing then but Reason, a Principle common to us
both; by which I must prove, that the Scriptures are from God, which Reason
partly makes use of the Churches Tradition, not in any notion of Infallibility,
but merely as built on Principles common to humane nature, and partly uses
those other arguments which prove by the greatest rational evidence, that the
Doctrine contained in Scripture, was from God; and if this were all the meaning
of saying, The Scriptures are a Principle supposed, because of a different way
of proving them, from particular objects of Faith, you can have no reason to
deny it.

. 15.
The next thing his Lordship insists on, is, That the Jews never had, nor can
have any other proof, P. 123. sect. 18. n. 5.
that the Old Testament is the Word of God, than we have of the New. In your
Answer to which, I grant that which you contend for, That the Tradition of
Scriptures among them, was by their immediate Ancestors as well as others; I
grant, That their Faith was not a Scientifical Knowledge, P. 122. n. 11.
but a firm and perfect assurance only (but understand not what you mean, by
saying, That otherwise it would not be meritorious) but am as far to seek as
ever for any Infallibility in the Jewish Church, which should in every age be
the ground of believing the Books of the Old Testament to be divinely inspired.
And if you will prove a constant succession of Prophets from Moses till our
Savior's appearing (which you seem willing to believe) you would do something
toward it; but for your permanent Infallible Authority in the High Priest and
his Clergy, I have already showed it to be a groundless, if not a wilful
mistake.

What remains concerning the nature of Infallibility (which at last his
Lordship makes to be no more than that which excludes all possibility of
doubting, and therefore grants, that an Infallible Assurance may be had by
Ecclesiastical and Humane proof) and how far that is requisite to Faith; P.
1^4. sect. 19.
concerning moral Certainty, and what Assurance may be had by it; concerning
the Canon of Scripture, Apostolical Tradition, the unwritten Word, S. Austin 's
Testimony about the Church, P. 123, etc. n. 12. ad fin. cap. 9.
they are all points so fully discussed before, that out of pity to the Reader,
I must referr him to their several places, which when he has thoroughly
considered, I will give him leave to sum up the several victories you have
obtained in the management of it, which will be much more honorable for you,
than for your self to do it, as you do most triumphantly in the end of this
Controversy concerning the Resolution of Faith. And although I have not been
much surprised with your attempts, yet I shall heartily conclude this great
Debate with your last words in it. The Consequence I leave to the serious
consideration of the Judicious Reader. I beseech God he may make benefit of it
to his eternal felicity.

PART II. Of Schism.
CHAP. I. Of the Universal Church.
The Question of Schism explained. The nature of it enquired into. Several
general Principles laid down for clearing the present Controversy. Three
grounds of the charge of Schism on Protestant Churches by our Author. The
first, of the Roman Churches being the Catholic Church, entered upon. How far
the Roman Church may be said to be a true Church. The distinction of a Church
morally and metaphysically true justified. The grounds of the Unity of the
Catholic Church, as to Doctrine and Government. Cardinal Perron's distinction
of the formal, causal, and participative Catholic Church examined. The true
sense of the Catholic Church in Antiquity manifested from St. Cyprian, and
several cases happening in his time: as, the Schism of Novatianus at Rome; the
case of Felicissimus and Fortunatus. Several other Instances out of Antiquity
to the same purpose, by all which it is manifest that the unity of the
Catholic Church had no dependence on the Church of Rome. The several
testimonies to the contrary of St. Ambrose, St. Hierome, John Patriarch of
Constantinople, St. Augustine, Optatus, etc. particularly examined; and all
found short of proving that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church. The
several Answers of his Lordship to the testimonies of St. Cyprian, St. Hierom,
St. Greg. Nazianzene, St. Cyril, and Ruffinus, about the infallibility of the
Church of Rome, justified. From all which it appears that the making the
Roman-Church to be the Catholic, is a great Novelty and perfect Jesuitism.

SInce so great and considerable parts of the Christian Church,. 1.
have in these last ages been divided in communion from each other, the great
contest and enquiry has been, which party stands guilty of the cause of the
present distance and separation. For, both sides retain still so much of their
common Christianity, as to acknowledge that no Religion does so strictly oblige
the owners of it to peace and unity as the Christian Religion does; and yet
notwithstanding this, we find these breaches so far from closing, that,
supposing the same grounds to continue, a reconciliation seems to humane reason
impossible. An evidence of which, is, that those persons who either out of a
generous desire of seeing the wounds of the Christian world healed, or out of
some private interest or design, have made it their business to propound terms
of reconciliation between the divided parties, have been equally rejected by
those parties they have professed themselves the members of. For whether any of
the Roman Communion have ingenuously confessed the great corruptions crept into
that Church, and desired a reformation of them, or any of the Protestant
Communion have endeavored to excuse, palliate, or plead for the corruptions of
the Roman Church: we find how little encouragement they have had for such
undertakings from that Church whose Communion they have professed to retain.
The distance then being so great as it is, it is a very necessary enquiry what
the cause of it is, and where the main fault lies; and it being acknowledged
that there is a possibility that corruptions may get into a Christian Church,
and it being impossible to prove that Christianity obliges men to communicate
with a Church in all those corruptions its Communion may be tainted with, it
seems evident to reason that the cause of the breach must lie there, where the
corruptions are owned and imposed as conditions of Communion. For, can any one
imagine it should be a fault in any to keep off from Communion, where they are
so far from being obliged to it, that they have an obligation to the contrary,
from the prinples of their common Christianity? and where men are bound not to
communicate, it is impossible to prove their not communicating to be Schism.
For there can be no Schism, but where there is an obligation to communion;
Schism being nothing else but a willful violation of the bonds of Christian
Communion; and therefore when ever you would prove the Protestants guilty of
Schism, you must do it by proving they were bound to communicate with your
Church in those things, which they are Protestants for disowning of. Or that
there is so absolute and unlimited an obligation to continue in the Society of
your Church, that no conditions can be so hard, but we are bound rather to
submit to them, than not join in Communion with you. But we who look on the
nature of a Christian Society in general, the Foundations of its constitution,
the ends and designs of it, cannot think our selves obliged to Communion in
those things which undermine those Foundations, and contradict those ends.

. 2.
This being a matter of so vast consequence, in order to the settling men's minds
in the present disputes of the Christian world, before I come to particulars, I
shall lay down those general principles which may manifest how free Protestants
are, from all imputation of Schism. Schism then importing a violation of that
Communion which we are obliged to, the most natural way for understanding what
Schism is, is to enquire what the Foundations are of Christian Communion, and
how far the bonds of it do extend. Now the Foundations of Christian Communion
in general depend upon the acknowledgement of the truth of Christian Religion.
For that Religion which Christ came to deliver to the world being supposed
true, is the reason why any look on themselves as obliged to profess it; which
obligation extending to all persons who have the same grounds to believe the
truth of it, thence arises the ground of Society in this profession, which is
a common obligation on several persons joining together in some acts of common
concernment to them. The truth then of Christian Religion being acknowledged by
several persons, they find in this Religion some actions which are to be
performed by several persons in Society with each other. From whence arises
that more immediate obligation to Christian Society, in all those who profess
themselves Christians; and the whole number of these who own the truth of
Christian Religion and are thereby obliged to join in Society with each other,
is that which we call the Catholic Church. But although there be such a
relation to each other in all Christians as to make them one common Society;
yet for the performance of particular acts of communion, there must be lesser
Societies wherein persons may join together in the actions belonging to them.
But still the obligation to communion in these lesser, is the same with that
which constitutes the great body of Christians, which is the owning
Christianity as the only true Religion and way to eternal Happiness. And
therefore those lesser Societies cannot in justice make the necessary
conditions of communion narrower, than those which belong to the Catholic
Church; i. e. those things which declare men Christians, ought to capacitate
them for communion with Christians. But here we are to consider that as to be a
Christian supposes men's owning the Christian Religion to be true, so the
conveyance of that Religion being to us now in those Books we call the
Scriptures, there must be an acknowledgement of them as the indispensable rule
of Faith and manners, which is, That these Books are the great Charter of the
Christian Society, according to which it must be governed.

These things being premised as the foundation in general of Christian
Society,. 3.
we shall the better understand how far the obligation to communion in it does
extend. For which it must be considered, that the grounds of continuance in
Communion, must be suitable and proportionable to the first reason of entering
into it. No man being obliged by virtue of his being in a Society, to agree in
any thing which tends to the apparent ruin of that Society; but he is obliged
to the contrary, from the general grounds of his first admission into it. His
primary obligation being to preserve the honor and interest of it, and to join
in acts of it so far as they tend to it. Now the main end of the Christian
Society being the promotion of Gods honor and the salvation of men's souls, the
primary obligation of men entering into it, is the advancement of these ends,
to join in all acts of it so far as they tend to these ends; but if any thing
come to be required directly repugnant to these ends, those men of whom such
things are required, are bound not to communicate in those lesser Societies
where such things are imposed, but to preserve their communion with the
Catholic Society of Christians. But these general discourses seeming more
obscure, it will be necessary for the better subserviency of them to our
design, to deduce them into particulars. Setting then aside the Catholic
Society of Christians, we come to enquire how far men are bound to communicate
with any lesser Society, how extensive so ever it may pretend its communion to
be.

1. There is no Society of Christians of any one Communion, but may impose some
things to be believed or practiced which may be repugnant to the general
Foundations of Christian Society. But if any Society shall pretend a necessity
of communion with her, because it is impossible this should be done by her:
this privilege must in reason be as evident as the common grounds of
Christianity are; nay much more evident, because the belief of Christianity it
self, does (upon this pretense) depend on the knowledge of such Infallibility,
and the indispensable obligation to communion depends upon it.

2. There being a possibility acknowledged, that particular Churches may
require unreasonable conditions of communion; the obligation to communion
cannot be absolute and indispensable; but only so far as nothing is required
destructive to the ends of Christian Society. Otherwise men would be bound to
destroy that which they believe, and to do the most unjust and unreasonable
things. But the great difficulty lies in knowing when such things are required,
and who must be the judge in that case: to which I answer,

3. Nothing can be more unreasonable, then that the Society imposing such
conditions of communion should be judge, whether those conditions be just and
equitable or no. If the question only were in matters of peace, and
convenience, and order, the judgment of the Society ought to overruled the
judgments of particular persons; but in such cases where great Bodies of
Christians, judge such things required to be unlawful conditions of communion,
what justice or reason is there, that the party accused should sit Judge in her
own cause?

4. Where there is sufficient evidence from Scripture, reason, and tradition,
that such things which are imposed are unreasonable conditions of Christian
communion, the not communicating with that Society which requires these things
cannot incurr the guilt of Schism. Which necessarily follows from the precedent
grounds, because none can be obliged to communion in such cases, and therefore
the not communicating is no culpable separation.

5. By how much the Societies are greater which are agreed in not communicating
with a Church imposing such conditions, by how much the power of those who rule
those Societies so agreeing is larger, by so much the more justifiable is the
Reformation of any Church from these abuses, and the settling the bonds of
Christian communion without them. And on those grounds, viz. the Church of
Romes imposing unlawful conditions of communion, it was necessary not to
communicate with her; and on the Church of Englands power to reform it self by
the assistance of the Supreme power, it was lawful and justifiable not only to
redress those abuses, but to settle the Church upon its proper and true
foundations. So that the Church of Romes imposing unlawful conditions of
communion, is the reason why we do not communicate with her, and the Church of
Englands power to govern and take care of her self, is the reason of our
joining together in the service of God upon the principles of our Reformation.
On these grounds I doubt not but to make it appear, how free the Church of
England is from all imputation of Schism.

. 4.
These things being thus in general premised, we come to consider what those
principles are on which you can found so high a charge as that of Schism on the
Protestant Churches. And having thoroughly considered your way of management of
it, I find all that you have to say may be resolved into one of these three
grounds. 1. That the Roman Church is the true and only Catholic Church. 2.
That our Churches could have no power or cause to divide in their Communion
from her. 3. That the Authority of the Roman Church is so great, that upon no
pretense soever could it be lawful to withdraw from Communion with her. I
confess, if you can make good any one of these three, you do something to the
purpose; but how little ground you have to charge us with Schism from any of
these Principles will be the design of this Part at large to manifest. I begin
then with the first, which is the pretense of your Churches being the Catholic
Church: and here we again enter the lists to see how fairly you deal with your
Adversary. Mr. Fisher says, That from the Controversy of the resolution of
Faith the Lady called them; and desiring to hear, whether the Bishop would
grant the Roman Church to be the right Church? the Bishop (says he) granted
that it was. To which his Lordship answers (after a just complaint of the abuse
of disputations, by men's resolution to hold their own, P. 127. sect 20. n. 1.
though it be by unworthy means and disparagement of truth) that the question
was neither asked in that form, nor so answered. And that there is a great deal
of difference (especially as Romanists handle the question of the Church)
between The Church and A Church, and there is some between a True Church and a
Right Church. For The Church may import the only true Church, and perhaps the
root and ground of the Catholic. N. 2.
And this (says he) I never did grant of the Roman Church, nor ever mean to
do. But A Church, can imply no more, then that it is a member of the whole. And
this I never did (says he) nor ever will deny, if it fall not absolutely away
from Christ. That it is a True Church I granted also; but not a Right. For
Truth only imports the being; right, perfection in conditions; thus a Thief is
a true man, though not an upright man. So a corrupt Church may be true, as a
Church is a company of men which profess the Faith of Christ and are baptized
into his Name; but it is not therefore a right Church, either in doctrine or
manners. And this (he says) is acknowledged by very learned Protestants before
him. This is the substance of his Lordships answer, to which we must consider
what you reply; P. 127. c. 2. n. 1.
That about the terms of the Lady's question you grant to be a verbal
Controversy; and that whatever her words were, she was to be understood to
demand this alone, viz. Whether the Roman were not the True, Visible,
Infallible Church out of which none can be saved; for, herein (you say) she had
from the beginning of the Controversy desired satisfaction: And in this
subject the Roman Church could not be any Church at all, unless it were The
Church and a Right Church. The reason is, because St. Peter's successor, being
the Bishop of Rome, P. 128. n. 2.
and Head of the whole Church (as you tell us you will prove anon) that must
needs be the Church (...) if it be any Church at all. And because the Church
can be but one, if it be a true Church it must be the right Church. But all
this amounts only to a confident assertion of that which wants evident proof,
which is, that the notion of a Church relates to one as appointed the Head of
the whole Church, without which it would be no Church at all. Which being a
thing so hard to be understood, and therefore much harder to be proved, we must
be content to wait your leisure till you shall think fit to prove it. When you
therefore tell us afterward, That the Universal Church supposes the
acknowledgement of the same Vicar of Christ, and that those Dioceses which
agree in this acknowledgement as well as in the same Faith, and communion of
the same Sacraments make up one and the same Universal Church; When you further
add, That the Roman Church is therefore styled the Church, because it is the
seat of the Vicar of Christ and chief Pastor of the Church Universal: I can
only say to all these confident affirmations, that if you had sat in the chair
your self, you could not have said more or proved less. It is not therefore in
what sense words may be taken by you (for who questions but you may abuse
words?) but in what sense they ought to be taken. You may call the Bishop of
Rome the Vicar of Christ, but before you can expect our submission to him, you
must prove that he is so; you may call the Roman Church, The Church if you
please, among your selves: but if by that you would persuade us there can be no
Church but that, you would do an office of kindness to offer a little at some
small proof of it, i. e. as much as the cause, and your abilities will afford.
And what if the Ancients by a true Church did mean an Orthodox Church? I know
but one of these things will follow from it, either that they took a true
Church for one morally and not metaphysically true; or that if your Church be
not an Orthodox Church, it can be none at all. From hence you proceed to
quarrel with his Lordship for saying, That may be a true Church which is not a
right Church (which is all the thanks he has for his kindness to you); N. 3.
for (say you) how can you call that a true Church in which men are not taught
the way to Heaven, but to eternal perdition? Which is as much as to ask, How
you can call that man a true man that has a Leprosy upon him. But if you had
considered, what his Lordship had said, you would never have made such an
objection. For his Lordship does not speak of the soundness of a Church, but of
the metaphysical entity of it. For he says, Sect. 20. n. 2.
It is true in that sense as ens and verum, Being and True, are convertible one
with another; and every thing that has a Being is truly that Being which it is
in truth of substance. But (say you), how can that be a true Church which
teaches the way to eternal perdition by some false Doctrine in matter of
Faith? because it either teaches something to be the Word of God which is not;
or denies that to be his Word which is: to err in this sort is certainly to
commit high and mortal offense against the honor and veracity of God, and
consequently the direct way to eternal perdition. An excellent discourse to
prove that no man can be saved that is not Infallible! for if he be not
Infallible he may either teach something to be Gods Word which is not, or deny
that to be his Word that is; either of which being a mortal offense against the
honor and veracity of God, it is impossible any man that is not Infallible
should be saved: either then we must put off that humanity which exposes us to
error, or pronounce it impossible for any men to be saved, or else assert that
there may be error where Gods veracity is not denied. And if so, then not only
men severally but a Society of men may propound that for truth which is not,
and yet not mortally offend against Gods veracity; supposing that Society of
men does believe (though falsely) that this is therefore true because revealed
by God. In which case that Church may be a true Church in one sense, though an
erroneous Church in another: true, as there is a possibility of salvation in
it; erroneous, as delivering that for truth which is not so. But here is a
great deal of difference between a Church acknowledging her self fallible, and
that which does not. For suppose a Church propose something erroneous to be
believed, if she does not arrogate Infallibility to her self in that proposal,
but requires men to search and examine her doctrine by the Word of God, the
danger is nothing so great to the persons in her communion; but when a Church
pretends to be Infallible and teaches errors, that Church requiring those
errors to be believed upon her Authority, without particular examination of
the Doctrines proposed, is chargeable with a higher offense against the honor
and veracity of God, and does as much as in her lies (in your expression) teach
men the way to eternal perdition. And of all sorts of blind guides it is most
dangerous following such who pretend to be Infallible in their blindness; and
it is a great miracle if such do not fall past recovery. The more therefore you
aggravate the danger of error, the worse still you make the condition of your
Church, where men are bound to believe the Church Infallible, when she
proposes the most dangerous errors. When you say, The whole Church is not
liable to these inconveniences of seducing or being seduced, P. 129.
if you mean (as you speak) of that which is truly the whole Church of Christ,
you are to seek for an Adversary in it; if you mean the Roman Church you are
either seduced or endeavor to seduce in saying so, when neither that is or can
be the whole Church, neither is it free from believing or proposing errors as
will appear afterward. You quarrel with his Lordship again, for his Similitude
of a man that may be termed a man and not be honest, and say it comes not home
to the case.

But we must see, how well you have fitted it. Instead of a man,. 5.
you would have a Saint put, and then (you say) the Parallel would have held
much better. But certainly then you mean only such Saints as Rome takes upon
her to Canonize; for the Question was of one that might be a man, and not be
honest, Will you say the same of your Saint too? If instead of Saint, you had
put his Holiness in, there are some in the world would not have quarrelled with
you for it. But you are an excellent man at paralleling cases: His Lordship was
speaking of the Metaphysical Truth of a Church being consistent with moral
corruptions, for which he instanced in a thiefs being truly a man, though not
an honest man; now you, to mend the matter, make choice of moral Integrity,
being consistent with Metaphysical Truth, which is of a Saint, and a man. And,
Does not this now come home to our case? That which follows, to show the
incongruity of his Lordships Similitude would much more show your wit, if it
were capable of tolerable sense: For, you say, the word Church in our present
debate, implies not a simple or uncompounded term, as that of man, P. 129. n. 3.
but is a compound of substance and accidents together. We had thought, Man had
been a compound of substance and accidents, as well as a Church: Or, Did you
mean some transubstantiated man, that had accidents without substance? But as
his Lordship spoke of a true real man, who yet might want moral Integrity; so
he supposed there might be a true real Church, as to the essential parts of it,
which yet might be in other respects a corrupted and defiled Church. But when
you add, That the notion of a Church implies Integrity and Perfection of
Conditions, still you betray your weak or wilful mistakes of a Church morally
for Metaphysically true. If you will prove it impossible for a Church to retain
its Being, that has any errors in Doctrine, or corruptions in Practice, you
will do something to the purpose: but when you have done it, see what you get
by it; for then we shall not so much as acknowledge your Church to be
Metaphysically a true Church. If his Lordship therefore be so charitable, as to
say, That because your Church receives the Scripture as a Rule of Faith:
(though but as a partial and imperfect Rule) and both the Sacraments as
Instrumental causes and seals of Grace (though they add more, and misuse these)
it cannot but be a true Church in essence: And you, on the other side, say, If
it does misuse the Sacraments, and make the Scripture an imperfect Rule of
Faith, it would be unchurched; Let the Reader judge, whether his Lordships
charity for, or your own Testimony against your Church, be built on better
grounds. What follows concerning the Holy Catholic Church in the Apostles
Creed, the entire Catholic Faith in the Athanasian Creed, the Churches being
the Spouse of Christ, and a pure Virgin, are all things as true in themselves,
as your Church is little concerned in them. The truly Catholic Church being
quite another thing from that which goes under the name of the Roman Catholic
Church; and this latter may prostitute her self to error, while the other
remains a pure Virgin; and it is only your saying, That yours only is the
Catholic Church, which is in effect to say, That Christ has a Harlot to his
Spouse, as you speak.

. 6.
To omit that which you call, A further skirmishing about the form of words, P.
129 n. 4.
and whether it savoured more of prudence, and charity, or cunning in the
Jesuit, to instruct the Lady what Questions she should ask; we come to that
which is the main subject of this chapter, viz. Whether the Church be styled
Catholic by its agreeing with Rome, which (you say) was a received and known
Truth in the Ancient Church, but is so far from being in the least true, P. 130
n 4.
that his Lordship deservedly calls it, A perfect Jesuitism. For (says he) in
all the Primitive times of the Church, a Man, or a Family, or a National Church
were accounted right and orthodox, as they agreed with the Catholic Church,
but the Catholic was never then measured or judged by Man, Family, or Nation.
But now in the Jesuits new School, the One, Holy, Catholic Church, must be
measured by that which is in the Diocese or City of Rome, or of them which
agreed with it; and not Rome by the Catholic. So upon the matter, belike the
Christian Faith was committed to the custody of the Roman, not of the Catholic
Church; and a man cannot agree with the Catholic Church of Christ (in this new
doctrine of A. C.) unless he agree with the Church of Rome; but if he agree
with that, all is safe, and he is as orthodox, as he need be. To which you seem
to answer at first by some slight tergiversations, P. 131.
as, though this did not follow from A. C 's words, and that the Lady did not
trouble her self with such punctilio's as those of the agreement of the
Catholic Church with Rome, or Romes agreeing with the Catholic Church, but at
last you take heart, and affirm stoutly, That the Church is styled Catholic
from its agreement with Rome, and that this is no Jesuitism, but a received and
known Truth in the Ancient Church. In these terms then I fix my self, and this
present dispute; as containing the proper state of the Controversy concerning
the Catholic Church. And if you can make it appear that the Church is styled
Catholic by agreeing with Rome, and that this was a received Truth in the
Ancient Church, then you may very plausibly charge us with Schism in our
separation from Rome; but if the contrary be made evident, by your own pretense
we are freed from that charge.

Now in the handling this Controversy, you first explain your terms, and then
produce your Testimonies. P. 130. n. 5.
In the explication of your terms, you tell us, The word Catholic may be used
in three different Acceptions, viz. either formally, causally, or by way of
participation. Formally, the Universal Church, i. e. the society of all true
particular Churches, united together in one body, in one Communion, under one
Head, is called Catholic. Causally the Church of Rome is styled Catholic,
because it has an influence and force to cause Universality in the whole body
of the Church Catholic; to which two things are necessary, Multitude and
Unity. The Roman Church therefore, which as a Center of Ecclesiastical
Communion, infuses this Unity, which is the form of Universality, into the
Catholic Church, and thereby causes in her Universality, may be called
Catholic causally, though she be but a particular Church. As he that commands
a whole Army is styled General, though he be but a particular person. Thirdly,
every particular orthodox Church is termed Catholic participative, by way of
participation, because they agree in, and participate of the Doctrine and
Communion of the Catholic Church. For which (you bring) the instance of the
Church of Smyrna writing to the Catholic Church of Philomilion, etc. Thus we
see (say you) both how properly the Roman Church is called Catholic, and how
the Catholic Church it self takes causally the denomination of Universal or
Catholic from the Roman, considered as the chief particular Church, infusing
Unity to all the rest, as having dependence of her, and relation to her. Thus I
have recited your words, that we may fully understand your meaning; the
substance of which is couched in your last words, That the reason why any
Church was accounted Catholic, was from its Union with the Church of Rome. But
if it appear that this sense of the Catholic Church is wholly a stranger to
Antiquity, That the Catholic Church was so called upon far different accounts
than those mentioned by you, If the Church of Rome had no other relation to the
Catholic Church but as a member of it as other Churches were, then all this
discourse of yours comes to nothing, and that is it which I now undertake to
prove. Now the Unity of the Catholic Church lying in two things, the Doctrine
and the Government of it, if in neither of these, it had any dependence of the
Church of Rome, then certainly it could not be called Catholic, causally from
the Church of Rome.

First, the Church was called Catholic from the Universal spread of its
Doctrine, and the agreement of all particular Churches in it.. 7.
So Irenaeus derives the Unity of the Church spread abroad over the world from
the Unity of that Faith which was Universally received, and from thence says,
That the Church is but as one house, and having one soul and heart, and speaks
as with one mouth. Nothing can be more plain then that Irenaeus makes the
consent in Doctrine to be the ground of Unity in the Catholic Church. Hanc
praedicationem cum acceperit, and hanc fidem quem idmodum praediximus Ecclesia,
and quidem in universum mundum disseminata, diligenter custodit, quasi unam
domum inhabitans, and similiter credit iis, videlicet quasi unam animam habens,
and unum cor, and consonanter haec praedicat and docet and tradit quasi unum
possidens os. Irenaeus advers. haeres. l. 1. c. 3.

Ecclesia enim per universum orhem usque ad fines terrae disseminata, and ab
Apostolis and a discipulis eorum accepit eam fidem, etc. l. 1. c. 2.


And that he did not suppose this consent to arise from the Church of Rome
appears from what he says before, That this Faith was received in the Church
so universally spread from the Apostles and their Disciples. Which must be
understood of that universal diffusion of it by the first Preachers of it in
the world, the continuance of which Doctrine was the ground of the Unity in the
Catholic Church. To the same purpose Tertullian gives an account of the
Churches Unity, by the adhering to that Doctrine which was first preached by
the Apostles, who having first delivered it in Judea and planted Churches
there, went abroad and declared the same to other Nations and settled Churches
in Cities, Statim igitur Apostoli -- 1. per Judaeam contesta^a fide in Jesum
Christum and Ecclesiis institutis; dehinc in orbem profecti, eandem doctrinam
ejusdem fidei Nationibus promulgava^unt, and proinde Ecclesias apud unamquamq,
civitatem condiderunt, a quibus traducem fidei and semia^ doctrine, ceterae
exinde Ecclesiae mutuatae sunt, and quotidie mutuantur ut Ecclesiae fiant: ac
per hoc and ipsae Apostolicae deput^ntur, ut soboles Apostolicarum Ecclesiarum.
Omne genus ad origin^m suam recenseatur, nec^sse est. Itaque tot ac tantae
ecclesiae, una est illa ab Apostolis prima, ex qua omnes. Sic omnes primae and
Apostolicae, dum una omnes probant unitatem* dum est illis communica^io pacis,
and appellatio fraternitatis, and contesseratio hospita^itatis. Tertul. de
prescript. haeretic. cap. 20.
from whence other Churches have the same Doctrine propagated to them, which
are therefore called Apostolical Churches, as the offspring of those which
were founded by them. Therefore so many and so great Churches, are all that one
prime Apostolical Church from whence all others come. And thus they are all
prime and Apostolical in regard of their Unity, as long as there is that
communication of that title of Brotherhood and common mark of peace and
hospitality. Wherein we see that which made Churches in Tertullians sense
Apostolical, is the embracing and continuing in that Doctrine which was first
delivered by the Apostles; and thus Churches though remote from the Apostolical
times may have the denomination of Apostolical from their consent in Doctrine
with those which were founded by them. But here is not the least intimation of
any center of Ecclesiastical communion infusing unity into the Catholic
Church, for this unity arises from that Doctrine which was declared in and
propagated by all the Apostolical Churches. So likewise Theodoret speaks, That
there is one Church throughout the world, and therefore we pray, for the Holy,
One, Catholic, and Apostolic Church, extended from one end of the earth to
the other. Which (says he) is divided by Cities, (...). Theodoret. in Psalm.
47.4. Tom. 1. p. 580. (...). Theodoret. Ecclesi. hist. l. 1. c. 9.
and Towns, and Villages, so that there are infinite and innumerable Churches
in the Islands and Continent, but all these are reduced to one being united in
the agreement of the same true doctrine. So Constantine in his Epistle to the
Bishops who were absent from the Council of Nice, says, That our Savior would
have one Catholic Church, whose members though dispersed in many several
places, yet are nourished by the same Spirit which is the Will of God. In all
which and many other places which might be produced to the same purpose, we see
a quite different account given of the unity of the Catholic Church, from that
which you mention as the cause of it; we find the Church called Catholic in
regard of its large extent in the world (as is apparent besides these
testimonies, from the Controversies between St. Austin and the Donatists) and
the unity of that Catholic Church not placed in the least respect to the
Church of Rome, but in the consent in the Apostolical Doctrine in all those
Churches which concurred as members to make up this Catholic Church. So that
the formal reason of any particular Churches having the denomination of
Catholic, must come not from any communion with the Church of Rome; but from
the owning the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and joining in communion with
those Churches which did own and acknowledge it. And therefore we find that the
symbol of communion in the ancient communicatory letters never lay in the
acknowledgement of Christ's Vicar on earth, or communion with the Church of
Rome, but in such things which were common to all Apostolical Churches. And
therefore the Church of Rome could not be then accounted the center of
Ecclesiastical communion as you speak, after Cardinal Perron, from whom you
have Verbatim transcribed all your former discourse. Perrons Reply to King
James l. 4. c 9.
This being therefore the utmost which that great wit of your Church was able
to plead in behalf of its being the Catholic Church, it deserves to be further
considered.

. 8.
We come therefore to that kind of unity in the Catholic Church which depends
on the Government of it; and this is that, which is pretended as the ground of
the Roman Churches being the Catholic Church; because though (as Cardinal
Perron says) she be in her own Being particular, yet she may be called
Catholic causally, as the center and beginning of Ecclesiastical communion,
infusing unity which is the form of universality into the Catholic Church.
This therefore must be more narrowly searched into, to see if this were a known
and received truth in the ancient Church. Which is so far from it, that we find
no such causal influence from the Church of Rome then owned or asserted, but
that the Catholic Church was a whole consisting of homogeneal parts, without
any such subordination or dependence, as the contrary supposition implies. This
is, by none more fully asserted, than by such who have with the greatest zeal
and industry stood up for the unity of the Catholic Church. The first of whom
is St. Cyprian; in whose time and writings there are very remarkable cases
occurring to clear, upon what terms the unity of the Catholic Church did then
stand. The first I begin with, is the case which arose in the Church about the
Schism of Novatianus, which will give us the fuller discovery of the grounds of
unity in the Catholic Church, because the first rise of this Schism was in
Rome it self. For Novatus coming to Rome in a discontent from Africa, v.
Rigalt. ad Cypr. ep. 49. Petav. ad Epiphan. haeres. 59. p. 226. Vales. ad
^useb. l. 6. c. 43, 44. Albaspin. and Balduin. in Optat.
falls in with Novatianus (which two names the Greek writers of the Church
commonly confound) who being likewise under discontent at the election of
Cornelius to be Bishop of Rome, was ready to join with the other in fomenting a
Schism. For which, they made this their pretext, That Cornelius had admitted
such to communion who had lapsed in the persecution of Decius which tended to
the overthrow of the Churches purity? upon this, Novatianus gets himself
ordained, by three Bishops, Bishop of Rome in opposition to Cornelius: the fame
of which Schism being spread abroad, there was great making of parties on both
sides. Cyprian and the Churches of Africa after full inquiry into it declare
for Cornelius, so did Dionysius of Alexandria and the Churches there; but
Fabius of Antioch with the Churches of Pontus and Cilicia suspend, and rather
incline to Novatianus, for some time; till they were after, more fully
satisfied by Dionysius of Alexandria. Now here is a case wherein the grounds of
unity in the Catholic Church may be easily discerned, which it is plain from
the proceedings in it, were (as in all such emergent cases) what should be
determined and agreed on, by the consent of the Catholic Church: i. e. of
those Churches which all consented in the same Catholic Faith, and therefore
made up one Catholic Church. Now if the Church of Rome had been the center of
Ecclesiastical communion, and had infused Catholic unity into the Church at
this time, what way or possibility had there been for restoring the Churches
unity? Neither was the appeal made to foreign Churches merely because Rome it
self was divided, and so the Controversy could not be ended there, but it
appears from the whole story of the proceedings, that this was looked on as the
proper means for preserving the unity of the Catholic Church, at that time;
when the Faith and communion of the Apostolical Churches were so fully known
and distinguished from all others. These things will more fully appear from St.
Cyprians Epistle to Antonianus upon the occasion of this Schism. Cyprian. ep.
52. ed. Rigalt.
Who it seems at first adhered to Cornelius and with him to the Catholic
Church, (not as though his joining with Cornelius was the cause of his being
with the Catholic Church, but because in joining with him, he joined with the
Catholic Church which declared for him); but it seems afterward by some
Letters of Novatianus he began to stagger, and desires Cyprian to give him an
account what Heresy Novatianus broached, and what the reason was why Cornelius
communicated with the lapsed persons. As to which particulars he endeavors to
satisfy him, and withal to give an account why they joined with Cornelius in
opposition to Novatianus, and what the practice of the Church was, as to lapsed
persons, and on what reasons it was built: wherein he tells him, That though
some of their own Bishops had formerly denied communion to lapsed persons, yet
they did not recede from the Unity of the Catholic Church, or communion of
their Fellowships, because by them they were admitted. For, says he, the bond
of concord remaining, and the communion of the Catholic Church continuing,
Manente concordiae vinculo, and perseverante Catholicae ecclesiae individuo
sacramento, actu^ suum disponit ac dirigit unusquisque episcopus, rationem
propositi sui Domino redditurus. Cyprian.ep. 52.
every Bishop orders and disposes his own actions as one that must give an
account of his design to God. Does St. Cyprian here speak like one that
believed the Church of Rome to be the center of Ecclesiastical communion? or,
that the unity of the Church lay in acknowledging the Pope to be Christ's Vicar,
or in dependence on the Church of Rome? when every Bishop is left to himself
and God, in all such things which he may do, and yet hold communion with the
Catholic Church? And therefore afterward he tells us, That there is one
Church divided into many members throughout the world, c^m sit a Christo una
Ecclesia per totum mundum in multa membra divisa: item Episcopatus unus,
Episcoporum multorum concordi (...) diffusus. Id ib p. 81.
and one Episcopal office spread abroad, by the consenting multitude of many
Bishops. If this Church be one in this sense, and the whole Government of the
Church but as one Bishopric, as all the Bishops unanimously consent in the
management of it; then here is not the least foundation for the Catholic
Churches taking its denomination causally from the Roman Church, and much less
for the Bishops having dependence on her, or relation to her. Since the care
and government of the Church by these words of Cyprian appears to be equally
committed to all the Bishops of the Catholic Church. And from thence it was,
that in this Epistle we read that St. Cyprian writ to the Church of Rome after
the death of Fabianus, to advise them what to do in the case of lapsed persons,
which letters of his were sent through the world; which, Rigaltius well
observes, did arise from that unity of Ecclesiastical discipline, Itaque ex
unitatis Ecclesiasticae disciplina^, Cyprianus solicitudinem omnium Ecclesiarum
ad se pertinere non ambigens, etiam Romam se dedisse literas ait ad clerum. Eas
verolite as per totum mundum missas, h. e. per Ecclesiam Catholicam, cujus
Ecclesiae unus est Episcopatus: atque hujusmodi Episcopatus a singulis
Ep^scopis in solidum pa^s tenebatur. Rigalt. observe. ad Cypr. p 64.
whereby Cyprian, not doubting but the care of all Churches was upon him,
dispatched these letters to the Clergy at Rome; from whence they were sent
through the Catholic Church, as an evidence that there was but one Episcopal
office in the whole Church, part of which was committed in full power to every
Bishop. Thus we see a quite different account given of the unity of the
Catholic Church than what you from Cardinal Perron would persuade us of. It
being an easy matter for men of wit and parts (especially such as that great
Cardinal was master of) to coin distinctions to make the most absurd things
seem plausible; but yet when they come to be examined, they are found to have
no other bottom but the invention of that person who coined them.

And that it is so as to this distinction of the formal, causal, and
participative Catholic Church,. 9.
will be further evident from another case which happened in St. Cyprians time,
which was this. Felicissimus and Fortunatus being cast out of communion by a
Synod of African Bishops, when they saw they could do little good in Africa,
run over to Rome, and bring letters to Cornelius the Bishop there,
misrepresenting the whole business of their being ejected out of the Church, on
purpose to persuade Cornelius to admit them into communion. Who at first being
unwilling to hearken to them, was at last by their threats and menaces brought
to receive their letters. Upon which St. Cyprian writes an Epistle to
Cornelius, wherein he tells him, That if the threats of such profligate persons
should relax the Churches discipline, all the power and strength of it would be
soon taken away; that the ground of all Schism and Heresy arises from
disobedience to the Bishop. Certainly he does not mean the Bishop of Rome, but
every Bishop in the Catholic Church (for it was not Cornelius but Cyprian and
the African Bishops who were disobeyed) upon which he falls upon the matter of
their appeal to a foreign Church, and after some fair commendations of the
Church of Rome (the meaning of which will be afterward examined) he very
sharply condemns these appeals to foreign Churches as unreasonable, unjust,
and dishonorable to those Bishops, whose sentence they appealed from. For,
What cause (says he) could these persons have of coming and declaring against
their Bishops? For either they are pleased in what they have done, and continue
in their wickedness; or if they are displeased at it and recede from it, they
know whither to return. For since it is decreed by us all, and it is a thing
just and reasonable in it self, Quae autem causa veniendi and pseudo
episcoporum contra Episcopos factum nunciandi? Aut enim placet illis quod
fecerunt, and in suo scelere perseverant: Aut, si disp^icet and reced^at,
sciunt quo revertantur. Nam cum statutum sic omnibus nobis, and aequum sit
pariter ac justum, ut uniuscujusque causa illic audiatur, ubi est crimen
admissum, and singulis pastoribus portio gregis sit adscripta, quam regat
unusquisque and gubernet, rationem sui actus Domino redditurus: oportet utique
eos quibus praesumus non circumcu^sare, nec Episcoporum concordiam cohaerentem
sua subdola and fallaci temeritate collidere, sed agere illis causam suam, ubi
and accusatores habere and testes sui criminis possint: nis^ si paucis
desperatis and perditis minor videtur esse auctoritas Episcoporum in Africa
constitutorum, qui jam de illis judicaverunt, and eorum conscientiam multis
delictorum laqueis vinctam judicii sui nuper gravitate damn^runt. Cyprian ep.
55. p. 95.
that every ones cause be heard where the fault was committed, and every
Pastor has a part of the flock committed to him, which he is to rule and
govern as being to give an account of it to God; it is requisite that those
whom we rule over, ought not to run about, and break the concord of Bishops by
their headdiness and subtilty; but there to defend their cause, where they may
have accusers and witnesses of their faults. Unless it be, that to a few
desperate and profligate persons the authority of the Bishops of Africa seems
less to them, who have already sat in judgment upon them, and solemnly
condemned them lately for their crimes. Can any thing be more express and
punctual then this testimony of Cyprian is, to overthrow that sense of the
Catholic Church which you contend for? How far were Cyprian and the African
Bishops from making Rome the center of Ecclesiastical communion, when they
looked on appeals thither as very unjust and unreasonable? What acknowledgement
and dependence was there on the Church of Rome in those who looked on
themselves as having a portion of Christ's flock committed to them, of which
they were to give an account to God alone? And I pray what excellent persons
were those who undervalued the Authority of the African Bishops, and ran to
Rome? St. Cyprian tells us, they were pauci, desperati, perditi, and translate
these with as much advantage to your cause as you can. So fatal has it been to
Rome even from its first foundation to be a receptacle for such persons. And is
not this a great credit to your cause that such persons who were ejected out of
communion for their crimes at home, did make their resort to Rome? and the more
pious and stout any Bishops were, the more they defended their own privileges
in opposition to the encroachments of the Roman Sec. Which was apt to take
advantage from such Renegado's as these were, by degrees to get more power into
her hands, and lift up her head above her fellow-Churches. But, lest you should
think that St. Cyprian only spoke these things in an heat, out of his
opposition to these persons and his desire to crush them, you shall see what
his judgment was concerning the same things when he purposely discourses of
them. For in his Book of the Unity of the Church, he uses that expression
which destroys all your subordinate union in the Church; which is, Episcopatus
unus est, De Unitate Eccles. p. 208*
cujus a singulis in solidum pars tenetur. They who consider and understand the
importance of that speech, will find nothing more destructive to your doctrine
of the Catholic Church then that is. For when he makes the Universal
Government of the Church to be but one Episcopal office, and that committed in
the several parts of it with full power to particular Bishops, can any be so
senseless to imagine that he should ever think the Government of the Church in
General to depend on any one particular Church as chief over the rest? And that
the former words do really import such a full power in particular Bishops, over
that part of the flock which is committed to them, appears from the true
importance of the phrase insolidum; a phrase taken out of the Civil Law where
great difference is made between an obligation in partem and in solidum, and so
proportionable between a tenure in partem and in solidum: those things were
held in solidum which were held in full right and power without payments and
acknowledgements. But where the usus-fructus belonged to another, it was not
held in solidum. So that when St. Cyprian says, that every part belonging to
each Bishop was held in solidum, he therein imports that full right and power
which every Bishop has over his charge; and in this speech he compares the
Government of the Church to an estate held by several Freeholders, in which
every one has a full right to that share which belongs to him. Whereas
according to your principles the Government of the Church is like a Manor or
Lordship, in which the several inhabitants hold at the best but by Copy from
the Lord; and you would fain have it at the will of your Lord too. But thus
far we see St. Cyprian was from your modern notion of the Catholic Church,
that he looks on the Unity of it as depending on the consent of the Catholic
Bishops and Churches under their full power, and not deriving that Unity from
any particular Church as the head and fountain of it. And therefore in the
former Schism at Rome about Cornelius and Novatianus, St. Cyprian employed two
of his colleagues thither, Caldonius and Fortunatus, that not only by the
Letters they carried, but by their presence and Counsel they should do their
utmost endeavor to bring the members of that divided body to the unity of the
Catholic Church. Ut ad Catholicae Ecclesiae unitatem scissi corporis membra
componere^t. Cypr. ep. 42.
Which is certainly a very different thing from the Catholic Church's
deriving its Unity from the particular Church of Rome. Many other instances of
a like nature might be produced out of the Reports of St. Cyprians times, but
these are sufficient to evidence how far the Unity of the Catholic Church was
then, from depending on the Church of Rome.

. 10.
But, lest we should seem to insist only on St. Cyprians testimony, it were
easy to multiply examples in this kind; which I shall but touch at some of,
and proceed. If the Church of Rome then had been looked on as the center of
Ecclesiastical communion, is it possible to conceive, that the excommunications
of the Church of Rome should be slighted as they were by Polycrates, Eusebius
histor. Ecclesiastic. lib. 5. cap. 24. Hieronym. de scriptor. ecclesiast. To. 1.
for which St. Hierome commends him, as a man of courage? that, Stephen should
be opposed as he was by Cyprian and Firmilian in a way so reflecting on the
Authority of the Roman Church? that appeals to Rome should be so severely
prohibited by the African Bishops? that causes should be determined by so many
Canons to be heard in their proper Dioceses? that, when the right of appeals
was challenged by the Bishops of Rome, it was wholly upon the account of the
imaginary Nicene Canons? that, when Julius undertook by his sole power to
absolve Athanasius, Socrat. l. 2 c. 5. Sozom. l. 3. c. 5. Socrat. l. 2 c. 11
the Oriental Bishops opposed it as irregular on that account, at the Council
at Antioch? that, when afterward, Paulus, Marcellus, and Lucius repaired to
Rome to Julius, and he seeks to restore them, the Eastern Bishops wonder at his
offering to restore them who were excommunicated by themselves? and that as
when Novatus was excommunicated at Rome they opposed it not, so neither ought
he to oppose their proceedings against these persons. What account can be given
of these passages, if the Unity of the Catholic Church had depended on the
particular Church of Rome? Besides, while the Church of Rome continued regular,
we find she looked on her self as much obliged to observe the excommunications
made by other Churches, as others were to observe hers. As in the case of
Marcion, who being excommunicated by his Father the Bishop of Sinope in Pontus,
and by no means prevailing with his Father for his admission into the Church
again; resorts to Rome and with great earnestness begs admission there, where
he received this answer; That they could not do it without the command of his
Father; (...). Epiphanius. haeres. 42. sect. 1.
for there is one Faith and one consent, and we cannot contradict our worthy
brother, your Father. This shows the Unity of the Catholic Church to proceed
upon other grounds than the causal influence of the Church of Rome, when the
consent of the Church did oblige the Church of Rome, not to repeal the
excommunication of a particular Bishop. Upon which ground it was, that Synesius
proceeded so high in the letters of excommunication against Andronicus; that he
forbids all the Churches upon earth to receive him into their communion. And
withal adds, (...). Synes. epist. 58. p. 203. ed. Petav.
That if any should contemn his Church because it was of a little City, and
should receive those who were condemned by it, as though it were not necessary
to obey so poor a Church; he lets them know that they make a Schism in that
Church which Christ would have to be one. We see here, on what equal terms the
communion of the Catholic Church then stood: when so small a Church as that of
Ptolemais could so far oblige by her act the Catholic Church that they should
be guilty of Schism who admitted them to communion whom she had cast out of it.
If Synesius had believed the Church of Rome to have been the center of
Ecclesiastical communion, had it not been good manners, nay duty in him to have
asked first the pleasure of the Church of Rome in this case, before he had
passed so full and definitive a sentence as this was? But the wise and great
men of those ages were utterly strangers to these rare distinctions of a
causal, formal, and participative Catholic Church. It is true indeed they did
then speak honorably of the Church of Rome in their age as a principal member
of the Catholic Church, and having advantages above other Churches by its
being fixed in the seat of the Empire, on which account her communion was much
desired by other persons. But still we find the persons most apt to extol her
Authority were such as were most obnoxious, who not being able to hold any
reputation in their own Churches, where their crimes and scandals were
sufficiently known, ran presently to Rome, which was ready still to take their
part, thereby to inhance her power: as is most evident in the many disputes
which arise upon such accounts between the Roman and African Bishops. But these
things we shall have occasion to discuss more particularly afterward. At the
present it may be sufficient by these few (of very many examples which might be
produced) to have made it appear, that it was far from being a known and
received truth in the ancient Church, that the Church of Rome was the center of
Ecclesiastical communion, or that the Church was called Catholic from the
union with her and dependence upon her.

But we must now consider what strenuous proofs you produce for so confident an
affirmation:. 11.
your instances therefore being the most pregnant to your purpose which you
could find in Antiquity must be particularly examined: your first is of St.
Ambrose, P. 131.
relating that his brother Satyrus going on shore in a certain City of Sardinia
(where he desired to be Baptized) demanded of the Bishop of that City whether
he consented with the Catholic Bishops, that is (says he) with the Roman
Church. Advocavit a^ se Episcopum loci, perconta^usque est, utruranam cum
Episcopis Catholicis, hoc est, cum Roman^ Ecclesia conveniret. D. Ambros. orat.
in obit. fra^r.
These words I grant to be in St. Ambrose, but whosoever thoroughly considers
them will find how little they make for your purpose. For which it will be
sufficient to look on the following words, which tell us, that at that time
there was a Schism in the Church, and Sardinia was the chief seat of it. For
Lucifer Caralitanus had newly separated himself from the Church, Et forte and
ad id locorum in Schismate regionis illius ecclesia erat. Lucifer enim se a
nostra^ tunc temporis communione diviserat, and quanquam pro fide exula;sset,
and fidei suae reliquisset haeredes, non putavit tamen fidem esse in Schismate.
Id. ib.

Nec ob Sardorum tantum mastrucam Dei Filium descendisse. Hieronym. c. Lucifer.
init. Mastruca vestis Barbaricae genus, quam Sardisu^ lingua Nastrucam
appellant: significans multos adhuc superesse bonos Christianos, etiamsi nulli
essent in Sardinia, in qua sola ille Christi ecclesiam esse volebat. Erasmus in
Scholiis.


and had left Societies there which joined in his Schism. For Caralis was the
Metropolis of Sardinia, and it appears by St. Hierome, that the Luciferians
confined the Church only to Sardinia, which is the cause of that expression of
his; That Christ did not come merely for the sake of the Sardinians. So that
those Luciferians were much like the Donatists, confining the Church only to
their own number. Now there being such a Schism at that time in Sardinia, what
did Satyrus any more then enquire whether the Bishop of the place he resorted
to was guilty of this Schism or no? But (say you) he made that the trial
whether he was a Catholic or no, by asking whether he agreed with the Church
of Rome. To which I answer, that there was very great reason for his particular
instancing in the Church of Rome. 1. Because Satyrus was originally of the
Church of Rome himself; for Paulinus in the life of S. Ambrose (Satyrus his
brother) speaking of him after his consecration to be Bishop, says, Ad urbem
Romam hoc est ad natale solum perrexit, He went to Rome, i. e. to the place of
his birth; now Satyrus being originally a Roman, what wonder is it that he
should particularly enquire of the Roman Church? As suppose one of the Gallican
Church of Arles or Vienna should have been cast upon shore in another Island
belonging to France at the same time, and understanding there was a Schism in
the place, should particularly enquire whether they agreed with the Catholic
Bishops, i. e. with the Church of Arles or Vienna, Could you hence infer that
either of these were the center of Ecclesiastical communion, and if not from
hence, how can you from the other? Or suppose, in the time of the Donatists
Schism in Africa, a stranger coming accidentally thither and desiring communion
with the Christians of that City he was in, should enquire of the Bishop of the
City, whether he communicated with the Catholic Bishops, i. e. with the Church
of Hippo or Carthage. Could you hence infer that Hippo was causally the
Catholic Church, and if not, with what reason can you do it from so parallel a
case? 2. Because Sardinia did belong to the Metropolitan Province of the Church
of Rome; it being one of the Suburbicarian Provinces under the jurisdiction of
the Roman Lieutenant, and consequently one of the Suburbicarian Churches
appertaining to the Metropolitan power of the Bishop of Rome: and therefore it
was but reason to ask whether the Churches in Sardinia did agree with their
Mother Church or no. But all this is very far from implying that the Unity of
the Catholic Church comes from the particular Church of Rome: on this account,
because at that time when the Unity of the Catholic Church was preserved by
that continual correspondence between the parts of it by the formed letters and
otherwise, who ever was known to have communion with any one particular Church
(which communicated with the rest) had thereby communion with the Catholic
Church. So that on that account the question might as well have been asked of
the Churches of Milan, Agobio, or any other in Italy as of the Church of Rome.
For whosoever communicated with any of them did communicate with the Catholic
Church, as well as those who did communicate with the Church of Rome. So that
your first instance will prove no more the Church of Rome to be the fountain
and center of Ecclesiastical communion, then any other particular Church. Your
second is, from St. Hieromes saying, That the Church of Alexandria made it her
glory to participate of the Roman Faith. Sed tu scito, etc. Romanam fidem
Apostolico ore laudatam, cujus se esse* participem Alexandrina Ecclesia
gloriatur. Hieronym. ep. 68. ad Theophil.
But does it hence follow that the Church of Alexandria was therefore
Catholic, because she participated of the Faith of the Roman Church considered
as a particular Church? For, any one who reads that Epistle will easily see,
that St. Hierome there speaks of the Roman Faith, not as it proceeds from the
Roman Church, but as it was received by it; and that he does not understand it
of the then present Roman Faith, any further then it agreed with that Faith
which the Apostle commended in them. So that the utmost which can be extracted
out of this testimony, is, that it was the glory of the Church of Alexandria to
hold the same Faith which the Primitive Roman Church did, for which the Apostle
commended it. Which is apparent by the design of the whole Epistle, which is to
encourage Theophilus the Patriarch of Alexandria to suppress the Nefarions
Heresy (as he calls it) of the Origenists; for, it seems, Theophilus then
dealt more mildly with them, which Hierome was displeased at. And therefore
tells him, that although he took some care by the discipline of the Church to
reduce them, yet that was not enough, and thence brings in these words; But
withal know, that nothing is more our design then to preserve the rights of
Christ, Sed tamen scito, nobis nihil esse antiquiu^ quam Christi jura servare,
nec patrum transire terminos, semperque meminisse Romanam fidem Apostolico ore
laudatam, cujus se esse participem Alexandrina Ecclesia gloriatur. Hieronym.
Theoph. Tom 2. p. 110. ed* Chevall, 1533.
and not to transgress the bounds of our Fathers, and always to remember the
Roman Faith, commended by the mouth of the Apostle, which it is the glory of
the Church of Alexandria that she is a partaker of. If you had dealt so fairly
as to have cited St. Hieromes words at large, any one might easily see how
remote they were from your purpose; it being manifest by them, that St.
Hieromes only design was; To persuade Theophilus to assert the ancient Faith
against the encroachments of modern Heresies; and, to encourage him to it,
mentions that commendation which was given to the ancient Faith by the Apostle
writing to the Romans upon their receiving it; and therefore since the same
Faith was in the Church of Alexandria which the Romans were commended for
receiving of, Theophilus ought to be a vigorous assertor of it, against the
oppositions of Heretics. But how from hence we should infer that the Church
of Rome was the fountain of Faith as well as center of communion, is a thing we
are yet to seek for, till you further direct us. Yet, it may be, the strength
of it lies in this, That the Roman Faith was commended by the Apostle. And was
not the Faith of other Churches where it was pure, commended as well as that?
And although the Fathers in their complemental addresses to the Church of Rome
were pleased often to mention this, That the Roman Faith was praised by the
apostle; yet, as Rigaltius well observes, Sic omnes fer^ Latini Patres, Pauli
ad Romanos verba accep^runt, quasi rectior and sincerior fuisset apud Romanos
fides: cum hoc tantum dicat Apostolus; agere se gratias Deo, quod ubique passim
fama fit, etiam Romanos rerum Dominos, fidem Christianam suscepisse. Quod certe
ob dignitatem Urbis, quae totius orbis erat* (...) and gentium (...) valde ad
fidei Christianae propagationem conducebat. Rigaltius Observat ad Cyprian,
epist. p. ^^.
That the Latin Fathers took those words of the Apostle, as though their Faith
were more pure and sincere then in other places; whereas the Apostle only
says, that he gave thanks to God that there was such a fame abroad, that the
Romans who swayed the world, had embraced the Christian Faith. Which by reason
of the dignity of the City which was head of the world, and Empress of Nations,
did conduce much to the propagation of the Christian Faith. For that there was
no peculiar excellency in the Roman Faith above the Faith of other Churches,
appears from the scope of this Epistle which was to instruct and settle them in
the right Faith and from the testimonies of the Author of the Commentaries
under St. Ambrose's name, and St. Hierome himself. The former tells us, The
reason why St. Paul commended their Faith, was, Because though they saw no
miracles yet they believed, Quia nulla virtutum videntes insignia, suscep^runt
fidem Christi, quamvis corrupto sensu. Ambros. praefat. in ep. ad Roman.

Quamvis non secundum regulam ab autoribus traditae veritatis, tamen quia quod
ab uno Deo erat, interposito nomine Christi, caeperant venerari, gratulatur;
sciens illos posse proficere. Id. ad v. ^. c. 1.


though not so purely as they ought to have done. And afterward says, That
St. Paul commends their Faith although it were not exact according to rule, yet
since by that they came to worship God in Christ he rejoices in it, knowing
they might increase more in it. And St. Hierome elsewhere speaking without
design or interest, says, Not that the Romans have any other kind of Faith
then what all other Churches have; Non quod aliam habeant Romani fidem, nisi
hanc quam omnes Christi Ecclesiae; sed quod devotio in eis major fit and
simplicitas ad credendum. Hieronym. praefat in l. 2. comment. in epist. ad
Galat. Tom. 9.
but that there was greater devotion and simplicity in believing. And withal
adds, that the very same faults which the Apostle condemned them for then, did
continue still among them, the greatest of which was Pride. And if this present
Controversy do not make good St. Hieromes observation till this time, we are
strangely mistaken: for what greater Pride can there be, than for any
particular Church to arrogate the title of Catholic to her self, and to make
all others no farther Catholic then they participate of her Faith and
Communion?

. 12.
Your next Testimony is that of John, the Patriarch of Constantinople, who did
in his Epistle to Hormisda, judge those to be severed from the communion of the
Catholic Church, Council. Tom. ^. p. 767.
who did not consent in all things with the Sea Apostolic: but the main force
of your testimonies lies in a presumption that men will never take the pains to
examine them. We must therefore consider the occasion and manner of the writing
this Epistle; for those words you cite, are not the words of the Patriarch
himself, but of the form of subscription required by Hormisda in order to an
Union of the Eastern and Western Churches; which had been then a long time in a
Schism. For after that Acacius stood up so resolutely in defense of the rights
of his See at Constantinople, the Roman Bishops (who made it then their design
to infringe the liberties of other Churches the better to inhance their own)
would by no means admit of any reconciliation unless the names of Acacius, and
those who defended him in that See being his Successors, as Phravita,
Euphemius, Macedonius, etc. were expunged out of the Diptychs of the Church;
which being so unjust and unreasonable a demand, for a long time the Patriarchs
of Constantinople would by no means assent to it. But after the death of the
Emperor Anastasius, Justin succeeds in the throne, one who made it his
business to have this breach made up; in order to which he writes to Hormisda,
and earnestly persuades him to a reconciliation; and so likewise does the
Patriarch John. But it has been the common practice of the Bishops of that
Church, to be therein unlike the unjust Judge, that they will not be wrought on
by importunities; but have been the more implacable, the more they have been
sought to: as it appeared in this present case. For this sour and inflexible
Pope would not yield to any terms of Union, but upon conditions of his own
prescribing, which were, the expunging of Acacius, and subscribing that form
which he sent to them. Which when the Emperor and Patriarch saw, though they
were sufficiently displeased at it, yet out of their greedy desire of peace,
they were contented rather to swallow these hard conditions than suffer the
Schism to remain still. Now it is in this form of subscription that these words
are contained, wherein they promise, not to recite the names of those in the
sacred mysteries, who are severed from the communion of the Catholic Church,
i. e. who consent not in all things with the Sea Apostolic. But lest these
words being thus inserted by the Pope himself, should be interpreted to the
disadvantage of other Churches, and particularly that of Constantinople; The
Patriarch makes a Preface to that Subscription by way of Protestation; wherein
after declaring the reception of the Popes letters, and congratulating the
hopes of Union, he manifests his own desire of peace, and his willingness to
refuse the communion of all Heretics. For, says he, I look on those most holy
Churches of your elder and our new Rome, Sanctissimas enim Dei Ecclesias, i. e.
superiores vestrae, and novellae istius Romae unam esse accipio, illam sedem
Apostoli Petri, and istius Augustae civitatis unam esse definio. Joh.
Patriarch. ep. inter ep. Hormisd. 35.
as both making but one Church. And after, declaring his assent to the decrees
of the four General Councils, he adds, That those who opposed them he judged
fallen off, a Sanct a Dei generali and Apostolica Ecclesia, from the holy
Catholic and Apostolic Church. Now when the Patriarch was thus careful to
explain himself, so as to assert that the Church of Rome, and that of
Constantinople, made but one Church, when he adds what he means by the
Catholic Church, viz. the truly General and Apostolical Church; infer as
much from Hormisda's words as you will, I am sure you can do little to your
purpose from the Patriarchs, taking them in the sense he explains himself in,
by this Protestation. So that the meaning of them is only this, that as he
judged the Church of Rome a member of the Catholic Church (whose Unity
required, that those who were out of communion in one Church should be so with
the rest) so he consented to acknowledge them justly excommunicated whom the
Church of Rome would have to be so. So that hence nothing arises to your
purpose, more then will equally advance the authority of any other particular
Church; whose excommunications did oblige the whole Church, as we have seen
already in the case of Sinope and Ptolemais.

You proceed to another Testimony of St. Austin addressing himself to the
Donatists, telling them,. 13.
That the succession of the Roman Bishops is the rock which the proud gates of
Hell overcome not, thereby insinuating, Numerate sacerdotes vel ab ipsa sede
Petri and in ordine illo Patrum quis cui successit videte. Ipsa est P^tra quam
non vincunt superbae Inferorum Portae. D. Aug. in Psalm. C. part. Donat. Tom.
7. col. 9.
that the very succession of those Bishops is in some true sense the Catholic
Church. But from whence does it appear that the succession of the Roman Bishops
is the Rock here spoken of? For St. Austin was there arguing against the
Donatists and showing them the danger of being separated from the unity of the
Catholic Church; that if they were cut off from the vine, they would wither
and be in danger to be cast into the fire; and therefore exhorts them, to come
and be planted into the vine, it being a grief to them to see them cut off. Now
in order to this, Venite fratres, si vultis ut inseramini in vite: Dolor est
cum vos videmus praecisos it^ jacere.
he brings in the former words to acquaint them with the way, whereby they
might better understand the Catholic Church, which could not in reason be
confined to their own age, but must be derived from the Apostles. Tertul. de
praescript. c. 36. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
So that his counsel is of the same nature with that of Tertullian and
Irenaeus, who put men upon a diligent search into the successions of the
Apostolical Churches. But now when by this search they have found out the
Catholic Church, he tells them, That is the Rock which the proud gates of hell
cannot overcome. For so elsewhere St. Austin calls the Catholic Church a Rock,
as he calls it likewise a House, and a City, in several places of these
disputations against the Donatists. As here before he calls it the Vine,
August. de baptism. c. Donatist. l 3. c. 18. l. 4. c. 12. l. 7. c. 51. Advers.
Petilian. l. 2. c 70. De Unitat. Eccles. cap. 20.
from whence all who are cut off wither and dye: But what is all this to the
particular Church of Rome; which none of the Disputes with the Donatists at all
concerned? As is fully manifest from the whole management of that Controversy;
in which though he was so much put upon showing what and where the Catholic
Church was, yet he never once expressed any such thing, as that the Church was
called Catholic from any relation to the Church of Rome, but still mentions it
as a particular Church, which with other Churches made up one Catholic Church.
So in his Commentaries on the 44. Psalm: Ecce Roma, ecce Carthago, ecce aliae
and aliae civitates: ^iliae Regum sunt, and delectaverunt Regem suum in honor
ipsius; and ex omnibus fit una quaedam Regin^. Aug. in Ps. 44. p. 282. ed.
Froben.
Behold Rome, says he, behold Carthage, behold several other Cities; these are
Kings daughters and have delighted the King in his honor, but they all make up
but one Queen. How incongruous had this expression been, had St. Austin
believed the Roman Church to be so much above all others, that the ground why
any others were called Catholic, was from their union with her; and therefore
he must according to your principles have saluted the Church of Rome as the
Queen of all the rest, and made other particular Churches but as her daughters
and handmaids. But St. Austin knew of no such difference, but looked on all
particular Churches, whether at Rome, Carthage, or elsewhere, as making up but
one Catholic Church. And to the same purpose he frequently speaks, when he
says, That the Church is called One in regard of her Unity, Propter unitatem
Ecclesiae, una Ecclesia; propter congregationes fraternas per lo^a, multae sunt
Ecclesiae. Id. in Psalm. 141.

An placet vo^is, ut contra Ecclesias quae membra sunt unius Ecclesi^ tot o^be
d^ffusae, etc. Id. de Unitat. Eccles. c. 11.


and Many in regard from the several Societies of Christians abroad in the
world; When he calls the several Churches, members of that one Church which is
spread all over the world, without setting any note of discrimination upon one
above all the rest; Verum etiam illas Ecclesias suas in Scripturis Apostolicis
and Canonicis pariter legimus non solum Romanorum, verum etiam Corinthiorum,
Galatarum, Ephesiorum, etc. Vt raceam de aliis tam latis atque universis
terrarum partibus, in quas ex his Apostolicis laboribus and plantationibus
p^rrecta crevit and crescit Ecclesia. Id. c. Crescon. Grammat. lib. 2. c. 37.
When he reckons the Roman, Corinthian, Galatian, Ephesian Churches together,
and that all these and the Churches propagated from them, do conspire in one
Universal Church. But the places are so many to this purpose in him, that it
would look too much like ostentation to offer to prove a matter so evident to
all that read any thing in him. And is it possible then for you to think That
St. Austin made the succession of Bishops at Rome in any sense the Catholic
Church? You might as well say, that he made the Church spread all over the
world a particular Church, as that he made any particular Church whether at
Rome or elsewhere (for he makes no difference) to be in any sense the Universal
Church.

But that which you seem to lay the greatest force on, is the testimony of
Optatus Milevitanus,. 14.
Who, say you, after he had said that St. Peter was head of all the Apostles;
Ibid.
and that he would have been a Schismatic, who should have erected another
chair against that singular one of St. Peter, as also that in that chair of St.
Peter being but one, Unity was to be kept by all; he adds that with Syricius
then Pope he himself was united in communion, with whom the whole world (says
he, meaning the whole Catholic Church) agrees by communicatory letters in one
Society of communion; See here (say you) how clearly he makes the union with
the Bishop of Rome the measure of the Catholic Church; which the Bishop calls
a Jesuitism, and further proves himself to be in the Catholic Church, because
he was in communion with the Sea of St. Peter. For our better understanding the
meaning of these words of Optatus, we must consider the state of the
Controversy between Optatus and Parmenianus, by which it will appear, how very
little these words of his make to your purpose. The main question between the
Catholics and the Donatists was, about the Catholic Church, To whom it was
that title did belong. The difficulty seemed the greater, because there was no
difference between them in any matter of Faith, or in the substance of the
Sacraments, and therefore they were fain to find out other means to decide this
Controversy, than by either of those two. For which the Catholics made choice
of these two arguments Universality and Succession, the former as agreeing with
that large spread of the Church which was Prophesied to be in the times of the
Gospel, whereas the Donatists confined the Church to a Corner in Africa: the
latter in regard of the necessity of deriving themselves from the Apostolical
Churches. Now the Donatists denying any but themselves to be the Catholic
Church, the proof lay on their Adversaries part, who upon all occasions offer
to make it good, That the Church from which the Donatists separated themselves,
was the only true and Catholic Church. Accordingly Optatus having in the first
book discussed the matters of fact about the rise of the Schism, the
ordinations of Cecilian and Majorinus, and the proceedings used for the ending
the Schism, in this second Book he enters on the Controversy of the Church
which Parmenianus would have to be only among themselves; against which he
urges first, that then certainly the Church could not be called Catholic,
because it was so called from its large comprehension and universal spread. Ubi
ergo erit proprietas Catholici nominis, cuminde dicta sit Catholica, quod sit
rationabilis and ubique diffusa. Optat. l. 2.
Had Optatus believed, the ground of the Churches being Catholic had been its
union with the Church of Rome, he would never have given that account of its
being called so, which here he does. After which he produces many places of
Scripture to prove the large extent of the Church, and concludes, That to be
the Catholic Church which was diffused over all the world, than which nothing
can be more contrary to your pretensions, who limit and confine the Catholic
Church to your own party as the Donatists did. And if those arguments then used
against the Donatists had any force against them, they have still as much
against you, who exclude so great and considerable Churches from being members
of the Catholic Church because not of your communion. From hence Optatus
proceeds to examine, Which had the better title to be the Catholic Church on
the account of Succession; and Parmenianus reckoning the Cathedra in the first
of the dotes Ecclesiae, Optatus begins with that by which is understood the
lawful derivation of power for governing the Church, so Albaspinaeus, (as well
as others) understands it. Now the Controversy was, where this Cathedra was.
Optatus proves, Cathedram Episcopalem, primam missionem, omnem potestatem, a
qua caeterae deducerentur. Albaspinaeus in Optat. lib. 2.
there can be no lawful power but what is derived from the Apostles, and
therefore where the succession is plain and uninterrupted, there and no where
else can that Cathedra be. Which Episcopal chair being first placed at Rome by
St. Peter, in which he as chief of the Apostles sat, from whence he had his
name Cephas; in which one chair Unity should be kept by all; lest the other
Apostles should set up others against it; so that he must be a schismatic and
offender, Igitur negare non potes scire te in urbe Rom^ Petro primo Cathedram
Episcopalem esse collatam in qua sederit o^nium Apostolorum caput Petrus; inde
and Cephas appellatus est; in qua una Cathedra, unitas ab omn^bus servaretur,
ne caeteri Apostoli singulas sibi quisque defenderent: ut jam Schismaticus and
peccator esset, qui contra singularem Cathedram, alteram co^locaret. Ergo
Cathedra unica quae est prima de dotibus, sedit prior Petrus: cui successit
Linus, Lino Clemens, etc. Damaso Siricius hodie, qui noster est Socius: Cum quo
totus orbis commercio formatarum, in una communionis societate concordat.
Vestrae Cathedrae vos originem reddite, qui vobis vul^is sanctam Ecclesiam
vindicare. Optatus l. 2. Sed suspicor haec verba (unde Cephas apellatus est)
esse ineptae alicujus glossae ad marginem temere ascriptae and deinde abs
librariis contextui insertae. Balduin in Optat l. 2.
who should place another chair against that. Therefore in this one chair St.
Peter sat first, to whom succeeded Linus, to him Clemens and so on to Syricius
who joins with us, with whom the whole world communicates by the intercourse of
formed letters. Do you now give an account of your chair, who challenge to your
selves the name of the Holy Church. To pass by that ridiculous account of the
name Cephas, which Baldwin supposes to be inserted into the text from some
ignorant gloss made in the margin, the main thing to be considered, is the
scope and design of these words; in which he does two things, 1. He shows the
evident succession of the Catholic Bishops from St. Peter in the Church of
Rome, which he does by a distinct and particular enumeration of them. 2. From
thence shows the unlawfulness of setting up another chair in opposition to
that, i. e. pretending to another right of Government then what was conveyed
down from the Apostles; or setting up another chair in opposition to that of
St. Peter at Rome, i. e. that succession of Bishops which was derived from him.
Now, says he, God providing for the unity of the Church, intended there should
be but one chair in a place, i. e. that the several Apostles should not in the
same place set up a distinct Cathedra or succession of Church Governors, and
therefore though St. Paul as well as St. Peter were instrumental in the
settling the Church of Rome, yet, that the Churches Unity might be preserved,
there were not two distinct series of Bishops, the one deriving from St. Peter
and the other from St. Paul. So that Optatus his saying is much of the same
nature with that of Cyprian in the case of the Schism about Cornelius and
Novatianus, who urges that most, That there ought to be but one Bishop in one
Church, now the Bishop and his Cathedra are correlates to each other. Optatus
therefore saying that there was but one Cathedra at Rome, puts the Donatist's
upon this issue, that if they could not deduce their succession from St. Peter
at Rome, they could have no pretense to the Cathedra there. And therefore
challenges them to deduce the succession of their Bishops there, as at large
appears in his following discourse. Which could be no higher then of Macrobius
from Encolpius, Encolpius from Bonifacius Ballitanus, as he from Victor
Garbiensis, who was sent over on purpose from the Donatists in Africa to make a
faction and a party at Rome, Vbi sedit victor Garbiensis, a vestris jam dudum
de Africa ad paucos erraticos missus, etc. Optatus ibid.
among the African Inhabitants there. Now this being the utmost succession,
they could pretend to, and that being in opposition to that succession which
was derived from St. Peter, nothing could be more plain then that at Rome
(about which the Contest was) the Cathedra could not belong to the Donatists
but their Adversaries; and therefore that being by Parmenianus acknowledged one
of the dowries of the Catholic Church, the title of that could not belong to
the Donatists but their opposers. This therefore does not at all concern Romes
being causally the Catholic Church, but is only produced as a particular
Church for a known instance whereby to decide this particular Controversy of
succession. For otherwise the argument would have held as well for any other
Apostolical Church where the succession was clear: And therefore afterward he
makes the communion with the seven Churches as plain an argument of communion
with the Catholic, Extra septem Ecclesias quicquid soris est alienum est. Id.
ib.
as he does here of the Church of Rome. You may therefore every jot as well
make the seven Churches of Asia, to be causally the Catholic Church, as the
Church of Rome. And to the same purpose he instanceth in the Corinthian,
Thessalonian, Galatian Churches, as he does in that of Rome, or the seven
Churches. Tibi unitas displicet; hoc si crimen putas, argue nos
Thessalonicensibus, Corinthiis, Galatis, septem Ecclesiis quae sunt in Asia,
communicasse. Ibid.
We see then, Optatus his design was to show that their Church from which the
Donatists separated, was the true Catholic Church, which he proves from their
communion with all the Apostolical Churches, which had a clear and distinct
succession from the Apostles their planters. And because of the Vicinity and
Fame of Rome, and the easier knowing the succession there, he instanceth in
that in the first place, and then proceeds to the rest of them. But withal, to
show the Unity of all these Apostolical Churches, when he had mentioned
Siricius as the present Bishop of Rome, he adds, That all the world agreed with
him in the intercourse of the formed Letters; not thereby intimating any
supremacy of that Church above others, but to show that that succession he
instanceth in at Rome, was of the Catholic Church, because the whole Christian
world, did agree in Communion with him that was the Bishop there. And when he
speaks of one chair, it is plain, he means it of the particular Church of Rome,
because every Apostolical Church had an Apostolical Chair belonging to it. So
Tertullian expressly, That in all the Apostolical Churches there were their
Chairs still remaining. Percurre Ec^lesias Apostolicas apud qua^ ipsae nunc
Cathedrae Apostolorum suis locis praesidentur. Tertul. praescript. ad haeret.
cap. 36.

Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 7. c. 32.


And Eusebius particularly mentions the Apostolical Throne or Chair at
Jerusalem, as others do that of Mark at Alexandria, and of the rest elsewhere.
Nothing then can possibly be inferred from these words of Optatus concerning
the Church of Rome, but what would equally hold for any other Apostolical
Church, and how much that is, let the Reader judge: And how much soever it be,
it will be very little for your advantage, who pretend to something peculiar to
the Church of Rome above all other Churches.

From Optatus you proceed, or rather return to S. Hierom, who, (say you)
professes the Church is built upon S. Peter 's See,. 15.
Ibid.
and that whoever eats the Lamb, that is, pretends to believe in Christ, and
partakes of the Sacraments out of that house, that is, Ego nullum primum
(praemium for^asse rectius) nisi Christum sequens, beatitudini tuae, id est
Cathedrae Petri communione consocior. Super illam Petram aedific^tam Ecclesiam
scio. Quicunque extra hanc domum Agnum comederit, profanus est -- Quicunque
tecum non colligit, spargit; hoc est, qui Christi non est, Antichristi est.
Hieron. ep. 57. ad Damas.
out of the communion of that Church, is profane, and an Alien; yea, that he
belongs to Antichrist, and not to Christ, whoever consents not with the
successor of S. Peter. This Testimony sounds big and high at first, and I shall
not impute these expressions either to S. Hierome's heat, or his flattery,
although it looks the more suspicious, because at that time he had so great a
pique against the Eastern Bishops, and that these words are contained in a
complemental address to Damasus. But, setting aside what advantages might be
gained on that account, to weaken the force of this Testimony, if we consider
the occasion or nature of these expressions, we shall find that they reach not
the purpose you design them for. We must therefore consider, that at the time
of the writing this Epistle, S. Hierom seems to be in a great perplexity what
to do in that division which was then in the Church of Antioch, concerning
Paulinus, Vitalis, and Miletius; but besides this Schism, it seems S. Hierom
suspected some remainders of Arrianism to be still among them; from their
demanding of him, Whether he acknowledged three distinct hypostases in the
Trinity. Theodoret. l. 2. c. 8.
Now S. Hierom by hypostasis understands the essence, as many of the Greek
Fathers did; and thence the Sardian Council defined, That there was but one
hypostasis of the Father, Son, and Spirit; and therefore he suspects, that when
they require of him the acknowledgement of three hypostases, they might design
to entrap him, and unawares betray him into Arrianism. And therefore argues
stiffly in the remainder of that Epistle, that hypostasis properly signifies
essence, and nothing else; and from thence urges the inconvenience of
admitting the terms of three hypostases. Tota secularium literarum Schola nihil
aliud hypostasin nisi (...) novit. Id. ib.
Now S. Hierom being thus set upon by these Eastern Bishops, he keeps off from
communion with them, and advises with the Egyptian Confessors, and follows
them at present; but having received his Baptism in the Church of Rome, and
being looked on as a Roman where he was, he thought it necessary to address
himself to Pope Damasus, Inde nunc mea animae postulans cibum, unde olim
Christi vestimenta suscepi. Ib.

Ab Arrianorum praesule and Camp^nsibus, novellum a me homine Romano nomen
exigitur. Ib.


to know what he should do in this case. And the rather, because if S. Hierom
had consented with them, they would have looked on it as an evidence of the
agreement of the Roman Church with them. Therefore he so earnestly and
importunately writes to Damasus concerning it, as being originally part of his
charge, having been baptized in that Church.

But (say you) whatever the occasion of the words were, Is it not plain, that
he makes the Church to be built on S. Peter's See, and that whosoever is out of
the communion of that Church, is an Alien, and belongs to Antichrist? To that
therefore I answer, 1. That he does not say, that the Catholic Church is built
on the particular Church of Rome: for it is not, super hanc Petram, as
referring to the Cathedra immediately preceding; but, super illam, and
therefore it is not improbably supposed by some, that the Rock here referrs to
Christ. And, although Erasmus does imagine, that some particular privilege and
dignity did belong to Rome above other Churches from this place (which is not
the thing we contend about) yet withal he says, that by the Rock we must not
understand Rome; for that may degenerate, but we must understand that Faith
which Peter professed. Non super Roman arbitror, nam fieri potest ut Roma
degen^ret, sed super illam fidem quam Petrus professus est. Erasmus in Schol.
Et si non minus aliis came laborasse, Erasmus hic mentiatur. Mar. Victor. Schol.
in ep. 57.
And it is a much easier matter for Marianus Victorius, to tell him, he lies,
as he does here in plain terms, than to be able to confute what he says. And
that the rather, because he begins his discourse in that manner, Ego nullum
primum nisi Christum sequens, whereby he attributes the supreme power, and
infallible judgment in the Church only to Christ. For, as for your learned
correction of praemium for primum, though you follow Cardinal Perron in it, yet
it is without any probability at all, it being contrary to all the MSS. used by
Erasmus, Victorius, Gravius, Possevin, and others; and has no authority to
vouch it, but only Gratian, who is condemned by your own Writers, for a
falsifier and corrupter of Authors.

2. I answer, when S. Hierom pronounces those Aliens and profane, who are out
of the communion of the Church; either it belongs not to the particular Church
of Rome, or, if it does, it makes not much for your purpose. 1. There is no
certainty that he there speaks of the particular Church of Rome, but that he
rather speaks of the true Universal Church; for it is plain, he speaks of that
Church which is built upon the Rock, now by your own confession, that cannot be
the Church of Rome, for that you suppose to be the Rock, it self, viz. the Sea
of Peter, and therefore the Church built upon it, must be the Universal Church.
And that this must be his meaning, appears from his plain words, for, he says,
Upon that Rock the Church is built, and whosoever eats the Lamb without this
house, is profane; -- he cannot certainly mean, Whosoever eats without the
Rock, but without the house built upon it; so that the house in the latter
clause must needs be the same with that which was built on the Rock in the
former. Either therefore you must deny the Sea of Peter to be the Rock, or you
must of necessity assert the house built upon it to be the Universal Church,
and not the particular one of Rome; and consequently the danger lies not upon
men's not being in communion with the Roman, but with the truly Catholic
Church. And how from hence you will infer, That they are profane who are out
of the Roman Church; it would be worth our while to understand. 2. Suppose I
should grant, that S. Hierom did mean the particular Church of Rome, yet I am
not satisfied, that this comes home to your purpose, unless you could prove,
that S. Hierom spoke of what was necessarily and unalterably to be in the
Church of Rome, and not merely of what was in that time, when he spoke these
words. But that is your perpetual Paralogism in the citations of the Fathers,
in praise of the Church of Rome, what they spoke, and it may be deservedly of
the Church of their own time (although sometimes their Rhetoric swelled too
high in their Encomiasticks) that you will needs have to be understood of the
same Church at all times, and in our present age. As though it were not
possible for a Church to be eminent for purity of Doctrine in one age, and to
decline as much from it in another. But I need give no other instance in this
case, than S. Hierom himself, for if we believe S. Hierom in his Catalogue, the
two immediate predecessors of Damasus, in the Sea of Rome, Liberius, and Felix
were tainted with Heresy; and that very Heresy, Vid. Fortunat. and Acacius.
viz. Arrianism, which S. Hierom writes to Damasus about now. I pray, tell us
then, Whether if S. Hierom had lived in Liberius his time, would he have writ
to him after the same rate he now writes to Damasus; if he had been of the same
mind then, he would have been so far from scrupling the three hypostases, that
he must have subscribed the Arrian confession, as S. Hierom tells us, Liberius
did, through the instigation of Fortunatianus. And therefore to let us see, on
what account he was now so liberal in his commendations of the Church of Rome,
he begins this Epistle with the praise of her present orthodoxness in the
Catholic Faith, And that amongst all the divisions and breaches of the Eastern
Churches they preserved the Faith of their Forefathers entire. Profligato a
sobole mala pa^rimonio, apud vos s^los incorrupta Patrum servatur haer^di^as.
-- Nunc in Occide^te Sol Justitiae oritur: in Orient a^tem Lucifer ille, qui
ceciderat, super sydera posuit thronam s^um, etc. Ibid.
That now the Sun of Righteousness rises in the West; but that Lucifer, who
fell, now reigns in the East; with many expressions to the same purpose. Which
supposition being granted true at that time, that which follows inferrs very
little to your purpose, unless you can prove, that what was so then, must
necessarily continue so in all ages. If the East was then corrupted, and the
West only sound, what praises belonged to the Catholic Church in general, did
of right devolve to that part which remained sound in the opinion of those
persons who judged so. You would needs therefore from hence have your Church
accounted Catholic now, by the same argument that Tully said (of the Roman
Lady, who still affirmed, she was but thirty years of age) that he believed it,
for he had heard her say so twenty years before; so must we believe your Church
sound and Catholic* because it was said so of her so many hundred years since;
as though no infirmities or wrinkles could have come upon her ever since. Prove
your Church to be as sound and orthodox, as pure and holy now, as she was in
the primitive Fathers time, and we will not grudge her the highest of those
commendations which were given her by them. But, without doing this, your
Testimonies come to nothing. The same Answer will serve the remaining
Testimonies of Eulalius, and the Emperor Gratian, who only spoke of the
communion of the Church of Rome, as it was then: That of Fulgentius stiling the
Roman Church, The top of the world, only imports the eminency of it, in regard
of the power of that City it was in, and so is wide enough from your purpose.
Thus we have considered all that you have produced out of Antiquity, to prove
that the Church is called Catholic, with a particular relation to, and
dependence of the Church of Rome; and can find nothing at all belonging to her,
as the center of Catholicism, but that those things which are said of her, and
communion with her, in relation to being called Catholic, might as well have
agreed with any other Apostolical Church remaining sound in the Catholic Faith.

P. 132. n. 6.
Hence it appears, that what his Lordship is pleased to term, a perfect
Jesuitism, viz. the measuring the Catholic Church, by that of Rome, is really
nothing else, and that the perfect mistake belongs to you, who assert, that it
was a received and known Truth in the Ancient Church. Your vindication of the
propriety of your Churches being called the Roman Catholic Church, from the
Roman Empire, and the Jewish Church would then signify something, when you
have proved that the Pope has as much the Government of the Church, as the
Roman-Emperour had of all the Provinces within the confines of the Empire, or
that we are all bound as much to resort to Rome, as the Jews were to Jerusalem
for the solemn worship of God. In the mean time the absurdity is never the less
for being vulgar, in calling yours, The Roman Catholic Church. And yet, as
though you had been only demonstrating these things, you tell us very
magisterially, The truth is, in all doubts concerning matter of Doctrine,
recourse is to be had to S. Peter 's successor, who (at least with a General
Council) can infallibly resolve all difficulties. An excellent way of proving,
to say, The truth is! Might not I as well say, The truth is, the Pope neither
in Council, nor out of it has any Infallibility at all? And would not this be
full as good an Answer as yours is an Argument? but the very truth is, you had
rather have these things believed, than go about to prove them; least the
weakness of the arguments should lay too much open your fond pretense of
Infallibility. Before you prove, That the Pope can carry his Infallibility out
of Rome with him, show us that he has it there. I grant S. Peter had been
infallible, though he had never been at Rome; and it is far from being clear,
that the Pope is at all the more infallible for his being there. How far you
have been from proving, That the Faith of every particular Church is to be
examined and proved to be Catholic by its conformity to the Faith of the Roman
Church, may abundantly appear from the preceding discourse. Those Questions,
which you say, make nothing to your purpose concerning the Popes transferring
his chair at Rome, and the Roman Clergies deserting him and the true Faith: I
shall so far believe you in, as to ease my self of the trouble of considering
them any further than has been done already in the very entrance into this
Conference.

And here, you tell us, You now come to perform your Promise,. 16.
viz. to examine more fully his Lordships pretended solutions (as you call
them) of Bellarmine 's authorities in behalf of the Infallibility of the Church
of Rome. But for all your boasting at first, what great things you would do,
you seem a little fearful of engaging too far, and therefore are resolved only
to maintain them in general, as they make for the Infallible Authority of the
Church, or of the Pope defining Articles of Faith in a General Council. But, as
far as you dare go, I shall attend your motions, and doubt not to make it
evident, that none of these authorities have any reference to that sense, which
you only offer to maintain them in, and that though they had, yet no such thing
as Infallibility can be proved out of them.

The first authority is out of S. Cyprian's Letter to Cornelius Bishop of Rome,
whose words I am contented should be recited as fully as may be; P. 133.
In which he charge Felicissimus and Fortunatus with their accomplices, Post
ista adhuc insuper pseudoepiscop^ sibi ab haereticis constituto, navigare
audent ad Petri Cathedram, atque ad Ecclesiam Principalem; unde unitas
sacerdotalis exorta est, a Schismaticis and prophanis literas far, nec
cogitare eos esse Romanos (quorum fides Apostolo praedicante laudata est) ad
quos perfidia habere non possit access^m. Cyprian. ep. 55. ad Cornel. n. 16.
that having set up a Bishop against him at Carthage, they sail to the chair of
Peter, and the principal Church from whence the sacerdotal Unity had its rise,
and carry Letters from profane and Schismatical persons, not considering that
the Romans (whose Faith was commended by the Apostle) were such to whom
perfidiousness could not have access. Now the meaning of this place you would
have to be this, and no other, viz. that the Sea of S. Peter, which is the
principal of all Churches, was so infallibly directed by the Holy Ghost, that
no error in Faith could have access to it, or be admitted by it* if not as a
particular Church, P. 134.
yet at least as the Head of the Universal Church of Christ, and as the
Fountain of Priestly Unity; which S. Cyprian here expressly affirms that Church
and See to be. This you sum up at last, as the most which can be made of this
Testimony; and which is indeed far more in all particulars than it can amount
to. Which will appear by particular examinations of what you return in answer
to his Lordship. Three things his Lordship answers to this place. Sect. 3. n.
3, etc.
1. That perfidia can hardly stand here for error in Faith; and if so then
this can make nothing for Infallibility. 2. That supposing it granted to
signify error in Faith and Doctrine, yet it belongs not to the Romans
absolutely, but with a respect to those first Romans whose Faith was commended
by the Apostle. 3. That it seems to be rather a Rhetorical insinuation, than a
dogmatical assertion. And that S. Cyprian could not be supposed to assert
herein the Popes Infallibility, appears by the contracts between him and the
Bishops of Rome. This is the short of his Lordships answers to this place, to
which we must consider what you reply. 1. His Lordship says, That perfidia can
hardly stand for error in Faith or misbelief, but it properly signifies
malicious falsehood in matter of trust and action, not error in Faith, but in
fact against the discipline and Government of the Church. And to make this
interpretation appear the more probable, his Lordship gives an account of the
story which was the occasion of writing that Epistle, which is this, as his
Lordship reports it from Binius and Baronius; In the year 255. there was a
Council in Carthage in the cause of two Schismatics, Felicissimus and
Novatian, about restoring of them to the communion of the Church, which had
lapsed in time of danger from Christianity to Idolatry. Felicissimus would
admit all even without penance, and Novatian would admit none, no not after
penance. The Fathers 42 in number went, as Truth led them, between both
extremes. To this Council came Privatus a known Heretic, but was not admitted
because he was formerly excommunicated, and often condemned. Hereupon he
gathers his Accomplices together, and chooses one Fortunatus (who was formerly
condemned as well as himself) Bishop of Carthage, and set him up against St.
Cyprian. This done Felicissimus and his Fellows haste to Rome with letters
testimonial from their own party, and pretend that 25 Bishops concurred with
them: and their desire was to be received into the communion of the Roman
Church, and to have their new Bishop acknowledged. Cornelius then Pope, though
their haste had now prevented St. Cyprians letters, having formerly heard from
him, both of them, and their Schism in Africa would neither hear them, nor
receive their letters. They grew insolent and furious (the ordinary way that
Schismatics take). Upon this Cornelius writes to St. Cyprian* and St. Cyprian
in this Epistle gives Cornelius thanks, for refusing these African fugitives,
declares their Schism and wickedness at large, and encourages him and all
Bishops to maintain the Ecclesiastical Discipline, and censures against any the
boldest threatenings of wicked Schismatics. This being the story, his Lordship
says, He would fain know why perfidia (all circumstances considered) may not
stand here in its proper sense for cunning and perfidious dealing, which these
men having practiced at Carthage, thought now to obtrude upon the Bishop of
Rome also, but that he was wary enough not to be overreached by busy
Schismatics? This demand of his Lordship seeming very just and reasonable we
are bound to consider what reasons you give, why perfidia must be understood
for error in Faith and not in the sense here mentioned. Why calls he (say you)
St. Peter's chair, Ecclesiam principalem (the chief Church) but because it is
the head to which all other Churches must be subordinate in matter of doctrine?
P. 133.
the words following signify as much, Unde unitas sacerdotalis exorta est,
from which chair of St. Peter as it were from its fountain, unity in Priesthood
and consequently unity in Faith is derived. Why brings he the Apostle as
Panegyrist of the Roman Faith? Is it forsooth, because no malicious falsehood in
matter of trust or error in fact against the Discipline and Government of the
Church can have access unto them, as the Bishop will needs misinterpret the
place? or rather because no error in Faith can approach the Sea Apostolic?
Certain it is perfidia in this sense, is diametrically opposed to the Faith of
the Romans immediately before commended by the Apostle (which was true
Christian Faith) and consequently it must of necessity be taken for the quite
contrary, viz. misbelief or error in Faith. Three Arguments in these words you
produce, why perfidia must be understood of error in Faith. 1. Because the
Church of Rome is called the chief Church; but is it not possible it should be
called so in any other sense, but as the head of all other Churches in matter
of doctrine? Is it not sufficiently clear from Antiquity, that there were other
accounts of calling the Church of Rome the chief or principal Church, as the
eminency of it joined with the power of the City (the potentior principalitas
in Irenaeus) which advanced its reputation to the height it was then at? What
matters of doctrine do you find brought to the Church of Rome to be Infallibly
decided there in St. Cyprians time? how little did St. Cyprian believe this,
when he so vehemently opposed the judgment of Stephen Bishop of Rome in the
case of rebaptization? Does he write, speak, or carry himself in that
Controversy like one that owned that Church of Rome to be head of all other
Churches, to which they must be subordinate in matter of doctrine? Nay in the
very next words St. Cyprian argues against appeals to Rome, and is it possible
then to think, that in these words he should give such an absolute power and
authority to it? And therefore any one who would reconcile St. Cyprian to
himself must by those words of Ecclesia principalis only understand the dignity
and eminency, and not the power, much less the Infallibility of the Church of
Rome. And no more is employed in the Second, That it is said to be the fountain
of Sacerdotal Unity, which some think may probably referr to the Priesthood of
the Church of Africa, which had its rise from the Church of Rome, as appears by
Tertullian and others, Tertul. de prescript. c. 36. Greg. l. 7. Ind. 1. ep. 32.
in which sense he might very well say, that the Unity of the Priesthood did
spring from thence; or if it be taken in a more large and comprehensive sense
it can import no more then that the Church of Rome was owned as the Principium
Vnitatis, which certainly is a very different thing from an infallible
judgment in matters of Faith. For what connection is there between Unity in
Government, and Infallibility in Faith? Suppose the Church of Rome should be
owned as the principal Member of the Catholic Church, and therefore that the
Unity of the Church should begin there in regard of the dignity of it, does it
thence follow that there must be an absolute subordination of all other
Churches to it? Nothing then can be inferred from either of those particulars,
that by perfidia, error in Faith must be understood, taking those two
expressions in the most favorable sense that can be put upon them. But
considering the present state of the Church of Rome at the time when
Felicissimus and Fortunatus came thither, I am apt to think another
interpretation more probable than either of the foregoing. For which we must
remember that there was a Schism at Rome between Novatianus and Cornelius, the
former challenging to be Bishop there, as well as the latter, upon which a
great breach was made among them. Now these persons going out of Africa to
Rome, that they might manage their business with the more advantage, address
themselves to Cornelius and his party; upon which St. Cyprian says, Navigare
audent ad Petri Cathedram atque ad Ecclesiam principalem, unde Vnitas
sacerdotalis exorta est, thereby expressing their confidence that they not only
went to Rome, but when they were there, they did not presently side with the
Schismatical party of the Novatians there, but as though they had been true
Catholics, they go to Cornelius, who, being the legal successor of St. Peter
in opposition to Novatianus, calls his See the chair of St. Peter, and the
principal Church, and the spring of the Unity of the Priesthood; because the
contrary party of Novatianus had been the cause of all the Schism and disunion
which had been among them. And in this sense which seems very agreeable to St.
Cyprians words and design, we may easily understand what this perfidia was,
viz. that falseness and perfidious dealing of these persons, that although they
were Schismatics themselves, yet they were so far from seeming so at their
coming to Rome, that as though they had been very good Catholics, they seek to
join in communion with Cornelius and the Catholic party with him. By which we
see what little probability there is from those expressions that perfidia must
be taken, for an error in Faith. But, 3. You say, To what purpose else does he
mention St. Paul's commendation of their Faith, if this perfidia were not
immediately opposite to it? But then inform us what part of that Apostolical
Faith was it, which Felicissimus and Fortunatus sought to violate at Rome? It
is apparent their whole design was to be admitted into communion with the
Church of Rome (which in all probability is that access here spoken of): if
therefore this perfidia imported some error in Faith, it must be some error
broached by those particular persons as contrary to the old Roman Faith which
was extold by the Apostle. And although these persons might be guilty of
errors, yet the ground of their going to Rome, was not upon any matter of
Doctrine, whereby they sought to corrupt the Church of Rome, but in order to
the justifying of their Schism, by being admitted into the communion of that
Church. Notwithstanding then any thing you have produced to the contrary, there
is no necessity of understanding perfidia, for an error in matter of Faith.
And St. Cyprians mentioning the praise given to the Romans for their Faith by
the Apostle, was not to show the opposition between that and the perfidia as an
error in Faith, but that being the greatest Elogium of the Church of Rome
extant in Scripture, he thought it now most convenient to use it, the better to
engage Cornelius to oppose the proceedings of the Schismatics there. Although
withal, I suppose St. Cyprian might give him some taste of his old office, of
a Rhetorician in the allusion between fides and perfidia, without ever
intending that perfidia should be taken in any other sense then what was proper
to the cause in hand.

You having effected so little in the solution of his Lordships first answer,
you have little cause to boast in your following words, That hence his other
explication also vanishes into smoke, Ibid.
viz. when he asserts that Perfidia non potest may be taken hyperbolically for
non facile potest; because this interpretation suits not with those high
Elogiums given by St. Cyprian to the Roman Church, as being the principal
Church, the Church whence Unity of Faith and Discipline is derived to all other
Christian Churches. If you indeed may have the liberty to interpret St.
Cyprians words as you please, by adding such things to them, of which there is
no intimation in what he says, you may make what you please unsuitable to
them. For although he calls it the principal Church, from whence the Unity of
the Priesthood is sprung; yet what is this to the Unity of Faith and Discipline
as derived from thence to all other Churches, as you would persuade the unwary
reader that these were St. Cyprians words, which are only your groundless
interpretation of them. And therefore there is no such improbability in what
his Lordship says, That this may be only a Rhetorical excess of speech, in
which St. Cyprian may laudando praecipere, by commending them to be such,
instruct them that such indeed they ought to be, to whom perfidiousness should
not get access. And for this he instanceth in such another Rhetorical
expression of Synesius to Theophilus of Alexandria, wherein he tells him that
he ought to esteem what his Throne should determine as an Oracle or Divine Law.
Synes. ep. 67.
And certainly this comes nearer Infallibility than that of St. Cyprian does.
But what inconveniency there should be, that St. Cyprian by this interpretation
should give no more prerogative to the Church of Rome, than to that of
Alexandria or Antioch, I cannot easily imagine, till you prove some greater
Infallibility attributed then to the Church of Rome, than was to other
Apostolical Churches: which as yet we are to seek for.

But at length (you tell us) after much ado he grants perfidia may be taken for
error in Faith, Ibid.
or for perfidious misbelievers and Schismatics, who had betrayed their Faith;
but then (say you) he cavils with the word Romanos. This must be limited only
to those Christians, who then lived in Rome, to whom qua tales, as long as they
continued such, error in Faith could not have access. What you say, his
Lordship, does at length and after much ado, he did freely and willingly; but
that you might have occasion for those words, you altered the course of his
answers, and put the second in the last place. But still you have the
unhappiness to misunderstand him. For although he grants that perfidia may
relate to error in Faith, yet as it is here used, it is not understood of it
abstractly but concretely, for perfidious misbelievers, i. e. such perfidious
persons, excommunicated out of other Churches, were not likely to get access at
Rome, or to find admittance into their communion. And in this sense, it is
plain that St. Cyprian did not intend by these words, to exempt the Romans from
possibility of error, but to brand his adversaries with a title due to their
merit, calling them perfidious, i. e. such as had betrayed or perverted the
Faith. When you therefore ask, is not this great praise? I suppose none but
your self would make a question of it, viz. that the Church of Rome had then so
great purity as not to admit such perfidious misbelievers into her communion.
And it were well if the present Church of Rome were capable of the same praise.
But when you add, It is as if St. Cyprian should say St. Peter's See could not
err so long as it continued constant in the truth; you wilfully misunderstand
his Lordships meaning, who speaks of the persons and not merely of their
errors; but however, is it not a commendation to say that the Church of Rome
consisted of such persons then who adhered to the Apostolical Faith, and
therefore error could not have access to them? And I look on it as so great a
commendation, that I heartily wish it could be verified of your Church now.
Neither is this any such Identical proposition as that you produce, but only a
declaration of their present constancy, and inferring thence, how unlikely it
was that errors should be admitted by them. His Lordship to make it plain that
St. Cyprian had no meaning to assert the unerring Infallibility of either Pope
or Church of Rome, insists on the contest which after happened between St.
Cyprian and Pope Stephen; upon which he says expressly, That Pope Stephen did
not only maintain an error but the very cause of Heretics, Stepha^us frater
noster Haereticorum causam contra Christianos and contra Dei Ecclesiam asserere
conatur. Cypr. ad Pompeium per Erasm. Basil. p. 327.
and that against Christians and the very Church of God. And after this he
charge him, with obstinacy and presumption; And I hope this is plain enough
(says his Lordship) to show that St. Cyprian had no great opinion of the Roman
Infallibility. To this you answer, P. 134.
With a famous distinction of the Popes erring as a private Doctor and as the
Universal Pastor, and that St. Cyprian might very well be supposed to think the
Pope erred only in the first sense. Not to spend time in rifling this
distinction of the Popes erring personally, but not judicially, or as a private
Doctor, but not as Universal Pastor, which it were an easy matter to do, by
manifesting the incongruity of it, and the absurdities consequent upon it, in
case that doctrine which the Pope erres in, comes to be judicially decided by
him; It is sufficient for us at present to show that this distinction cannot
relieve you in our present case. For your Doctors tell us, the Pope then erres
personally and as a private Doctor, when he erres only in his own judgment
without obliging others to believe, what he judges to be true; but then he
erres judicially and as Universal Pastor, when he declares his judgment so as
to oblige others to receive it as true. Now can any thing be more evident then
that St. Cyprian judged Pope Stephen to err in this latter and not in the
former sense? For does he not absolutely and severely declare himself against
St. Cyprians opinion: condemning it as an error and an innovation? But say
you, He did not properly define any doctrine in that contestation; but said
nihil innovetur nisi quod traditum. But was not that the question what was
traditum and what not, for Cyprian and his party denied it to be a tradition,
which Stephen asserted was so; and does he not therefore undertake to define
something in this cause? But say you, If this argument hold good against the
Infallibility of Popes, viz. that St. Cyprian held Pope Stephen erred,
therefore the Pope may err in matters of Faith, it will be a good consequence
also to say St. Cyprian held Pope Stephen erred, even whilst he maintained an
universal immemorial tradition -- therefore the Pope may err whilst he follows
such a tradition. I answer, 1. Who besides you, would not have seen, that the
question was not, Whether the Pope was Infallible or no, but whether St.
Cyprian judged him to be Infallible or no? for if it appear that St. Cyprian
did not judge him Infallible, then those former words cannot be interpreted to
such a sense as does imply Infallibility. 2. No doubt if the Pope may err in
other things, he may err when he thinks he follows an universal immemorial
tradition; not that he does err, when he does really follow such a one, but he
may err in judging that to be an universal immemorial tradition which is not:
and this was the case between St. Cyprian and Pope Stephen; the Pope pretended
to follow an universal tradition, St. Cyprian judges him to err in it, and
that it was not so. And is it not plain still, notwithstanding these frivolous
pretenses, that St. Cyprian had no opinion at all of the Popes Infallibility in
any sense: and therefore out of honor to him, you are bound to interpret his
former words to some other sense then that of any Infallibility in the Church
of Rome. Thus all his Lordships answers standing good, you have gained no great
matter by this first testimony of St. Cyprian.

The second Authority is out of St. Hierome whose words are, The Roman Faith
commended by the Apostle, admits not such praestigiae, Attamen scito Romanam
fidem Apostolic^ voce laudatam ejusmodi praestigias non recipere, etiamsi
Angelus aliter annun^iet, quam semel praedicatum est, Pauli authoritate munitam
non posse mutari. Hierony. l. 3. Apol. c. Ruff. cap. 4.
deceits and delusions into it, though an Angel should Preach it otherwise,
than it was Preached at first, being armed and fenced by St. Paul's Authority it
cannot be changed. Here you tell us, You willingly agree with his Lordship that
by Romanam fidem, St. Hierom understands the Catholic Faith of Christ, and so
you concur with him against Bellarmine, that it cannot be understood of the
particular Church of Rome. But by the way you charge your Adversaries, with
great inconsequence that in this place they make Roman and Catholic to be the
same, and yet usually condemn you for joining as Synonyma 's Roman and
Catholic together. A wonderful want of judgment! as though the Roman Faith
might not be the Catholic Faith then, and yet the Catholic Faith not be the
Roman Faith now. The former speech only affirms that the Faith at Rome was
truly Catholic; the latter implies that no Faith can be Catholic but what
agrees with Rome: and think you there is no difference between these two? But
you say further, That this Catholic Faith must not here be taken abstractly
that so it cannot be changed, for Ruffinus was not ignorant of that, P. 135.
but that it must be understood of the immutable Faith of the Sea Apostolic,
so highly commended by the Apostle and St. Hierom; which is founded upon such a
rock, that even an Angel himself is not able to shake it. But St. Hierom
speaking this with a reference to that Faith he supposes the Apostle commended
in them (although the Apostle does not so much commend the Catholickness or
soundness of their Faith as the act of believing in them, and therefore
whatever is drawn from thence, whether by St. Hierome or any else can have no
force in it; for if he should infe^ the immutability of the Faith of the Church
of Rome from so apparently weak a foundation, there can be no greater strength
in his testimony than there is in the ground on which it is built; and if there
be any force in this Argument, the Church of Thessalonica will be as Infallible
as Rome, for her Faith is commended rather in a more ample manner by the
Apostle then that of Rome is) St. Hierome, I say, 1 These. 1.8.
referring to that Faith he supposes the Apostle commended in them, must only
be understood of the unchangeableness of that first Faith, which appears by the
mention of an Angel from Heaven Preaching otherwise. Which certainly cannot
with any tolerable sense be meant thus, that St. Hierome supposed it beyond the
power of an Angel from Heaven to alter the Faith of the Roman Church. For in
the very same Apology he expresses his great fears, lest the Faith of the
Romans should be corrupted by the Books of Ruffinus. But, say you, What is this
then to Ruffinus, who knew, as well as St. Hierom, that Faith could not change
its essence? However, though St. Hierome should here speak of the Primitive and
Apostolical Faith which was then received at Rome, that this could receive no
alteration; yet this was very pertinent to be told Ruffinus, because St.
Hierome charges him with an endeavor to subvert the Faith not merely at Rome,
but in all other places, by publishing the Books of Origin with an Encomiastick
Preface to them; and therefore the telling him, The Catholic Faith would admit
of no alteration, which was received at Rome as elsewhere, might be an Argument
to discourage him from any attempts of that nature. And the main charge against
Ruffinus, is not an endeavor to subvert merely the people of Rome, Non tibi
sufficit scandalum Graeciae, nisi illud and Latinorum auribus ingeras. Id. ib.
but the Latin Church by his translation; and therefore these words ought to be
taken in their greatest latitude; and so imply not at all any Infallibility in
the Roman See.

The remaining Testimonies of Gregory Nazianzene, Cyril, and Ruffinus, P. 136,
137.
(as appears to any one who reads them) only import that the Roman Church had
to their time preserved the Catholic Faith; but they do not assert it
impossible it should ever do otherwise; or that she is an Infallible preserver
of it, and none of their Testimonies are so proper to the Church of Rome, but
they would equally hold for any other Apostolical Churches at that time.
Gregory Nazianzene indeed says, That it would become the Church of Rome to
hold the entire Faith always: and would it not become any other Church to do
so to? does this import that she shall Infallibly do it, or rather that it is
her duty to do it? And if these then be such pregnant Authorities with you, it
is a sign there is little or nothing to be found in Antiquity for your purpose.

But before we end this Chapter,. 18.
we are called to a new task on occasion of a Testimony of St. Cyril produced
by his Lordship in stead of that in Bellarmin which appeared not in that
Chapter, where his Name is mentioned. In which he asserts, That the foundation
and firmness which the Church of Christ has, is placed not in or upon the
person, much less the Successor of St. Peter; but upon the Faith which by Gods
Spirit in him he so firmly professed: Petram opinor per agnominationem nihil
aliud, quam inconcussam and firmissimam discipuli fidem vocavit; in qua
Ecclesia Christi ita fundata and firmata esset, ut non laberetur, and esset
inexpugnabilis inserorum portis, in perpetuum manens. S. Cyril. Alex. Dial. de
Trinit. l. 4. p. 278. Paris. A. 1604.
which (says his Lordship) is the common received opinion both of the ancient
Fathers and of the Protestants. Upon this Rock, that is, upon this Faith will I
build my Church. On which occasion you run presently out into that large common
place concerning Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram; and although I should
grant all that you so earnestly contend for, viz. That these words are not
spoken of St. Peter's Confession, P. 138, 139.
but of his Person, I know no advantage which will accrue to your cause by it.
For although very many of the Fathers understand this place of St. Peter's
Confession, as containing in it the ground and Foundation of Christian
Religion, Thou art Christ the Son of the Living God, which therefore may well
be said to be the Rock on which Christ would build his Church, and although it
were no matter of difficulty to defend this interpretation from all exceptions;
yet because I think it not improbable (the words running by way of address to
St. Peter) that something peculiar to him, is contained in them, I shall not
contend with you about that. But then, if you say that the meaning of St.
Peter's being the Rock, is, The constant Infallibility in Faith which was
derived from St. Peter to the Church of Rome, as you seem to suggest, you must
remember you have a new task to make good, and it is not saying, That St. Peter
was meant by the Rock, will come within some leagues of doing it. I pass
therefore by that discourse as a thing we are not much concerned in, for it is
brought in by his Lordship as the last thing out of that testimony of Cyril:
but you were contented to let go the other more material Observations, that you
might more freely expatiate super hanc ^etram. Touching Ruffinus, I grant his
Lordship is of opinion, That he neither did nor could account the Roman Church
Infallible, for which he gives this reason, For if he had so esteemed of it, P.
16.
he would not have dissented from it in so main a point as is the Canon of
Scripture as he plainly does: For reckoning up the Canonical Books, he most
manifestly dissents from the Roman Church. Therefore either Ruffinus did not
think the Church of Rome was Infallible, or else the Church of Rome at this day
reckons up more Books within the Canon, than heretofore she did. If she do,
then she is changed in a main point of Faith, the Canon of Scripture, and is
absolutely convinced not to be Infallible; for if she were right in her
reckoning then, she is wrong now; and if she be right now, she was wrong then;
and if she do not reckon now more then she did, when Ruffinus lived, then he
reckons fewer than she, and so dissents from her, which doubtless he durst not
have done, had he thought her judgment Infallible. Yea and he sets this mark
upon his dissent besides, that he reckons up the Books of the Canon just so,
and no otherwise, then as he received them out of the Monuments of the
Forefathers, and out of which the assertions of our Faith are to be taken. Now
what have you to say to this strong and nervous Discourse of his Lordship?
Ruffin* in Symbol. p. 188, 189. P. 139.
Why (forsooth) this argument of the Bishop is far from being convincing. And
why so? For (say you) though it should be granted that the Catholic Church
(the Roman you mean) at present declares more books to be contained in the
Canon, than she did in Ruffinus his time, yet this could be no error in her.
That is strange, that the Church should declare the Canon to be complete then,
without these books, and now not to be, and yet neither time be in an error!
No (say you) unless it be showed (which I am sure cannot be) that she condemned
those books then as not Divine Scripture, or not Canonical, which now she
declares to be Divine or Canonical. Excellent good still! that which you are
sure cannot be showed, is obvious to any one that has eyes in his head. For I
only ask you, Whether the Church of Rome did declare any Canon or no, in that
age? If not, according to your principles those who lived in that age could
have no Divine Faith as to the Scripture: if she did declare the Canon of
Scripture, without these Books, did she not thereby condemn these Books to be
not Canonical? For you say, that all are bound to take her judgment what is in
the Canon and what not; if therefore she did not put them into the Canon, did
she not leave them out of the Canon? or, Can you find any medium between being
put in and being left out? Yes (say you) these Books were left then under
dispute: with whom were they under dispute? with the Church of Rome or not? If
with her, was she not Infallible the mean while, when so great a matter as the
Canon of Scripture was under dispute with her? But this whole business
concerning the Canon of Scripture is largely discussed already; only here it is
sufficient to show, how you are pent in on every side; so that there is no
possibility of getting out.

As to the strait (his Lordship takes notice of) that the Church of Rome is
driven to, in borrowing a testimony for her Infallibility from one whom she
branded with Heresy in that very Book from whence this testimony is taken; You
answer, That it evidently argues the truth and uncorruptedness of that Church,
which is so clear that even her Adversaries cannot but confess it. But if they
confess it no better then Ruffinus does, she will have little cause to applaud
her self for her Integrity in that respect. And although a Testimony may be
taken from persons suspected in some things, yet it argues those have but very
few friends, who are fain to make use of their enemies to bear witness for
them. What follows concerning a particular Church being Infallible, P. 140.
because you disown it (although not consonantly to the principles of your
party as was showed in the occasion of the Conference) I pass by.

The errors of the Church of Rome (which his Lordship mentions, but you say
proves not) you shall find abundantly proved before our task is over.

Your vindication of Bellarmin from inconsistency in saying A proposition is
most true, and yet but peradventure as true as another, is so fine and subtle
that it were an injury to the Reader to deprive him of the pleasure of perusing
it. And yet when all is done, a Proposition very false might be as true as this
which Bellarmin speaks of, viz. That the Pope when he teaches the whole Church
in matters of Faith cannot err.

And thus I have cleared that there can be no ground of an imputation of Schism
on our Church from hence, that the Roman Church is the Catholic Church, which
acception of the Catholic Church I have manifested to be as great a stranger
to Antiquity as it is an enemy to Reason: And that the calling the Roman Church
the Catholic Church, is (as his Lordship truly says) a mere Novelty and
perfect Jesuitism.

CHAP. II. Protestants no Schismatics.
Schism a culpable separation; therefore the Question of Schism, must be
determined by enquiring into the causes of it. The plea from the Church of
Rome's being once a right Church, considered. No necessity of assigning the
punctual time when errors crept into her. An account why the originals of
errors seem obscure. By Stapleton's confession, the Roman and Catholic Church
were not the same. The falsity of that assertion manifested, That there could
be no pure Church since the Apostles times, if the Roman Church were corrupt.
No one particular Church free from corruptions; yet no separation from the
Catholic Church. How far the Catholic Church may be said to err. Men may
have distinct communion from any one particular Church, yet not separate from
the Catholic Church. The Testimony of Petrus de Alliaco vindicated. Bellarmin
not mis-cited. Almain full to his Lordships purpose. The Romanists guilty of
the present Schism, and not Protestants. In what sense there can be no just
cause of Schism; and how far that concerns our case. Protestants did not depart
from the Church of Rome, but were thrust out of it. The Vindication of the
Church of Rome from Schism, at last depends upon the two false Principles, Of
her Infallibility, and being the Catholic Church. The Testimonies of S.
Bernard and S. Austin not to the purpose. The Catalogue of Fundamentals, the
Churches not erring, etc. referred back to their proper places.

. 1.
BEfore I come to examine the particulars of this Chapter, it will be necessary
to see, what the state of the Controversy was, concerning Schism, between his
Lordship and his Adversary. His Lordship delivers his sense clearly and fully
in these words; P. 133. sect. 21. n. ^.
It Is too true indeed, that there is a miserable rent in the Church, and I make
no question but the best men do most bemoan it; nor is he a Christian that
would not have Unity, might he have it with Truth. But, I never said, nor
thought, that the Protestants made this rent. The cause of the Schism is yours;
for you thrust us from you, because we called for truth, and redress of abuses.
For a Schism must needs be theirs, whose the cause of it is. The woe runs full
out of the mouth of Christ ever against him that gives the offense; not against
him that takes it ever. And in the Margent, showing that a separation may
sometimes be necessary, he instanceth in the orthodox departing from the
communion of the Arrians: upon which he says; It cannot be that a man should
do well in making a Schism. There may be therefore a necessary separation,
which yet incurrs not the guilt of Schism; and that is, when Doctrines are
taught contrary to the Catholic Faith. And after says, The Protestants did
not depart: for, departure is voluntary, P. 135. n. 3.
so was not theirs; I say not theirs, taking their whole body and cause
together. For, that some among them were peevish, and some ignorantly zealous,
is neither to be doubted, nor is there danger in confessing it. Your body is
not so perfect (I wot well) but that many amongst you are as pettish and as
ignorantly zealous as any of ours. You must not suffer for these, nor we for
those, P. 136, n. 4.
nor should the Church of Christ for either. And when A. C. says, That though
the Church of Rome did thrust the Protestants from her by excommunication, yet
they had first divided themselves by obstinate holding and teaching Opinions
contrary to the Roman Faith. His Lordship answers, So then in his Opinion,
Excommunication on their part was not the prime cause of this division, but the
holding and teaching of contrary Opinions. Why but then in my opinion (says
he) that holding and teaching was not the prime cause neither, but the
corruptions and superstitions of Rome, which forced many men to hold and teach
the contrary: So, the prime cause was theirs still. P. 142. n. 6.
And A. C. telling him, That he said that it was ill done of those who first
made the separation. He answers, That though he remembered not that he said
those words; yet withal adds, If I did not say it then, I do say it now; and
most true it is, That it was ill done of those, whoere they were, who first
made the separation. But then A. C. must not understand me of Actual only, but
of Causal separation. For (as I said before) the Schism is theirs, whose the
cause of it is: and he makes the separation that gives the first just cause of
it; not he that makes an actual separation upon a just cause preceding. And
this is so evident a Truth, that A. C. cannot deny it, for he says it is most
true. These passages I have laid together, that the Reader may clearly
understand the full state of this great Controversy concerning Schism; the
upshot of which, is, that it is agreed between both parties, that all
separation from communion with a Church, does not involve in it the guilt of
Schism, but only such a separation as has no sufficient cause or ground for
it. So that the Question comes to this, Whether your Church were not guilty of
such errors and corruptions, as gave sufficient cause for such a separation.
The Question being thus stated, we now come to consider how you make good your
part in it.

Your first pretense is (if reduced into argument,. 2.
for you seem to have a particular pique against a close way of disputing) That
your Church is a right and orthodox Church, and therefore could never give any
just cause of separation from it. For the Lady asked (as A. C. would have it)
Whether the Roman Church was not the right Church; not, be not, but, was not;
that is, relating to the times, before the breach was made. P. 131. n. 5.
Now his Lordship tells him, That as to the terms he might take his choice; For
the Church of Rome neither is, nor was the right Church, as the Lady desired to
hear. A particular Church it is, and was, and in some times right, and in some
times wrong: but the right Church, or the Holy Catholic Church, it never was,
nor ever can be. And therefore was not such before Luther and others left it,
or were thrust from it. A particular Church it was; but then A. C. is not
distinct enough here neither. For the Church of Rome, both was, and was not a
right or orthodox Church before Luther made a breach from it. For the word
ante, before, may look upon Rome, and that Church a great way off, or long
before; and then in the prime times of it, it was a most right and orthodox
Church. But it may look also nearer home, and upon the immediate times before
Luther, or some ages before that: and then in those times Rome was a corrupt
and tainted Church, far from being Right. And yet both these times, before
Luther made his breach. And so he concludes that Section with this clause, That
the Roman Church which was once right, is now become wrong, by embracing
superstition and error. And what say you now to all this? Two things you have
to return in answer to it, or at least to these two all that you say may be
reduced. 1. That if the Roman Church was right once, it is so still. 2. That if
the Roman Church were wrong before Luther, the Catholic Church was so too.
These two containing all that is said in this case, must be more particularly
discussed.

1. That if the Roman was the right Church, it still is so, P. 142.
seeing no change can be shown in her Doctrine. If there have been a change,
let it appear when, and in what the change was made. Thus you say: but you know
his Lordship never granted, that the Roman Church ever was the right Church (in
the sense you take those words for the true Catholic Church;) that it was once
a right particular Church he acknowledged, and as such was afterward tainted
with errors and corruptions. If so, you desire to know what these were, and
when they came in; to the former I shall reserve an Answer till I come to the
third part of my task, where you shall have an account of them; to the latter,
the time when these came in, because this is so much insisted on by your party,
I shall return you an Answer in this place. And that I shall do in these
following Propositions.

1. Nothing can be more unreasonable, than to deny, that errors and
corruptions have come into a Church, merely because the punctual time of their
coming in cannot be assigned. For, Will any one question the birth of an
Infant, because he cannot know the time of his conception? Will any one deny
there are tares in the field, because he did not see them sown? and our Savior
has told us, Matthew. 13.25.
That the time of sowing tares by the enemy, was, when the men were asleep. So
we say, The errors and corruptions of your Church came in, in a time of great
Ignorance, when little notice was taken of them, and few records preserved of
those times and all the passages of them. Since Learning and Religion commonly
decay and flourish together, How is it possible there should be as exact an
account given of the decay of Religion, as of the flourishing of it? Besides,
Are there not many things you judge errors and corruptions your selves, which
you can give no account when they first entered into the Church? As the
necessity of communicating Infants; name us the person who first broached that
Doctrine, and the time in which it was first received in the Church? That no
souls of men departed, shall see God till the day of resurrection, is, I
suppose, with you, an error; yet it would puzzle you to find out the first
Author of it. So for the rebaptizing Heretics, and many things of a like
nature, it is easier to show, when they appeared publicly, than when they
first came into the Church. And as evident is it, in the decay of the primitive
Discipline of the Church, the altering the orders of penitents, and the rites
belonging to them, the leaving of the communicatory Letters between Churches,
and many other customs of the Church grown into disuse; and yet I suppose you
will not presume to name the persons who first altered the former orders of the
Church; and methinks, this is as reasonable as the naming the punctual time
when other corruptions came in. If you say, the primitive Discipline decayed
gradually and insensibly; so say I, that the Churches corruptions came in as
the other went out, in the same gradual and insensible manner; and if you
cannot name the precise time of the one, it is not reasonable you should expect
the other from us.

2. We may have sufficient reason to judge what are errors and corruptions in
a Church, though we cannot fix on the time when they came in: Which is, by
comparing them with that Rule of Faith which is delivered down by an
interrupted tradition to us, and with the practice of the first Ages of the
Christian Church. What is apparently contrary to either of these, we have
reason to reject, though we cannot determine when it first came in. For as long
as these are our certain standards, it matters not who first departed from
them, as long as we see that they have departed. But when we own an absolute
and infallible Rule of Faith and manners, to question, Whether any thing
contrary to it, be an error or no, because we cannot tell when it first began,
would be, as if the Egyptians, when they saw their Land overflowed by the
Nile, should question, Whether it were so or no, because they could not find
out the head of Nilus.

3. They who assert their Doctrines and Practices to be Apostolical, are bound
to show the continued succession of them from the Apostles times. And if they
fail in this, upon their own principles, they must be errors and corruptions,
though the punctual time of their first obtaining in the Church, cannot be set
down. Since therefore you affirm, you are bound to prove. If you say, The
judgment of your Church being infallible, you need prove no more than that. I
answer, you must prove that this Infallibility then, has been ever received in
the Church; but if there be not the least footstep of it in the records of the
ancient Church, we justly look on this as an error of the first magnitude,
though we cannot tell you the minute of its first rising.

4. We have sufficient evidence from your selves, that many Doctrines and
Practices are owned by you, which are of no great antiquity in the Christian
Church. Thus, by the confession of Scotus, Transubstantiation is no elder than
the Council of Lateran, Purgatory not much heard of in the primitive Church by
the acknowledgement of Bishop Fisher, Communion in one kind confessed by most
to be contrary to the primitive practice and institution, Prayer in an unknown
tongue can be no elder than the general disuse of the Latin tongue in the Roman
Provinces. And so for many others, for which we have the confessions of your
own party; but I need not insist upon that, since your very Doctrine of the
Churches power to declare matters of Faith, may make things necessary in one
Age, which were not in a foregoing, and, in that case, sure it is no great
difficulty to tell you, when some things of School-points became necessary
Doctrines; but then the Question goes off from the time to the matter, Whether
any thing declared by your Church can be an error: but of that, enough has
been said already.

5. There may be a sufficient account given, why the beginnings of errors and
corruptions in your Church have been so obscure; because they came not in all
of a sudden, but some at one time, some at another, because they rise
gradually, as is apparent in Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images,
because many of those things which ended in great corruptions, were taken up at
first out of good designs, to win more upon the Gentile world, because many
things were at first practiced freely, which afterward were urged as
necessary; because Barbarism came into the Church along with these corruptions;
because many who gave occasion to them, were persons of great esteem in their
age, and others strove to follow their example more than the Rule; because the
state of the Church did very much alter from it self in several ages, which
altered men's apprehensions and judgments of things, in regard of their
suitableness and necessity; because those persons who brought in, and contended
for these things, were the persons chiefly in power then in the Church, which
hindered their being cast out of communion as others had been; because a long
time most of these errors and corruptions, were but the private opinions and
practices of a faction, though then the more prevalent in the Church, and
therefore not so vehemently opposed in the first rise of them, as when this
imposthumated matter was grown to a head, and then there was a necessity of
lancing it. These, and several other reasons might be given, why the first
originals of errors and corruptions in your Church, cannot with so much
clearness be manifested, as that they were errors and corruptions: Although
such, who would take the pains to travel in an argument of that nature, might
with very great probability, trace the most both of your errors and
corruptions to the time and age, when they were first publicly owned and
received. But thus much may here suffice as to your demand, That if your Church
be not the same she was, we should mention the time, when the change was made.
As though Chronical distempers could not be known, unless we could set down the
punctual time of their first onset. The distempers of your Church are
Hectical, I wish not in that respect, that they are seldom fully discovered,
till they be incurable.

2. You answer, That if your Church has erred, the Catholic Church has done
so too;. 3.
for which you say two things. 1. That in this dispute the Roman Church, and
the Catholic Church, are all one. 2. That then there was no one visible Church
untainted, P. 142. n. 1.
incorrupt, right, orthodox throughout the whole world. 1. You learnedly tell
us, That the Roman and Catholic Church are all one in this dispute, and most
discreetly tell his Lordship, That he beggs the Question in supposing the
contrary; but you know whose arts those are to charge their neighbors with
that, they were sure to be told of themselves, if the other had spoke first.
But very worthily you prove this, from D. Stapleton, who offers to confirm his
assertion by that which overthrows yours. He says, That amongst the Ancients,
the Roman Church, and the Catholic Church were taken for the same, and his
reason is, because the communion of the Roman Church was most certainly and
evidently with the whole Catholic. And, Can any thing then be more plain, than
that the Roman and Catholic Church were not the same? For, Can any thing be
the measure of it self? If it were therefore Catholic, because agreeing with
the Catholic Church, then it was not causally the Catholic Church, but only
by way of communion and participation. If I should say, That a man and a
living-creature, are the same, and should give this reason for it, Because man
agrees in every thing with the nature of a living creature; does this imply,
that the formal notion of man, and a living-creature, are the same? or only
that man partakes so much of the properties of a living creature, that he may
well receive the denomination? So it is here with the Roman Church, that might
well be called Catholic by the Ancients, because it did partake of the
properties of the Catholic Church, but not as though the formal Reason of a
Churches being Catholic, came from partaking of communion with the Roman
Church; as you assert, wherein you are diametrically opposite to Stapleton, for
he makes the reason, why the Roman Church was Catholic, to be, Because it had
communion with the Catholic Church. By which it is evident, that the notion of
the Catholic Church was much larger than that of the Roman Church. Besides,
Stapleton only says, That the Ancients thought so, and surely they thought so
only of the Roman Church of their own time; which might then have certain
communion with the Catholic Church, and yet not have so in the next age
ensuing; therefore, though the Catholic Church continue ever the same, and
incorrupt, it will by no means follow, that the Roman Church must do so too.
Whatever A. C. or you understand by the Catholic Church, is not, as you
elsewhere phrase it, a straws matter, unless you proved better than you have
done, that the proper notion of the Holy Catholic Church, is the same with
those who agree with the Church of Rome in Doctrine and Communion. Which is
your fundamental mistake, and a thing you would fain have taken for granted,
without the least shadow of a solid proof.

But there may be more force in your second Answer, That if the Roman Church
were wrong and corrupted, it follows, that not only for some time,. 4.
P. 143.
but for many ages before Luther, yea even up to the Apostles times, there was
no one visible Church untainted, incorrupt, right, orthodox throughout the
whole world. It were worth our while to know what you mean by no one Visible
Church; Do you think there are, or may be, more Visible Churches than one,
taking the Visible Church in its proper sense for the Catholic Visible Church?
If this be your meaning in general, how unhappily soever it be expressed, viz.
that then it follows, there could be no Visible Church at all with whom we
might have communion; I see not how it is proved by what you bring: But if this
be all you aim at (for no further your arguments will carry you) that there was
no one Visible Church untainted, i. e. no one Church of a distinct communion
from other Churches altogether free from error; I see no such dangerous
consequence in the owning it. But if it were so, when Luther began to oppose
the corruptions of the Church of Rome, How does it follow that it must be so
even up to the Apostles times? But we ought to see, how you prove your
assertion. For if in all those Ages the Roman Church were wrong, corrupted, and
tainted; and all those likewise that disagreed from her, viz. Hussites,
Albigenses, Waldenses, Wicklevites, Greeks, Abyssins, Armenians, etc. had in
them corrupt Doctrine during those ages (as it is certain they had, neither
could the Relator deny it) I say, If the Roman Church was thus corrupt; it
follows, that not only for some time, but for many ages before Luther, yea even
up to the Apostles times, there was no one Visible Church untainted, incorrupt,
right, and orthodox, throughout the whole world. And consequently, that during
the said ages, every good Christian was in conscience obliged in some point of
Christian belief or other, to contradict the Doctrine, and desert the communion
of all Visible Churches in the world, etc. Whence it would further follow, that
Schism or separation from the external communion of the whole Church might be
not only lawful, but even necessary; which is impossible, as being contrary to
the very essential predicates of Schism, which is defined to be, A voluntary or
wilful departure (such as no just cause, or reason, can be given of it) from
the communion of the whole Church. Three things this discourse of yours may be
resolved into. 1. That if in Luthers time the Roman Church was corrupt, then
there was no one Visible Church incorrupt. 2. That if so, it follows that there
was none incorrupt even up to the Apostles times. 3. That if there were no one
Visible Church incorrupt, then it was necessary to separate from the external
communion of the whole Church. To every one of these I shall return a peculiar
and distinct Answer. To the first I say, That the utmost you can prove from
hence, is, That there was no one Church of any distinct communion from others,
which was free from all errors. And what great absurdity is there in saying
so? Unless you could prove, that there must be some one Church in all ages of
the world, which must be free from all kind or possibility of error. And when
you have done this, I shall acknowledge it absurd to say the contrary; but
otherwise that very supposition seems to have the greater absurdity in it;
because it restrains the utmost supposable privileges of the truly Catholic
Church, to a particular Church of some one denomination. What then if we grant
that in Luthers time, there was no one Visible Church free from errors and
corruptions? What if we should say, in our own times? What if, in elder times?
For that which is possible to be, may be supposed actually in any time. If it
be possible for one particular Church to fall into errors and corruptions, Why
is it not for another? (unless some particular privilege of Infallibility be
pretended; but that is not our present Question) if it be possible for every
particular Church to fall into error, Why may not that possibility come into
act in one Age, as well as several? Is there any promise that there shall be a
succession and course of erring in Churches, that one Church must err for one
age, and another for the next? but that it shall never fall out, that by any
means whatsoever they shall err together? If there be no such promise to the
contrary, the reason of the thing will hold, that they may all err at the same
time. No, say you, for then it would follow, that the Catholic Church might
err. To that I answer, 1. Either you mean by that, that all societies in the
Christian world may concur in the same error, or else that several of them
may have several errors: and this latter is it only which you prove, for you
do not suppose that the Romanists, Hussites, Albigenses, etc. were all guilty
of the same errors, but that these several societies were guilty of several
errors; and therefore from hence it follows not, that they may all concur in
the same error, which is the only way to prove that the Church as Catholic
may err, for otherwise you only prove, that the several particular Churches,
which make up the Catholic, may fall into error. 2. Supposing all these
Churches should agree in one error, (which is more than you have proved, or,
it may be, can) have you proved that they concur in such an error, which
destroies the Being of the Catholic Church? For you would do well to evince,
that the Church is secured from any but such errors which destroy its Being;
for the means of proving, That the Catholic Church cannot err, are built on
the promises of its perpetuity; now those can only prove that the Church is
secured from Fundamental errors, for those are such only which destroy its
Being. And so his Lordship tells you, P. 139. sect 18. n. 5.
That the whole Church cannot universally err in the Doctrine of Faith, is
most true, and granted by diverse Protestants (so you will but understand its
not erring in absolute Fundamental Doctrines) and this he proves, from that
promise of Christ, That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it. So that
the Catholic Church's not erring, and the perpetuity of the Catholic Church
do with us, P. 141.
mean the same thing. For his Lordship grants, That she may err in
superstructures, and deductions, and other By, and Unnecessary truths, if her
curiosity, or other weakness, carry her beyond, or cause her to fall short of
her Rule. There is then a great difference between saying, That the Catholic
Church cannot err, which is no more than to say, That there shall be always a
Catholic Church, and saying, That there must be always some one Visible
Church, which must be free from all error and corruption. For this we deny,
and you produce no reason at all to prove it. Granting, that all particular
Churches, whether of Romanists, Greeks, or others, are subject to errors and
corruptions, we assert no more of them, than you grant your selves, that any
particular Church is subject to; for the only ground, why you would have your
Church exempt from error, is, the supposing her not to be a particular, but
the Catholic Church, which implies, that if she were only a particular Church
(as she is no more) she might be subject to errors as well as other Churches.
And what incongruity then there is in asserting, that there may be no one
Visible Church of any particular denomination free from all error and
corruption, I cannot understand.

But further, you say, If there were no one Visible Church then free from
error,. 5.
it follows, not only for some time, but for many ages before Luther, yea even
up to the Apostles times, there was no one Visible Church untainted throughout
the whole world. Not to meddle with the truth of the thing, Whether there were
so or no, the consequence is that, we are now to examine; that if it were so in
Luthers time, it must be so even up to the Apostles times. The proof of which
depends upon the impossibility of a Churches degeneracy in Faith or Manners,
and so supposes the thing in question, that there must be some one Visible
Church absolutely exempt from all impossibility of error. For otherwise that
might be true in one age, which might not in another. For although we say, that
particular Churches may err, and be corrupt, we do not say, that it is
necessary they should always be so. For, in some ages particular Churches may
be free from error and corruption, and yet in another age be overspread with
them. And thus we assert it to have been with the Roman Church: for his
Lordship says, In the prime times it was a most right and orthodox Church, but
in the immediate times before. Luther, or in some ages before, that it was a
corrupt and tainted Church: And so in those times in which it was right, those
might be heretical who did not communicate with it, not merely because they did
not communicate with it, but because in not communicating with a right and
orthodox Church they showed themselves guilty of some error or corruption. We
see then, there is no connection in the world in the parts of your consequence,
That if it were so at one time, it must be so always; if in the time of
Luther, it must be so even up to the Apostles times.

3. From hence you say it will follow, That it will be necessary to separate
from the external communion of the whole Church. I answer, there can be no
separation from the whole Church, but in such things wherein the Unity of the
whole Church lies; for separation is a violation of some Union: now when men
separate from the errors of all particular Churches, they do not separate from
the whole, because those things which one separates from those particular
Churches for, are not such, as make all them put together to be the whole, or
Catholic Church. This must be somewhat further explained. There are two things
considerable in all particular Churches; those things which belong to it as a
Church, and those things which belong to it as a particular Church. Those
things which belong to it as a Church, are the common ligaments or grounds of
union between all particular Churches, which taken together, make up the
Catholic Church: Those things which belong to it as a particular Church, are
such as it may retain the essence of a Church without. Now, I say, Whosoever
separates from any particular Church (much more from all) for such things
without which that can be no Church, separates from the communion of the
Catholic Church; but he that separates only from particular Churches as to
such things which concern not their Being, is only separated from the communion
of those Churches, and not the Catholic. And therefore, supposing that all
particular Churches have some errors and corruptions in them, though I should
separate from them all, I do not separate from the communion of the whole
Church, unless it be for something, without which those could be no Churches.
An evidence of which, is, that by my declaring the grounds of my separation to
be such errors and corruptions, which are crept into the communion of such
Churches, and imposed on me in order to it, I withal declare my readiness to
join with them again, if those errors and corruptions be left out. And where
there is this readiness of communion, there is no absolute separation from the
Church as such, but only suspending communion till such abuses be reformed.
Which is therefore more properly a separation from the errors, than the
communion of such a Church. Wherefore if we suppose that there is no one
Visible Church, whose communion is not tainted with some corruptions, though,
if these corruptions be enjoined as conditions of communion, I cannot
communicate with any of those Churches, yet it follows not that I am separated
from the external communion of the Catholic Church, but that I only suspend
communion with those particular Churches, till I may safely join with them. As,
suppose all the particular men I can converse with, were infected with
Leprosy, my not associating with them, does not imply that I am separated from
the communion of all mankind, but that I am loath to be infected as they are,
and therefore withdraw my self till I can meet with such healthful persons with
whom I may safely associate again. And if several other persons be of the same
mind with me, and we therefore join together, Do we therefore divide our selves
from the whole world by only taking care of our own safety? And especially if
any company of such leprous persons should resolve that none should live among
them, but such as would eat of those meats which brought that distemper upon
them; our withdrawing our selves, and associating without them will still
appear more reasonable and commendable. Therefore we say, We do not necessarily
separate from all Churches that have errors or corruptions in them, supposing
those errors and corruptions be not imposed on us, as conditions of communion;
and thence though we should grant, No one visible Church free from taint or
corruption, yet it is not necessary we should separate from them all: For we
may lawfully join in Communion with Churches having errors and corruptions, if
our joining be not an approbation of them. Thus though the Greeks, Armenians,
Albigenses, Abyssms may have some errors, or corruptions, yet if they be not
Fundamental, and be not enjoined as necessary to be approved in order to their
Communion, notwithstanding them, we may lawfully Communicate with them. It does
not then at all follow, that if there may be no one visible Church free from
error and corruption, it would be necessary to separate from the Communion of
the Catholic Church: because 1. All those particular Churches may not make
those errors conditions of Communion. 2. Though they did, we separate not from
them as Catholic, but as corrupt and erroneous particular Churches. And
therefore you might have spared your labor in telling us from the Holy
Fathers, and the Reverend and learned Dr. Hammond, That it can never be lawful
to separate from the Catholic Church, for we assert the same, but have made it
appear that it follows not from the premises which were laid down.

. 6.
His Lordship having said, That the Roman Church before Luther was a corrupt and
tainted Church, in his Margin produces a Citation to that purpose of Cardinal
de Alliaco, who acknowledges infinite abuses, Cum infiniti abusus, Schism^ta
quoque and haereses, per totum nunc Ch^istianum orbem invalescant; Ecclesiam
Dei legitima indigere reformatione, nemini non apertum erit. Petrus de Alliaco
lib. de Reform. Eccles.
Schisms and Heresies to prevail over the Christian world; so that it is plain,
The Church of God stands in need of due reformation. From which his Lordship
says, That it will hardly sink into any man's judgment that so great a man, as
Pet. de Alliaco was in that Church, should speak thus if he did not see some
errors in the Doctrine of that Church as well as the manners. To this you
answer, That he speaks not of false Doctrines taught by the Roman Church, P.
143.
but of Schisms and Heresies raised against the Church (not fostered by her) in
all parts of Christendom. But I appeal to any indifferent Reader of this
Testimony, whether he can conceive that the Cardinal intended to acquit or
accuse the Roman Church in those words of his. For taking them in your sense,
they must contain a high commendation of the Roman Church, that in the midst of
so many Heresies and Schisms raised against her, she preserved her Faith
entire; and think you that he that said, The Church of God needed reformation,
thought there was nothing in the Church which stood in need of it? And
therefore this Testimony does sufficiently prove that the Roman Church was a
tainted and corrupted Church.

If there be sufficient evidence, that there are tares sown in the Church of
Rome, it is not to much purpose to enquire Whether they were sown while the
Bishops slept, or whether they themselves did not help to sow them. But it
seems in their private capacities they might sow them, as private Doctors, and
then it is not likely that in their public capacity they would pluck them up.
If the Catholic Faith only, as you tell us, oblige us to maintain that the
Pope is Infallible when he defines a General Council; then there will be
opportunity enough for errors to be sown, and grow up in the interval of such
definitions. But you further add, That though this be all which men are obliged
to maintain (for no man can be bound to impossibilities) yet that it is a very
pious opinion to hold, That no Popes have personally erred as private Doctors,
i. e. you have a very good mind to maintain it, if you knew how; for that is
the meaning of your pious opinion. For if you thought it had been defensible,
no doubt it had been de fide long ago. But it was hard thwarting the Records of
former ages wherein the errors of Popes, and their mutual contradictions are
so visible to all that search after them, and therefore it was wisely concluded
that this should not be held de fide, but, if any would venture upon a thing so
acceptable at Rome as Personal Infallibility is, it should be accounted a very
pious undertaking. And accordingly Bellarmin has with the greatest care and
industry endeavored it in several Chapters; but, as his Lordship truly says,
All Bellarmin's labor though great and full of art, is not able to wash them
clean. And this (if you had undertaken the defense of Bellarmin) should have
been made good; but since you are so cautious as not to think your self obliged
to do it, I commend your discretion in it, and proceed. I cannot see that his
Lordship is guilty of a false quotation of Bellarmin for that saying, Et Papas
quosdam graves errores seminasse in Ecclesia Christi, luce clarius est, for he
does not seem at all to Cite Bellarmin for it; but having Cited the place just
before, where he endeavors to vindicate the Popes from all errors; he adds
this expression, as directly contrary to his design, that though he had
endeavored so much to clear them from errors, yet that they had sown some
grievous errors in the Church was as clear as the day; and as it immediately
follows is proved by Jac. Almain, etc. And therefore it was only your own
oscitancy which made you set it in the Contents of your Chapter, that Cardinal
Bellarmin was most falsely quoted by him. But that falseness which with so much
confidence you charge his Lordship with, rebounds with greater force on your
self, when you say, That Almain speaks not of errors in Faith at all, but only
of errors, or rather abuses in point of manners; whereas he not only asserts
but largely proves, That the Pope may err, not only personally but judicially,
Papa potest errare, errore judiciali; de personali, omnibus notum est. Jac.
Almain. de auctorit. Eccles. cap. 10.

Quorum unus determinavit judicialiter, Christum and Apostolos nihil habuisse
in communi nec in proprio; alter, oppositum. Id. ib.


and in the same Chapter brings that remarkable Instance of the evident
contradiction between the definitions of Pope Nicolaus 3. and John 22. And
Platina tells us, that John 22. declared them to be Heretics who held
according to the former definition. And, Is this only concerning some abuses
abuses in point of manners, and not concerning errors in Faith that Almain
speaks? You might as well say so of Lyra, who said, That many Popes have
Apostatized from the Faith; of Cusanus, who says, Lyra in Matthew. 16. Cusan.
Concord. l. 1. c. 14. Alphons. c. haeres l 1 c 2. Carranz. Controv. 4. Canus
loc Com. l. 6 c. ult.
That both in a direct and collateral line, several Popes have fallen into
Heresy; of Alphonsus a Castro, who says, That the best friends of the Popes
believe they may err in Faith; of Carranza, who says, No one questions but the
Pope may be an Heretic; of Canus, who says, It is not to be denied but that
the chief Bishop may be an Heretic, and that there are examples of it: You
might as well, I say, affirm that all these spoke only of abuses in Manners,
and not errors in Faith, as you do of Almain. Neither will your other
subterfuge serve your turn, That they taught errors in Doctrine as private
men; for, Alphonsus a Castro expressly affirms in the case of Pope Coelestine,
about the dissolution of Marriage in case of Heresy, De haeres. l. 1. c. 4.
That it cannot be said that he erred through negligence, and as a private
person, and not as Pope; For (says he) this definition is extant in the
decretals, and he had seen it himself. Although the contrary to this were
afterward defined not only by Pope Innocent 3. but by the Council of Trent.
And hence it appears whatever you pretend to the contrary, That there may be
tares sown in the Church of Rome, P. 144.
not only by private persons, but by the public hands of the Popes too, if
they themselves may be believed, who else do most Infallibly contradict each
other. But whether these errors came in at first through negligence or public
definitions is not so material to our purpose; for which it is sufficient to
prove that the Church of Rome may be tainted and corrupted, which may be done
one way as well as the other. As Cornfieldsd may be overrun with tares though
no one went purposely to sow them there. Cassand. Consult. act. 21.
And so much is acknowledged by Cassander when he speaks of the superstitious
practices used in your Church, That those who should have redressed those
abuses, were, if not the Authors, yet the incouragers of them for their own
advantage; by which means, errors and corruptions may soon grow to a great
height in a Church though they were never sown by public definitions. And when
you disparage Cassanders Testimony, by telling us how little his credit is
among Catholics, you thereby let us see how much your Church is overrun with
corruptions, when none among you can speak against them but they presently
forfeit their reputation.

The case of the Schism at Rome between Cornelius and Novatianus, and the
employment of Caldonius and Fortunatus from St. Cyprian thither, N. 3.
does belong to the former Chapter, where it has been fully discoursed of
already, and must not be repeated here. Only thence we see that Rome is as
capable of a Schism within her own bowels as any other Church is, which is
abundantly attested by the multitudes of Schisms, which happened afterward
between the Bishops of that See. But this being insisted on by his Lordship in
the former Controversy of the Catholic Church, does not refer to this Chapter
wherein the causes of our separation should be enquired into.

. 7.
Which at last you come to, and passing by the verbal dispute between A.C. and
his Lordship about what was spoken at the Conference, N. 4. ibid.
you tell us, It more concerns you to see what could or can be said in this
point. You draw up therefore a large and formal charge of Schism against us in
your following words. Our assertion, say you, is; but, good Sir, it is not what
you assert, but what you prove. It were an easy matter for us to draw up a far
larger Bill against your Church, and tell you our assertion is, that you are
the greatest Schismatics in the world. Would you look on it as sufficiently
proved because we asserted it? I pray think the same of us, for we are not apt
to think our selves guilty of Schism at all the more, because you tell us what
your assertion is; if this be your way of dealing with us, your first assertion
had need be, That you are Infallible; but still that had need be more then
asserted, for unless it be Infallibly proved we should not believe it. But
however, we must see what your assertion is, that we may at least understand
from you the state of the present Controversy. Your assertion therefore is,
that Protestants made this rent or Schism, P. 145.
by their obstinate and pertinacious maintaining erroneous Doctrines, contrary
to the Faith of the Roman or Catholic Church: by their rejecting the Authority
of their lawful Ecclesiastical Superiors both immediate and mediate; by
aggregating themselves into a separate body or company of pretended Christians,
independent of any Pastors at all, that were in lawful and quiet possession of
jurisdiction over them; by making themselves Pastors and Teachers of others,
and administering Sacraments without Authority given them by any that were
lawfully impower^d to give it; by instituting new rites and ceremonies of their
own in matter of Religion, contrary to those anciently received throughout all
Christendom; by violently excluding and dispossessing other Prelates and
Pastors of and from their respective See's, Cures, and Benefices; and
intruding themselves into their places in every Nation where they could get
footing, the said Prelates and Pastors for the most part yet living. These are
your assertions, and because you seek not to prove them it shall be sufficient
to oppose ours to them. Our assertion therefore is, that the Church and Court
of Rome are guilty of this Schism, by obtruding erroneous Doctrines and
superstitious practices, as the conditions of her Communion; by adding such
Articles of Faith which are contrary to the plain rule of Faith, and repugnant
to the sense of the truly Catholic and not the Roman Church; by her
intolerable encroachments and usurpations upon the liberties and privileges of
particular Churches, under a vain pretense of Universal Pastourship; by forcing
men if they would not damn their souls by sinning against their consciences in
approving the errors and corruptions of the Roman Church, to join together for
the Solemn Worship of God according to the rule of Scripture and practice of
the Primitive Church; and suspending Communion with that Church till those
abuses and corruptions be redressed. In which they neither deny obedience to
any Lawful Authority over them, nor take to themselves any other Power than the
Law of God has given them, receiving their Authority in a constant Succession
from the Apostles: they institute no Rites and Ceremonies either contrary to,
or different from the practice of the Primitive Church; they neither exclude or
dispossess others of their Lawful Power, but in case others neglect their
office, they may be notwithstanding obliged to perform theirs in order to the
Churches Reformation. Leaving the Supreme Authority of the Kingdom or Nation
to order and dispose of such things in the Church which of right appertain unto
it. And this we assert to be the case of Schism, in reference to the Church of
England, which we shall make good in opposition to your assertions, where we
meet with any thing that seems to contradict the whole or any part of it. These
and the like practices of yours (to use your own words) not any obstinate
maintaining any erroneous Doctrines, as you vainly pretend, we aver to have
been the true and real causes of that separation which is made between your
Church and Ours. And you truly say, That Protestants were thrust out of your
Church; which is an Argument they did not voluntarily forsake the Communion of
it, and therefore are no Schismatics; but your carriage and practices were
such as forced them to join together in a distinct Communion from you. And it
was not we who left your Church, but your Church that left her Primitive Faith
and Purity in so high a manner, as to declare all such excommunicate who will
not approve of and join in her greatest corruptions, though it be sufficiently
manifest that they are great recessions from the Faith, Piety, and Purity of
that Roman Church which was planted by the Apostles, and had so large a
commendation from the Apostolical men of those first ages. Since then such
errors and corruptions are enforced upon us as conditions of Communion with
you, by the same reason that the Orthodox did very well in departing from the
Arrians, because the Arrians were already departed from the Church by their
false Doctrine; will our separation from you be justified who first departed
from the Faith and Purity of the Primitive Church; and not only so, but thrust
out of your Communion all such as would not depart from it as far as you.

Having thus considered and retorted your Assertions, we come to your Answers..
8.
Nor (say you) does the Bishop vindicate the Protestant party, by saying, P.
145.
The cause of Schism was ours, and that we Catholics thrust Protestants from
us, because they called for truth and redress of abuses. For first, there can
be no just cause of Schism; this has been granted already even by Protestants.
And so it is by us, and the reason is very evident for it, for if there be a
just cause, there can be no Schism; and therefore what you intend by this, I
cannot imagine, unless it be to free Protestants from the guilt of Schism,
because they put the Main of their trial upon the justice of the cause which
moved them to forsake the Communion of your Church; or else you would have it
taken for granted that ours was a Schism, and thence infer there could be no
just cause of it. As if a man being accused for taking away the life of one who
violently set upon him in the Highway with an intent both to rob and destroy
him, should plead for himself that this could be no murder in him, because
there was a sufficient and justifiable cause for what he did; that he designed
nothing but to go quietly on his road; that this person and several others
violently set upon him; that he entreated them to desist, that he sought to
avoid them as much as he could, but when he saw they were absolutely bent on
his ruin, he was forced in his own necessary defense to take away the life of
that person; Would not this with any intelligent Jury be looked on as a just
and reasonable Vindication? But if so wise a person as your self had been among
them, you would no doubt have better informed them; for you would very gravely
have told them, All his plea went on a false supposition, that he had a just
cause for what he did, but there could be no just cause for murder. Do you not
see now how subtle and pertinent your Answer is here, by this parallel to it?
For as in that case all men grant that there can be no just cause for murder,
because all murder is committed without a just cause; and if there be one, it
cease to be murder: So it is here in Schism, which being a causeless
separation from the Churches Unity, I wonder who ever imagined there could be
just cause for it. But to rectify such gross mistakes as these are for the
future, you would do well to understand that Schism formally taken always
imports something criminal in it, and there can be no just cause for a sin; but
besides that, there is that which (if you understand it) you would call the
materiality of it which is the separation of one part of the Church from
another. Now this, according to the different grounds and reasons of it,
becomes lawful or unlawful, that is, as the reasons do make it necessary or
unnecessary, For separation is not lawful but when it is necessary: now this
being capable of such a different nature that it may be good or evil according
to its circumstances, there can be no absolute judgment passed upon it, till
all those reasons and circumstances be duly examined; and if there be no
sufficient grounds for it, then it is formally Schism, i. e. a culpable
separation; if there be sufficient cause, then there may be a separation, but
it can be no Schism. And because the Union of the Catholic Church lies in
Fundamental and necessary truths, therefore there can be no separation
absolutely from the Catholic Church but what involves in it the formal guilt
of Schism; it being impossible any person should have just cause to disown the
Churches Communion for any thing whose belief is necessary to salvation. And
whosoever does so, thereby makes himself no member of the Church, because the
Church subsists on the belief of Fundamental truths. But in all such cases
wherein a division may be made, and yet the several persons divided retain the
essentials of a Christian Church, the separation which may be among any such,
must be determined according to the causes of it. For it being possible of one
side, that men may out of capricious humors and fancies renounce the Communion
of a Church which requires nothing but what is just and reasonable; and it
being possible on the other side, that a Church calling her self Catholic may
so far degenerate in Faith and practice, as not only to be guilty of great
errors and corruptions, but to impose them as conditions of Communion with
her, it is necessary where there is a manifest separation to enquire into the
reasons and grounds of it; and to determine the nature of it according to the
justice of the cause which is pleaded for it. And this I hope may help you a
little better to understand, what is meant by such, who say, There can be no
just cause of Schism; and how little this makes for your purpose.

But you go on and I must follow. And to his calling for truth, etc.. 9.
I Answer, What Heretics ever yet forsook the Church of God, but pretended
truth, and complained they were thrust out, and hardly dealt with, merely
because they called for truth and redress of abuses? And I pray, what Church
was ever so guilty of errors and corruptions, but would call those Heretics
and Schismatics who found fault with her Doctrine, or separated from her
Communion? It is true, Heretics pretend truth, and Schismatics abuses, but is
it possible there should be errors and corruptions in a Churches Communion, or
is it not? if not, prove but that of your Church, and the cause is at an end;
if it be, we are to examine whether the charge be true or no. For although
Heretics may pretend truth, and others be deceived in judging of it, yet
doubtless there is a real difference between truth and error. If you would
never have men quarrel with any Doctrine of your Church because Heretics have
pretended truth: would not the same reason hold, why men should never enquire
after Truth, Reason, or Religion, because men have pretended to them all which
have not had them. It is therefore a most senseless cavil to say we have no
reason to call for truth because Heretics have done so; and on the same
grounds you must not be called Catholics because Heretics have been called
so. But those who have been Heretics were first proved to be so, by making it
appear that was a certain truth which they denied; do you the same by us; prove
those which we call errors in your Church to be part of the Catholic and
Apostolic Faith; prove those we account corruptions, to be parts of Divine
worship, and we will give you leave to call us Heretics and Schismatics, but
not before. But, say you, He should have reflected that the Church of God is
styled a City of Truth by the Prophet, (and so it may be, and yet your Church
be a fortress of Error) And a pillar and foundation of Truth by the Apostle,
(but what is this to the Church of Romes being so) And by the Fathers, a rich
depository or Treasury of all Divine and Heavenly Doctrines (so it was in the
sense the Fathers took the Church in, for the truly Catholic Christian
Church). And we may use the same expressions still of the Church as the
Prophets, Apostles, and Fathers did, and nevertheless charge your Church justly
with the want of truth, and opposition to the preaching of it, and on that
ground justly forsake her Communion, which is so far from being inexcusable
impiety and presumption, that it was only the performance of a necessary
Christian duty. And therefore that Woe of scandal, his Lordship mentioned,
still returns upon your party who gave such just cause of offense to the
Christian world, and making it necessary for all such as aimed at the purity of
the Christian Church to leave your Communion, when it could not be enjoyed
without making shipwreck both of Faith and a good Conscience. And this is so
clear and undeniable (to follow you still in your own language) that we dare
appeal for a trial of our cause to any Assembly of learned Divines, or what
Judge and Jury you please, provided they be not some of the parties accused;
and because you are so willing to have Learned Divines, I hope you will believe
the last Pope Innocent so far, as not to mention the Pope and Cardinals.

What follows in Vindication of A. C. from enterfeiring and shuffling in his
words, P. 146.
because timorous and tender consciences think they can never speak with
caution enough, for fear of telling a lie, will have the force of a
demonstration, (being spoken of and by a Jesuit) among all those who know what
mortal haters they are of any thing that looks like a lie or aequivocation: And
what reason there is that, of all persons in the world, they should be judged
men of timorous and tender consciences.

But whatever the words were which passed, you justify A. C. in saying, That
the Protestants did depart from the Church of Rome,. 10.
and got the Name of Protestants by protesting against her. For this (say you)
is so apparent that the whole world acknowledges it. If you mean that the
Communion of Protestants is distinct from yours, Whoever made scruple of
confessing it? But because in those terms of departing, leaving, forsaking your
Communion, you would seem to imply that it was a voluntary act and done without
any necessary cause enforcing it, therefore his Lordship denies that
Protestants did depart; for, says he, departure is voluntary so was not
theirs. But because it is so hard a matter to explain the nature of that
separation between your Church and Ours, especially in the beginning of it,
without using those terms or some like them, as when his Lordship says, that
Luther made a breach from it. It is sufficient, that we declare that by none of
these expressions we mean any causeless separation, but only such acts as were
necessarily consequential to the imposing your errors and corruptions as
conditions of Communion with your Church. To the latter part his Lordship
answers, That the Protestants did not get that name, by Protesting against the
Church of Rome, P. 135. n. 3.
but by Protesting (and that when nothing else would serve) against her errors
and superstitions. Do you but remove them from the Church of Rome, and our
Protestation is ended and our Separation too. This, you think, will be answered
with our old put off, That it is the common pretext of all Heretics, when they
sever themselves from the Roman- Catholic Church. If your Church indeed were
what she is not, the Catholic Church, we might be what we are not, Heretics:
but think it not enough to prove us Heretics, that you call us so, unless you
will likewise take it for granted, that the Pope is Antichrist, and your
Church, the Whore of Babylon, because they are as often, and as confidently
called so. And if your Church be truly so (as she is shrewdly suspected to be)
Do you think she, and all her followers, would not as confidently call such as
dissented from her, Heretics, and the using those expressions of her virulent
execrations against her, as you do now, supposing her not to be so. What
therefore would belong to your Church, supposing her as bad as any Protestants
imagine her to be, cannot certainly help to persuade us, that she is not so bad
as she is. When you say still, That Protestants did really depart from the
Roman Church, and in so doing, remained separate from the whole Church; you
very fairly beg the thing in dispute, and think us uncivil for denying it. You
know not what that passage means, That the Protestants did not voluntarily
depart, taking their whole body and cause together, since there is no obscurity
in the expression, but a defect elsewhere, I can only say, That his Lordship
was not bound to find you an Understanding as often as you want it. But it were
an easy matter to help you; for it is plain, that he speaks those words to
distinguish the common cause of Protestants, from the heats and irregularities
of some particular persons, whom he did not intend to justify, such as he
says, Were either peevish, or ignorantly zealous. And if you distinguish the
sense of your Church from the judgments of particular persons, I hope it may
be as lawful for us to distinguish the body and cause of Protestants from the
inconsiderate actings of any particular men. All that which follows about the
name of Protestants, which his Lordship says, Took its rise, not from
protesting simply against the Roman Church, but against the Edict at Worms,
which was for the restoring all things to their former state, without any
reformation, is so plain and evident, that nothing but a mind to cavil, and to
give us the same things over and over, P. 147.
could have made you stay longer upon it. For what else means, your talk of
Innovation in matters of Religion (which we say, was caused by you) and
protesting against the Roman Church, and consequently against all particular
Visible Churches in the world, and that which none but Heretics and
Schismatics used to do? Do you think these passages are so hard, that we
cannot know what they mean, unless we have them so often over? But they are not
so hard to be understood, as to be believed, and that the rather, because we
see you had rather say them often, than prove them once. If the Popes professed
Reformation necessary as to many abuses, I hope they are not all Schismatics
who call for the redress of abuses in your Church. But, if all the Reformation
we are to expect of them, be that, which you say, was effectually ordained by
the Council of Trent, if there had not been an Edict at Worms, there were the
Decrees of that Council which would have made a Protestation necessary.
Although we think your Church needs Reformation in Manners and Discipline, as
much as any in the world, yet those are not the abuses mainly insisted on by
the Protestants, as the grounds of their Separation, and therefore his Lordship
ought to be understood, of a Reformation as to the errors and corruptions of
the Roman Church; and doubtless that Edict of Worms which was for the restoring
all things to their former state, did cut off all hopes of any such Reformation
as was necessary for the Protestants to return to the Roman Communion. And
whatever you say, till you have proved the contrary better than as yet it is
done, it will appear, that they are the Protestants who stand for the ancient
and undefiled Doctrine of the Catholic Church, against the novel and corrupt
Tenets of the Roman Church. And such kind of Protestation no true Christian,
who measures his being Catholic, by better grounds than communion with the
Church of Rome, will ever have cause to be ashamed of.

But A. C. (says his Lordship) goes on, and will needs have it, that the
Protestants were the cause of the Schism.. 11.
P. 136. n. 4.
For, (says he) though the Church of Rome did thrust them from her by
excommunication, yet they had first divided themselves by obstinate holding and
teaching Opinions contrary to the Roman Faith, and practice of the Church,
which to do, S. Bernard thinks, is pride, S. Austin, madness. At this his
Lordship takes many and just exceptions. 1. That holding and teaching was not
the prime cause neither, but the corruptions and superstitions of Rome, which
forced many men to hold and teach the contrary. So the prime cause was theirs
still. Now to this your Answer is very considerable. That the Bishop of Rome
being S. Peter 's successor in the Government of the Church, Ibid.
and Infallible (at least with a General Council) it is impossible, that
Protestants, or other Sectaries, should ever find such errors or corruptions
difinitively taught by him, or received by the Church, as should either warrant
them to preach against her Doctrine, or lawfully to forsake her communion. We
say, Your Church has erred; you say, It is impossible she should; we offer you
evident proofs of her errors; you say, She is Infallible; we say, It is
impossible, that Church should be Infallible, which we can make appear has
been deceived; you tell us again, It is impossible she should be deceived; for,
let Heretics say what they will, she is Infallible. And if this be not a
satisfactory way of answering, let the world judge. But having already pulled
down that Babel of Infallibility, this Answer falls to the ground with it; and
to use your phrase, The truth is, all that you have in effect to say for your
Church, is, that she is Infallible, and the Catholic Church, and by this means
you think to cast the Schism upon us; and these things are great enough indeed,
if you could but make any show of proof for them; but not being able to do
that, you do in effect as much as if a man in a high fever should go about to
demonstrate it was impossible for him to be sick, which, the more he takes
pains to do, the more evident his distemper is to all who hear him. And it is
shrewdly to be suspected, if your errors had not been great and palpable, you
would have contented your selves with some thing short of Infallibility. But as
the case is with your Church, I must confess it is your greatest wisdom to talk
most of Infallibility; for if you can but meet with any weak enough to swallow
that, all other things go down without dispute; but if men are left at liberty
to examine particulars, they would as soon believe it was impossible for that
man to fall, whom they see upon the ground, as your Church to be infallible,
which they find overspread with error and corruptions.

Much such another Answer you return to his Lordship's second Exception, which
is, at his calling the Christian Faith the Roman Faith: For, you say, It is no
incongruity so to call it, for the Bishop of Rome being Head of the whole
Christian or Catholic Church, Ibid.
the Faith approved and taught by him as Head thereof, though it be de facto
the general Faith and Profession of all Christians, may yet very well be called
the Roman Faith; Why? because the root, origin, and chief Foundation under
Christ, of its being practiced and believed by Christians is at Rome. But if
the Bishop of Rome be no such thing as Head of the Christian Church (and they
must have a very wide Faith, which must swallow that Universal Headship, with
all the appurtenances upon your bare affirmation) if it belongs no more to him
to approve and teach the Faith then to any other Catholic Bishop, if the
coming from Rome affords no credibility at all to the Christian Faith; then
still there remains as great an incongruity as may be, in calling the Christian
Faith, the Roman Faith. And as to all these my denial is as good as your
affirmation; when you undertake to prove, I shall to answer.

If A. C. adds the practice of the Church to the Roman Faith, I see no
advantage is gotten by it, for the first must limit the latter, P. 148.
and the Faith being Roman, the Church must be so too, and therefore all your
cavils on that subject come to nothing.

The third Exception is, against the place out of S. Bernard,. 12.
and S. Austin, which, his Lordship says, are mis-applied; P. 137.
for neither of them (says he) spoke of the Roman; and S. Bernard perhaps
neither of the Catholic, nor the Roman, but of a particular Church or
Congregation. His words are, What greater pride, than that one man should
prefer his judgment before the whole Congregation. Which A. C. conveniently to
his purpose rendered before the whole Congregation of all the Christian Churches
in the world. Quae major superbia quam ut unus hamo toti Congregatione judicium
suum praeserat, tanquam ipse solus Spiritum Dei habeat, S. Bern. Sermon. 3. de
Resurrect.
Whereas no such thing is in him as all the Christian Churches in the world.
And his Lordship says, He thinks it is plain, that he speaks both of, and to
the particular Congregation, to which he was then preaching. This you deny not,
but say, Ibid.
The argument holds a minori ad majus, to show the more exorbitant pride of
those, who prefer their private fanatic Opinions, before the judgment of the
whole Catholic Church. The Roman Church you should have said* for you own no
Catholic Church, but what is Roman, and therein the argument you mention will
hold yet further, against those who prefer the Novel Opinions of the Roman
Church, before the ancient Apostolical Faith of the truly Catholic Church. His
Lordship adds, That it is one thing to prefer a man's private judgment before
the whole Congregation; and another, for an intelligent man in something
unsatisfied, modestly to propose his doubts even to the Catholic Church. And
much more may a whole National Church, nay, the whole body of Protestants do
it. Now you very wisely leave out this last clause, that you might take an
opportunity to declaim against Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, etc. for want of
modesty. But what pretext could there have been for such virulency, had they
been guilty of what you charge them, if you would but have given us all that
his Lordship said; And may not I now therefore more justly return you your own
language in the same page upon a far less occasion. That here is a manifest
robbery of part of his Lordships words, for which you are bound to restitution.
For his Lordship, as it were, foreseeing this cavil, warily adds that
concerning a whole National Church, and the whole body of Protestants; which
you for reasons best known to your self, craftily leave out. But we must excuse
our adversary for this slip, though it be an unhandsome one; For the truth is,
he had no other way to hide the guiltiness of his own pen, etc. These are your
own words only applied, and that much more justly to your self, for a more
palpable fault in the very same page wherein you had accused his Lordship for
one of that kind. But you go on further, and supposing the doubts had been
modestly proposed, yet this could not at all help the Protestant cause, in
regard their doubts were in points of Faith, already determined for such by
authority of the Catholic Church; to question any of which with what seeming
modesty soever is sinful, heretical, and damnable. Were it our present
business, it were easy to make it appear, that the far greatest part of the
matters in Controversy; were never determined as points of Faith, before the
Council of Trent, and, I hope you will not say, that was before the
Reformation, or any proposal of doubts? But, if they had been defined by your
Church for matters of Faith, and our great doubt be, How your Church comes to
have this power of determining points of Faith, to whom should this doubt be
propounded? to your Church, no doubt then we should hear from her, as now we do
from you, That to question it with what seeming modesty soever, is sinful,
heretical, and damnable. And, Is it not then likely that your Church should
ever yield to the proposal of doubts? and you do well to tell us so; for it
will save Protestants a great deal of labor, when they see your Church so
incurable, that she makes it sinful, heretical, and damnable, to question any
thing she has determined. Although we do with much more reason assert it to be
sinful, heretical, and damnable in your Church, to offer to obtrude erroneous
Doctrines on the Faith of the Christian world, as points necessary to be
believed, and to urge superstitious practices as the conditions of communion
with her.

To the place of S. Austin, wherein he says, That it is a part of most
insolent madness, for any man to dispute, Whether that be to be done, which is
usually done in and through the whole Catholic Church of Christ. His Lordship
answer, P. 138.
1. Here Is not a word of the Roman Church, but of that which is all over the
world, Catholic, which Rome never yet was; and for all your boast of having
often shown, P. 149.
That the Roman and the Catholic are all one; I dare leave it to the
indifferent Reader, Whether you have not miserably failed in your attempts that
way. 2. He answers, That A. C. applies this to the Roman Faith, whereas S.
Austin speaks expressly of the rites and ceremonies of the Church, and
particularly about the manner of offering upon Maundy-Thursday, whether it be
in the morning, or after supper, or both. 3. It Is manifest by the words
themselves, that S. Austin speaks of no matter of Faith there, Roman, nor
Catholic, for he speaks of things done, and to be done, and not for things
believed, or to be believed. 4. A right sober man may, without the least touch
of insolency or madness, dispute a business of Religion with the Roman, Ibid.
either Church or Prelate, as all men know Irenaeus did with Victor. Now to all
this you reply, That the argument still holds a minori ad majus, and reaches to
every person that in any matter whatsoever obstinately opposes himself against
the Church of God. And is not this an excellent way of arguing from the less to
the greater, to argue from a rite or ceremony observed by the Universal Church
to a matter of Faith determined by the Roman Church? This is a minori ad majus,
with a witness. But your Reason is as good as your Answer, which is, because
there was always some point or matter of Faith involved in every Universally
practiced rite or ceremony of the Church, I pray Sir then, Tell us what the
matter of Faith was which lay in the offering on Maundy-Thursday in morning, or
after supper? and by whom this point of Faith was determined? and and how far
it is obligatory? and whether it be not sinful, heretical, and damnable, so
much as modestly to doubt of it? For all this, you told us, belongs to all
matters of Faith determined by the Catholic Church. What remains of this
Chapter, need not hold us long, for A. C's. illation from the Catholic
Churches not erring, that therefore it cannot be lawful to separate from the
Roman Church, is absurd and illogical; and depends on that gross mistake that
the Roman and Catholic Church are all one, which we have abundantly disproved
in the precedent Chapter. What follows concerning the Catholic Churches not
erring, and how far that extends, P. 150, 151.
concerning the Catalogue of Fundamentals, and any errors admitted in the
Church, being destructive to its Being, because derogatory to Gods Veracity,
have been so amply discussed in their proper places, that I find no temptation
from any new arguments here suggested, to resume the debate of them. There
being then nothing material, which has not been handled already; I here
conclude this Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of keeping Faith with Heretics.
The occasion of this Dispute. The reason why this Doctrine is not commonly
defended: Yet all own such Principles from whence it necessarily follows. The
matter of fact as to the Council of Constance; and John Hus opened. Of the
nature of the safe conduct granted him by the Emperor, that it was not a
general one, salva justitia, but particular, jure speciali; which is largely
proved. The particulars concerning Hierom of Prague. Of the safe conduct
granted by the Council of Trent. Of the distinction of Secular and
Ecclesiastical Power, and that from thence it follows, that Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics. Simancha, and several others fully assert this Doctrine.
Of the Invitation to the Council of Trent, and the good Instructions there; and
of Public Disputation.

A. C's Endeavor not only to charge Protestants with the guilt of Schism,. 1.
but to justify and clear the proceedings of the Church of Rome toward them,
has led us into a new dispute, how far she is to be trusted in the greatest
promises which are made to such whom she accounts Heretics. Which is
occasioned by these words of his, That after this breach was made, the Church
of Rome was so kind and careful to seek the Protestants, that she invited them
publicly with safe conduct to Rome, to a General Council, freely to speak what
they could for themselves: Or, if we take his words, as you give them us, the
sense is the same to our purpose (and therefore you impertinently cavil with
his Lordship for not keeping Faith with A.C.) Which did at first seek to recall
them from their Novel Opinions, and after their breach did permit, yea invite
them publicly to Rome to a General Council, etc. Upon which his Lordship
says: Indeed I think the Church of Rome did carefully seek the Protestants; P.
143. n. 7.
but I doubt it was to bring them within their net. And she invited them to
Rome. A very safe place, if you mark it, for them to come to, just as the Lion
(in the Apologue) invited the Fox to his own Den. Yea, but there was
safe conduct offered too: Yes, conduct perhaps, but not safe, or safe perhaps,
for going thither, but none for coming thence. Vestigia nulla retrorsum. Yea,
but it should have been to a General Council: Perhaps so. But was the conduct
safe, that was given to a Council which they call General, to some others
before them? No sure, John Hus, and Jerome of Prague burnt for all their safe
conduct. And so long as the Jesuits write and maintain. That Faith given is not
to be kept with Heretics. And the Church of Rome leaves this lewd Doctrine
uncensured (as it has hitherto done, and no exception put in of force and
violence.) A. C. shall pardon us, that we come not to Rome, nor within the
reach of Roman Power, what freedom of speech soever he promised us. For to what
end freedom of speech on their part, since they are resolved to alter nothing?
And to what end freedom of speech on our part, if after speech has been free,
life shall not. P. 152.
This you call a Theme, which, for the most part, our Adversaries love to dwell
upon, as thinking they have some great advantage against us therein. And, Can
you blame them for insisting much on that which their lives are concerned in,
and it will appear in the prosecution of this subject, that we have this great
advantage against you, that we are come to understand your arts so well, as not
so easily to be catched by your perfidious subtilties. And as we understand
your practices better than to rely on your promises of this nature, so we are
not so ignorant of the intrigues of your proceedings, as to suppose that
commonly and openly you should defend this Position, That Faith is not to be
kept with Heretics. For thereby you would lose the intent and design of it;
for none would be so silly as to venture themselves into the hands of such, who
openly profess, They are not bound to keep Faith with them. For, Do you think
that Father Fulgentio would ever have gone to Rome on the safe conduct most
solemnly given by Paul. 5. if he had understood beforehand, with what
perfidiousness he should have been dealt with there; and all under this
pretext, That safe conduct was given for his coming hither, but not for his
going thence. Is this the Faith of the Apostolical See? Is this the Catholic
and Roman Faith? If so, the Roman Faith, before ever it was Christian, was much
more infallible* than this; that never was acquainted with such a perfidious
Infallibility. Well then might his Lordship say, The conduct might be safe for
going thither, but not for coming thence. Vestigia nulla retrorsum. And so
Fulgentio to his sorrow found it. We see therefore, it is very necessary for
you to disown this principle as much as possible, till you have occasion to
practice it, and then woe be to them to whose lot it falls to make the
experiment. Though therefore both publicly and privately, in word and writing,
as you tell us, You teach and profess, That Faith is to be kept as well with
Heretics as Catholics, yet your Adversaries have no great reason to reply on
your promises; when they find your practices apparently to the contrary, and
those practices built on such principles which you all own, and contend for,
and that notwithstanding, what you confidently say to the contrary, several of
your Writers have in terms asserted it. All which shall be made good in this
Chapter. And therefore, though you say it, and say it over again, those who
know the ambiguity of your expressions, your many reservations, and exceptions
which you make, will not be very confident of the honesty of your meaning, by
the fairness of your expressions. These are therefore no clamorous accusations,
but very sad truths, which the experience of the world, and your dealings have
too often taught us; that at last we are forced to distinguish between a
Princes safc-conduct, and an Eccleastical Trepan. For no other, will that
appear to be, which was granted by Pope Paul to Fulgentio, or the Emperor, and
Council of Constance to John Hus, and Hierom of Prague. If Christ therefore,
after he had said, That they should give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's,
had either denied the payment of tribute, or demanded it himself, Becanus might
then say, That was a fit parallel for you in this Controversy, whose open
actions do palpably contradict you, when you say, That Faith is to be kept with
Heretics.

For the clearing of which,. 2.
we must first relate the matter of fact in the case of the Council of
Constance, and then examine the several evasions you make in vindication of
their proceedings, notwithstanding the safe conduct given by the Emperor and
Council. The story then is briefly this; A Council at Constance being called
for redressing abuses in the Church, and putting an end to that Schism, which
was between the three Antipopes Gregory 12, Benedict. 13, John 23. John Husse
is summoned by the Emperor Sigismund to appear before it. And to take away all
fears and suspicions of unhandsome dealing, the Emperor grants him a
safe conduct, in which it was expressed, Omni prorsus impedimento remoto,
transire, stare, morari, and redire libere permittatis; that without all manner
of hindrance, he should be suffered to come, appear, stay, and return freely.
That such a safe conduct was given by the Emperor, and pleaded by Husse, is
agreed on all sides. But notwithstanding this, he had not been above three
weeks in Constance, but, contrary to his safe conduct, he is thrown into
prison; which being done in the Emperors absence, he returns to the Council,
and argues the case with them, upon which they pass the decree contained in the
19 Session of that Council, in these words cited in the Margent, which, that
you may not quarrel with my interpretation of, I will take your own. Praesens
sancta Synodus ex quovis salvo-conductu per Imperatorem, reges, and alios
feculi principes, haereticis, vel de haeresi diffamatis, putantes eosdem sic a
suis erroribus revocare, quocunque se vinculo* obstrinxerint, concesso, nullum
fidei Catholicae vel jurisdictioni Ecclesiasticae praejudicium generari, vel
impedimentum praest^^i posse, seu debere declarat, quo minus dicto
salvo-conductu non obstante, liceat judici competen^i and Ecclesiastico, de
hujusmodi personarum erroribus inquirere, and alias contra eos debite
procedere, eosdemque punire, quantum justitia suadebit, si suos errores
revocare pertinaciter recusaverint, etiamsi de salvo-conductu confifi ad locum
venerint judicii alias non venturi; nec sic promittentem cum secerit quod in
ipso est, ex aliquo remansisse obligat^m Council Constant. sess. 19. p. 1075.
Tom. 7. Council. p. 2. ed. Binii.
This present Sacred Synod declares, That by whatsoever safe conduct, granted
by the Emperor, Kings, or other Secular Princes, to Heretics, or such as are
defamed for Heresy, no prejudice can arise, no impediment can, or ought to be
put to the Catholic Faith, or other Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but that
(notwithstanding the said safe conduct) it may be lawful for any competent and
Ecclesiastical Judge to enquire into the errors of such persons, and duly
otherways proceed against them, and punish them so far as justice shall
require, if they shall pertinaciously refuse to revoke their errors; yea
though they come to the place of judgment, relying upon such safe conduct, and
would not otherwise come thither; nor does he who so promises, remain obliged
in any thing, having done what lies in him. Upon this decree of the Council the
Emperor looks on himself, as absolved from his obligation, and not only
concurred in the sentence against Husse, but gave order himself about his
execution. The Question then is, Whether the Emperor did not break his Faith
with John Husse in so doing; and, Whether the Council did not decree, that
neither he, nor any else, were bound to keep it with Heretics. Although this
case be so plain and clear to all persons, who have any sense of justice and
honesty, that we dare appeal to the most indifferent persons in the world,
Whether it be not a notorious violation of Faith, after a most solemn promise
of safe return, to proceed to judgment against the person, who came merely
relying on that promise, and the same person to be the Instrument of his
execution, who gave the safe conduct on which he trusted: And whether the
declaring, that such a person is not obliged to keep his promise, because it is
a matter of Heresy he had promised in, be not to declare, That no Faith is to
be kept with Heretics. Yet since no actions are so bad, if they tend to your
advantage, but you will have something to blind the eyes of the simple with, we
must consider what you have to plead in vindication of these proceedings. You
tell us then, P. 153 n. 2.
That the Emperor did not break his Faith with John Husse, and that
notwithstanding the safe conduct given, he was justly burnt. Bold and daring
assertions! but we must enquire into the reasons of them. Two things you seem
most to rely on, and the strength of all your Answer depends on them: which
being the things, Becanus, and the rest of your party insist on in this case, I
shall more closely examine. The first is, From the nature of the safe conduct
given, that it was not such as could hinder justice; the second is, From the
difference of the Secular and Ecclesiastical Power, and that the Emperor could
make no promise in prejudice of the Churches Jurisdiction.

First, You distinguish of a safe conduct, which, you say, may be granted two
ways;. 3.
first, jure communi, when it is given only against unjust violence, salva semper
justitia, Ibid.
provided always that Justice be not impeached: Secondly, jure speciali, when
it secures a man against all violence whatsoever, whether just or unjust, and
chiefly in that cause for which it is given. In the former manner only, you
say, A safe conduct was granted by the Emperor to John Husse, and by the
Council of Constance to Hierom of Prague: In the latter sort, the Council of
Trent offered safe conduct to the Protestants in Germany, etc. No Faith
therefore was broken with John Husse; for, a safe conduct was only given him
jure communi, by which Justice was to remain unimpeachable, since he was only
promised to be defended against unjust violence; which was performed. I grant,
a safe conduct may be given two ways; the first, is to secure men from all
unjust violence, in order to a legal trial; and this is granted in such cases,
when the person accused looks on the Law, as open for him as well as his
Adversaries, and puts himself on a fair trial before equal and indifferent
Judges: and in such cases the intent of the safe conduct is expressed, Damus
tibi fidem publicam causam dicendi in judicio contra vim, non contra juris
executionem; as the Formula of it is in the Roman Empire, thence that Imperial
Constitution, which prohibits that any safe conduct be given to the accuser, or
the guilty person adversus publicum judicium, sed solum contra vim, against
public justice, but only against violence: but then, these are the
safe-conducts which subordinate Officers can only grant; because these have no
power over the life of persons, but they are only to see justice duly
administered to all persons, in order to which they may give such safe-conducts
as may prevent such things, as may hinder the due execution of Justice. But
then further, a safe conduct may be given with respect to those who are to
judge of the cause, i. e. in case a person avoids appearance upon fears that
the persons he is summoned before, will presently cast him into prison, or put
him to death; now, if a safe conduct be granted by him, who has the absolute
power of life and liberty, so as to hinder the execution of any sentence
passed, in this case the safe conduct is full and absolute, and admits of no
restrictions or limitations. Now this latter is plainly our present case; For
John Husse had been summoned before to appear at Rome, to vindicate himself in
point of Heresy, but suspecting foul dealing, he durst not go: And, Can we in
reason think he would ever have gone to Constance, if the Emperor had not
granted him such a Conduct as might secure him from his fears, as to his life
and liberty? And therefore, since the Emperor, to whom it only belonged to
dispose of both, had granted him so express a safe conduct, he thought he might
securely go. For, To what end or purpose is a safe conduct granted, if it be
not to secure that which the person to whom it was given had most cause to
fear? Now it is apparent, John Husse was not afraid of any unjust violence by
the way, for he was so secure as to that, that he left his safe conduct in the
hands of his friends, till he came at Constance, as appears by the
unquestionable reports of that story on all hands; which is an evident
argument, that the intent of the safe conduct was to secure him at Constance,
from any injury being done him by the Council. And although the Council might
take upon them, not only to judge of Heresy, but to condemn him for it; yet,
as long as the execution of that sentence belonged to the Secular Power, he had
reason to think, that whatever the Council might determine, yet the Emperors
Faith being solemnly given him, he need not fear the execution of it. For that
being in the Emperors power, he was bound by his public Faith not to give way
to it. To make this clear by an Instance; It is more evident by our Laws, that
one who has taken orders at Rome, coming into the Nation, and being convicted
of it, is liable to death, than it was by the Laws then in force, that such who
were condemned for Heresy, should be burnt; Suppose now, that a Priest be
summoned by the King to appear before his Courts of Justice, with a
safe conduct, or promise given, that he should come, appear, and return freely,
without any hinderance; Would not you, or any other Romish Priest, think your
selves hardly dealt with, and that the King had broken his Faith, if he should
not only suffer you to be condemned, but give express order for your execution;
and then tell you, that the safe conduct was to be understood salva justitia,
without any impeachment of Justice, and that it was only to protect you from
all unjust violence? And, Was not the case just the same here of the Emperor
Sigismund, and John Husse? Was John Husse so ignorant, as not to know they
would condemn him for Heresy, when a Council at Rome had condemned him for it
already? Or, Did not he know what course was like to be taken with persons so
condemned? What could he then imagine to be the intent of this safe conduct,
but to secure him from all violence to be done to his person under a pretense
of execution of Justice? And for all this, was not the Emperors Faith
violated, when he was not only imprisoned, but burnt, by the Emperors express
order, notwithstanding his solemn promise that he should come, appear, and
return freely, without any hinderance? If this be a safe conduct, it is only
such a one as they that go to the Gallows have, a safe conduct to execution.
Besides, that this could not be such a safe conduct, salva justitia, as you
speak of, is manifest from the tenor and words of it. For safe-conducts, being
granted in favor of persons, are to be taken in their largest sense, if no
limitations be expressed in them; and it is a Rule among those who should, and
do understand these things best, That a safe conduct is of the nature of a
Covenant, and the words of it import a promise, and therefore if they be
general, Verba salvi-conductus sunt verba fidei (...)* and sapiunt naturam
pacti: quare, si generalia sint, extenduntur quatenus verba p^tiuntur. Omnes
Doctores uno ore asserunt, Generalem promissionem Securitatis veniendi ad
judicem seu compare^di in judicio, etiam libertatem recedendi ab^undique
complecti. Pet. Premus de Securit. quaest. 6. p. 33, 36.
are extended as far as the words will bear. And that all the Doctors do
unanimously concur, that a general safe conduct of coming to a Judge, or
appearing in a Court of Judicature, do import a freedom of departure and going
thence. So that we see, if we take the Emperors safe conduct in the express
words of it, it imports much more than such a one as is only salva justitia;
because it ran in the most general and comprehensive terms, and was granted not
by any subordinate Judge, but by the Emperor himself, who was able, as well as
bound, to make it good in the most large and extensive sense. But further, if
this had been granted only salva justitia, so that the Council had liberty to
proceed on him as they saw good, What made the Emperor take their imprisonment
of him so ill, as Nauclerus and others report he did, and that because of the
safe conduct he had given him? It seems the Emperor wanted Becanus, and you,
to have told him, That he never granted any safe conduct, but what had the
reservation of a salva justitia, and that such justice too, as his greatest
enemy must show him: If he had known this, he needed not have been troubled at
that which he made account of, in granting the safe conduct. Lastly, What need
the Council have taken such pains to satisfy the Emperor, by declaring in a
decree, that neither he, nor any Prince was bound by their safe-conducts, to
hinder Heretics from being punished, if he had not thought himself obliged to
do it, by the safe conduct he had given? and if he did think so before the
decree of the Council, then certainly there was no salva justitia understood by
him in the safe conduct he had granted. Thus we see, how on all hands it
appears, from Husse's fears and desires, the Emperors power, the nature of
safe-conducts, the Emperors own sense of it, and the Councils decree, that
this first Answer has no ground at all, viz. that the safe conduct was granted
jure communi, and that it was only to hinder unjust violence, and not the
execution of Justice.

But besides, you say, John Husse was justly burnt, for two reasons: The first
is, For being obstinate in his Heresy; the second, For having fled, which the
Emperor had prohibited in his safe conduct, under pain of death. I answer, It
is not, Whether a man, obstinate in Heresy, may be burnt, which is now the
Question, although that may justly bear a dispute too: But, Whether one,
suspected for Heresy, and coming to a Council with safe conduct for coming and
returning, may be burnt without violation of Faith; your first reason then, is
nothing to the purpose, and your second as little: First, Because there is no
certain evidence at all of Husse's flying; it not being objected against him by
the Emperor, who only upbraided him with his obstinacy in his Heresy, as the
cause of his execution; and withal, if Husse had fled, and had suffered death
for that, as you say he ought to have done, he would not have suffered the
death proper to Heresy, and not to flying; nor been accounted (as by all your
own Authors he is) a sufferer on the account of Heresy. But this being a
groundless Calumny, it needs no further confutation.

But before we come to your second Answer, the case of Hierom of Prague must be
discussed so far as it is distinct from that of John Husse;. 4.
who, it seems, was trepanned by a pretended safe conduct granted him by the
Council, and not by the Emperor, wherein, you tell us, that express clause of
salva semper justitia was inserted (which is another argument that the
safe conduct of the Emperor to Husse was of another nature, because it ran in
general terms, without any such clause) but poor Hierom, who, it seems, was not
acquainted with the arts and subtilties of his enemies, but thought them as
honest as himself, ventures to Constance upon this safe conduct: but when he
came thither, and began to understand the jugglings of his enemies, he thought
to shift for himself by flight, but being taken, was burnt. So that Hierom
suffered through his honest simplicity and credulity, not considering what that
salva justitia would mean in his case, which, as they interpreted it, was such
another safe conduct, as known Malefactors have to the place of Justice: but to
call it a safe conduct, in the sense which Hierom apprehended it in, is as
proper as to say, A man that is to be executed shall have a Salvo for his life.
This was therefore intended, as appears by the event, as a mere trick to bring
him within their power; and so all such safe-conducts granted with those
clauses (by such persons who are to interpret them themselves) are, and nothing
else: For they are the sole Judges what this Justice shall be, Neither can you
say then, That Faith was kept with Hierom of Prague: for no such thing as a
safe conduct, truly so called, was intended him; and when the Emperor was
solicited to grant him one, he utterly denied it, because of the bad success
he had in that of John Husse; and some of the Council being then present with
the Emperor, offered to give him a safe conduct, but they very honestly
explained themselves, that it was a safe conduct for coming thither, but not
for going thence again. And so it proved. So that Faith was well given to
Hierom of Prague, and as well kept to John Husse.

But, say you, Had the Protestants gone to the Council of Trent, upon the
safe conduct granted them by that Council jure speciali, in the second manner,
they could not at all have been punished under any pretense of Heresy, without
manifest breach of Faith; which all Catholics hold to be unlawful. The like
may be said of the safe conduct offered them for going to Rome. But you must
better satisfy us, that you look upon this as a breach of Faith, than as yet
you have done. For so are your ambiguities, in your expressions of this nature,
that men who know your arts, can hardly tell when they have your right meaning.
For you may look on all breach of Faith as unlawful, and yet not look on your
acting contrary to your express words, in safe-conducts offered to Heretics,
to be a breach of Faith. For you may say, Faith is there only broken, where men
are bound to keep it; but you are not bound to keep it with Heretics, and that
because your obligation to the Church is greater than it can be to Heretics;
when therefore you have Heretics in your power, it is an easy matter for you
to say, that, were it in any thing else, but in a matter so nearly concerning
the Interest of your Holy Mother the Church, you could not but observe it, but
your obligation to that is so great, as destroies all other which are contrary
to it: and the obligation being destroyed, there is no breach of Faith at all;
and therefore you may hold all breach of Faith unlawful, and yet you may
proceed against those whom you account Heretics, contrary to all engagements
whatsoever, and then say, This is no breach of Faith. And the truth is, by your
Doctrines of aequivocations, and mental reservations, you have made all manner
of converse in the world so lubricous and uncertain, that he who has to deal
with you, especially in matters where the interest of your Church is concerned,
had need be wary, and remember to distrust, or else he may repent it
afterward. If you therefore account the Protestants crafty Foxes, in not
coming to Rome, or the Council of Trent, it was, because they would not venture
too near the Lions Den; but if you will not account them wise men, for refusing
so fair an offer, you will give us leave to think them so, till they see better
reason to trust your offers. And the Council of Trent did very well to tell
them in their form of safe conduct, they would not do by them as the Council of
Constance did, for therein they show, how much the Faith of Councils was sunk
by that, so that if that were not particularly excepted, no trust would ever be
given to them more. But, supposing the safe conduct of the Council of Trent to
have been never so free from suspicion, the Protestants had sufficient reasons
not to appear there, as will be manifested afterward.

We come therefore now to your second Answer,. 5.
in vindication of the Council of Constance, which is this, That by that decree
the Council declares, that no Secular Power, how sovereign soever, P. 154.
can hinder the proceedings of the Ecclesiastical Tribunal in causes of
Heresy; for which there is great reason; and consequently, if the Emperor, or
any other Secular Prince, grants a safe conduct, or makes promise of any thing
to the prejudice of that Jurisdiction, it shall not hold. The reason is,
because it is a promise made of a thing not pertaining to the Jurisdiction of
that Prince, nor wholly in his power to see performed. To this I answer, 1.
That if I understand any thing, this is expressly to say, That no Prince is to
keep Faith with Heretics, and that is it which you are charged with; and you
made use of this distinction, to free your selves from. Now that this is the
plain meaning of it, thus appears; you say in the words immediately after; But
the Council no where teaches, That Faith or safe conduct given in temporal
causes properly pertaining to the Princes Jurisdiction, is not to be kept by
all, and to all persons of what condition soever, so far as it is possible.
Which is as much as to say, That in any other case but that of Heresy, they
are to keep Faith, but not in that: for this of Heresy, is that which you
oppose to all Temporal Causes, and challenge it as belonging to an
Ecclesiastical Tribunal; when therefore the Council of Constance decrees, That
no Secular Power is obliged by any safe conduct, to any thing which may hinder
the Ecclesiastical Tribunals proceeding in causes of Heresy, what does it else
but declare in express terms, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, i.
e. in any thing relating to their Heresy; for this, you say, they have nothing
to do with: and therefore let Kings and Princes make never so solemn promises
and engagements to men suspected of Heresy, to their peril be it, who rely
upon them, for they have nothing to do to promise in such matters, and though
their Faith be given never so publicly and solemnly, they are not bound to
keep it; nay, they are bound not to keep it: for, if they should, it would be
to the apparent mischief and prejudice of the Church. This necessarily follows
from your own words, and the distinction here used by you. So that now we need
seek no further than your self, and Becanus, for the open avowing of this
Principle, That no Prince is bound to keep Faith with Heretics; but if he does
promise safe conduct to them though it be more than he can do, yet the Church
can make that good use of it, that by that means she may get the Heretics
under her power; and when she has them, it is but then declaring this promise
to be null, and she may do with them as she pleases. Neither is it only
Becanus, and you, who say this, but it is the received Principle among you,
whatever you say or pretend to the contrary; I mean not, that you say in
express terms, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, but by this
distinction of the Secular and Ecclesiastical Power, as you use it, you say
that from whence it necessarily follows. But yet I answer 2. Though this
distinction should be granted, yet it cannot really excuse the Emperor from
violating his Faith. For, I say, he promised nothing but was in his power,
which was, to secure him as to life and liberty. Now, although the Emperor had
suffered the Ecclesiastical Tribunal, to do what belonged to it, which was to
enquire into the charge of Heresy, and to give sentence upon the person, yet
the execution belonged wholly to the Secular Power; as the Council it self
acknowledged, when after the sentence of Heresy was pronounced against John
Husse, there was nothing of the executive part which was pleaded, as belonging
to the Church, but only degradation, and that was performed in the presence of
the Council; H^c Sancta Synodus Constantiensis Johannem Hus, attento quod
Ecclesia Dei non habeat ultra quid gerere valeat, judicio seculari relinquere,
and ipsum curiae seculari relinquendum sore decernit, Council. Constant. sess.
15. p. 1056.
upon which the Sacred Synod declares, That they had no more to do with him,
but to deliver him over to the Secular Power, and accordingly decrees it to be
done. Now when the Synod declares this, Is it not plain, that what concerns his
life, does properly and only belong to the Secular Power; if therefore the
Emperor was bound to do all which lay in him to do, he was effectually bound
to secure him as to life and liberty, for both those lay within his power. And
therefore, when he gave order for his execution, he was highly guilty of the
violation of his Faith; and if the Council of Constance declared him absolved
as to this too, it is yet more evident, that they not only decreed, That no
Faith was to be kept with Heretics in matters concerning the Ecclesiastical
Tribunal, but in such as concerned the Secular Power, which is much as to say,
Not at all. And by this the vanity of this distinction of the Secular and
Ecclesiastical Power is sufficiently manifest, and that it evidently appears,
that the Council of Constance did decree, That no Faith was to be kept with
Heretics. And thus I have proved, that his Lordship has not, as you
calumniate him, ignorantly or maliciously wronged the Council, but that no
other tolerable sense, besides that which his Lordship says, can be made of
the decree then passed; and notwithstanding your arts and distinctions, nothing
can be more plain, than that John Husse was trepanned into his ruin by the
Faith of the Emperor given to him. It can be therefore nothing but either
palpable ignorance, or a deceit as gross as trusting your safe conduct in a
matter of Heresy, for you so confidently to assert, That if the Relator had
not mangled the words of the Council (to deceive his Reader) but set down the
decree fairly and fully as it is, the business had been so clear, that it would
scarce have any dispute. Whereas his Lordship only sets down the title of the
decree, and so he tells you himself, and this he does as faithfully as may be,
and whereas nothing can more evidence the juglings of the Council, than the
Decree it self does, in which nothing is more plain than that, In case of
Heresy, no Prince is bound to keep Faith with any persons whatsoever.

From the Council of Constance, we proceed to other Authors, to see, whether
they do not concur with it in this Opinion. For this,. 6.
his Lordship cites Simancha a Spanish Bishop, and a Canonist as well as
Civilian, who expressly says, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, as
neither with Tyrants, Pirates, Fides Haereticis data servanda non est, sicut
nec Tyrannis, Piratis, and caeteris publicis praedonibus. Simanca Instit.
Cathol. tit. 46. sect. 51.

Jures igitur Haretici quid^m gravissimo Concilii Constantiensis judicio,
legitima flamina concremati sunt, quamvis promissa illis securitas faiss^t.
Instit. tit. 46. sect. 52.


or other public Robbers; and plainly justifies the proceedings of the Council
of Constance in that respect, in that Heretics by their solemn judgment were
burnt, although public security had been given them. Let us now see, what
answer you return to these clear Citations. In general you say, The Bishop was
insincere or unadvised in quoting this Author. I wonder wherein: P. 155.
I am sure, not so much as you are in your Answers to him. For, you say
Simancha holds not this absolutely and universally, but only in cases, wherein
that which is promised cannot be lawfully performed. Hence, say you, Simancha
has these words, Veruntamen (ut Marius Salomonius ait) promissa contra
Christum fides, si praestetur, perfidia est, If Faith be given against Christ,
that is to the dishonor of God, or contrary to the precepts of true Religion,
it were perfidiousness to observe it. But the Answer to this is easy: for it
appears from Simancha's own grounds, that he supposes it holds universally,
because Faith can never be given to Heretics, so as that promise can be
lawfully performed, because thereby he supposes it given against Christ, and
to the dishonor of God, and therefore concludes, it would be perfidiousness to
observe it. And this is evident from Simancha's own grounds, which he gives for
it. For, says he, if Faith be not kept with Tyrants, Pirates, and other
Robbers, which kill the body; Si Ty^annis, Piratis, and caete^is praedonibus
fides servanda non est, qui corpus occidunt; long m^nus haereticis
pertinacibus, qui occidunt animas. Id. ib.
much less with Heretics, who destroy souls: which reason being absolute and
universal, his Proposition must be so too. And very consonantly to his former
assertions concludes, Quamobrem fides illis data, etiam juramen^o firmata,
contra publicum bonum, contra salutem animarum, contra jura divina and humana,
nullo modo servanda. Ib.
That if Faith be given them with an Oath, against the public good, against
the salvation of souls, against divine and humane Laws, it is not to be kept;
and it is well known that all Heresies are accounted so by you, and therefore
in no case Faith is to be kept with Heretics. Neither can this possibly be
understood merely of private persons; for his words are general, and we see he
vindicates the proceedings of the Council at Constance upon these grounds, and
he quotes Marius Salomonius and Placa, who likewise assert in terms, That Faith
given to Heretics is not to be kept, Scribit etiam Salomonius in d. l. 2.
exact. de orig. juris, and refert Petrus laca. l. 1. epit. delict. c. 37. in
fin. Ita observatum fuisse contra haereticos vocatos in Concilio Constantiensi
sub salvo-conductu, qui tamen contra datam fidem ne^ati fuerunt. Non ergo
salvo-conductui fidere d^buit. D. Scipio. Menochius. lib. 1 Council. 100. n. 191.

Quod vero scribit Placa d. c. 37. in fin. haereticis datam fidem servandam non
esse, intelligo um data fides est ad detrimentum fidei Catholicae. Id Council.
100. n. 219.

Ita enim loquitur Conradus Brunus in tract. de haere^. c. 14. l 3. cum
scribit, Non licere pacisci cum haereticis, ut libere possent in damnata eorum
secta vivere. n. 220.

Quod si ob^ic^atur, Concilium Constantiense non observasse sa^vos-conductos
concessos ab Imperatoribus and Regibus; facile erit respondere, Non licuisse
illis Imperatoribus and Regibus, concedere tutos reddere haereticos; tum quia
inferior non potest salv^m-conductum concedere damnato a majori, tum etiam quia
Im^eratorum and Regum est haereticos expugnare, non autem securos and tutos
reddere; quemadmodum abund^ tradit Con. rad. Brunus. l. 3. de haeret. c. 15.
Recte a Concilio salvi-conductus illi annullati fuerunt. n. 227, 128.


and makes use of the instance of the Council of Constance to prove it. And
Menochius, whom Simancha likewise cites, who was an Italian Canonist, and
therefore might well know the practices of Rome in these cases, says, That
Placa expressly holds, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics, which, he
says, he understands so, when Faith is given to the injury of the Catholic
Faith: and cites Conradus Brunus to this purpose, That it is not lawful to make
such agreements with Heretics, that they may enjoy the liberty of their own
sect. If therefore they must interpret, how far the Faith given tends to the
prejudice of the Catholic Faith, we see, how little security can be had from
any solemn promise. And Menochius himself asserts the safe conduct granted by
Princes, in case of Heresy to be unlawful, because the inferior (as he
supposes Princes to be to the Ecclesiastical Tribunal) cannot secure them who
are condemned by the Superior, and because Kings and Emperors ought rather to
destroy Heretics, than to secure them. And therefore the Council of Constance
did well in nulling the safe-conducts granted to Heretics. And what now is
this, but in plain terms to assert, That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics? Neither can you say, as some do, That they are the Canonists, and
not the Church of Rome, which assert this: for, besides that the Canonists
understand well enough the intrigues and proceedings of the Court of Rome,
although it seems they do not conceal them so much as they should do, yet they
are not only these who have asserted it, but some great men of your Church,
have, upon occasion, expressly said it; for we are not to expect that this
should be avowed as a public Opinion of your Church, for that were to make it
unserviceable to you; but when you have those whom you call Heretics at an
advantage, then is the time to discover this. So there wanted not some to
persuade Charles the fifth, notwithstanding the safe conduct given to Luther at
his coming to Worms, to deal by him as the Council of Constance had done by
John Husse, and that upon this very account, That no Faith was to be kept with
Heretics: But the Emperor, and the Princes about him, were persons of too
great honor and honesty to hearken to such perfidious Councils. And no meaner
a person than Cardinal Hosius, admonishes Henry King of Poland, that he ought
not to keep the Faith he had given to the Protestants, and gives this reason
for it, Nunquam patiaris ulla te ratione ad ea quae promisisti praestanda
teneri; quia juramentum non debet esse vinculum iniquitatis. Hosius Cardinal.
epistol. 193, 202, 220.
That an Oath ought to not be the bond of iniquity. And the Jesuit Possevin is
reported to have given the same counsel afterward to Stephen King of Poland.
But these things are, as much as possible, kept from our view, and the Books
containing such Doctrines in them, are like the Golden Legends bought up by
themselves to prevent our discovery of their frauds and imposture; and
therefore if we cannot instance in those Jesuits, who have expressly taught this
Opinion in print, yet that only argues the greater fraud and subtilty of them,
who will own and practice such things, which they dare not publicly avow to
the world. And yet it appears from the way used by Becanus, and you, in
vindication of your selves, that you cannot possibly avoid, the asserting such
things from whence it necessarily follows, That Faith is not to be kept with
Heretics. But because the Doctrine it self is grown a matter so odious to the
world, being contrary to all principles of humanity and justice, and which, if
practiced by all those who call each other Heretics, would overthrow all civil
societies; therefore you dare not but in terms disown it, though it still
remains among those Arcana Societatis, those hidden works of darkness, which
want only a fair opportunity to discover themselves. But as much as you wipe
your mouth, though it be foul enough in saying, That neither the Bishop, nor
all his gang, are able to name one of them of that Opinion, to make it appear,
how much you have abused your self in these words; I shall make a short
business of it, and name your self for one, and Becanus your Author for
another, and refer the Reader to what goes before, for an evidence that you own
those Principles from whence it unavoidably follows, That no Faith is to be
kept with Heretics.

But, Are the Jesuits indeed grown such honest men,. 7.
that not one of their number can be named, who assert this Doctrine? A happy
change! For sure they were not always so; if we believe that excellent person
of as great integrity as learning, and a Romanist too, Jac. Augustus Thuanus in
his Elegy in Parricidas, wherewith he concludes his sacred Poems; Scilicet has
arts nuper gens gnara nocendi
Exitio invexit, Gallia, nata tuo.
Hesperiae suscis gens emissaria ab oris
Fucum affectata quae gravitate tegit,
Nata Magistratum convell^re, nata Ministris
Substrahere obsequium, Praesulibusque suum:
Geryonae qua dum placeat, faveatque trifauci,
Terrarum reliquos non facit assis heroes.
Et coelo facinus dignum putat, omnia saevi
In Regis longas tradere sceptra manus.
Quae disciplinam morum, quae Gallica venit,
Exuto, legum solvere jura, metu,
Et vileis regnantum anima^, ipsosque necandos
Horrenda Reges proditione docet;
Servandamque fidem negat, argutisque cavillis
Detorquet magni jussa severa Dei.
Nos patimur segnes, lentique sedemus ad iram
Et pietas ipsa religione perit*
Protinus Induciae violantur patre Quiritum
Auctore, and Martis nuncius urbe venit.
Nos juvat antiquo vitam producere ritu,
Nos juvat in prisca simplicitate mori.
Jac. Aug. Thuanus Eleg. in Parricidas.
in which he speaks great and sad truths of that honest Society; where he
mentions those Cruelties and Assasinations, which were brought into these parts
of the world by the Arts and Opinions of a famous Society, which makes nothing
of Laws, Faith, Honesty, Religion, to advance that Interest which it has
espoused; and expressly says, That they deny Faith to be kept, that by their
distinctions and subtilties, they enervate the force of divine commands, they
deny obedience to authority, destroy Religion under a pretense of Piety, break
engagements, teach the murdering Kings; and what not? And yet all this while,
not one of all this Society ever taught, That Faith was not to be kept with
Heretics. But whence came then the great disputes, Whether an Oath of
Allegiance might be taken to Heretical Princes? Was it not from hence that
Heresy was supposed to dissolve that obligation to obedience, which otherwise
men lay under? And if it does destroy that Faith which men owe to their
Sovereigns, in case of Heresy; Will it not equally destroy that Faith which
Princes promise to their subjects in case of Heresy too? For what reason can
be given for the one, which will not hold for the other also. And who were
they, I pray, but those loyal persons the Jesuits, who broached, fomented, and
propagated that Doctrine? Was not Father Creswell a Jesuit, who, under the name
of Andreas Philopator, delivers this excellent Doctrine, That the whole School
of Divines teach, Vniversa Theologorum Schola tenet, and est certum ac de fide,
Quemcunque principem Christianum, si a Catholica Romana Religione manifest
deflexerit, and alios avocare voluerit, excidere statim omni potestate, and
dignitate ex ipsa vi juris divini and humani: hocque and ante sententiam
Pontificis and Judicis contra ipsum prolatam; and subditos quoscunque liberos
esse ab omni juramenti obligatione, quod de obedientia praestitissent, posseque
and debere hujusmodi hominem tanquam Apostatam and haereticum ex dominatu
ejicere, ne alios insiciat. Andreas Philopator Resp. ad edict. Regin. Angl. p.
149. n. 157.
and it is a thing certain, and of Faith, that any Christian Prince, if he
manifestly falls off from the Religion of the Catholic Roman Church, and
endeavors to draw others from it, does by Law of God and man, fall from all
power and authority; and that before the sentence of the Pope and Judge
delivered against him; and that all his subjects are free from the obligation
of any Oath to him, of obedience and loyalty, and that they may and ought cast
such a one out of his power, as an Apostate and a Heretic, lest he infect
others. I might mention many more, who write after the same nature, but I spare
you, only this one may serve instead of many; for he delivers it not only as
his own judgment, but the consent of the School, and as a thing most certain,
as being of Faith: And will you still say, That no Jesuits own such principles,
as, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics? For if Heresy does thus
destroy all obligation to obedience in subjects to Heretical Princes, Will it
not much more in Princes toward heretical subjects? because certainly Princes
have a greater power and right to command over subjects, than subjects over
them, even in your own case of Heresy. Since this therefore is the avowed
Doctrine of the Jesuitical School, persuade whom you can to believe, that you
look on an obligation to Faith remaining in a case of Heresy? Certainly none
who understand your principles and practices, will have much cause to rely on
your Faith in this particular. So much at present of the Jesuits Integrity, as
to this principle of keeping Faith with Heretics. P. 156.
What you add further about the Council of Constance, and John Husse, and
Hierom of Prague, is only serving up the very same matter in somewhat different
words; for there is nothing contained in them but what has been sufficiently
disproved already: for it all depends on the nature of the safe conduct, and
the difference of the Secular and Ecclesiastical Power.

. 8.
His Lordship very pertinently asks, supposing men might go safely to Rome, To
what purpose is it to go to a General Council thither, and use freedom of
speech, since the Church of Rome is resolved to alter nothing; and you very
pertinently answer, That they were invited thither to be better instructed, P.
157.
and reclaimed from their errors. But, Will no place serve to reclaim them but
Rome? Can they not be as well instructed elsewhere, and by other means, than by
being summoned to a General Council. We had thought the intention of General
Councils had been to have had free debates concerning the matters which divide
the Church. But, it seems the Protestants must have been summoned as guilty
persons, i. e. Heretics, and their Adversaries must have sat as their proper
Judges, and such who were accused as the great Innovators, must have believed
themselves Infallible, and by your own saying, If an Angel from Heaven had come
as a Protestant thither, he would not have been believed; nay, it had been well
he had escaped so, if your power were as great over spirits, as over our
grosser bodies. So I suppose John Husse, and Hierom of Prague were invited to
Constance to be better instructed; and it is well we know by their example what
you mean by your good instructions, and out of a desire to avoid them, care not
how little we appear where our Adversaries not only intend to be Judges, but
resolve beforehand to condemn us whatsoever we say: For so you tell us, That
Rome, and the Fathers of Trent were resolved to stick to their own Doctrine
(which they call Catholic) notwithstanding any pretended difficulties or
objections brought against it, either by Bishops, or any other person. Your
kind invitations then of the Protestants, were wonderful expressions of your
Churches civility toward them; that they might be present to hear themselves
condemned, and then escape how they could themselves.

The offer of a public Disputation, his Lordship truly tells you, signifies
nothing without an indifferent arbitration, and the impossibility of agreeing
on that, renders the other useless; and only becomes such Thrasonical persons
as Campian was, who yet had as little reason as any man to boast of his
Achievements in his disputations. When you therefore say, His Lordship would
have some Atheist, Turk or Jew, to fit as indifferent persons; you show only
your Scurrility, and want of understanding. For his Lordship only insists on
the necessity of that, to show the uselesness of public Disputations, where
such cannot be agreed on, as in this case. And he truly says, This is a good
Answer to all such offers; that the Kings and Church of England had no reason
to admit of a public Dispute with the English Romish Clergy, till they shall
be able to show it under the Seal or Powers of Rome, that that Church will
submit to a Third, who may be an indifferent Judge between us and them; or to
such a General Council as is after mentioned (not such a one as you would have,
wherein the Pope should sit as Head of the Church, for that is to make the
greatest Criminal, Judge in his own cause. P. 185.
) And this, says he, is an honest, and, I think, a full Answer. And without
this, all Disputation must end in Clamor; and therefore the more public, the
worse. Because, as the Clamor is the greater, so perhaps will be the Schism
too.

CHAP. IV. The Reformation of the Church of England justified.
The Church of Rome guilty of Schism, by unjustly casting Protestants out of
Communion. The Communion of the Catholic and particular Churches
distinguished. No separation of Protestants from the Catholic Church. The
Devotions of the Church of England and Rome compared. Particular Churches Power
to reform themselves in case of general Corruption, proved. The Instance from
the Church of Judah vindicated. The Church of Rome paralleld with the ten
Tribes. General Corruptions make Reformation the more necessary. Whether those
things we condemn as errors, were Catholic Tenets at the time of the
Reformation. The contrary showed, and the difference of the Church of Rome
before and since the Reformation. When things may be said to be received as
Catholic Doctrines. How far particular Churches Power to reform themselves
extends. His Lordships Instances for the Power of Provincial Councils in
matters of Reformation vindicated. The particular case of the Church of England
discussed. The proceedings in our Reformation defended. The Church of England a
true Church. The National Synod. 1562. a lawful Synod. The Bishops no intruders
in Queen Elizabeth's time. The justice and moderation of the Church of England
in her Reformation. The Popes Power here, a forcible fraudulent usurpation.

HAving thus far examined your Doctrine, of keeping Faith with Heretics,. 1.
we now return to the main business concerning Schism. And his Lordship saying,
P. 146. sect. 22.
That there is difference between departure out of the Church, and causeless
thrusting from you; and therefore denying that it is in your power to thrust us
out of the Church; You answer by a Concession, That we were thrust out from the
Church of Rome, but that it was not without cause: Which, P. 185. n. 1.
that you might not seem to say gratis, you pretend to assign the causes of our
expulsion. So that by your own confession the present division or separation
lies at the Church of Rome's door, if it be not made evident that there were
most just and sufficient reasons for her casting the Protestants out of her
communion. If therefore the Church of Rome did thrust the Protestants from her
communion, for doing nothing but what became them as members of the Catholic
Church, then that must be the Schismatical party, and not the Protestants. For,
supposing any Church (though pretending to be never so Catholic) does restrain
her communion within such narrow and unjust bounds, that she declares such
excommunicate, who do not approve all such errors in doctrine, and corruptions
in practice, which the Communion of such a Church may be liable to, the cause
of that division which follows, falls upon that Church which exacts those
conditions from the members of her Communion: That i^, when the errors and
corruptions are such as are dangerous to salvation. For in this case, that
Church has first divided her self from the Catholic Church; for, the
Communion of that lying open and free to all, upon the necessary conditions of
Christian Communion, whatever Church takes upon her to limit and enclose the
bounds of the Catholic, becomes thereby divided from the Communion of the
Catholic Church: and all such who disown such an unjust enclosure, do not so
much divide from the Communion of that Church so enclosing, as return to the
Communion of the Primitive and Universal Church. The Catholic Church therefore
lies open and free, like a Common-Field to all Inhabitants; now if any
particular number of these Inhabitants should agree together, to enclose part
of it, without consent of the rest, and not to admit any others to their right
of Common, without consenting to it, which of these two parties, those who deny
to yield their consent; or such who deny their rights if they will not, are
guilty of the violation of the public and common rights of the place? Now this
is plainly the case between the Church of Rome, and Ours; the Communion of the
Catholic Church lies open to all such who own the Fundamentals of Christian
Faith, and are willing to join in the profession of them: Now to these your
Church adds many particular Doctrines, which have no foundation in Scripture,
or the consent of the Primitive Church; these, and many superstitious
practices, are enjoined by her, as conditions of her Communion, so that all
those are debarred any right of Communion with her, who will not approve of
them; by which it appears, your Church is guilty of the first violation of the
Union of the Catholic; and whatever number of men are deprived of your
Communion, for not consenting to your usurpations, do not divide themselves
from you, any further than you have first separated your selves from the
Catholic Church. And when your Church by this act is already separated from
the Communion of the Catholic Church, the disowning of those things wherein
your Church is become Schismatical, cannot certainly be any culpable
separation. For, whatever is so, must be from a Church so far as it is
Catholic; but in our case it is from a Church so far only as it is not
Catholic, i. e. so far as it has divided her self from the Belief and
Communion of the Universal Church.

But herein a great mistake is committed by you, when you measure the Communion
of the Catholic Church, by the judgment of all,. 2.
or most of the particular Churches of such an Age, which supposes that the
Church of some one particular Age, must of necessity be preserved from all
errors and corruptions, which there is no reason or necessity at all to
assert; and that is all the ground you have for saying, P. 159.
That the separation of Protestants was not only from the Church of Rome, but
(as Calvin confesses) a toto mundo, from the whole Christian world, and such a
separation necessarily involves separation from the true Catholic Church. Now
to this, we answer two things. 1. That we have not separated from the whole
Christian World in any thing wherein the whole Christian World is agreed; but
to disagree from the particular Churches of the Christian World in such things
wherein those Churches differ among themselves, is not to separate from the
Christian World, but to disagree in some things from such particular Churches.
As I hope you will not say, That man is divided from all mankind, who does in
some feature or other differ from any one particular man; but, although he does
so, he does not differ from any in those things, which are common to all; for
that were to differ from all; but when he only differs from one in the color
of his eyes, from another in his complexion, another in the air of his
countenance, and so in other things; this man, though he should differ from
every particular man in the world in something or other, yet is a man still as
well as any, because he agrees with them in that in which they all agree, which
is, Humane nature, and differs only in those things wherein they differ from
each other. And therefore from the disagreement of the Protestants from any one
particular Church, it by no means follows, that they separated from the whole
Christian World, and therefore from the true Catholic Church. 2. The Communion
of the Catholic Church is not to be measured by the particular opinions and
practices of all, or any particular Churches, but by such things which are the
proper Foundations of the Catholic Church. For there can be no separation from
the true Catholic Church, but in such things wherein it is Catholic; now it
is not Catholic in any thing, but what properly relates to its Being and
Constitution. For whatever else there is, however universal it may be, is
extrinsecal to the nature and notion of the Catholic Church, and therefore
supposing a separation from the Church, in what is so extrinsecal and
accidental, it is no proper separation from the Catholic Church. As for
Instance; supposing all men were agreed, that some particular habit should be
worn all over the world, will you say, That any number of men who found this
habit extremely inconvenient for them, and therefore should disuse it, did on
that account separate from humane nature, and ceased to be men by it? Such is
the case of any particular Churches laying aside some customs or ceremonies,
which in some one age of the Church, or more, the greatest part of Christian
Churches were agreed in the practice of; for, although this general practice
should make men more diligent in enquiry, and careful in what they did; yet if
such a Church having power to govern it self, see reason to alter it, it does
not separate from the Communion of the Catholic Church therein, and therefore
does not cease to be a Church. For there is no culpable separation from the
Church Catholic, but what relates to it properly as Catholic; now that does
not relate to it as Catholic, which it may be Catholic without, now certainly
you cannot have so little reason as to assert, that the Church cannot be
Catholic without such extrinsecal and accidental agreements. And from hence it
follows, That no Church can be charged with a separation from the true
Catholic Church, but what may be proved to separate it self in some thing
necessary to the Being of the Catholic Church; and so long as it does not
separate as to these essentials, it cannot cease to be a true member of the
Catholic Church. If you would therefore prove, that the Church of England,
upon the Reformation, is separated from the true Catholic Church; you must not
think it enough to say, (which as weakly as commonly is said) That no one
particular Church can be named, which in all things agreed with it; for that
only proves, that she differed from particular Churches in such things wherein
they differed from each other, but that she is divided from all Christian
Churches in such things wherein they are all agreed, and which are essential to
the Being of the Catholic Church; when you have proved this, you may expect a
further Answer.

This then can be no cause why your Church should expel the Protestants out of
her Communion,. 3.
but it shows us sufficient cause to believe that your Church had separated her
self from the Communion of the Catholic. For which we must further consider,
that although nothing separates a Church properly from the Catholic, but what
is contrary to the Being of it; yet a Church may separate her self from the
Communion of the Catholic, by taking upon her to make such things the
necessary conditions of her Communion, which never were the conditions of
Communion with the Catholic Church. As for Instance, Though we should grant,
Adoration of the Eucharist, Invocation of Saints, and Veneration of Images to
be only superstitious practices taken up without sufficient grounds in the
Church, yet since it appears, that the Communion of the Catholic Church was
free for many hundred years, without approving or using these things; that
Church which shall not only publicly use, but enjoin such things upon pain of
excommunication from the Church, does, as much as in her lies, draw the bounds
of Catholic Communion within her self, and so divides her self from the true
Catholic Church. For, whatever confines, must likewise divide the Church; for
by that confinement a separation is made between the part confined, and the
other, which separation must be made by the party so limiting Christian
Communion. As it was in the case of the Donatists, who were therefore justly
charged with Schism, because they confined the Catholic Church within their
own bounds: And if any other Church does the same which they did, it must be
liable to the same charge which they were. The sum then of this discourse is,
That the Being of the Catholic Church lies in Essentials, that for a
particular Church to disagree from all other particular Churches in some
extrinsecal and accidental things, is not to separate from the Catholic
Church, so as to cease to be a Church; but still, whatever Church makes such
extrinsecal things the necessary conditions of Communion, so as to cast men out
of the Church, who yield not to them, is Schismatical in so doing; for it
thereby divides it self from the Catholic Church: and the separation from it,
is so far from being Schism, that being cast out of that Church on those terms
only, returns them to the Communion of the Catholic Church. On which grounds
it will appear, that yours is the Schismatical Church, and not ours. For,
although before this imposing humor came into particular Churches, Schism was
defined by the Fathers, and others, to be a voluntary departure out of the
Church, yet that cannot in reason be understood of any particular, but the true
Catholic Church; for not only persons, but Churches may depart from the
Catholic Church; and in such cases, not those who depart from the Communion of
such Churches, but those Churches, which departed from the Catholic, are
guilty of the Schism.

These things I thought necessary to be further explained, not only to show,
how false that imputation is, of our Churches departing from the true Catholic
Church, but with what great reason we charge your Church with departing from
the Communion of it; and therefore not those whom you thrust out of Communion,
but your Church so thrusting them out, is apparently guilty of the present
Schism.

But still you say, Your Church had sufficient cause for the expulsion of
Protestants out of her Communion; P. 158 n. 1.
and for this you barely repeat your former assertions, and offer not at the
proof of one of them; as though you intended to carry your cause, by the
frequent repeating your Declaration. But, Sir, it is the proof of what you say,
that we expect from you, and not the bare telling us, That Protestants are
Schismatics, because they are Schismacicks. When you will be at leisure to
prove that the Protestants were guilty of Heretical Doctrine, or Schismatical
proceedings; that they raised a new, separate, and mutinous faction of
pretended Christians distinct from the one Catholic body of the Church; by
choosing new Pastors, instituting new rites and ceremonies not in their power to
do, by Schismatical convening in several Synods, and there broaching new
heretical Confessions of Faith; when I say, You shall think good to prove all,
or any one of these, you shall receive so full an Answer as will make it
evident, that the Protestants did not depart from the Catholic Churches
Doctrine and Communion; but that the Church of Rome is departed thence, first,
by imposing erroneous Doctrines, and superstitious practices, as conditions of
Communion, and then by thrusting out all such as would not consent to them.

His Lordship disputing the terms on which a Separation in the Church may be
lawful,. 4.
P. 146. n. 22.
says, That corruption in manners only, is no sufficient cause to make a
separation in the Church. And, says he, This is as ingenuously confessed for
you, as by me. For if corruption in manners were a just cause of actual
separation of one Church from another, in that Catholic body of Christ, the
Church of Rome has given as great cause as any, since (as Stapleton grants)
there is scarce any sin that can be thought on by man (Heresy only excepted)
with which that Sea has not been foully stained, especially from eight hundred
years after Christ. And he need not except Heresy, into which Biel grants it
possible, the Bishops of the Sea may fall. And Stella and Almain grant it
freely, that some of them did fall, and so ceased to be Heads of the Church,
and left Christ (God be thanked) at that time of his Vicars defection, to look
to his Cure himself. But you tell us, The discovery of some few motes, P. 159.
darkens not the brightness of the Sunshine; I wonder what you account Beams,
if the Sins of your Popes and others be but motes with you? We grant, that the
Sun himself has his Maculae, but they are such as do not Eclipse his Light; we
find the Maculae in your Church, but we are to seek for the bright Sunshine:
Or, Does it lie in the service of your Religious Votaries? For that is the
great part of the conspicuous Piety of your Church, which you instance in. But,
Is this indeed the bright Sunshine of your Church, that there are so many
thousand of both Sexes (you do well to join them together) who tie themselves
by perpetual vows, never to be dissolved by their own seeking (and therefore
doubtless pleasing to God, whether they are able to keep them or no) and these
pray (if they understand what they say) and sing Divine Hymns day and night
(which makes the Sunshine the brighter) which you say is a strange and unheard
of thing among Protestants. What, that men and women (though not in Cloisters)
pray and sing Hymns to God? no surely. For as the Devotion of our Churches is
more grave and solemn, so it is likewise more pious and intelligible. You pray
and sing, but how? Let Erasmus speak, who understood your praying and singing
well. Cantiuncularum, clamorum, Erasm. in Mat. 6.7.
murmurum ac bomborum ubique plus satis est, si quid ista delectant Superos. Do
you think those Prayers and Hymns are pleasing to God, which lie more in the
throat than the heart? And such who have been wise and devout men among your
selves have been the least admirers of your mimical, uncouth, and superstitious
devotions; but have rather condemned them as vain, ludicrous things; and
wondered (as Erasmus said) what they thought of Christ, Hodie videmus
Sacerdotes, nihil dicam qualibus sed certe nimium prolixis precibus, hisque
praescriptis, aliquoties ineptis ac ridiculis, ne dicam impiis, oneratos.
Erasm. in Mat. 6.7. Ad haec qui modeste pii sunt taciti secum ingemiscunt: qui
populi malis aluntur, and quorum interest Christi gregem, quem ille suo
sanguine liberum reddidit, quam maxim servum esse and ebnoxium, adeo non
reclamant ut modis omnibus exaggerent. Accedunt iis qui vel ambiunt praemium
aliquod obsequii vel timent poenam libertatis. Ita dum nemo succurrit, re^
p^^^atim eo prolabitur ut pene nihil jam pudeat. Id. in Mat. 11.30.
who imagined he could be pleased with them. ( Quid sentiunt obsecro de Christo
qui putant eum ejusmodi cantiunculis delectari?) Are these then the glorious
parts of your Devotions, your Prayers and Hymns? But they pray and sing Divine
Hymns day and night: If this be the only excellency of your Devotion* How much
are you outdone by the ancient Psalliani and Euchitae, that spent all their
time in prayer, and yet were accounted Heretics for their pains. Still you
pray and sing, but to whom? to Saints and Angels often, to the Virgin Mary with
great devotion, and most solemn invocations; but to God himself, very sparingly
in comparison. If this then be the warm Sunshine of your Devotions, we had
rather use such, wherein we may be sure of Gods blessing; which we cannot be in
such Prayers and Hymns which attribute those honors to his creatures, which
belong wholly to himself, But you not only sing and pray, but can be very idle
too; and the number of those men must be called Religious Orders, and the
Garment of the Church is said by you to be imbroidered by the variety of them;
and for this, Psalm 44.10. is very luckily quoted. And are those indeed the
ornaments of your Church, which were become such sinks of wickedness, that
those of your Church, who had any modesty left were ashamed of them, and called
loud for a Reformation. Those were indeed such Gardens wherein it were more
worth looking for useful or odoriferous flowers (as you express it) than for
Diogenes to find out an honest man in his crowd of Citizens. Therefore not to
dispute with you the first Institutions of Monastic life, nor how commendable
the nature of it is, nor the conveniences of it, where there are no
indispensable vows; the main things we blame in them, are, the restraints of
men's liberties, whatever circumstances they are in, the great degeneracy of
them in all respects from their Primitive Institutions, the great snares which
the consciences of such as are engaged in them, are almost continually exposed
to, the unusefulness of them in their multitudes to the Christian world, the
general unserviceableness of the persons who live in them, the great
debaucheries which they are subject to, and often overrun with; and if these
then be the greatest Ornaments of your Churches Garments, it is an easy matter
to espy the spots which she has upon her. What you add concerning the good
lives of Papists, and bad of Protestants, if taken universally, i^ as unjust as
uncharitable; if indefinitely, it shows only that not the particular lives of
men on either side, but the tendency of the Doctrine, to promote or hinder the
sanctity of them, is here to be regarded. And to that you speak afterward, but
in a most false and virulent manner, when you say, That though sins be
committed among you, they are not defended or justified as good works; whereas,
among Protestants, P. 160.
Darkness it self is called Light, and the greatest of all sins, viz. Heresy,
Schism, Sacrilege, Rebellion, etc. together with all the bad spawn they leave
behind them, are cried up for perfect Virtue, Zeal, good Reformation, and what
not? I doubt not but you would be ready to defend and justify this open
Raillery of yours, and call it a good work, notwithstanding what you said
before. If we had a mind to follow you in such things, How easy a matter were
it to rip up all the frauds, impostures, villainies of all sorts and kinds which
have been committed by those who have sat in your Infallible Chair, and charge
them all on your Church, with much more justice than you do the miscarriages of
any under the name of Protestants. For the Protestant Churches disown such
persons, and condemn those practices with the greatest indignation; whereas you
excuse, palliate, and plead for the lives of the Popes, as much as you dare,
and not outface the Sun at Noon, which has laid open their Villainies. Where
do the Principles of Protestants encourage or plead for, Heresy, Schism,
Sacrilege, Rebellion, etc. much less cry them up as Heroical actions? Does
not the Church of England disown and disclaim such things to the uttermost?
Have not her sufferings made it appear, how great a hater she is of Heresies,
Schisms, Sacrilege, and Rebellion? Did she ever cry up those for Martyrs, who
died in Gunpowder treasons? Did she ever teach it lawful to disobey Heretical
Princes, and to take away their lives? Yet these things have been done by you,
and the doers of them not condemned, but rather fomented and encouraged, as
zealous promoters of the Holy See, and most devout Sons of the Church of Rome.
Cease therefore to charge the guilt of persons disowned by the Church of
England upon her; when you are unwilling to hear of the faults of those persons
among your selves, whom you dare not disown, I mean your Popes and Jesuits.

. 5.
Leaving therefore these unbecoming Railleries of yours, and that which
occasioneth them, viz. corruption of manners; we come to consider that, which
is more pertinent to our purpose, viz. errors in Doctrine; which his Lordship
truly assigned as the ground of the Reformation, and not only that there were
doctrinal errors in your Church, P. 147. n. 2.
but that some of the errors of the Roman Church were dangerous to salvation.
For it is not every light error in disputable Doctrine and points of curious
speculation, that can be a just cause of separation, in that admirable body of
Christ, which is his Church, or of one member of it from another. But, that
there are errors in Doctrine, and some of them such as most manifestly
endanger salvation in the Church of Rome, is evident to them that will not shut
their eyes. The proof (his Lordship says) runs through the particular points,
and so is too long for this discourse. Now to this you manfully answer, That in
vain do they attempt to reform the Church of what she can never be guilty. P.
160.
Which, if it depends on your Churches Infallibility (which is largely
disproved already) must needs fall to the ground with it. And it is an
excellent Answer when a Church is charged actually with erring, to say, She
does not err, because she cannot: Which is all that you give us here. But if
you prove it no better than you have done, the Heretical and Schismatical
obstinacy is like to be found in that Church which in her errors challenges
Infallibility.

The Question now comes to this, Whether, errors being supposed in the
Doctrine, and corruptions in the Communion of a Church, when the General Church
would not reform, it was not lawful for particular Churches to reform
themselves? To this his Lordship answers affirmatively, in these words. Is it
then such a strange thing, that a particular Church may reform it self, if the
general will not? P. 149. sect. 24.
I had thought, and do so still, that in point of Reformation of either Manners
or Doctrine, it is lawful for the Church, since Christ, to do as the Church
before Christ did, and might do. The Church before Christ consisted of Jews and
Proselytes: This Church came to have a separation, upon a most ungodly Policy
of Jeroboams, so that it never pieced together again. To a Common Council to
reform all, they would not come. Was it not lawful for Judah to reform her
self, when Israel would not join? Sure it was, or else the Prophet deceives me,
that says expressly, Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin. Hos. 4.15.
And S. Hierom expounds it of this very particular sin of Heresy and Error in
Religion. After which he proves, That Israel, during this Separation, was a
true Church, which we shall insist on, when we have considered what Answer you
return to his Lordships Argument; which lies in these two things; First, That
Judah did not reform her self. Secondly, That Judah is not the Protestant
party, P. 160. n. 2.
as his Lordship supposes it to be. First, You say, Judah did not reform her
self. For Juda being the orthodox Church, united with her Head the High Priest,
and not tainted with any Doctrinal errors, What need was there of her
Reformation? And so the meaning of that place, Though Israel transgress, yet
let not Juda sin, is rather against, than for him, because the sense is rather,
Let not Juda fall into Schism, though Israel does, than, let Judah reform her
self. But if it appears that Judah had corruptions crept into her, as well as
Israel had, though not so great, and universal, then it follows, that by these
words Judah had power to reform her self. And the antecedent is clear to any
one who takes the pains to read the Scripture, and compare the places in it,
more than it seems you do. For, Hos. 6.4.7.
Does not this very Prophet check Judah as well as Israel for transgressing
Gods Covenant? Does he not say, Hos. 12.2.
That God had a Controversy with Judah, and would punish Jacob according to
his ways? And for all this, Was there no need of Reformation in the Church of
Judah? Indeed in one place it is said, That Judah rules with God, Hos. 11.12.
and is faithful with his Saints; but then that is to be understood of Judah,
when she had reformed her self in the days of Hezekiah: for surely you will
not say, That Judah did not stand in need of Reformation, when Hezekiah began
his Reign; for it is said of him, That he removed the high places, and brake
the Images, and cut down the groves. And were not these, 2 King 18.4.
things which wanted Reformation, think you? If we consider the times of those
three Kings before Hezekiah, in which Hosea prophesied; we shall see, Hos. 1.1.
what need there was of Reformation among them, and those were Vzziah, Jotham,
and Ahaz; of the time of Vzziah called Azariah, in the Book of Kings it is
said, That the high places were not removed, but the people sacrificed and
burnt Incense still on the high places; 2 King. 15.4. v. 35.
the same is affirmed of the time of Jotham in the same Chapter; so that though
these Princes were good themselves, yet there were many corruptions still among
the people. But of Ahaz it is said expressly, That he walked in the way of the
Kings of Israel; and he sacrificed and burnt Incense in the high places, and on
the hills, 2 King. 16.3, 4
and under everygreen tree. Choose now which of these three you please (for it
is most improbable those words, considering the long time of Hosea's Prophecy,
should be spoken in the time of Hezekiah the last of the four Kings he
prophesied under) And will you tell us again, That the Church of Judah needed
no Reformation? But you offer at a reason for it, Because she was united with
her Head the High Priest at Jerusalem. So then, belike as long as Judah and
the High Priest were united, she could be guilty of no Doctrinal Errors: No,
not although she should pronounce Christ a blasphemer, and condemn him to be
crucified as a malefactor; for then certainly Judah and the High Priest were
united. But, I know you will say, You spoke this of the time before the Messiah
was come. And was it then true, 2 King. 16.10, 11.
that as long as Judah was united with her Head, the High Priest, there was no
need of Reformation? What think you then of the time of Ahaz, when Vzziah the
Priest built an Altar at the command of Ahaz, according to the pattern of the
Altar of Damascus, contrary to Gods express Law: yet, according to you, as long
as Judah was united with her Head, the High Priest, there was nothing which
needed Reformation. And, although it be plainly affirmed, that Judah kept not
the commands of the Lord their God, 2 King. 17.19.
but walked in the statutes of Israel which they had made; yet you, who, it
seems, knew Judah's Innocence better than God, or the Prophets did, say very
magisterially, That as long as she was united with her Head the High Priest,
What need, I pray, was there of her Reformation? And this being the case of
Judah, I may easily grant you, That Judah is not the Protestant party, but that
of the Roman Church, i. e. while Judah was under her corruptions; and yet, you
say, She needed no Reformation, she is the fittest parallel you could think of
for your Church; but we pretend to no parallel between Judah and the Protestant
party, in not needing a Reformation, but in her power to reform her self. Which
we say still, that she had, though Israel would not join with her, by virtue of
these words of the Prophet, Though Israel transgress, yet let not Judah sin:
thereby manifesting, that though the greatest part was degenerated in the ten
Tribes, yet Judah might prevent the same in her self, by reforming those abuses
which were crept among them; And therefore the sense of those words, Let not
Judah sin, must in this case imply a power to reform her self. If therefore we
speak of Judah degenerated, we grant the parallel lies wholly between Judah and
the Church of Rome; for, although there were great corruptions in Judah, and as
great in your Church, yet with the same reason you say, That neither needed
Reformation: But if we speak of Judah reforming her self under Hezekiah, then
we say, The parallel lies between Judah, and the Protestant party; whatever you
say to the contrary. But you shrewdly ask, Ibid.
If you be Judah, Who, I pray, are the revolted ten Tribes? Who are of
Jeroboams Cabal? Even they who set up the Calves at Dan and Bethel: Such who
worship Images instead of the true God; though they intend them only as Symbols
of the Divine Presence; for no more did Jeroboam and the Israelites intend by
their Calves, and there is no pretense which you use to justify your selves
from Idolatry, but will excuse Jeroboam, and the ten Tribes from it. If the
Protestant party then be Judah; it is easy finding out the revolted ten
Tribes, and Jeroboams Cabal, the Court of Rome answering to this, as the Church
of Rome does to the other. But we cannot be Judah, because we left the
Catholic Jerusalem, that is Rome the City of Peace: By whom, I pray, was Rome
christened, The Catholic Jerusalem? For if we consider the worship there used,
and the politic ends of it, it much more looks like Samaria, or Dan, and
Bethel. If Rome be our Catholic Jerusalem, show us, When God made choice of
that, for the peculiar place of his Worship? Where we are commanded to resort
thither for Divine Worship? When God placed his Name there, as he did of old in
Jerusalem? When you have showed us these things, we may think the worse of our
selves for leaving Rome, but not before. And, let the world judge, Whether it
be more likely one should meet with the worship of Golden Calves at Rome, or
among the Protestants? It is you who have found out new Sacrifices, new Objects
of Worship, new Rites and Ceremonies in it, new Altars, and consequently new
Priests too; and yet for all this, you must be orthodox Judah, which needed no
Reformation? And who, I pray, do in point of obedience most resemble the ten
Tribes? Have not you set up a spiritual Jeroboam, as a new Head of the Church,
in opposition to the Son of David? And that you may advance the Interest of
this spiritual Head, you raise his authority far above that of Kings, and
Temporal Princes, whom you ought to be subject to; declaring it in his power to
excommunicate, depose, and absolve subjects from obedience to them. And
therefore is not the parallel between the ten Tribes, and the Church of Rome,
very pat, and much to the purpose? But when you would seem to return this upon
us by a false and scurrilous parallel between Jeroboam, P. 161:
and that excellent Princess Queen Elizabeth in the Reformation of the Church
of England, you only betray the badness of your cause, which makes detractions
so necessary to maintain it: For as her title to the Crown was undoubted, so
her proceedings in the Reformation were such as are warranted by the Law of
God, and the Nation; and her carriage in her reign toward Jesuits and Priests,
no other than what the apparent necessity of her own and her Kingdoms
preservation put her upon. But if she must be accounted like Jeroboam, for
banishing Priests and Jesuits often convicted of treasonable practices, upon
pain of death if they were found in England; What must we think of the
Catholic Jerusalem the City of Peace, that sweet and gentle Mother the Church
of Rome, that has carried her self so peaceably toward those who have
dissented from her? Witness the blood of so many hundred thousands which she
has imbrued her hands in, merely for opposing her doctrines and superstitions;
witness that excellent School of Humanity the Inquisition, and the easy
Lessons she teaches those who come under her discipline there; witness the
proceedings in England in the days of Queen Mary; and then let any judge if
the parallel must be carried by cruelty toward dissenters, which of their two
Reigns came the nearest that of Jeroboam. The only true words then that you
say, are, but enough of this parallel; and more than enough too of such
impudent slanders against the memory of that famous Queen: But your Church
would have been more unlike the ten Tribes, if there had not been a lying
Prophet there.

You dispute very manfully against his Lordship, for asserting, That Israel
remained a Church after the separation between Judah and the ten Tribes; Ibid.
and yet, after you have spent many words about it, you yield all that he
asserts; when you say, P. 162.
That in a general sense they were called the people of God, as they were
Abraham's seed, according to the flesh, by reason of the promise made to
Abraham, I will be a God to thee, and to thy seed after thee. And what is there
more than this, that his Lordship contends for? for he never dreamt that the
ten Tribes were Abraham's seed according to the Spirit; but only says, That
there was salvation for those thousands that had not bowed their knees to Baal,
which cannot be in the ordinary way where there is no Church. And if, as you
say, Abraham's seed only according to the Spirit, i. e. the faithful make the
true Church; then it follows, Where there were so many faithful, there must
needs be a true Church. And thus for any thing you have said to the contrary,
his Lordships argument from the case of Judah holds for every particular
Churches power to reform it self, when the General will not reform.

His Lordship further argues,. 6.
That to reform what is amiss in Doctrine or Manners, is as lawful for a
particular Church, P. 150. n. 2.
as it is to publish and promulgate any thing that is Catholic in either. And
your Question, Quo judice? lies alike against both. And yet, I think, says he,
It may be proved, that the Church of Rome, and that as a particular Church, did
promulgate an orthodox truth, which was not then Catholickly admitted in the
Church; namely, the procession of the Holy Ghost from the Son. If she erred in
this fact, confess her error; if she erred not, Why may not another particular
Church do as she did? From whence he inferrs, That if a particular Church may
publish any thing that is Catholic where the whole Church is silent; it may
reform any thing that is not Catholic, where the whole Church is negligent, or
will not. P. 162* n. 3.
Now to this you answer, 1. That this procession from the Son, was a truth
always acknowledged in the Church; but what concerns that, P. 164.
and the time of this Article being inserted into the Creed, have been so amply
discussed already, that I shall not cloy the reader with any repetition, having
fully considered whatever you here say concerning the Article it self* P. 163.
or its addition to the Creed. 2. You answer, That the consequence will not
hold, that if a particular Church may in some case promulgate an orthodox
truth, not as yet Catholickly received by the Church, then a particular Church
may repeal, or reverse any thing that the whole Church has already Catholickly
and definitively received? Surely no. Yet this (say you) is his Lordships, and
the Protestants case. You do well to mention an egregious fallacy presently
after these words; for surely this is so. For does his Lordship parallel the
promulgating something Catholic, and repealing something Catholic together?
Surely no. But the promulgating something true, but not Catholickly received
with the reforming something not Catholic. Either therefore you had a mind to
abuse his Lordships words, or to deceive the reader by beging the thing in
Question, viz. that all those which we call for a Reformation of, were things
Catholickly and definitively received by the whole Church: which you know we
utterly deny. But you go on, and say, That thence it follows not, that a
particular Church may reform any thing that is not Catholic, where the whole
Church is negligent, or will not, because this would suppose error, or
something uncatholick, to be taught or admitted by the whole Church. To put
this case a little more plainly by the former Instance; Suppose then that the
Worship of God under the symbols of the Calves at Dan and Bethel, had been
received generally as the visible worship of the Tribes of Judah, and Benjamin,
as well as the rest; Does not this Answer of yours make it impossible that ever
they should return to the true Worship of God? For this were to call in
question the truth of Gods Promise to his Church; and to suppose something not
Catholic to be received by the whole Church. And so the greater the
corruptions are, the more impossible it is to cure them; and in case they
spread generally, no attempts of Reformation can be lawful: which is a more
false and paradoxical Doctrine than either of those which you call so. And the
truth is, such pretenses as these are, are fit only for a Church that hates to
be reformed; for if something not good in it self, should happen in any one age
to overspread the visible Communion of all particular Churches, this only makes
a Reformation the more necessary; so far is it from making it the more
disputable. For thereby those corruptions grow more dangerous, and every
particular Church is bound the more to regard its own security in a time of
general Infection. And if any other Churches neglect themselves, What reason is
it that the rest should? For, any or all other particular Churches neglecting
their duty, is no more an argument, that no particular Church should reform it
self, than that if all other men in a Town neglect preserving themselves from
the Plague, then I am bound to neglect it too. But you answer, 3. That all this
does not justify the Protestants proceedings, because they promulged only new
and unheard of Doctrines, directly contrary to what the Catholic Church
universally held and taught before them for Catholic Truths. This is the great
thing in Question; but I see, you love best the lazy trade of begging things,
which are impossible to be rationally proved.

But yet you would seem here to do something toward it in the subsequent
words;. 7.
For about the year of our Lord 1517. when their pretended Reformations began,
Ibid.
was not the real presence of our Saviors body and blood in the Eucharist, by
a true substantial change of Bread and Wine, generally held by the whole
Church? Was not the real Sacrifice of the Mass then generally believed? Was not
Veneration of Holy Images, Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, Praying for the
dead, that they might be eased of their pains, and receive the full remission
of their sins generally used and practiced by all Christians? Was not Free
will, Merit of good works, and Justification by Charity, or inherent Grace, and
not by Faith only, universally taught and believed in all Churches of
Christendom? Yea even among those who in some few other points dissented from
the Pope, and the Latin Church? To what purpose then does the Bishop urge, that
a particular Church may publish any thing that is Catholic? This does not
justify at all his Reformation; he should prove that it may not only add, but
take away something that is Catholic from the Doctrine of the Church; for this
the pretended Reformers did, as well in England as elsewhere. His Lordship
never pretends, much less disputes, that any particular Church has a power to
take away any thing that is truly Catholic; but the ground why he supposes,
such things as those mentioned by you, might be taken away, is, because they
are not Catholic; the Question then is between us, Whether they were Catholic
Doctrines or not: this you attempt to prove by this medium, Because they were
generally held by the whole Church at the time of the Reformation. To which I
answer, 1. If this be a certain measure to judge by, what was Catholic and
what not; then what does not appear to have been Catholic in this sense, it
was in our Churches power to reject, and so it was lawful to reform our selves
as to all such things which were not at the time of the Reformation received by
the whole Church. And what think you now of the Popes Supremacy, your Churches
Infallibility, the necessity of Coelibate in the Clergy, Communion in one kind,
Prayer in an unknown tongue, Indulgences, etc. Will you say, That those were
generally received by the Church at the time of the Reformation? If you could
have said so, no doubt you would not have omitted such necessary points, and
some of which gave the first occasion to the Reformation. If then these were
not Catholickly received, a particular Church might without Schism reject them,
and so the Church of England is sufficiently vindicated from Schism by your
self, as to these points here mentioned; which you willingly omitted, because
you could not but know how far they were from being universally received in all
Churches in Christendom?

2. As to those things which you insist on, you give no sufficient evidence at
all, that they were received by the whole Church as Catholic Doctrines. For,
so far it is from appearing, that these were held as Catholic Doctrines by all
Churches in the Christian world (for then you do most unreasonably condemn the
Greek, and Abyssine Churches, etc. for Heresy or Schism, if they owned all
Catholic Doctrines; and they must do so, if they agreed with your Church in
all these things which are the only Doctrines you mention as Catholic, in
opposition to such whom you condemn for Heresy or Schism; and if the agreement
of all Churches be the measure of what is Catholic, then those Doctrines
cannot be so, which those great Churches differ from you in, by your own
argument) but, so far is it, I say, from appearing, that these were held so by
all Churches in Christendom, that you cannot prove they were so held in the
Church of Rome her self, before the Reformation. The Church of Rome I take here
in the largest sense, as it takes in all such who were the visible members of
her Communion. Now, I hope you will not say, that such Doctrines are received
as Catholic Doctrines, which are embraced only by a party in your Church,
another party opposing it, both which still remain members of your Communion;
for whatever is received as a Catholic Doctrine (according to you) is so
received, that those who deny or doubt of it, do thereby become no members of
the visible Communion of that Church; which is by the Churches so declaring her
self in those points, that she admits none to her Communion, but upon the
acknowledgement of them. Now, Will you say, This was the case of your Church,
as to these Doctrines at the beginning of the Reformation? Were
Transubstantiation, real Sacrifice of the Mass, Veneration of Images,
Invocation of Saints, Purgatory, etc. so defined then by your Church to be
Articles of Faith, that whoever did not assent to them, was declared
excommunicate, and cast out of your Church? If not, it is impossible, upon your
own grounds, to prove, that these were universally held and believed as
Catholic Doctrines of your Church. I do not say, As truly Catholic Doctrines
in themselves; for, whatever your Church defines concerning them, they are not
more or less so in themselves for your Churches definition; but, I say, you
cannot assert that these were held by your Church to be Catholic Doctrines,
till they were defined to be such. For, according to your principles, that
which differenceth a Catholic Doctrine from a particular Opinion, is the
Churches Definition; before then the Church had passed a definition in these
points, they could not be held as Catholic Doctrines. To make this somewhat
clearer, because it is necessary for undeceiving those who are told, as you
tell us here, That at the Reformation we rejected such things which were
universally owned for Catholic Doctrines, which is so far from being true,
that it is impossible they should be owned for such by the Church of Rome upon
your own principles. For, I pray, tell us, Are there not several sorts of
Opinions among you at this day, none of which are pretended to be Catholic
Doctrines? and this you constantly tell us, when we object to you your
dissentions about them. As for Instance, the Popes personal Infallibility, the
Superiority of Pope over General Councils, the Immaculate Conception of the
Blessed Virgin, the Disputes about Praedestination, etc. when we tell you of
your differences in these points, you answer, That these hinder not the Unity
of the Church, because these are only in matters of Opinion; and that it is not
de fide, that men should hold either way. When we demand the reason of this
difference concerning these things, your Answer is, That the Church has
defined some things to be believed, and not others; that what the Church has
defined, is to be looked on as Catholic Doctrine, and the denyers of it are
guilty of Heresy; but where the Church has not defined, those are not
Catholic Doctrines, but only at best but pious Opinions, and men may be good
Catholics, and yet differ about them. I pray, tell me, Is this your Doctrine,
or, is it not? If not, there may be Heretics within your Church, as well as
without: if it be your Doctrine, apply it to the matters in hand. Were these
things defined by the Church at the beginning of the Reformation? If they were,
produce those Definitions for all those things which you say were owned as
Catholic Doctrines then: that we may see, that at least in the judgment of
your Church they were accounted so. Tell us, when and where those Doctrines
were defined before the Council of Trent? and, I hope you will not say, that
was before the beginning of the Reformation. If then there were no such
definitions concerning them, they could not by your Church be accounted as
Catholic Doctrines; at the most, they could be but only pious Opinions, as
that of the Popes Infallibility among you is, and consequently men might be
Catholics still, though they disputed or denied them. And how then come the
Protestants to be accounted Heretics in their Reformation, if upon your own
principles, those things which they denied were then no Catholic Doctrines:
Though you should therefore prove more than you have done, That these points of
Doctrine were generally received at the time of the Reformation, yet that by no
means proves that they were Catholic Doctrines, unless you make it impossible
that mere Opinions should be generally received in your Church. For, if any
thing may be generally received in the nature of an Opinion, you cannot prove
from the bare general reception, that it was a Catholic Doctrine: unless you
would attempt to prove it by the notion under which it was received, Whether as
an Opinion, or a Catholic Doctrine.

But then you must remember to prove these things, 1. That all those who did
receive it, received it under that notion; as for instance,. 8.
In any one of those Articles by you mentioned, Transubstantiation, Invocation
of Saints, etc. you must first prove, That all who were in your Church's
Communion did believe those things; which it is impossible for you to do,
unless you could prove, that none could be of your Church, unless they believed
them; which is again impossible to be done, unless your Church had so defined
those things, that they ceased to be members of it who did not believe them.
Thus, we see, your first task is rendered impossible, viz. to know, Whether all
in your Church held these Doctrines or no; but, suppose you knew this, it falls
short of your purpose, unless you can prove, that all those who held these
things, did not hold them as bare Opinions, but as Catholic Doctrines; and
this is again as impossible as the former; for, How can you tell, whether they
judged these things to be so, unless you knew what their Rule was whereby they
judged of Catholic Doctrines? If you knew their Rule, How can you tell,
Whether they made a right Use of it or no? or, Whether they made any Use at all
of it? or, Whether they did not take up such Opinions by prejudice, education,
the judgment of others, and several other ways, without examining of what
nature or importance the things were. If you think you have a certain Rule to
judge of Catholic Doctrines by, you must prove that they had the same Rule,
and looked upon it as such too: otherwise they might not use it for those ends,
nor be governed at all by it. When you will therefore prove any Doctrines to be
Catholic, by being generally received, you must remember what brave
impossibilities you have undertaken. But, suppose you could master this too,
and prove, that men generally received these as Catholic Doctrines; yet,
before you can prove, that these are Catholic Doctrines from thence, you have
a further task yet upon you, which is, to prove it impossible that these men
should be out in their judgment concerning the nature of an Opinion, and that
they could not look on any thing as a Catholic Doctrine, but what was really
so. For, if they may be mistaken in their judgment, we are as far to seek as
ever, for knowing what are Catholic Doctrines, and what not. You must
therefore prove the judgment of all these persons infallible concerning what
are Catholic Doctrines, and what not: And by that time, the Pope will return
you little thanks for your pains, in making every member of your Church as
infallible as himself. If it be then so impossible to prove, that these were
received as Catholic Doctrines, either from any definition of your Church, or
from the general reception of them among the members of it, you see, what
little reason you had to say, That the Protestants at the beginning of the
Reformation, did take away something that was Catholic from the Doctrine of
the Church. Which is notoriously false and inconsistent with your own
principles. If we should therefore grant, that Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
etc. were generally owned in your Church at the time of the Reformation, the
utmost you can prove, is, only that they were owned as particular Doctrines by
particular men, but not that they were owned as the Catholic Doctrines of your
Church. And therefore we deny not, but that party and faction in your Church
which owned and contended for these, had got the upper-hand of the other,
before the time of the Reformation, so that those who doubted of, or denied
them, durst not appear so publicly as their adversaries did; but they were but
a party, and a faction still, and there were many outward members of your
Church, who groaned under the abuses and tyrannies of the prevailing faction,
and called loud for a Reformation. As appeared not only by the open testimonies
of some against such Doctrines; the sad complaint of others for want of
Reformation; but by the general sense of the necessity of it, at the time when
it was set upon, the great applause it met with among all persons who allowed
themselves liberty to enquire into things, the general consent of the main
bodies of those who set about reforming themselves in the main Articles of
Christian Doctrine, and unanimous opposition to those erroneous Opinions which
you call Catholic Doctrines. So that these were not at the time of the
Reformation, so much as the owned Catholic Doctrines of the Roman Church; but
the Opinions of a prevailing Faction in it: and therefore the disowning them,
is no rejecting any thing Catholic, but rejecting the opinions and practices
of a tyrannical and usurping Faction. There must be then a great deal of
difference put between the State and Doctrine of the Church of Rome, before the
beginning of the Reformation, and since, especially since the Council of Trent.
For then these Doctrines were owned by a Faction, but yet there might have been
communion with that Church, without believing them to be Catholic Doctrines;
and no doubt, many pious souls went to Heaven without believing any of these
things, ( viz. such who believed and improved the common principles of
Christianity, without regarding the erroneous Doctrines, or superstitious
Practices of those among whom they lived) but upon the first stirrings toward
a Reformation, the Court of Rome was so far from reforming the abuses which
were complained of, that they sought to enforce them with the greatest severity
upon all persons, thundering out Excommunications against all such who should
question or dispute them. By which means those who might have lived peaceably
before within the external Communion of that Church, without consenting to the
errors of it, are now forced out of it, unless they would approve of such
things which their consciences detested; in comparison with the peace of which,
they accounted not their lives to be dear to them, as many thousands of them
made it appear in several Countries. This is the true and just account of the
state of things at the beginning of the Reformation; but afterward, when,
through the necessity of the Pope's affairs, a Council was summoned, and all
the arts imaginable were made use of, to steer that grand affair for the
Interess of the Court of Rome; a new scene of affairs appears in the Christian
world: those Doctrines which before were owned only by particular men, are
defined by Pope and Council, to be the Catholic Doctrines of the Roman Church,
and all those Anathematized who will not own them. By which means the Roman
Church is become it self that party and faction, which only prevailed in it
before but with reluctance and opposition; and now, none are looked on as
members of that Church, but such as own the definitions of that Council in
point of Doctrine. Which makes it vastly to differ from what it was before, as
to the terms of its Communion, and the state of the persons who remain in it;
who can neither enjoy that freedom in judgment which they might use before,
nor yet can pretend those excuses for not knowing the errors and corruptions
of that Church, which might have prevented obstinacy in them before. So that
upon the whole it appears, that the Protestants in the beginning of the
Reformation, were so far from taking away any thing that was received as a
Catholic Doctrine, by all Christian Churches, that they did not reject any
thing which could be looked on as the Catholic Doctrine of the Church of Rome;
and consequently that the Protestants were so far from a wilful separation from
the Church of Rome, that they were driven out by a prevalent Faction, which
imposed those things which had been before only the errors of particular
persons, as the Catholic Doctrines of that Church, and the necessary
conditions of Communion with her.

3. I may answer yet further, That it is not enough to prove any Doctrine to be
Catholic, that it was generally received by Christian Churches in any one Age;
but it must be made appear, to have been so received from the Apostles times.
So that if we should grant, that these Doctrines were owned for Catholic, not
only by the Church of Rome, but all other Christian Churches (so far as it can
be discerned by their Communion) yet this does not prove these Doctrines so
owned to be truly Catholic, unless you can first prove, that all the Christian
Churches of one Age can never believe a Doctrine to be Catholic, which is not
so. You see therefore your task increases further upon you: for, it is not
enough to say, That A. D. 1517. such and such Doctrines were looked on as
Catholic, and therefore they were so; but that for 1517. years, successively
from the Apostles to that time, they were judged to be so, and then we shall
more easily believe you. When you will therefore prove Transubstantiation, the
Sacrifice of the Mass, Image Worship, Invocation of Saints, or any other of the
good Doctrines mentioned by you, in a constant tradition from the Apostles
times to have been looked on as Catholic Doctrines, you may then say, That
Protestants in denying these, did take away something Catholic from the
Doctrine of the Church; but, till that time, these Answers may abundantly
suffice.

We now come closer to the business of the Reformation; but,. 9.
before we examine the particulars of it, the general grounds on which it
proceeded, must somewhat further be cleared, which his Lordship tells you, are
built upon the power of particular Churches reforming themselves, in case the
whole Church is negligent, or will not; to which you say, P. 164. n. 6.
That you grant in effect as great power as the Bishop himself does, to
particular Churches, to National and Provincial Councils, in reforming errors
and abuses either of doctrine or practice: only we require that they proceed
with due respect to the chief Pastor of the Church, and have recourse to him in
all matters and decrees of Faith, especially when they define or declare points
not generally known and acknowledged to be Catholic Truths. What you grant in
effect at first, you in effect deny again afterward. For the Question is about
Reformation of such errors and abuses as may come from the Church of Rome; and
when you grant a power to reform only, in case the Pope consent, you grant no
power to reform at all. For the experience of the world has sufficiently
taught us, How little his consent is to be expected in any thing of
Reformation. For his Lordship truly says, in Answer to Capellus, who denies
particular Churches any power of making Canons of Faith, without consulting the
Roman See, P. 151. n. 3.
That as Capellus can never prove that the Roman See must be consulted with
before any Reformation be made: So it is as certain, that, were it proved and
practiced, we should have no Reformation. For it would be long enough before
the Church should be cured, if that See alone should be her Physician, which in
truth is her disease. Now to this you say, That even Capellus himself requires
this: as though Capellus were not the man whom his Lordship answers as to this
very thing. But besides you say, The practice of the Church is evident for it,
in the examples of the Milevitan and Carthaginian Councils, which, as St.
Austin witnesses, sent their decrees touching Grace, Original sin in Infants,
and other matters against Pelagius, to be confirmed by the Pope: but what is
all this to the business of Reformation, that nothing of that nature is to be
attempted without the Popes consent? That these Councils did by Julius an
African Bishop communicate their decrees to Pope Innocent, Who denies? but,
what is it you would thence infer to your purpose? for the utmost which can be
drawn hence, is, that they desired the Pope to contribute his assistance in
condemning Pelagius and Coelestius; by adding the authority of the Apostolical
See to their decrees: that so by the consent of the Church that growing Heresy
might the more easily be suppressed. And who denies but at that time the Roman
Church had great reputation, (which is all that Authority implies) and by that
means might be more serviceable in preventing the growth of Pelagianism, if it
did concur with the African Councils in condemning that Doctrine. But because
they communicated their decrees to Pope Innocent desiring his consent with
them, that therefore no reformation should be attempted in the Church without
the consent of the Pope is a very far-fetched inference; and unhappily drawn
from those African Fathers, who so stoutly opposed Zosimus, Innocents
Successor, in the case of Appeals about the business of Apiarius. Did they,
think you, look on themselves as obliged to do nothing in the reforming the
Church without the Popes authority, who would by no means yield to those
encroachments of power, which Zosimus would have usurped over them? Nay it
appears, that, till the African Fathers had better informed him, Zosimus did
not a little favor Coelestius himself, and in case he had gone on so to do, do
you think they would have thought themselves ever the less obliged to reform
their Churches from the Pelagian Heresy which began to spread among them? And
in this time of the Controversy between Zosimus and them, though they carried
it with all fairness toward the Roman See, yet they were still careful to
preserve and defend their own privileges; and in case the Pope should then
have challenged that power over them, which he has done since, no doubt they
would not have struck at calling such encroachments The disease of the Church,
(without any unhandsomness or incivility) and would have been far from looking
on him as the only Physician of it.

To that pretense, That things should have been born with, till the time of a
General Council,. 10.
his Lordship answers: First, it is true, a General Council, free and entire, P.
152. n. 4.
would have been the best remedy, and most able for a Gangrene that had spread
so far, and eaten so deep into Christianity. But what? should we have suffered
this Gangrene to endanger life and all, rather then be cured in time by a
Physician of weaker knowledge, and a less able hand? Secondly we live to see
since, if we had stayed and expected a General Council, what manner of one we
should have had if any. For that at Trent was neither General nor free. And for
the errors which Rome had contracted, it confirmed them, it cured them not.
And yet I much doubt, whether ever that Council (such as it was) would have
been called, if some Provincial and National Synods under Supreme and Regal
power, had not first set upon this great work of Reformation; which I heartily
wish had been as orderly and happily pursued as the work was right Christian
and good in it self. But humane frailty and the heats and distempers of men, as
well as the cunning of the Devil would not suffer that. For even in this sense
also the wrath of man does not accomplish the will of God, St. James 1.20. but
I have learnt not to reject the good, which God has wrought, for any evil
which men may fasten upon it. Now to this you answer, 1. By a fair Concession
again, that a Provincial Council is the next Surgeon, when a Gangrene
endangers life, P. 165.
but still the Popes assistance is required: For fear the Surgeon should do
too much good of himself, you would be sure to have the Pope as Physician to
stand by, whom you know too much concerned in the maladies of the Church, to
give way to an effectual cure. 2. But you say further, That the most proper
expedient is an Ecumenical Council; and this you spoil again, with saying;
Such as the Council of Trent was. For what you say in vindication of that being
General and free, we shall consider in the Chapter designed for that purpose.
What you object against our National Synod 1562. will be fully answered before
the end of this; which that we may make way for, we must proceed to the
remainder of these general grounds; in which his Lordship proves, That when the
Universal Church will not, or for the iniquity of the times cannot obtain and
settle a free General Council, it is lawful, P. 152. n. 5.
nay sometimes necessary to reform gross abuses by a National or a Provincial.
To this you answer in General, P. 166. n. 8.
That you deny not but matters of less moment as concerning rites and
ceremonies, abuses in manners and discipline, may be reformed by particular
Councils, without express leave of the Pope; but that in matters of great
moment concerning the Faith and public Doctrine of the Church, Sacraments, and
whatever else is of Divine Institution, or universal obligation, particular
Councils, (if they duly proceed) attempt nothing without recourse to the Sea
Apostolic, and the Pope's consent either expressly granted or justly presumed.
Fair hopes then there are of a cure when the Imposthume gathers in the Head! we
are indeed by this put into a very good condition; for if a small matter hurts
a Church she has her hands at liberty to help her self; but if one comes to
ravish her, her hands are tied, and by no means must she defend her self. For
in case, say you, it be any matter of great moment, it must be left to the
Pope, and nothing to be done without his consent; no not although the main of
the distempers come through him. But thanks be to God, our Church is not
committed to the hands of such a merciless Physician, who first causes the
malady and then forbids the cure: we know of no such obligation we have, to
sleep in St. Peter's Church, as of old they did in the Temple of Aesculapius in
hopes of a cure. God has entrusted every National Church with the care of her
own safety, and will require of her an account of that power he has given to
that end. It will be little comfort to a Church whose members rot for want of a
remedy, to say, The Pope will not give leave or else it might have been cured.
I wonder where it is that any Christian Church is commanded to wait the Popes
good leisure for reforming her self? Whence does he derive this Authority and
sole power of reforming Churches? But that must be afterward examined. But is
it reasonable to suppose that there should be Christian Magistrates, and
Christian Bishops in Churches, and yet these so tied up that they can do
nothing in order to the Churches recovery though the distempers be never so
great and dangerous? Do we not read in the Apostolical Churches that the
Government of them was in themselves, without any the least mention of any
Ecumenical Pastor over all? if any abuses were among them, the particular
Governors of those Churches are checked and rebuked for it, and commanded to
exercise their power over offenders? and must the encroachments of an usurped
and arbitrary power in the Church hinder particular Churches from the exercise
of that full power which is committed to the Governors of them? Neither is
this only a Right granted to a Church as such, but we find this power practiced
and asserted in the history of the Christian Churches from the Apostles times.
For no sooner did the Bishops of Rome begin to encroach, but other Bishops were
so mindful of their own privileges and the Interess of their Churches, that
they did not yield themselves his Vassals, but disputed their rights and
withstood his usurpations. As has partly appeared already, and will do more
afterward.

. 11.
And that particular Churches may reform themselves, his Lordship produces
several Testimonies; The first is of Gerson, who tells us plainly, That he will
not deny, P. 153.
but that the Church may be reformed by parts. And that this is necessary; and,
that to effect it, Provincial Councils may suffice, and in some things
Diocesan. And again, Either you should reform all estates of the Church in a
General Council, or command them to be reformed in Provincial Councils: P. 167.
But all this, you say, does not concern matters of Faith, but only personal
abuses; But I pray what ground is there that one should be reformed and not the
other? Is it not the reason why any reformation is necessary, that the Churches
purity and safety should be preserved? and is not that as much or more
endangered by erroneous doctrines then by personal abuses? Will not then the
parity of reason hold proportionably for one as well as the other? that if the
Church may be reformed by parts as to lesser abuses, then much more certainly
as to greater. Besides, you say, Gerson allowed no Schismatical Reformations
against the Churches head; neither do we plead for any such; but then you must
show, Who the Churches head is, and, By what right he comes to be so; otherwise
the cause of the Schism will fall upon him who pretends to be the head to
direct others, and is as corrupt a member as any in the body. But his Lordship
adds, Ibid.
This right of Provincial Synods, that they might decree in causes of Faith,
and in cases of Reformation, where corruptions had crept into the Sacraments of
Christ, was practiced much above a thousand years ago by many, both National
and Provincial Synods. For which he first instanceth in the Council at Rome
under Pope Sylvester An. 324. condemning Photinus and Sabellius, whose heresies
were of a high nature against the Faith; but here you say, The very title
confutes his pretense, for it was held under the Pope and therefore not against
him. Ibid.
But however, whether with the Pope or against him, it was no more then a
Provincial Synod; and this decreed something in matters of Faith, though
according to your own Doctrine the Pope could not be Infallible there: for you
restrain his Infallibility to a General Council, and do not assert that it
belongs to the particular Church of Rome. As well then may any other Provincial
Synod determine matters of Faith, as that of Rome, since that has no more
Infallibility belonging to it as such then any other particular Church has;
and the Pope himself you say may err when he does not define matters of Faith
in a General Council. To his Lordships second instance of the Council of Gangra
about the same time condemning Eustathius for his condemning marriage as
unlawful; you answer to the same purpose, That Osius was there Pope Sylvester's
Legate; but what then? if the Pope had been there himself he had not been
Infallible, much less certainly his Legate who could have only a Second-hand
Infallibility. To the third of the Council of Carthage condemning rebaptization
about 348. you grant, That it was assembled by Gratus Bishop of Carthage, but
that no new Article was defined in it, but only the perpetual tradition of the
Church was confirmed therein. Neither do we plead for any power in Provincial
Councils to define any new Articles of Faith, but only to revive the old, and
to confirm them in opposition to any Innovations in point of Doctrine; and as
to this we profess to be guided by the sense of Scripture as interpreted by the
unanimous consent of the Fathers and the four first General Councils. To the
fourth of the Council of Aquileia A. D. 381. condemning Palladius and
Secundinus for embracing the Arrian Heresy, St. Ambrose being present; you
answer, That they only condemned those who had been condemned already by the
Nicene Council; and, St. Ambrose and other Bishops of Italy being present, Who
can doubt but every thing was done there by the Popes authority and consent?
But if they only enforced the decrees of the Council of Nice, What need of the
Pope's authority to do that? And do you think that there were no Provincial
Councils in that part of Italy which was particularly distinguished from the
suburbicarian Churches under the Bishop of Rome, wherein the Pope was not
present either by himself or Legates? If you think so, your thoughts have more
of your will then understanding in them. But if this Council proceeded
according to that of Nice, Will it not be as lawful for other Provincial
Councils to reform particular Churches, as long as they keep to the Decrees not
barely of Nice, but of the four General Councils, which the Church of England
looks on, as her duty to do. In the two following Instances of the second
Council of Carthage declaring in behalf of the Trinity, and the Milevitan
Council about the Pelagian Heresy; you say, The Bishops of Rome were
consulted: But what then? Were they consulted as the Heads of the Church, or
only as eminent members of it in regard of their Faith and Piety? Prove the
former when you are able; and as to the latter it depends upon the continuance
of that Faith and Piety in them; and when once the reason is taken away, there
can be no necessity of continuing the same resort. The same answer will serve
for what you say concerning the second Council of Aurange, determining the
Controversies about Grace and Free Will, supposing we grant it assembled by the
means of Felix 4. Bishop of Rome; as likewise to the third of Toledo. We come
therefore to that which you call his Lordships reserve, and Master-allegation
the fourth Council of Toledo; which, says he, P. 154.
did not only handle matters of Faith for the reformation of that people, but
even added also something to the Creed, which were not expressly delivered in
former Creeds. Nay, the Bishops did not only practice this, to condemn Heresies
in National and Provincial Synods, and so to reform those several places and
the Church it self by parts; but they did openly challenge this as their right
and due, and that without any leave asked of the Sea of Rome. Council. Toles*
4. Can. 3.
For in this fourth Council of Toledo they decree, that, If there happen a
cause of Faith to be settled, a general that is a National Synod of all Spain
and Gallicia shall be held thereon. And this in the year 643. where you see it
was then Catholic Doctrine in all Spain, that a National Synod might be a
competent Judge in a cause of Faith. But here still we meet with the same
Answer, P. 168.
That all this might be done with a due subordination to the Sea Apostolic,
but that it does not hence follow that any thing may be done in Provincial
Councils against the authority of it. Neither do we plead that any thing may be
done against the just authority of the Bishop of Rome, or any other Bishop; but
then you must prove that he had a just authority over the Church of England,
and that he exercised no power here at the Reformation but what did of right
belong to him. But the fuller debate of these things must be left to that place
where you designedly assert and vindicate the Pope's Authority.

. 12.
These things being thus in the general cleared, we come to the particular
application of them to the case of the Church of England. As to which, Ibid.
his Lordship says; And if this were practiced so often and in so many places,
Why may not a National Council of the Church of England do the like? As she
did. P. 155.
For she cast off the Pope's usurpation, and as much as in her lay restored the
King to his right. The institution of a Christian man. A. 1534.

In Synodo Lond^n. Sess. 8. die Veneris Jan. An. 1562.


That appears by a Book subscribed by the Bishops in Henry the eighths time.
And by the Records in the Archbishops office, orderly kept and to be seen. In
the Reformation which came after, our Princes had their parts, and the Clergy
theirs. And to these two principally the power and direction for Reformation
belongs. That our Princes had their parts, is manifest by their calling
together of the Bishops, and others of the Clergy, to consider of that which
might seem worthy Reformation. And the Clergy did their part: for, being thus
called together by Regal power, they met in the National Synod of sixty two.
And the Articles there agreed on were afterward confirmed by acts of State,
and the Royal assent. In this Synod, the Positive truths which are delivered
are more then the Polemicks. So that a mere calumny it is, that we profess only
a Negative Religion. True it is, and we must thank Rome for it, our Confession
must needs contain some Negatives. For we cannot but deny that Images are to be
adored. Nor can we admit maimed Sacraments. Nor grant Prayers in an unknown
tongue. And in a corrupt time or place, it is as necessary in Religion to deny
falsehood, as to assert and vindicate Truth. Indeed this latter can hardly be
well and sufficiently done but by the former, an Affirmative verity being ever
included in the Negative to a falsehood. As for any error which might fall into
this (as any other Reformation) if any such can be found; then I say, and it is
most true, Reformation, especially in cases of Religion, is so difficult a
work, and subject to so many Pretensions, that it is almost impossible but the
Reformers should step too far, or fall too short in some smaller things or
other, which in regard of the far greater benefit coming by the Reformation it
self, may well be passed over and born withal. But if there have been any
wilful and gross errors, not so much in opinion as in Fact (Sacrilege too
often pretending to Reform Superstition) that is the crime of the Reformers, not
of the Reformation; and they are long since gone to God to answer it, to whom I
leave them.

This is his Lordships full and just account of the proceedings of the
Reformation in the Church of England, to which we must consider what Answer you
return. To his Lordships Question, Why may not a National Council of the Church
of England do the like; you give this answer, Truly I know no reason why it may
not, P. 168. n. 9.
provided it be a true National Council and a true Church of England, (as those
recited were true Churches and Councils) and provided also that it do no more.
We are contended to put the issue of this business upon these three things,
viz. That our Church is a true Church, That the power which reformed it was
sufficient for that purpose, and, That no more was done by them then was in
their power to do. But for the first you tell us, That seeing by the Church of
England he means the present Protestant Church there, Ibid.
you must crave leave of his Lordship to deny his supposition, and tell him the
Church of England in that sense, signifies no true Church. Were it not an easy
matter to requite you by telling you, It is impossible we should be guilty of
Schism in any separation from your Communion, because we must crave leave of
you to say that the Church of Rome is no true Church; and where there is Schism
that must be a true Church which men are guilty of it in separating from. Not
as though I sought only to return a blow on you which I could not defend our
Church from; but to let you see, that by whatever way you would prove your
Church to be true, by the same we may prove ours to be so too. If you own and
believe the Christian Doctrine to be the way to salvation, so do we. If you
embrace the ancient Creeds, so do we. If you acknowledge the Scriptures to be
Gods Word, so do we. If you join together in participation of the Sacraments of
Baptism, and the Lords Supper, so do we. If you have a constant succession of
Bishops, so have we. Name then What it is, which is Fundamental to the Being of
a Church, which our Protestant Church does want? You grant the Church of
England was a true Church before the Reformation, Wherein was it altered from
it self by it, that it ceased to be a true Church? Was it, in denying the
Pope's Supremacy in Henry the eighth's time? That cannot be: for you very
remarkably grant afterward, That the Bishops, and the King too, P. 169.
left the Pope in possession of all that he could rightly challenge. (Which is
a concession we shall make more use of afterward.) Surely then this could not
unchurch them. Or, Was it the proceedings of the Reformation in Queen
Elizabeth's time? The Supremacy could not be it neither now; for that was
asserted under a more moderate title in her time, than in her Fathers. Was it
the Use of the Liturgy in the English tongue? Surely not; when Pius the fourth
offered to confirm it, as is credibly reported from Vincentius Parpalia, whom
that Pope employed on a Message to Queen Elizabeth, with terms of
Accommodation. But, What was it which did unchurch us? Were they the Articles
of Religion agreed on in the Convocation, 1562? If they were these, Were they
either the positive or negative Articles? If the positive, Were they the
asserting the Articles contained in the three Creeds, the sufficiency of
Scriptures, the necessity of Divine Grace? or, What else? If the negative, Was
it the denying Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, Unlawfulness of Priests
Marriage, Communion in one kind? or, Which of them else was it, which made the
Protestant Church to be no true Church? Or, Is it lastly the asserting, That as
the Church of Jerusalem, Alexandria, and Antioch, have erred, so also the
Church of Rome has erred, not only in their livings, A^t 19.
and manner of Ceremonies, but also in matters of Faith? Is this it which has
done us all the mischief to unchurch us, viz. the denying your Churches
Infallibility? If this be it, it is our comfort yet, that our Church will
remain a true Church, till yours be proved to be Infallible; which I dare say,
will be long enough. But, as though it were in your absolute power to church
and unchurch whom, and when you please, you offer at no proof at all of this
assertion, but only very fairly crave his Lordships leave to call the
Protestant Church no true Church: Which indeed is a more civil way of begging
the Question. And if it will not be granted, you cannot help it; for you have
done your utmost, in craving his leave for it, and you have no more to say to
it.

But, you seem to say much more to the second,. 13.
That the Reformation was not managed by a lawful power, nor carried on in a
due manner; for you offer to prove, that the National Synod 1562. was no lawful
Synod, in these words. For is it not notorious, that pretended Synod A. D.
1562. were all manifest usurpers? Is it not manifest, 168, 169.
that they all by force intruded themselves, both into the Sees of other lawful
Bishops, and into the cures of other lawful Pastors, quietly and Canonically
possessed of them before the said intrusion? Can those be accounted a lawful
National Council of England, or lawfully to represent the English Church, who
never had any lawful, that is, Canonical and just Vocation, Mission, or
Jurisdiction given them to, and over the English Nation? Two things you object
as the great reasons why those persons who sat in the Convocation, A. 1562.
could make no lawful Synod, and those are Intrusion, and want of a lawful
Mission: which shall be particularly examined. The first charge is of
Intrusion, which you would seem to aggravate by several circumstances, that
they intruded themselves, and that by force; and not some, but all; and that
into the Sees of other lawful Bishops, and cures of lawful Pastors. But how
true these circumstances are, must appear by a true account of the matters of
fact relating to these things in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign. How
false that is, That all intruded themselves, is notorious to any one who
understands any thing of those times; For this Convocation was held in the
fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, and in the fifth of her Reign: Of 26 Cathedral
Churches, there were but fourteen or fifteen Bishops then living in England.
For the Sees of Salisbury and Oxford fell vacant A. 1557. and were not supplied
in the time of Queen Mary. Hereford, Bristow, Bangor, were vacant by the death
of the several Bishops some weeks before Queen Mary. Canterbury by the death of
Cardinal Pool, the same day with the Queen. Norwich and Gloucester a few weeks
after her; and so likewise Rochester, Worcester, and S. Asaph became vacant by
the voluntary exile of Pates and Goldwell, the Bishops thereof; so that but
fifteen Bishops were then living and remaining in England. And, Were all those
who supplied these vacant Sees, Intruders? A strange kind of Intrusion into
dead men's places! So then, this circumstance is notoriously false, That they
All by force intruded themselves into the Sees of other lawful Bishops. But let
us see, Whether the other are more justly charged with a forcible Intrusion
into the Sees of the other Bishops. For which we must consider what the
proceedings were in reference to them: It appears then, that in the first year
of the Queen, the Oath of Supremacy, formed and enjoined in the time of Henry
8. was in the first Parliament of Queen Elizabeth revived for the better
securing the Queen of the Fidelity of her subjects; but yet it was so revived,
that several considerable passages in the Act concerning it, were upon mature
deliberation mitigated, both as to the Queens title which was not Supreme Head,
but Supreme Governor; a title which Queen Mary had used before, as appears by
an Act passed in the third Session of Parliament in her time: and likewise as
to the penalty; for, whereas the Stat. 28. Hen. 8. c. 10. was so very severe,
That whosoever did extol the authority of the Bishop of Rome, was, for the
first offense, within the compass of a Praemunire, and for refusing to take the
Oath, was guilty of Treason; it passed now in Queen Elizabeth's time, only with
this penalty, That such who refused it, should be excluded such places of
honor and profit, as they held in the Church or Commonwealth; and that such
as should maintain or defend the authority, pre-eminence, power, or
jurisdiction, Spiritual or Ecclesiastical of any foreign Prince, Prelate,
Person, State, or Potentate whatsoever, should be three times convicted before
he suffered the pains of death. Upon the expiring of the Parliament,
Commissioners were appointed to require the Bishops to take the Oath of
Supremacy, according to the Law made to that purpose, which being tendered to
them, they all ( Kitchen of Landaffe only excepted) unanimously refused it,
although they had taken it before as Priests or Bishops, in the Reign of Henry
8. or Edward 6. But whether by some secret intimations from Rome, or their own
obstinacy, they were resolved rather to undergo the penalty of the Law, than to
take it now; and accordingly before the end of that year they were deprived of
their Bishoprics. So that the Question about the Intrusion of those Bishops,
who came into their Sees, depends upon the legality of the deprivation of
these. And certainly, whosoever considers their former carriage toward the
Queen, in refusing to assist at her Coronation, White and Watson.
and some of them threatening to excommunicate her instead of disputing at
Westminster, as they had solemnly engaged to do, joined with this contumacy in
refusing the Oath, will find that these persons did not unjustly suffer this
deprivation. For which I need not run out into the Princes power over
Ecclesiastical persons; for you have given a sufficient reason for it your self
in that acknowledgement of yours, That the Bishops, and the King too (meaning
King Henry) left the Pope in possession of all he could rightly challenge. If
this be true, that notwithstanding the Stat. 28. Hen. 8. notwithstanding the
Oath of Supremacy then taken, the Pope might enjoy all that belonged to him of
Divine Right, he might then do the same, notwithstanding this Oath in Queen
Elizabeth's time, which was only reviving the former with some mitigation; and
what could it be then else but obstinacy and contumacy in them to refuse it?
And therefore the plea which you make for those whom you call the
Henry-Bishops, will sufficiently condemn these present Bishops, whom we now
speak of. For if those Bishops only renounced the Popes Canonical and acquired
Jurisdiction here in England, as you say, i. e. that Authority and Jurisdiction
in Ecclesiastical matters, which the Pope exercised here by virtue of the
Canons, Prescription, and other titles of humane right, and gave it to the
King; yet they never renounced or deprived him of that part of his authority,
which is far more intrinsecal to his office, and of Divine Right; they never
denied the Popes Sovereign Power to teach the Universal Church, and determine
all Controversies of Faith whatsoever in a General Council. If these things, I
say, be true, which you confidently assert, the more inexcusable were these
Bishops for refusing that Oath of Supremacy which they had not only taken in
King Henry's time, but which, by your own confession, takes away nothing of the
Pope's Authority, in relation to the whole Catholic Church. And by this means
their obstinacy appeared so great, as might justly deserve a deprivation. It
being certainly in the Power of the King and Bishops to assert their own rights
in opposition to any Canons or Prescriptions whatsoever of merely humane right.
So that by your own confession, the more excusable the Henry-Bishops were, as
you call them, the less excusable the Mary-Bishops were (as, to follow you, we
must call them) in refusing the Oath of Supremacy, when tendered to them. Was it
lawful then in King Henry's time, to take this Oath or not? If not, then King
Henry's Bishops are infinitely to blame for taking it, and you for defending
them: If it was lawful then, why not in Queen Elizabeth's time? Had she not as
much reason to impose it as her Father? Had she not as much power to do it?
When one of the chief refusers, Heath, Archbishop of York, and then L.
Chancellor of England, did, upon the first notice of the death of Queen Mary,
declare to the House of Commons, That the succession of the Crown did of right
belong to the Princess Elizabeth, whose title they conceived to be free from
all legal Questions; this could be then no plea at all for them. So that if any
persons through the greatest obstinacy, might be deprived by a Prince of their
Ecclesiastical preferments, these might; and when you can prove, that in no
case a Prince has power to deprive Ecclesiastical persons, you will say more
to your purpose than yet you have done. But till you have done that, it remains
clear, that these Bishops were justly deprived; and if so, What was to be done
with their vacant Sees? Must they be kept vacant still? or such be put into
them who were guilty of the same fault with themselves, in refusing the Oath,
when tendered to them? If not such, then it was necessary that other fit persons
should be legally consecrated and invested in them: And so they were, the
places being supplied by worthy persons; the Archbishop of Canterbury being
consecrated by a Canonical number of Edward-Bishops, and the rest duly
consecrated by other hands. And for all this, Must all these persons be
intruders, and intrude themselves by force, and that into the places of other
lawful Bishops? When so many Sees were actually vacant, and the rest by due
form of Law, into which other Bishops were elected, and legally consecrated,
notwithstanding the putid Fable of the Nags-Head ordination, which has so
often and so evidently been disproved, that I am glad to find you have so much
modesty, as not to mention it. These Bishops being thus legally invested in
their places, To whom did the care and Government of the English Church belong?
to these, or to those who were justly deprived? If to these, Were not they then
the due representatives of the English Church in a National Synod, who with
those of the lower House of Convocation, make up a true National Council? And
if so, it belonged to them as such, to consider what appertained to the Faith
and Government of the Church of England. For they undertook not to prescribe to
the whole world, that they leave to the Bishop and Church of Rome (not as
legally belonging to them, but arrogantly usurped by them) but to draw up
Articles of Religion, which should be owned by all such who enjoyed any place
of Trust in the Church of England. So that in all this they were neither
intruders, neither did they act any thing beyond their place and authority. But
you would seem to quarrel with their Vocation, Mission, and Jurisdiction, as
though it were not lawful, i. e. Canonical and Just; all these are your own
words, and they are but words; for not one syllable like a proof is suggested.
I tell you then (not to spend time in a needless vindication of the Vocation of
the Bishops and Pastors of the Church of England, when you give us no reason to
question it) that by the same arguments that you can prove that you have any
lawful Bishops and Pastors in your Church, it will appear that we have too. And
that our Vocation and Mission is far more consonant to the Apostolical and
Primitive Church than yours is.

. 14.
But, the main quarrel is still behind, which is, that, Supposing they had been
true Bishops, P. 196.
and Pastors of the English Church, and their Assembly a lawful National
Council, yet, you say, They were so far from doing the like (that other
Provincial Councils had done) that they acted directly contrary to them, which
charge lies in these things. 1. Condemning points of Faith that had been
generally believed and practiced in the Church before them. This you know we
deny, and you barely affirm it, and I have showed some reason of our denial
already, and shall do more when we come to particulars. 2. In contradicting the
Doctrine of the Roman Church: A great Heresy indeed, but never yet condemned
in any General Council. 3. In convening against the express Will of the Church
of Rome: We shall then think that a fault, when you prove it belongs to that
only, to summon all Councils, General, National, and Provincial. 4. In denying
the Popes Authority, or attempting to deprive him of it: if you speak of his
usurped Authority, you must prove it a fault to deprive him of it, i. e. to
withdraw our selves from obedience to it, for that is all the deprivation can
be here understood. If you mean Just Authority, show wherein it lies, whence he
had it, by what means he came into it in the Church of England, and if you can
make it appear that he had a just claim, it will be easy proving them guilty
of a fault who disowned it. But, Whether it were a fault in them or no, I am
sure it is one in you, to lay such things, and so many to our charge, and not
offering to give evidence for one of them. But I must consider the
Infallibility of your Church lies in dictating, and not proving. Thus then, for
any thing which you so much as seem to say to the contrary, the proceedings of
the Reformation were very regular and just, being built on sufficient grounds,
managed in a legal manner, and carried on with due moderation. Which are the
highest commendations can be given to a work of Reformation; and do with the
greatest right belong to the Church of England, of any Church in the Christian
world. There remains nothing now which you object against our Reformation, but
some faults of the Reformers; as to which his Lordship had already said, If any
such be found, they are the crimes of the persons, and not of the Reformation,
P. 170.
and they are long since gone to God to answer it, to whom I leave them. Which
Answer so full of justice and modesty, one would have thought, should have been
sufficient for any reasonable man; but you are not satisfied with it. For you
will have those faults to come from the principles of the Reformation, and that
they did not belong to the persons of the Reformers, but are entailed on their
Successors. But a short Answer will suffice for both these: show us, What
avowed principles of the Church of England tend to any real Sacrilege, before
you charge any thing of that nature, as flowing from the Maxims of the
Reformation. And if you can prove the Successors of the Reformers to continue
in any Sacrilegious Actions, let those plead for them who will, I shall not;
but leave them, as his Lordship did, to answer such things to God.

As to the Memorandum, which his Lordship concludes this discourse with, That
he spoke at that time of the General Church, as it was for the most part forced
under the Government of the Roman See: not doubting, P. 156. n. 6.
but that as the Universal Catholic Church would have reformed her self, had
she been in all parts freed of the Roman Yoke; so, while she was for the most
in these Western parts under that Yoke, the Church of Rome was, if not the
only, yet the chief hinderance of Reformation: You answer with some stomach; By
what force I pray? Is it possible? or, Ibid.
Can it enter into the judgment of any reasonable man, that a single Bishop,
of no very large Diocese, should be able by force, to bring into subjection so
many large Provinces of Christendom, as confessedly did acknowledge the Popes
Power, when the pretended Reformation began? But, What reasonable man can
imagine, that a single Bishop indeed of no very large Diocese (if kept within
his bounds) should, in progress of time, extend his power so far as the Pope
did, but by one of these two means, force, or fraud? And since, you seem to be
so much displeased at the former, I pray take the latter; or rather, the
conjunction of both together. For that there was force used, appears by the
manifold resistance which was made to the encroachments of the Popes power; and
the sad complaints of the usurpations and abuses which were in it; and these
abundantly delivered by Classical Authors of both the present and precedent
times: and (to use more of your own words) all Ecclesiastical Monuments are
full of them; so that this is no false calumny, or bitter Pasquil (as you call
it) but a very plain and evident truth. But that there was likewise a great
deal of art, subtilty and fraud used in the getting, keeping, and managing the
Popes power, he has but a small measure of wit who does not understand, and
they as little of honesty, who dare not confess it.

CHAP. V. Of the Roman Churches Authority.
The Question concerning the Church of Rome's Authority entered upon. How far
our Church, in reforming her self, condemns the Church of Rome. The Pope's
equality with other Patriarchs, asserted. The Arabic Canons of the Nicene
Council proved to be supposititious. The Polity of the Ancient Church
discovered from the sixth Canon of the Council of Nice. The Rights of Primates
and Metropolitans settled by it. The suitableness of the Ecclesiastical, to the
Civil Government. That the Bishop of Rome had then a limited Jurisdiction
within the suburbicary Churches; as Primate of the Roman Diocese. Of the
Cyprian Privilege; that it was not peculiar, but common to all Primates of
Dioceses. Of the Pope's Primacy according to the Canons; how far pertinent to
our dispute. How far the Pope's Confirmation requisite to new elected
Patriarchs. Of the Synodical and Communicatory Letters. The testimonies of
Petrus de Marca concerning the Pope's Power of confirming and deposing Bishops.
The Instances brought for it, considered. The case of Athanasius being restored
by Julius, truly stated. The proceedings of Constantine in the case of the
Donatists cleared, and the evidence thence against the Pope's Supremacy. Of the
Appeals of Bishops to Rome, how far allowed by the Canons of the Church. The
great case of Appeals between the Roman and African Bishops discussed. That the
Appeals of Bishops were prohibited, as well as those of the inferior Clergy.
T. C's. fraud in citing the Epistle of the African Bishops, for acknowledging
Appeals to Rome. The contrary manifested from the same Epistle to Boniface, and
the other to Coelestine. The exemption of the Ancient Britannick Church from
any subjection to the Sea of Rome, asserted. The case of Wilfrids Appeal
answered. The Primacy of England not derived from Gregory's Grant to Augustine
the Monk. The Ancient Primacy of the Britannick Church not lost upon the Saxon
Conversion. Of the state of the African Churches, after their denying Appeals
to Rome. The rise of the Pope's Greatness under Christian Emperors. Of the
Decree of the Sardican Synod, in case of Appeals: Whether ever received by the
Church: No evidence thence of the Pope's Supremacy. Zosimus his forgery in
sending the Sardican Canons instead of the Nicene. The weakness of the pleas
for it, manifested.

. 1.
THat which now remains to be discussed in the Question of Schism, is,
concerning the Authority of the Church and Bishop of Rome, Whether that be so
large and extensive, as to bind us to an universal submission, so that by
renouncing of it, we violate the Unity of the Church, and are thereby guilty of
Schism? But, before we come to a particular discussion of that, Chap. 14.
we must cast our eyes back on the precedent Chapter, in which the title
promises us, That Protestants should be further convinced of Schism; but upon
examination of it, there appears not so much as the shadow of any new matter,
but it wholly depends upon principles already refuted, and so contains a bare
repetition of what has been abundantly answered in the first part. So your
first Section has no more of strength, than what lies in your Churches
Infallibility: For, when you would plead, That though the Church of Rome be the
accused party, yet she may judge in her own cause; P. 171, 172.
you do it upon this ground, That you had already proved the Roman Church to be
infallible, and therefore your Church might as well condemn her accusers, as
the Apostles theirs; and that Protestants not pretending Infallibility cannot
rationally be permitted to be Accusers and Witnesses against the Roman Church.
Now, What does all this come to, in case your Church be not infallible, as we
have evidently proved she is not, in the first part; and that she is so far
from it, that she has most grossly erred, as we shall prove in the third part?
Your second Section supposes the matter of fact evident, P. 173.
That Protestants did contradict the public Doctrine and belief of all
Christians generally throughout the world, which we have lately proved to be an
egregious falsity, and shall do more afterward. The cause of the Separatists,
and the Church of England, is vastly different, Whether we look on the
authority, cause, or manner of their proceedings; and in your other Instances
you still beg the Question, That your Church is our Mother Church, and
therefore we are bound to submit to her judgment, though she be the accused
party. But as to this whole business of Quo Judice, nothing can be spoken with
more solidity and satisfaction, than what his Lordship says. If it be a cause
common to both, as certain it is here (between the Protestant and Roman Church)
then neither part alone may be Judge; if neither alone may judge, P. 157.
then either they must be judged by a third, which stands indifferent to both,
and that is the Scripture: or if there be a jealousy, or a doubt of the sense
of the Scripture, they must either both repair to the Exposition of the
Primitive Church, and submit to that; or both call and submit to a General
Council, which shall be lawfully called, and fairly and freely held with
indifferency to all parties; and that must judge the Difference according to
Scripture, which must be their Rule as well as private men's. When you either
attempt to show the unreasonableness of this, or substitute any thing more
reasonable instead of it, you may expect a further Answer to the Question, Quo
Judice? as far as it concerns the difference between your Church, or ours. The
remainder of this whole Chapter is only a repetition of somewhat concerning
Fundamentals, ad p. 181.
and a further expatiating in words, without the addition of any more strength
from reason or authority upon the Churches Infallibility being proved from
Scripture; which having been thoroughly considered already, and an account
given, not only of the meaning of those places (one excepted, which we shall
meet with again) but of the reason, Why the sense of them as to Infallibility
should be restrained to the Apostles, I find no sufficient motive inducing me
to follow you, in distrusting the Readers memory, and trespassing on his
patience, so much as to inculcate the same things over and over, as you do.
Passing by therefore the things already handled, and leaving the rest (if any
such thing appear) to a more convenient place, where these very places of
Scripture are again brought upon the stage in the Questions of the Pope's
Authority and Infallibility of General Councils, I come to your following
Chapter, in which you enter upon the Vindication of the Roman Churches
Authority.

2. That which his Lordship has long insisted on,. 2.
and evidently proved, is, The Right which particular Churches have to reform
themselves, when the General Church cannot for impediments, or will not for
negligence do it. And your Answers to his proofs have had their weakness
sufficiently laid open; the only thing here objected further, is, Whether in so
doing particular Churches do not condemn others of Errors in Faith? To which
his Lordship answers, That to reform themselves, and to condemn others, P. 166.
are two different works, unless it fall out so, that by reforming themselves,
they do by consequence condemn any other, that is guilty in that point, in
which they reform themselves; and so far to judge and condemn others, is not
only lawful but necessary. A man that lives Religiously does not by and by sit
in judgment, and condemn with his mouth all profane livers: but yet while he
is silent, his very life condemns them. To what end his Lordship produces this
Instance, any one may easily understand; but you abuse it, as though his
Lordship had said, That Protestants only by their Religious lives do condemn
your Church; and upon this run out into a strange declamation about Who the men
are that live so Religiously? P. 182. n. 1.
They who to propagate the Gospel the better, marry wives contrary to the
Canons and bring Scripture for it? Yes surely, much more then they who to
propagate your Church, enjoy Concubines; for which if they can bring some
Canons of your Church, I am sure they can bring no Scripture for it. They who
pull down Monasteries both of Religious men and women? I see, you are still as
loath to part them, as they are to be parted themselves; but if all their lives
be no more Religious then the most of them have been; the pulling of them down
might be a greater act of Religion then living in them. They who cast Altars to
the ground? More certainly then they who worshipped them. They who partly
banish Priests, and partly put them to death? Or they who commit treasons and
do things worthy of death? But you are doubtless very Religious and
tenderhearted men, whose consciences would never suffer you to banish or put
any to death for the sake of Religion; no not in Queen Mary's time here in
England! They who deface the very Tombs of Saints, and will not permit them to
rest even when they are dead? Or they who profess to worship dead Saints, and
martyr living ones with Fire and Faggot? If this be your religious living, none
who know what Religion means will be much taken with it. I shall easily grant
that you stick close to the Pope, but are therein far enough from the Doctrine
or life of St. Peter. If any of you have endured Sequestrations, Imprisonments,
Death it self, I am sure it was not for any good you did; not for the Catholic
Faith, but if you will, for some Catholic Treasons, such as would have enwrapt
a whole Nation in misery. If this be your suffering persecution for
righteousness sake, you will have little cause to rejoice in your
Fellow Sufferers. But if you had not a mind to calumniate us, and provoke us to
speak sad truths of you, all this might have been spared; for his Lordship only
chose this Instance, to show that a Church or person may be condemned
consequentially, which was not intentionally. But you say, Our Church has
formally condemned yours, by public and solemn censures in the 39. Articles.
Does his Lordship deny that our Church in order to our own reformation has
condemned many things which your Church holds? No, but that our Churches main
intention was to reform it self; but, considering the corruption and degeneracy
of your Church, she could not do it, without consequentially condemning yours:
and, that she did justly in so doing, we are ready on all occasions to justify.

. 3.
But his Lordship asks, If one particular Church may not judge or condemn
another, P. 167.
What must then be done where particulars need reformation? To which his
Adversary gives a plain Answer, That particular Churches must in that case (as
Irenaeus intimates) have recourse to the Church of Rome, which has more
powerful principality; and to her Bishop, who is the chief Pastor of the whole
Church, as being St. Peter's Successor, etc. This is the rise and occasion of
the present Controversy. To this his Lordship Answers, That it is most true
indeed; the Church of Rome has had, and has yet, more powerful Principality,
then any other particular Church. But she has not this power from Christ. The
Roman Patriarch by Ecclesiastical constitutions might perhaps have a Primacy of
order: but for principality of power, the Patriarchs were as even, as equal, as
the Apostles were before them. The truth is, this more powerful Principality
the Roman Bishops got under the Emperors, after they became Christian; and
they used the matter so, that they grew big enough to oppose, nay to depose the
Emperors, by the same power which they had given them. And after this, other
particular Churches, especially here in the West, submitted themselves to them
for Succor and Protections sake. And this was one main cause that swelled Rome
into this more powerful Principality, and not any right given by Christ to make
that Prelate, Pastor of the whole Church. To this you Answer, That to say that
the Roman Churches Principality is not from Christ, P. 183.
is contrary to St. Austin and the whole Milevitan Council, who in their
Epistle to Innocent the first profess that the Popes Authority is grounded upon
Scripture and consequently proceeds from Christ. But whoever seriously reads
and thoroughly considers that Epistle will find no such thing as that you aim at
there. Arbitramur -- adjuvante misericordia^ Domini nostri Jesu Christi --
Authoritati Sanctitati^ tuae de sanctarum Scripturarum Authoritate depromptae,
facilius eos qui tam perversa and perniciosa sentiunt, esse cessur^s. Aug. ep.
92.
For the scope of the Epistle is to persuade Pope Innocent to appear against
Coelestius and Pelagius; to that end they give first an account of their
Doctrine, showing how pernicious and contrary to Scripture it was; after which
they tell him that Pelagius being at Jerusalem was like to do a great deal of
mischief there, but that many of the Brethren opposed him and especially St.
Hierom. But we, say they, do suppose that through the mercy of our Lord Christ
assisting you, those which hold such perverse and pernicious principles may
more easily yield by your Authority drawn out of Scripture. Where they do not
in the least dream of his Authority as Universal Pastor being grounded on
Scripture, but of his appearing against the Pelagians with his Authority drawn
out of Scripture, that is, to that Authority which he had in the Church, by the
reputation of the Roman See, the Authority of the Scripture being added, which
was so clear against the Pelagians, or both these going together were the most
probable way to suppress their Doctrine. And it has been sufficiently proved
by others, by very many instances of the writers about that Age, that
Authoritas was no more then Rescriptum; as particularly appears by many
passages in Leo's Epistles, in which sense no more is expressed by this, than,
that by the Pope's Answer to the Council drawn out of the Authority of
Scripture, the Pelagians might more probably be suppressed. But what is this to
an Universal Pastorship given by Christ to him; any otherwise then to those who
sat in any other Apostolical Sees?

But your great quarrel is against his Lordship, for making all the Patriarchs
even and equal, as to Principality of power: and when he says, Equal as the
Apostles were, you say, that is aequivocal; for though the Apostles had equal
jurisdiction over the whole Church, yet St. Peter alone had jurisdiction over
the Apostles; but this is neither proved from John 21. nor is it at all clear
in Antiquity as will appear when we come to that Subject.

But this assertion of the equality of Protestants is so destructive to your
pretensions in behalf of the Church of Rome,. 4.
that you set your self more particularly to disprove it; which you offer to do
by two things. 1. By a Canon of the Nicene Council. 2. By the practice of the
ancient Church. P. 184.
You begin with the first of them, and tell us, That it is contrary to the
Council of Nice, In the third Canon whereof, which concerns the jurisdiction of
Patriarchs, the Authority (or Principality if you will) of the Bishop of Rome
is made the Pattern, and Model of that Authority and Jurisdiction which
Patriarchs were to exercise over the Provincial Bishops. The words of the Canon
are these. Sicque praeest Patriarcha iis omnibus, qui sub ejus potestate sunt,
sicut ille qui tenet sedem Romae, caput est and princeps omnium Patriarcharum,
The Patriarch (say they) is in the same manner over all those that are under
his Authority, as he who holds the Sea of Rome is head and Prince of the
Patriarchs. And in the same Canon the Pope is afterward styled, Petro similis
and Authoritate par, resembling St. Peter and his equal in Authority. These are
big words indeed and to your purpose, if ever any such thing had been decreed
by the Council of Nice; but I shall evidently prove that this Canon is
supposititious, and a notorious piece of Forgery. Which forgery is much
increased by you when you tell us, these words are contained in the third Canon
of the Council of Nice: Which in the Greek Editions of the Canons by du Tillet,
and the Codex Canonum by Justellus, and all other extant, in the Latin versions
of Dionysius Exiguus, and Isidore Mercator, is wholly against the (...), i. e.
such kind of women which Clergy men took into their houses, neither as wives or
Concubines, but under a pretext of piety. In the Arabic Edition of the Nicene
Canons, set out by Alphonsus Pisanus, the third Canon is against the ordination
either of Neophyti or criminal persons, and so likewise in that of Turrianus.
So that in no Edition, whether Arabic or other, is this the third Canon of the
Council of Nice; and therefore you were guilty either of great ignorance and
negligence in saying so, or of notorious fraud and imposture if you knew it to
be otherwise, and yet said it that the unwary reader might believe this Canon
to be within the 20. which are the only genuine Canons of the Council of Nice.
Indeed such a Canon there is in these Arabic Editions, but it is so far from
being the third, that in the Editions both of Pisanus and Turrianus it is the
thirty ninth, and in it I grant those words are; but yet you will have little
reason to rejoice in them, when I have proved, (as I doubt not to do) that this
whole farrago of Arabic Canons is a mere forgery; and that I shall prove both
from the true number of the Nicene Canons, and the incongruity of many things
in the Arabic Canons with the State and Polity of the Church at that time.

In those Editions set out by Pisanus and Turrianus from the Copy which they
say was brought by Baptista Romanus from the Patriarch of Alexandria there are
no fewer then eighty Canons; whereas the Nicene Council never passed above 20.
Which if it appear true, that will sufficiently discover the Forgery and
Supposititiousness of these Arabic Canons. Now that there were no more then
twenty genuine Canons of the Council of Nice, I thus prove. First from
Theodoret, who after he had given an account of the proceedings in the Council
against the Arrians, he says, That the Fathers met in Council again, and
passed twenty Canons relating to the Churches Polity: (...). Theodoret. hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 7. ed. Sirmond. 1642.

(...). Gelas. Acta Council. Nicen. lib. 2.

(...). Niceph. Ecclesiast. hist. l 8. c 19.

Quanquam Graci omnes asserant et tu^antur, Nicaeni Concilii Canones viginti
tantum ^uisse, etc. Bin not. in Council. Nicaen p 366.10.1.


and Gelasius Gricenus whom Alphonsus Pisanus set forth with his Latin version,
recounts no more then twenty Canons; the same number is asserted by Nicephorus
Callistus; and we need not trouble our selves with reciting the testimonies of
more Greek Authors, since Binius himself confesses that all the Greeks say,
there were no more then twenty Canons then determined. But although certainly
the Greeks were the most competent Judges in this case, yet the Latins
themselves did not allow of more. Ruffin. Ecclesiast. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5.
For although Ruffinus makes twenty two, yet that is not by the addition of any
more Canons, but by splitting two into four. Viginti tantum capitula Nicanae
Synodi in Sancta Romana Ecclesia haberi. Gratian* distinct. 16. c. 20.
And if we believe Pope Stephen in Gratian, the Roman Church did allow of no
more then twenty. And in that Epitome of the Canons which Pope Hadrian sent to
Charles the Great for the Government of the Western Churches, Deinde etiam 20.
capitulis Nicani Concilii recitatis, communi decreto statuerunt capitula 37. (
sive 39.) quae subsequuntur. Vid. Justell. not. in Cod. Eccles. African. p. 14.
A.D. 773. the same number of the Nicene Canons appears still. And in a M S. of
Hincmarus Rhemensis against Hincmarus Laudunensis, Quod non nisi viginti
capitula quae habemus in Nicaeno Concilio fuerunt constituta. c. 21. apud
Justell. ibid.
this is not only asserted but at large contended for, that there were no more
Canons determined at Nice, then those twenty which we now have, from the
testimonies of the Tripartite history, Ruffinus, the Carthaginian Council, the
Epistles of Cyril of Alexandria, and Atticus of Constantinople, and the twelfth
action of the Council of Chalcedon. So that if both Greeks and Latins say true,
there could be no more then twenty genuine Canons of the Council of Nice; which
may be yet further proved by two things, viz. the proceedings of the African
Fathers in the case of Zosimus about the Nicene Canons and the Codex Canonum
Ecclesiae Vniversae, both which yield an abundant testimony to our purpose. If
ever there was a just occasion given for an early and exact search into the
authentic Canons of the Council of Nice, it was certainly in that grand Debate
between the African Fathers and the Roman Bishops in the case of Appeals. For
Zosimus challenging not only a right of Appeals to himself, but a power of
dispatching Legates unto the African Churches to hear causes there, and all this
by virtue of a Canon in the Nicene Council, and this being delivered to them in
Council by Faustinus, Philippus, and Asellus whom Zosimus sent into Africa, to
negotiate this affair; no sooner did they hear this, but they were startled and
amazed at it, that such a thing should be challenged by virtue of a Canon in
the Council of Nice which they had never heard of before. Upon this they
declare themselves willing to yield to what should appear to be determined by
the Nicene Canons; thence they propound that a more exact search might be made
into the authentical Copies of them: for they profess no such thing at all to
appear, in all the Greek copies which they had among them; although Caecilianus
the Bishop of Carthage were present in the Council of Nice and brought home
those Copies which were preserved in the Church of Africa. For in all the
subscriptions of the Nicene Council, whether Arabic or others, the name of
Caecilian appears; now Caecilian was immediate Predecessor in Carthage to
Aurelius who presided in that Council wherein these things were debated. And
there it is expressly said, Codex Can. Eccles. Afric; p: 58.
There were but twenty Canons. But in order to further satisfaction, they
decree that a message should be sent on purpose to Constantinople, Antioch, and
Alexandria to find out the authentic Copies of the Nicene Canons, and after a
most diligent search no more Canons could be found then what the African
Fathers had before. And thence in the Epistle of Atticus of Constantinople
written to the Council of Carthage, he acquaints them that he according to
their desire had sent them the true and complete Canons ((...)) of the Nicene
Council. Codex Canon. p. 363.
And to the same purpose Cyril the Patriarch of Alexandria mentioning their
desires of having (...) the most true and authentic copies out of the Archives
of that Church, so he tells them he had sent ((...)) the most faithful copies
of the authentic Synod of Nice. Id. p 360.
Now if there had been any ground in the world for Turrianus his conjecture,
Turrian. praef. in Canon. Arab.
that the Nicene Canons were translated into Arabic by Alexander who was
present at the Council, for the Benefit of those in Pentapolis or Egypt who
only understood that language, (and that before the Nicene Canons were burnt,
of which Athanasius complains); who was more likely to have found out these
Arabic Canons then Cyril the Patriarch of Alexandria upon this occasion
especially, when the full and authentic Copies were so extremely desired? And
since no such thing at all appeared then, upon the most diligent inquiry, What
can be more evident, then that these eighty Arabic Canons are the imposture of
some latter age? Besides, if these Canons had been genuine and authentic, what
imaginable reason can be given why they were not inserted in the Codex Canonum
as the other twenty were? For, as Jacobus Leschasserius well observes, we are
not to imagine that the Ancient Church was governed at Random by loose and
dispersed Canons, whereby it had been an easy matter to have foisted in false
and supposititious Canons; Consultatio de Controvers. inter Paul. 5: and
Rempub. Venet. apud Goldast. Monarch. Tom. 3. p. 444.
but that there was a certain body and collection of them digested into an
exact order; so that none could add to or take away any thing from it: and
whatever Canons were not contained in this body had no power or force at all in
the Church. And that there was such a Codex Canonum, that learned Person has
abundantly proved from the Council of Chalcedon, which has many passages
referring to it; so that there is now no question made, but that which
Justellus published is the true collection of those Canons of the Universal
Church which were inserted into the Codex; in which we find but only the twenty
Canons of the Nicene Council; and that there could possibly be no more, appears
by the number of the Canons as they are reckoned in the Council of Chalcedon.
From whence it follows that only these twenty Canons were ever owned by the
Universal Church; for had the Fathers of the Church known of so many other
Canons of the Nicene Council, (as surely at least the Patriarchs of Alexandria
could not be ignorant of them if there had been any such) can we possibly think
that those who had so great a Veneration for the Nicene Council, should have
left the far greater part of the Canons of it, out of the Code of the Churches
Canons? I am not ignorant of what is objected by Binius, Bellarmin, and others,
to prove that there were more then twenty Canons of the Council of Nice; but
those proofs either depend upon things as supposititious as the Arabic Canons
themselves, such as the Epistles of Julius and Athanasius ad Marcum; or else
they only prove that several other things were determined by the Nicene Council
as concerning the celebration of Easter, rebaptizing Heretics, and such like,
which might be by the Acts of the Council without putting them into the Canons,
as Baronius confesses; but there cannot be any evidence brought of any Canon
which concerned the Churches Polity (for about that Theodoret and Nicephorus
tell us the Canons were made) which was not among these twenty. So that it
appears that these Arabic Canons are a mere forgery of later times, there
being no evidence at all that they were known to the Church in all the time of
the four General Councils: Quoniam hac ignorasse majores visi sunt, quando
^borta controversia in Ecclesia African^, de iis mentio necessaria incubuisset;
haec libentius aliis disserenda relinquemus. Baron. ad. An. 325. parag. 108.
and therefore Baronius, (notwithstanding the pretenses of Pisanus and
Turrianus from the Alexandrian Copy, and that out of Marcellus his Library,
yet) since these Canons were unknown in the Controversy of the African Church
about the Nicene Canons, leaves the Patronage of them to such as might be able
to defend them. And Spondanus in his contraction of him, (though in his
marginal note he says, Quamobrem quod in epistol^ quadam Marci nomine 70.
recenseantur. -- quodque Tur^ianus profiteatur 80. inventos Arabica lingua
Scriptos, Latinitate se donasse -- quoniam haec omnia scripta quibus ingens
ille numerus Canonum stabilitur, prorsus incertae vel potius nullius sunt
fidei; nec aliquis unquam probatus antiquitatis auctor amplius quam 20. Canones
Nicenae Synodi agnovisse reperiatur, ceteros ab aliis assertos libentius
rejicimus. Spondan. Epitom. Baron. ad A. 325. n. 42.
Baronius was sometimes more inclinable to the enlarged number of the Nicene
Canons) yet he relates it as his positive opinion, that he rejected all but the
twenty, whether Arabic or other as spurious and supposititious. You see then
what a fair choice you have made of the third Canon of the Council of Nice to
prove the superiority of the Pope over other Patriarchs by; when neither is it
the third Canon, nor any Canon at all of the Council of Nice, but a spurious
figment like those of Isidore Mercator, who thought all would pass for gold
which made for the Interess of the Church of Rome.

But were there not such a strong and pregnant evidence from authority to make
it appear that these Canons were supposititious,. 5.
yet the incongruity of them, with the state of the Church at that time would
abundantly manifest it, if we had time to compare many of those Canons with it.
But that which is most material to our purpose, concerning the equality of the
Patriarchs, your following words will put us upon a further enquiry into. This
also, say you (viz. That the Pope was head and Prince of all the Patriarchs)
the practice of the Church shows, P. 184.
which is always the best expositor and assertor of the Canons. For not only
the Popes confirmation was required to all new elected Patriarchs, but it
belonged likewise to him to depose unworthy ones, and restore the unjustly
deposed by others. Nicol. Pap. ^p. ad Michael. Imperat*
We read of no less then eight several Patriarchs of Constantinople deposed by
the Bishop of Rome. Sixtus the third deposed also Polychronius Bishop of
Jerusalem, as his Acts set down in the first Tome of the Councils testify. On
the contrary, Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria, and Paulus Bishop of
Constantinople, Zozom. l. 3. c. 7.
were by Julius the first restored to their respective Sees having been
unjustly expelled by Heretics. The same might be said of diverse others; over
whom the Pope did exercise the like authority: which he could never have done,
upon any other ground, then that of Divine Right, and as being generally
acknowledged St. Peter's Successor in the Government of the whole Church. Three
things I shall return you in Answer to this Discourse. 1. That the practice of
the Church does not show any such inequality as you contend for between the
Pope and other Patriarchs. 2. That no such practice of the Church can be proved
from the instances by you brought; And therefore, lastly, It by no means
follows that the Pope exercised any such authority by Divine right, or was
acknowledged to be St. Peter's Successor in the Government of the whole Church.
I begin with the practice of the ancient Church, which is so far from being an
evidence of such an inequality of Patriarchs as that you contend for, that
nothing does more confirm that which his Lordship says concerning the equality
of them then that does. For which we appeal to that famous testimony to this
purpose in the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council. (...) Council. Nicen. Can. 6.
Let ancient customs prevail; according to which, let the Bishop of Alexandria
have power over them who are in Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis; because this was
likewise the custom for the Bishop of Rome. And accordingly in Antioch and
other Provinces, let the privileges be preserved to the Churches. Which Canon
is the more remarkable, because it is the first that ever was made by the
ancient Church for regulating the rights and privileges of Churches over each
other; which there was like to be now more contest about, not only by reason of
the Churches liberty under Constantine, but because of the new disposition of
the Empire by him, which was made not long before the sitting of the Council of
Nice. But the particular occasion of this Canon is generally supposed to be
this. Meletius an ambitious Bishop in Egypt, much about the time that Arrius
broached his Heresy at Alexandria, takes upon him to ordain Bishops and others
in Egypt, without the consent of the Bishop of Alexandria. This case being
brought before the Nicene Fathers, they pronounce these ordinations null,
depose Meletius, and, to prevent the like practices for the future, do by this
Canon confirm the ancient customs of that nature in the Church; so that the
Bishop of Alexandria should enjoy as full right and power over the Provinces of
Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, as the Bishop of Rome had over those subject to
him, as likewise Antioch and other Churches should enjoy their former
privileges. Where we plainly see that the ground of this extent of power is
not attributed to any Divine right of the Bishop of Rome, or any other
Metropolitan, but to the ancient custom of the Church; whereby it had obtained
that such Churches that were deduced (as it were so many colonies) from the
Mother Church, should retain so much respect to and dependence upon her, as not
to receive any Bishop into them without the consent of that Bishop who governed
in the Metropolis. Which was the prime reason of the subordination of those
lesser Churches to the Metropolis: And this custom being drawn down from the
first plantation of Churches, and likewise much conducing to the preserving of
unity in them, these Nicene Fathers saw no reason to alter it, but much to
confirm it. For otherwise, there might have been continual bandying and
opposition of lesser Bishops and Churches against the greater; and therefore
the Discipline and Unity of the Church did call for this subordination; which
could not be better determined then by the ancient custom which had obtained
in the several Churches. It being found most convenient that the Churches in
their subordination should be most agreeable to the civil disposition of the
Empire. And therefore for our better understanding the force and effect of this
Nicene Canon, we must cast our eye a little upon the civil disposition of the
Roman Empire by Constantine, then lately altered from the former disposition of
it under Augustus and Adrian. He therefore distributed the administration of
the Government of the Roman Empire under four Praefecti Praetorio; but for the
more convenient management of it, the whole body of the Empire was cast into
several Jurisdictions containing many Provinces within them which were in the
Law called Dioeceses; over every one of which there was appointed a Vicarius,
or Lieutenant, to one of the Praefecti Praetorio, whose residence was in the
chief City of the Diocese, where the Praetorium was, and justice was
administered to all within that Diocese, and thither appeals were made. Under
these were those Proconsuls or Correctores who ruled in the particular
Provinces; and had their residence in the Metropolis of it, under whom were the
particular Magistrates of every City; now according to this disposition of the
Empire, the Western part of it contained in it seven of these Dioceses, as,
under the Praefectus Praetorio Galliarum, was the Diocese of Gaul, which
contained seventeen Provinces; the Diocese of Britain, which contained five,
(afterward but three in Constantines time) the Diocese of Spain, seven. Under
the praefectus Praetorio Italiae, was the Diocese of Africa, which had six
Provinces, the Diocese of Italy, whose seat was Milan, 7. the Diocese of Rome,
10. Under the Praefectus Praetorio Illyrici, was the Diocese of Illyricum, in
which were seventeen Provinces. In the Eastern Division, were the Diocese of
Thrace, which had six Provinces, the Diocese of Pontus 11. and so the Diocese
of Asia, the Oriental (properly so called) wherein Antioch was, 15. all which
were under the Praefectus Praetorio Orientis; the Egyptian Diocese, which had
six Provinces, was under the Praefectus Augustalis; in the time of Theodosius
the elder, Illyricum was divided into two Dioceses, the Eastern, whose
Metropolis was Thessalonica, and had eleven Provinces, the Western, whose
Metropolis was Syrmium, and had six Provinces. According to this division of
the Empire, we may better understand the Affairs and Government of the Church,
which was modeled much after the same way; unless where Ancient custom, or the
Emperor's edict, did cause any variation. For as the Cities had their Bishops,
so the Provinces had their Archbishops, and the Dioceses their Primates, whose
Jurisdiction extended as far as the Diocese did; and as the Conventus Juridici
were kept in the chief City of the Diocese for matters of Civil Judicature, so
the chief Ecclesiastical Councils for the affairs of the Church, were to be
kept there too; for which there is an express passage in the Codex of
Theodosius, whereby care is taken, That the same course should be used in
Ecclesiastical, which was in civil matters; Codex Theodos. de Episcop. l. 23.
Qui mos est causarum civilium, iidem in negotiis Ecclesiasticis obtine^di sunt,
ut, si qua sunt -- ad religionis observantiam pertinentia, locis suis and a
suae dioec^s^os Synodis audiantur.
so that such things which concerned them should he heard in the Synods of the
Diocese. Where the word Diocese is not used in the sense the African Fathers
used it in, for that which belonged to one Bishop (as it is now used) but as it
is generally used in the Codex of Theodosius and Justinian, and the Novells and
Greek Canons; for, that which comprehends in it many Provinces, as a Province,
takes in several Dioceses of particular Bishops.

These things being premised,. 5.
we may the better understand the scope of the Canon of the Council of Nice; in
which three things are to our purpose considerable; 1. That it supposes
particular bounds and limits set to the Jurisdiction of those who are mentioned
in it. 2. That what Churches did enjoy privileges before this Council had them
confirmed by this Canon, as not to be altered. 3. That the Churches enjoying
these privileges were not subordinate to each other.

1. That particular bounds and limits were supposed to the power of those
Churches therein mentioned. For, although we grant that this Canon does not fix
or determine, What the bounds were of the Roman Bishops power, yet that it does
suppose that it had its bounds, is apparent from the example being drawn from
thence for the limits of other Churches. For, What an unlikely thing is it,
that the Church of Rome should be made the pattern for assigning the limits of
other Metropolitan Churches, if that had not its known limits at that time?
And, Can any thing be more absurd or unreasonable, than the Answer which
Bellarmin gives to this place, That the Bishop of Alexandria ought to govern
those Provinces, Quarta igitur and vera expositio est, Alexandrinum debere
gubernare illas provincias, quia Romanus Episcopus ita consuevit, ^d est, quia
Romanus Episcopus ante omnem Co^ciliorum definitionem consuevit pe^mittere
Episc^po Alexandrino regimea Aegypti, Libyae and Pentapolis. Bellarm. de Romans
ont, l. 2. c* 13.
because the Roman Bishop has so accustomed, i. e. says he, To let the
Alexandrian Bishop govern them. Here is an id est with a witness. What will not
these men break through, that can so confidently obtrude such monstrous
interpretations upon the credulous world* Is it possible to conceive when the
Canon makes use of the parallel of the Roman Bishop, and makes that the ground
why the Bishop of Alexandria should enjoy full power over those Provinces,
because the Bishop of Rome did so; that the meaning should be, That he gave the
Bishop of Alexandria power to govern those Provinces? They who can believe such
things, may easily find arguments for the Pope's unlimited Supremacy every
where. I make no scruple to grant what Bellarmin contends for, from the Epistle
of Nicolaus 1, That the Council did not herein assign limits to the Church of
Rome, but made that a pattern whereby to order the Government of other
Churches. And from thence it is sufficiently clear to any reasonable man, that
the limits of her Government were, though not assigned, yet supposed by the
Council. For otherwise, How absurd were it to say, Let the Bishop of Alexandria
govern Egypt, Libya, and Pentapolis, because the Bishop of the Church of Rome
has no limits at all, but governs the whole Church? Does not (...) import some
parallel custom in the Church of Rome, and name therefore what that is,
supposing he has no limits set to his Jurisdiction? Yes, it may be you will
reply, He had limits as a Metropolitan, but not as Head of the Church. Grant me
then, that he had limits as Metropolitan, and then prove you, that ever he had
any unlimited power acknowledged as Head of the Church. Would they ever have
made such an instance in him, without any discrimination of his several
capacities, if they had known any other power that he had, but only as a
Metropolitan? Nay, might not the Bishops of Antioch, and Alexandria, be rather
supposed to have the greater power, because their Provinces were much larger
here than his. And although Bellarmin uses that as his great argument, Why
Ruffinus his exposition cannot hold, Because the Bishop of Rome would have a
lesser Diocese assigned him, than either the Bishops of Antioch, or Alexandria;
yet when we consider, What has been said already of the agreement of the Civil
and Ecclesiastical Government, a sufficient account may thence be given of it.
For as the Praefectus Augustalis had all the Provinces of Egypt for his
Diocese, so had the Bishop of Alexandria; and, as the Lieutenant of Antioch had
that which was properly called the Orient, containing fifteen Provinces under
him, so had the Bishop of Antioch; and by the same proportion, the power of the
Bishop of Rome did correspond to the Diocese of the Roman Lieutenant, which was
over those ten Provinces, which were subject to his Jurisdiction, as it was
distinct from the Diocese of Italy, which was under that Lieutenant, whose
residence was at Milan. Here we see then a parity of reason in all of them: and
therefore I cannot but think that the true account of the Suburbicary Churches
in Ruffinus his exposition of this Canon, is, that which we have now set down,
viz. those Churches which lay within the ten Provinces subject to the Roman
Lieutenant. But of them more afterward. That which I now insist on, is, that
the Bishop of Rome had then a limited Jurisdiction, as other Metropolitans and
Primats had. Nay, if we should grant that the title produced by Paschasinus in
the Council of Chalcedon to this Canon, were not such a forgery as that of
Zosimus, yet the most that it could prove, was only this, That the Roman Church
had always the primacy within her Diocese, i. e. all Metropolitical power; but
not that it had an unlimited primacy in the whole Church, which was a thing
none of those Fathers who lived in the time of the four Councils, did ever
acknowledge; but always opposed any thing tending to it, as appears by those
very proceedings of Paschasinus at the Council of Chalcedon, and by the Canons
of that Council, and of the Council of Constantinople. And it is a rare Answer
to say, That those Canons are not allowed by the Roman Church; for by that very
Answer it appears, that they did oppose the Pope's Supremacy, or else doubtless
they would have been allowed there. But that the Pope's Metropolitical Power
was confined within the Roman Diocese, so as not to extend to the Italick, we
have this pregnant evidence, that it appears by the occasion of the Nicene
Canon, that the main Power contested for, was that of Ordination; and it is
evident by Theodoret and Synesius his Epistles, Theodoret. l. 1. c 9. Syncs.
ep. ad Theophil. Alexand.
that the Bishop of Alexandria did retain it as his due by virtue of this
Canon, to ordain the Bishops of Pentapolis as well as Egypt. But now the
Bishop of Rome did not ordain the Bishop of Milan who was in the Italick
Diocese; for S. Ambrose was ordained Bishop by a Synod of Italy at the
appointment of the Emperor Valentinian, and by an Epistle of Pelagius 1. A. D.
555. it appears that the Bishops of Aquileia and Milan, were wont to ordain
each other; which, though he would have believed, was only to save charges in
going to Rome; yet as that learned and ingenuous person Petrus de Marca
observes, the true reason of it, was, because Milan was the Head of the Italick
Diocese, as appears by the Council of Aquileia, Cum vera hujus instituti ratio
in eo consistat, quod cum Mediolanum esset caput Dioeces^os Italicae, ut
constat ex Concilio Aquileiensi, ordinatio Metropolitae Aquileie^sis ad
Episcopum Mediolanensem optimo jure pertinebat; Primatis vero Mediolanensis
ordinatio ad Aquileiensem Episcopum, quod primus esset inter Metropolitanos
Synodi Generalis Dioeceseos Italicae. Petrus de Marca de Concord. Sacerdot. and
Imp. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 7.
and therefore the ordination of the Bishop of Aquileia, did of right belong to
the Bishop of Milan; and the ordination of the Bishop of Milan did belong to
him of Aquileia, as the chief Metropolitan of the general Synod of the Italick
Diocese. Although afterward the Bishops of Rome got it so far into their
hands, that their consent was necessary for such an ordination, yet that was
only when they began more openly to encroach upon the liberties of other
Churches. But, as the same learned Author goes on, Ibid. sect. 8.
those Provinces which lay out of Italy, did undoubtedly ordain their own
Metropolitans, without the authority or consent of the Bishop of Rome, which he
there largely proves of the African, Spanish, and French Churches. It follows
then from the scope of the Nicene Canon, and the practice of the Church, that
the Bishop of Rome had a limited Jurisdiction, as the Bishops of Alexandria,
and Antioch, and other Primates had.

2. That what Churches did enjoy privileges before,. 6.
had them confirmed by this Canon, as not to be altered. For it makes provision
against any such alteration, by ordaining that the ancient Customs should be in
force still. And accordingly we find it decreed in the second Canon of the
Constantinopolitan Council, That the same limits of Dioceses should be
observed, which were decreed in the Council of Nice; and that none should
intrude to do any thing in the Dioceses of others. And by the earnest and
vehement Epistles of Pope Leo to Anatolius, we see the main thing he had to
plead against the advancement of the Patriarch of Constantinople was, that by
this means the most sacred Decrees of the Council of Nice would be violated. We
see then, that those privileges which belonged to Churches then, ought still
to be inviolably observed; so that those Churches which then had Primates and
Metropolitans of their own, might plead their own right by virtue of the Nicene
Canon. So we find it decreed in that Council of Ephesus in the famous case of
the Cyprian Bishops; for their Metropolitan being dead ( Troilus the Bishop of
Constance) the Bishop of Antioch pretended that it belonged to him to ordain
their Metropolitan, Council Ephesians. act. 7. part. ^. p. 424.
because Cyprus was within the civil Jurisdiction of the Diocese of Antioch;
upon this the Cyprian Bishops make their complaint to the General Council at
Ephesus, and ground it upon that ancient custom which the Niccne Canon insists
on, viz. that their Metropolitan had been exempt from the Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Antioch, and was ordained by a Synod of Cyprian Bishops; which
privilege was not only confirmed to them by the Ephesine Council, but a
general decree passed, That the rights of every Province should be preserved
whole and inviolate, which it had of old according to ancient custom. (...).
Council. Ephesians. Can 8. in edit. vero Binii ante Canones habetur. Tom. 2. Council.
Part. 2. Act. 7. p. 426.
Which was not a decree made merely in favor of the Cyprian Bishops, but a
common asserting the rights of Metropolitans, that they should be held
inviolate. Now therefore it appears, that all the Churches then were far from
being under one of the three Patriarchs, of Rome, Antioch, or Alexandria; for,
not only the three Dioceses of Pontus, Asia, and Thracia, were exempt (although
afterward they voluntarily submitted to the Patriarch of Constantinople) but
likewise all those Churches which were in distinct Dioceses from these, had
Primates of their own, who were independent upon any other. Upon which account
it has not only been justly pleaded in behalf of the Britannick Churches, that
they are exempt from the Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop; but it is
ingenuously confessed by Father Barns, Insula autem Britanniae gavisa est olim
privilegio Cyprio ut nullius Patriarchae legibus subderetur. Hoc autem
privilegium et si abolitum olim fuit bellorum tumultibus and vi, tamen cum
tempore Henrici 8. totius regni consensu fuerit repetitum, and ab eo tempore
pacifice praescriptum: videtur pacis ergo retineri debere, sine dispendio
Catholicism^, and absque Schismatis ullius nota* Barns Catholico-Romanus
Pacificus MS. sect. 3.
That the Britannick Church might plead the Cyprian privilege, that it was
subject to no Patriarch. And, although this privilege was taken away by force
and tumult, yet being restored by the consent of the Kingdom, in Henry 8. time,
and quietly enjoyed since, it ought to be retained for peace sake, without
prejudice of Catholicism, and the brand of Schism. If so, certainly it can be
no Schism, to withdraw from the usurped Authority of the Roman Church. But,
these things have been more largely insisted on by others, and therefore I pass
them over.

3. From thence it follows, that there was then an equality, not only among the
Patriarchs (whose name came not up till some time after the Council of Nice)
but among the several Primates of Dioceses, all enjoying equal power and
authority over their respective Dioceses, without subordination to each other.
But here it is vehemently pleaded by some, who yet are no Friends to the
unlimited power of the Roman Bishop, That it is hardly conceivable, that he
should have no other power in the Church, but merely as Head of the Roman
Diocese, and that it appears by the Acts of the Church he had a regular
pre-eminence above others in ordering the Affairs of the Church. To which I
answer, 1. If this be granted, it is nothing at all to that Universal
Pastorship over the Church, which our Adversaries contend for, as due by divine
right, and acknowledged to be so by consent of the Church. Let the Bishop of
Rome then quit his former plea, and insist only on this, and we shall speedily
return an Answer, and show, How far this Canonical Primacy did extend. But, as
long as he challenges a Supremacy upon other grounds, he forfeits this right,
whatever it is, which comes by the Canons of the Church. 2. What merely comes
by the Canons of the Church, cannot bind the Church to an absolute submission,
in case that authority be abused to the Churches apparent prejudice. For the
Church can never give away her Power to secure her self against whatever
encroachments tend to the injury of it. This power then may be rescinded by the
parts of the Church, when it tends to the mischief of it. 3. This Canonical
pre-eminence is not the main thing we dispute with the Church of Rome; let her
reform her self from all those errors and corruptions which are in her
communion, and reduce the Church to the primitive purity and simplicity of
Faith and Worship, and then see if we will quarrel with the Primacy of the
Bishop of Rome, according to the Canons, or any regular pre-eminence in him
merely in order to the Churches Peace and Unity. But this is not the case
between us and them, they challenge an unlimited power, and that by divine
right, and nothing else will satisfy them but this, although there be neither
any ground in Scripture for it, nor any evidence of it in the practice of the
Ancient Church.

But however, we must see, what you produce for it; First, you say, The Pope's
Confirmation was required to all new elected Patriarchs. To that I shall return
the full and satisfactory Answer of the late renowned Archbishop of Paris,
Petrus de Marca, Quod ad Patriarchas attinet, responderi potest, Confirmationem
illam non esse signum jurisdictionis, sed tantum susceptionis in communionem,
and testimonium quo conslabat, summum Pontificem consentire consecratio^^ jam
peractae. Petrus de Marca de Concord. c. Sacerdot. and Imper. l 6. c 5. sect. 2.
where he propounds this as an Objection out of Baronius, and thus solves it;
That the confirmation of Patriarchs by the Bishop of Rome, was no token of
Jurisdiction, but only of receiving into Communion, and a testimony of his
consent to the consecration already performed. And this was no more than was
done by other Bishops in reference to the Bishop of Rome himself; Factus est
autem Cora^lius Episcopus de Dei and Ch^isti ejus judicio, de Cle^icorum pen^
omnium testimonio, de plebis quae tan^ affu^t suffragio, and de Sacerdotum
a^liquorum and bono^um ^irorum Coll^gio -- Cum Fabiani ^ocus vacaret, quo
occupato de Dei voluntare and omnium nostrum consentione Firmato. Cyprian. ep.
52. p. 75. ed. Rigalt.
for S. Cyprian writing to Antonianus about the election of Cornelius, says,
That he was not only chosen by the suffrage of the people, and testimony of the
Clergy; but that his election was confirmed by all their consent. May not you
then as well say, That the Bishop of Carthage had power over the Bishop of
Rome, because his ordination was confirmed by him, and other African Bishops.
Quippe usu receptum erat per illas tempestates, ut Patriarchae, and ipse etiam
Romanus Pontifex recens electus, literas de sua ordinatione mitterent; quibus
addebatur prefessio fidei in Synodicis eorum Epistolis conscripta. Petrus de
Marca. ib.
But any one who had understood better than you seem to do, the proceedings of
the Church in those ages, would never have made this an argument of the Pope's
Authority over other Patriarchs, since, as the same Petrus de Marca observes,
It was the custom in those times, that not only the Patriarchs but the Roman
Bishop himself upon their election, were wont to send abroad Letters,
testifying their ordination, to which was added a profession of Faith contained
in their Synodical Epistles. Upon the receipt of which, Communicatory Letters
were sent to the person newly ordained, to testify their Communion with him,
in case there were no just impediment produced. So that this was only a matter
of Fraternal Communion, and importing nothing at all of Jurisdiction; but the
Bishops of Rome, who were ready to make use of all occasions to advance their
own Grandeur, did in time make use of this for quite other ends, than it was
primarily intended; for, in case of any suspicions and jealousies of any thing
that might tend to the dis-service of their See, they would then deny their
Communicatory Letters as Simplicius did in the case of the Patriarch of
Alexandria. And in that Confirmation of Anatolius by Leo 1. which Baronius so
much insists on, Leo himself gives a sufficient account of it, viz. to manifest
that there was but one entire Communion among them throughout the world. Ut per
totum mundum una nobis sit unius Communionis integr^tas, in qua societatem tuae
dilectionis amplectimur, and gestorum quae sumpsim^s serien^, necessariis
munitam subscription^bus approbamus. Leo 1. ep. 38.
So that if the Pope's own judgment may be taken, this Confirmation of new
elected Patriarchs imported nothing of Jurisdiction. But, in case the Popes did
deny their Communicatory Letters, that did not presently hinder them from the
execution of their office; as appears by the instance of Flavianus, the
Patriarch of Antioch: for although three Roman Bishops successively opposed
him, Theodoret. l. 5. c. 13.
Damasus, Syricius, and Anastasius, and used great importunity with the
Emperor, that he might not continue in his place, yet because the Churches of
the Orient, Asia, Pontus, and Thracia, did approve of him, and communicate with
him, he opposed their consent against the Bishops of Rome. Upon which, and the
Emperor's severe checking them for their pride and contention, they at last
promised the Emperor, that they would lay aside their enmity, and acknowledge
him. So that, notwithstanding whatever the Roman Bishops could do against him,
he was acknowledged for a true Patriarch, and at last their consent was given
only by renewing Communion with him; which certainly is far from being an
instance of the Pope's power over the other Patriarchs.

. 8.
Whereby we also see, What little power he had in deposing them; although you
tell us, P. 184.
That it belonged likewise to him to depose unworthy ones, and restore the
unjustly deposed by others. But, that the power of deposing Bishops was
anciently in Provincial Councils, appears sufficiently by the fifth Canon of
the Nicene Council, and by the practice of the Church, both before and after
it; and it is acknowledged by Petrus de Marca, that the sole power of deposing
Bishops, was not in the hands of the Bishop of Rome, till about eight hundred
years since; and refutes the Cardinal Perron for saying otherwise; De Concord.
l 7. c. 1. sect* 6.
and afterward largely proves, that the Supreme authority of deposing Bishops,
was still in Provincial Councils, and that the Pope had nothing to do in it,
till the decree of the Sardican Synod, in the case of Athanasius; which yet, he
says, did not (as is commonly said) decree Appeals to be made to Rome, but
only gave the Bishop of Rome power to Review their actions, but still reserving
to Provincial Councils that Authority which the Nicene Council had established
them in. All the power which he then had, was only this, that he might decree
that the matters might be handled over again, but not that he had the power
himself of deposing or restoring Bishops: Which is proved with that clearness
and evidence by that excellent Author, that I shall refer you to him for it:
and consider the instances produced by you to the contrary. We read (say you)
of no less than eight several Patriarchs of Constantinople deposed by the
Bishop of Rome. Surely if you had read this your self, you would have quoted
the place, with more care and accuracy than you do: for you give us only a
blind citation of an Epistle of Pope Nicolaus, to the Emperor Michael, neither
citing the words, nor telling us which it is, when there are several, and those
no very short ones neither. But however, it is well chosen, to have a Pope's
testimony in his own cause, and that such a Pope who was then in contest with
the Patriarch of Constantinople, and that too so long after the encroachments
of the Bishops of Rome, it being in the ninth Century; and yet for all this,
this Pope does not say those words which you would fasten upon him; that which
he says, is, That none of the Bishops of Constantinople, Au^ nunquam omnino,
aut certe vix, horum aliquis sine consensu Romani Pontificis reperitu^ ejectus.
Nicol. 1. epist. 8. Michael. Imp. Tom. 6. Council. p. 506.
or scarce any of them, were ejected without the consent of the Bishop of Rome.
And then instanceth in Maximus, Nestorius, Accacius, Anthimus, Sergius,
Pyrrhus, Paulus, Petrus; but his design in this, is only to show that Ignatius
the Patriarch ought not to have been deposed without his consent. But what is
all this to the Pope's sole power of deposing? when even at that time the Pope
did not challenge it: But, supposing the Popes had done it before, it does not
follow that it was in their power to do it, and that the Canons had given them
right to do it, but least of all certainly that they had a Divine right for it,
which never was in the least acknowledged by the Church as to a deposition of
Patriarchs, which you contend for. But besides this, you say, Sixtus the third,
deposed Polychronius Bishop of Jerusalem. Whereas Sixtus only sent eight
persons from a Synod at Rome to Jerusalem, who when they came there, did not
offer to depose Polychronius by virtue of the Popes power; but a Synod of
seventy or more neighbor Bishops were called, by whom he was deposed; and yet
after all this, Binius himself condemns those Acts which report this story, for
spurious; there being a manifest repugnancy in the time of them, Tom. 2.
Concis. p. 685.
and no such person as Polychronius ever mentioned by the Ecclesiastical
Historians of that time, and other fabulous Narrations inserted in them. Yet
these are your goodly proofs of the Popes power to depose Patriarchs.

But we must see whether you have any better success in proving his power to
restore such as were deposed; for which you only instance in Athanasius and
Paulus restored by Julius; whose case must be further examined, which, in
short, is this: Athanasius being condemned by the Synods of Tire and Antioch,
goes to Rome, where he and Paulus are received into Communion by Julius, who
would not accept of the Decree of the Eastern Bishops which was sent after him
to Rome. For Pope Julius did not formally offer to restore Athanasius to his
Church, but only owned and received him into Communion as Bishop of Alexandria,
and that because he looked on the proceedings as unjust in his condemnation.
And all that Julius himself pleads for, is, not a power to depose or restore
Patriarchs himself, but only that such things ought not to have been done
without communicating those proceedings to him, which the Unity of the Church
might require. And therefore Petrus de Marca says, that Baronius, Bellarmin,
and Perron are all strangely out in this story, L. 7. c. 4. sect. 6.
when they would infer, That the causes of the Eastern Bishops upon appeal were
to be judged by the Bishop of Rome: whereas all that Julius pleads for, is,
that such things should not be done by the Eastern Bishops alone, which
concerned the deposition of so great a person in the Church as the Patriarch of
Alexandria, but that there ought to be a Council both of the Eastern and
Western Bishops; on which account afterward the Sardican Synod was called. But
when we consider with what heat and stomach this was received by the Eastern
Bishops, how they absolutely deny that the Western Bishops had any more to do
with their proceedings, then they had with theirs; when they say, that the Pope
by this usurpation was the cause of all the mischief that followed, we see what
an excellent instance you have made choice of, to prove the Popes power of
restoring Bishops by Divine right, and that this was acknowledged by the whole
Church.

The next thing to be considered is that speech of St. Augustine,. 9.
That in the Church of Rome there did always flourish the Principality of an
Apostolic chair. In Romana Ecclesia semper Apostolicae Cathedrae viguit
Principatus. S. Aug. Epist. 162.
As to which his Lordship says, That neither was the word Principatus so
great, nor the Bishops of those times so little, P. 168.
as that Principes and Principatus are not commonly given them both by the
Greek and Latin Fathers of this great and learned age of the Church made up
of the fourth and fifth hundred years, always understanding Principatus of
their spiritual power, and within the limits of their several jurisdictions,
which perhaps now and then they did occasionally exceed. And there is not one
word in St. Augustine, that this Principality of the Apostolic chair in the
Church of Rome was then, or ought to be now exercised over the whole Church of
Christ as Bellarmin insinuates there, and as A. C. would have it here. To all
this you say nothing to purpose; but only tell us, That the Bishop by this
makes way to some other pretty perversions (as you call them) of the same
Father. P. 184.
For we must know, say you, that he is entering upon that main Question
concerning the Donatists of Africa; and he is so indeed, and that not only for
clearing the meaning of St. Augustine in the present Epistle, but of the whole
Controversy, to which a great light will be given by a true account of those
proceedings. Thus then his Lordship goes on. And to prove that St. Augustine
did not intend by Principatus here to give the Roman Bishop any power out of
his own limits (which God knows were far short of the whole Church) I shall
make it most manifest out of the same Epistle. P. 169.
For afterward (says St. Augustine) when the pertinacy of the Donatists could
not be restrained by the African Bishops, only they gave them leave to be heard
by foreign Bishops. And after that he has these words: And yet peradventure
Melciades the Bishop of the Roman Church, Pergant ad Fratres and Collegas
nostros transmarinarum Ecclesiarum Episcopos. S. Aug. Ep 162.

An forte non debuit Romanae Ecclesiae Melciades Episcopus cum Collegis
transmarinis Episcopis illud sibi usurpare judicium quod ab Afris Septuaginta,
ubi Primas Tigisitanus praesedit, fuerit terminatum. Quid quod nec ipse
usurpaverit? Rogatus quippe Imperator, Judices misit Episcopos, qui cum eo
seder^nt, and de tota illa causa, quod justum videretur, statuerent. S. Aug. ib.


with his Colleagues the transmarine Bishops, non debuit, ought not to usurp to
himself this judgment which was determined by seventy African Bishops;
Tigisitanus, sitting Primate. And what will you say if he did not usurp this
power? for the Emperor being desired, sent Bishops Judges, which should sit
with him, and determine what was just upon the whole cause. In which passage,
says his Lordship, there are very many things observable. As first, That the
Roman Prelate came not in till there was leave for them to go to Transmarine
Bishops. Secondly, That if the Pope had come in without this leave, it had been
an Usurpation. Thirdly, That when he did thus come in, not by his own
Authority, but by Leave, there were other Bishops made Judges with him.
Fourthly, That these other Bishops were appointed and sent by the Emperor and
his power; that which the Pope least of all will endure. Lastly, Lest the Pope
and his Adherents should say, this was an Usurpation in the Emperor, St.
Austin tells us a little before in the same Epistle still, that this does
chiefly belong ad curam ejus, to the Emperors care and charge, Ad cujus curam,
de qua rationem Deo redditurus est, res illa maxim pertinebat. Id. ib.
and that he is to give an account to God for it. And Melciades did sit and
judge the business with all Christian Prudence and Moderation. So at this time
the Roman Prelate was not received as Pastor of the whole Church, say A. C.
what he please; nor had he Supremacy over the other Patriarchs. In order to the
better shaping your Answer to this Discourse, you pretend to give us a true
Narrative of the Donatists proceedings, by the same figure that Lucians Book is
inscribed De vera historia. There are several things therefore to be taken
notice of in your Narrative, before we come to your particular Answers, whose
strength depends upon the matters of fact.

First, You give no satisfactory account at all, Why, if the Popes Universal
Pastourship had been then owned, the first appeal on both sides was not made to
the Bishop of Rome; for in so great a Schism as that was between the different
parties of Caecilian and Majorinus, To whom should they have directly gone but
to Melchiades then Bishop of Rome? How comes it to pass that there is no
mention at all of his judgment by either party, till Constantine had appointed
him to be one of the Judges? St. Austin indeed pleads in behalf of Caecilian,
why he would not be judged by the African Synod of LXX. Bishops, that there
were thousands of his Colleagues on the other side the Sea, whom he might be
tried by? But why not by the Bishop of Rome alone, if the Universal Pastorship
did belong to him? Aug. ep. 162.
But your Narrative gives us a rare account, why the Donatists did not go to
the Pope before they went to the Emperor, viz. That they durst not appear
there, or else knew it would be to little purpose. P. 185.
But by what Arguments do you prove they durst not appear there before, when we
see they went readily thither after the Emperor had appointed Rome for the
place, where their cause was to be heard; if they thought it were to so little
purpose? For we see the Donatists never except against the place at all, or the
person of the Bishop of Rome; but upon the command of Constantine made known to
them by Analinus the Proconsul of Africa, ten of their party go to Rome to
negotiate their affairs before the Delegates. This is but therefore a very lame
account, why the first appeal should be to the Emperor and not to the Pope, if
he had been then known to be the Universal Pastor of the Church. But say you
further, The Emperor disliked their proceedings and told them expressly, That
it belonged not to him, neither durst he act the part of a Judge in a cause of
Bishops. But on what grounds he durst not do it, we may easily judge by his
undertaking it at last, and passing a final judgment in this cause himself
after the Councils at Rome, at Arles, could not put an end to it. If
Constantine had judged it unlawful, could their importunity have excused it?
and could it be any other then unlawful if the Pope were the Universal Pastor
of the Church? Do you think it would be accounted a sufficient plea among you
now, for any Prince to assume to himself the judgment of any cause already
determined by the Pope, because of the importunity of the persons concerned in
it? Indeed Constantine did at first prudently wave the business himself, and
that I suppose the rather because the Donatists in their Petition had entreated
that some of the Bishops of Gaul might umpire the business; either because that
was then the place of the Emperors residence, or else that Gaul under
Constantius had escaped the late persecution, and therefore were not liable to
the suspicion of those crimes whereof Caecilian and Felix of Aptung were
accused. But however though Constantine did not sit as Judge himself, he
appointed Marinus, Rheticius, and Maternus, to join with Melchiades the Bishop
of Rome in the determining this case. But this he did, you say, to comply with
the Donatists. What, to join other Bishops with the Head of the Church in equal
power for deciding Controversies? and all this merely to comply with the
Schismatical Donatists? was this, think you, becoming one who believed the
Popes Universal Pastourship by Divine Right? Well fare then the Answer of
others who love to speak plain truths, and impute all these proceedings to
Constantines Ignorance of his duty, being yet but a Catechumen in Christian
Religion, and therefore did, he knew not what: But methinks the Universal
Pastor or some of those nineteen Bishops who sat at Rome in this business, or
of those two hundred whom you say met afterward at Arles about it, should have
a little better instructed him in his duty; and not let him go so far on in it,
as from delegating Judges to hear it, and among them the Head of the Church, to
resume it afterward himself both to hear and determine it. If the Emperor had
(as you say) protested against this as in it self unlawful, would none of the
Bishops hinder him from doing it? P. 186.
But where does Constantine profess against it as in it self unlawful? if so,
no circumstances, no importunities could ever make it lawful: Unless you think
the importunity of Joseph's Mistress would have made adultery no sin in him. If
Constantine said he would ask the Bishops pardon in it, that might be, as
looking on them as the more competent Judges, but not thinking it unlawful in
it self for him to do, as you say.

Well but you tell us, It was rather the justice and moderation of the Roman
Prelate,. 10.
that he came not in before it was due time, and the matter orderly brought
before him. I am very much of your mind in this, and if all Popes since
Melchiades had used the same justice and moderation, to have staid till things
had been orderly brought to them, and not usurped upon the privileges of other
Churches, things had been in a far better condition in the Christian world then
they are. Had there been none but such as Melchiades, who showed so much
Christian prudence and moderation in the management of this business, that
great Schism, which your Church has caused by her arrogant pretenses, might
have been prevented. But how come you to know, that this case did properly
belong to the Popes cognizance? who told you this? to be sure not the Emperor
Constantine, who in his Epistle to Miltiades, extant in Eusebius, intimates no
such thing; but only writes to him as one delegated to hear that cause with the
other Bishops and gives him Instructions in order to it. Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5.
Do the Donatists or their Adversaries mention any such thing? Does the Pope
himself ever express or intimate it? It seems, he wanted your information much
at that time. Or it may be, like the late Pope Innocent in the case of the five
propositions, he might say, he was bred no Divine, and therefore might the less
understand his duty. But can it possibly enter into your head, that this case
came to the Pope at last by way of regular appeal, as you seem to assert
afterward. Is this the way of appeals to go to the Emperor and Petition him
to appoint Judges to hear the case? If the case of appeals must be determined
from these proceedings, to be sure, the last resort will be to the Emperor
himself, as well as the first appeal.

Whether the African Bishops gave leave to the Donatists to be heard by
foreign Bishops, or they took it themselves, is not much material; because the
Schism was so great at home, that there was no likelihood of any ending the
Controversy by standing to a fair arbitration among themselves. And therefore
there seemed a necessity on both sides of referring the business to some
unconcerned persons who might hear the Allegations and judge indifferently
between them. And no other way did the nineteen Bishops at Rome proceed with
them, but as indifferent Arbitrators; and therefore the Witnesses and
Allegations on both sides were brought before them; but we read of no power at
all challenged absolutely to bind the persons to the judgment of the Church of
Rome, as the final judgment in the case. P. 187.
The Question, Whether the Pope had usurped this power or no, depends not upon
the Donatists Question, Whether Melchiades ought to have undertaken the
judgment of that cause which had been already determined by a Synod of LXX.
Bishops in Africa? But upon St. Augustines Answer, who justifies the lawfulness
of his doing it, because he was thereto appointed by the Emperor. But when you
say, St. Austin gives this answer only per (...), by way of condescension to
his adversaries way of speaking: you would do well to prove elsewhere from St.
Austin that when he lay's aside his Rhetoric he ever speaks otherwise, but
that it would have been an Usurpation in the Pope to challenge to himself the
hearing of those causes which had been determined by African Bishops. But what
St. Augustines judgment as well as the other African Fathers was in this point
abundantly appears from the Controversies between them and the Bishop of Rome
in the case of Appeals. It sufficiently appears already, That neither our
Savior, nor the Canons of the Universal Church gave the Pope leave to hear and
judge the causes of St. Athanasius and other Patriarchs and Bishops of the
Church; and therefore you were put to your shifts when you run thither for
security. But that which follows is notoriously false, That when he did so
interpose, no man (no not the persons themselves who were interessed and
suffered by his judgment) complained or accused him of usurpation; when in the
case of Athanasius it is so vehemently pleaded by the Eastern Bishops that the
Pope had nothing at all to do in it; but they might as well call in Question
what was done at Rome, as he what was done at Antioch. Nay name us any one
cause in that age of the Church, where the Pope did offer to meddle in matters
determined by other Bishops, which he was not opposed in, and the persons
concerned did not complain and accuse him of meddling with what he had no right
to, which are but other words for Usurpation.

You say, The Bishops whom the Emperor sent as Judges with the Pope,. 11.
were an inconsiderable number to sway the sentence. It seems three to one are
with you an inconsiderable number. But say you, The Pope to show his authority
added fifteen other Bishops of Italy to be his Colleagues and Assistants in the
business. Either these fifteen Bishops were properly Judges in the cause, or
only assistants for better management and speedier dispatch; if they were
Judges, how prove you that Constantine did not appoint them, if they were only
assistants and suffragans to the Bishop of Rome, as is most probable (except
Merocles Bishop of Milan) what authority did the Pope show in calling his
Suffragans to his assistance in a matter of that nature, which required so much
examination of Witnesses. But the Pope had more effectually shown his authority
if he had refused the Bishops whom Constantine sent; and told him he meddled
with that which did not concern him, to appoint any Judges at all in a matter
of Ecclesiastical Cognizance, and that it was an unsufferable presumption in
him to offer to send three underling Bishops to sit with him in deciding
Controversies; as though he were not the Universal Pastor of the Church
himself, to whom alone by Divine right all such things did belong. Such
language as this would have become the Head of the Church; and in that indeed
he had shown his authority. But for him sneakingly to admit other Bishops as
joynt-commissioners, forsooth, with him; and that by the Emperors appointment
too; What did he else but betray the rights of his See, and expose his
Infallible Headship to great contempt? Do you think that Pope Hildebrand or any
of his Successors would have done this? No, they understood their power far
better then so; and the Emperor should have known his own, for offering such
an Affront to his Holiness. And if his Bay Leaves did not secure him, the
Thunderbolts of Excommunication might have lighted on him to his prejudice.
For shame then never say, That Pope Miltiades showed his authority; but rather
give him over among those good Bishops of Rome but bad Popes, who knew better
how to suffer Martyrdom, then assert the Authority of the Roman See. I pray
imagine but Paul 5. or any other of our stout-spirited Popes in Miltiades his
place, Would they have taken such things at Constantines hands as poor
Miltiades did? and, for all that we see, was very well contented too; and
thought he did but his duty in doing what the Emperor bid him. Would they have
been contented to have had a cause once passed the Infallible judgment of the
Roman See, to be resumed again, and handled in another Council, as though there
could be any suspicion that all things were not rightly carried there? and that
after all this too, the Emperor should undertake to give the final decision to
it? would these things have been born with by any of our Infallible Heads of
the Church? But good Miltiades must be excused, he went as far as his knowledge
carried him, and thought he might do good service to the Church in what he did;
and that was it he looked at more then the grandeur of his See. The good
Bishops then were just crept out of the Flames of persecution, and they thought
it a great matter that they had liberty themselves, and did not much concern
themselves about those Usurpations which the Pride and Ease of the following
ages gave occasion for. They were sorry to see a Church that had survived the
cruel Flames of Dioclesians persecution, so suddenly to feel new ones in her
own bowels; that a Church whose constitution was so strong as to endure
Martyrdomes, should no sooner be at ease but she begins to putrify, and to be
fly-blown with heats and divisions among her members; and that her own Children
should rake in those wounds, which the violence of her professed enemies had
caused in her; and therefore these good Bishops used their care and industry to
close them up; and rather rejoiced they had so good an Emperor who would
concern himself so much in healing the Churches breaches, then dispute his
Authority or disobey his Commands. And if Constantine does express himself
unwilling to engage himself to meddle in a business concerning the Bishops of
the Church, it was out of his tender respect to those Bishops who had
manifested their piety and sincerity so much in their late persecutions, and
not from any Question of his own Authority in it. For that he after
sufficiently asserted, not only in his own actions, but when the case of Felix
of Aptung was thought not sufficiently scanned at Rome, in appointing (about
four months after the judgment at Rome) Aelianus the Proconsul of Africa to
examine the case of Felix the Bishop of Aptung, Valesius de Schismate Donatist.
cap. 11.
who had ordained Caecilian. To this the Donatists pleaded, Ait quidam, Non
debuit Episcopus Procons^lari judicio purgari: quasi vero ipse sibi hoc
comparaverit, ac non Imperator ita quaeri jusserit, ad cujus curam de qua
rationem Deo redditurus esset, res illa maxim pertinebat. Augustine. ep. 162.
That a Bishop ought not to be tried by Proconsular judgment: to which St.
Austin Answers, That it was not his own seeking, but the Emperors appointing,
to whose care and charge that business did chiefly belong, of which he must
give an account to God. And can it now enter into any head but yours, that for
all this the Emperor looked on the judgment of this cause as a thing not
belonging to his Authority? They who can believe such things as these, and
notwithstanding all the circumstances of this story can think the Popes
Universal Pastourship was then owned, the most I can say of them, is, that they
are in a fair way to believe Transubstantiation; there being nothing so
improbable, but upon equal grounds they may judge it true.

. 12.
That the Pope had no Supremacy over other Patriarchs, his Lordship says,
That, P. 170.
were all other Records of Antiquity silent, the Civil Law is proof enough; And
that is a Monument of the Primitive Church. The Text there is, A Patriarcha non
datur appellatio. From a Patriarch there lies no appeal. No appeal. Therefore
every Patriarch was alike Supreme in his own Patriarchate. Therefore the Pope
then had no Supremacy over the whole Church. ^od. l. 1. Tit. 4. l. 29. Authent.
Collat. 9 ti^ 15. c. 22.
Therefore certainly not then received as universal Pastor. Two things you
answer to this. 1. That this reaches not the difference between Patriarchs
themselves, who must have some higher ordinary Tribunal, where such causes may
be heard and determined. Very well argued against the Pope's power of judging:
P. 188. n. 4.
for, in case of a difference between him and the other Patriarchs, who must
decide the difference? Himself no doubt! But still, it is your way to beg that
you can never prove; for you herein suppose the Pope to be above all
Patriarchs, which you know is the thing in dispute. Or, Do you suppose it very
possible, that other Patriarchs may quarrel and fall out among themselves, but
that the Popes are always such mild and good men, that it is impossible any
should fall out with them, or they with others; that still they must stand by
as unconcerned in all the quarrels of the Christian world, and be ready to
receive complaints from all places. If therefore a General Council must not be
the Judge in this case, I pray name somewhat else more agreeable to reason, and
the practice of the Church. But you answer. 2. What the Law says, is rightly
understood, and must be explicated of inferior Clerks only, who were not (of
ordinary course) to appeal further than the Patriarch, or the Primate of their
Province. For so the Council of Africa determines. But it is even there
acknowledged, Council. Afric. Can 101. Epist. ad Bonifac.
that Bishops had power in their own causes to appeal to Rome. This answer of
yours necessarily leads us to the debates of the great case of appeals to Rome,
as it was managed between the African Bishops, and the Bishops of Rome, by
which we shall easily discover the weakness of your answer, and the most
palpable fraud of your citation; by which we may see, What an excellent cause
you have to manage, which cannot be defended but by such frauds as here you
make use of, and hope to impose upon your Reader by. Your Answer therefore in
the general, is, That the Laws concerning appeals, did only concern inferior
Clergymen; but that Bishops were allowed to appeal to Rome, even by the
Council of Africa, which not only decreed it, but acknowledged it in an Epistle
to Pope Boniface. And therefore for our through understanding the truth in this
case, those proceedings of the African Church must be briefly explained, and
truly represented. Two occasions the Churches of Africa had to determine in the
case of Appeals to Rome; the first in the Milevitan, the second in the
Carthaginian Councils: in both which we have several things very considerable
to our purpose. In the Milevitan Council they decree, That whosoever would
appeal beyond the Sea, should not be received into Communion by any in Africa;
which decree is supposed by some to be occasioned by Coelestius, having
recourse to Pope Zosimus, after he had been condemned in Africa. No doubt,
those prudent Bishops began to be quickly sensible of the monstrous
inconvenience which would speedily follow upon the permission of such appeals
to Rome; for by that means they should never preserve any discipline in their
Churches, but every person, who was called in Question for any crimes, Item
placuit ut Presbyteri, diaconi, vel caeteri inferiores Clerici, in causis quas
habuerint, si de judiciis episcoporum suorum questi fuerint, vicini episcopi,
eos cum consensu episcopi sui audiant, and inter eos definiant, adhibiti ab eis
episcopi: quod si and ab iis provocandum putaverint, non provocent ad
transmarina judicia; sed ad primites suarum provinciarum, aut ad Universale
Concilium; Sicut de Episcopis saepe constitutum est. Ad transmarina autem qui
putaverit appellandum, a nullo intra Africam ad Communionem suscipiatur, Codex
Canon. Eccles African. Can. 28.
would slight the Bishops of those Churches, and presently appeal to Rome. To
prevent which mischief, they make that excellent Canon, which allows only
liberty of appealing to the Councils of Africa, or to the Primates of their
Province, but absolutely forbids all foreign appeals. All the difficulty is,
Whether this Canon only concerned the Inferior Clergy, as you say, (and which
is all that the greatest of your side have said in it) or, Whether it does not
take away all appeals of Bishops too. For which we need no more than produce
the Canon it self, as it is extant in the authentic collection of the Canons
of the African Church. In which is an express clause, declaring that the same
thing had been often determined in the case of Bishops. Which, because it
strikes home, therefore Perron and others have no other shift, but to say, That
this clause was not in the original Milevitan Canons, but was inserted
afterward. But why do not they, who assert such bold things, produce the true
authentic Copy of these Milevitan Canons? that we may see, What is genuine,
and what not: But, suppose we should grant, that this clause was inserted
afterward, it will be rather for the advantage, than prejudice of our cause.
For which we must consider, that in the time of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage,
there had been very many Councils celebrated there: no fewer than seventeen
Justellus and others reckon. But a general Council meeting at Carthage A. D.
419. (which was about three years after that Milevitan Council which was held
416. as appears by the Answer of Innocentius to it, A. D. 417.) at the end of
the first Session they reviewed the Canons of those lesser Councils, and out of
them all composed that Codex Canonum Ecclesiae Africanae, as Justellus at large
proves in the preface to his edition of it. So that if this clause were
inserted, it must be inserted then, for it is well known, that the case of
Appeals was then at large debated; and by that means it received a more general
authority by passing in this African Council. And hence it was that this Canon
passed with this clause into the Greek Churches; for Balsamon and Zonaras both
acknowledge it; and not only they, but many ancient Latin Copies had it too,
and is so received and pleaded by the Council of Rhemes; as Hincmarus, and
others, have already proved. But Gracian has helped it well out, for he has
added a brave Antidote at the end of it, by putting to it a very useful clause,
Nisi forte Romanam Sedem appellaverit; by which the Canon makes excellent
sense, that none shall appeal to Rome, unless they do appeal to Rome; for none
who have any understanding of the state of those Churches at that time, do make
the least Question, but the intent of the Canon was to prohibit appeals to
Rome; but then, say they, They were only the appeals of the Inferior Clergy,
which were to be ended by the Bishops of their own Province.

But this Answer is very unreasonable on these accounts. 1. If Appeals do of
right belong to the Bishop of Rome,. 13.
as Universal Pastor of the Church, then, Why not the Appeals of the Inferior
Clergy, as well as Bishops? Indeed, if Appeals were challenged only by virtue
of the Canons, and those Canons limit one, and not the other (as the most eager
pleaders for Appeals in that age, pleaded only the Canons of the Church for
them) then there might be some reason, Why one should be restrained, and not
the other; but if they belong to him by Divine Right, then all Appeals must
necessarily belong to him. 2. If Appeals belong to the Pope, as Universal
Pastor, then no Council or persons had any thing to do to determine who should
appeal, and who not. For this were an usurping of the Pope's privilege, for he
to whom only the right of Appeals belongs, can determine, Who should appeal,
and who not; and where, and by whom those Controversies should be ended. So
that the very act of the Council in offering to limit Appeals, implies that
they did not believe any such Universal Pastorship in the Pope; for, had they
not done so, they would have waited his judgment, and not offered to have
determined such things themselves. 3. The Appeals of the upper and inferior
Clergy, cannot be supposed to be separate from each other. For the Appeal of a
Presbyter does suppose the impeachment of the Bishop for some wrong done to
him, as in the case of Apiarius accusing Urban the Bishop of Sicca for
excommunicating him. So that the Bishop becomes a party in the Appeal of a
Presbyter. And if Appeals be allowed to the Bishop, it is supposed to be in his
favor, for clearing of his right the better; and if it be denied to the
Presbyter, it would savor too much of injustice and partiality. 4. The reason
of the Canon extends to one as well as the other, which must be supposed to
prevent all those troubles and inconveniences which would arise from the
liberty of Appeals to Rome; and, would not these come as well by the Appeals of
Bishops, as of Inferior Clergy? Nay, Does not the Canon insist on that, that
no Appeals should be made from the Council of Bishops, or the Primates of
Africa; but, in case of Bishops Appeals, this would be done as well as the
other: and therefore they are equally against the reason and design of the
Canon. 5. The case of Presbyters, may be as great and considerable as that of
Bishops, and as much requiring the judgment of the Universal Pastor of the
Church. As, for instance, that very case which probably gave occasion to the
Milevitan Canon, viz. the going of Coelestius to Rome, being condemned of
Heresy in Africa: Now, What greater cause could there be made an Appeal to
Rome in, than in so great a matter of Faith as that was, about the necessity of
Grace. De Concord. Sacerdot. and Imp. l. 7. c. 13. sect. 6, 7, 9.
And therefore Petrus de Marca proves at large against Perron, that in the
Epistle of Innocent to Victricius, where it is said, That the greater causes
must be referred to the Apostolic See, is not to be understood only of the
causes of Bishops, but may referr to the causes of Presbyters too, i. e. when
they either concern matter of Faith, or some doubtful piece of
Church Discipline. 6. The Pope, notwithstanding this Canon, looked on himself
as no more hindered from receiving the Appeals of Presbyters, than those of
Bishops. If therefore any difference had been made by any act of the Church,
surely the Pope would have remanded Presbyters back to their own Provinces
again; but, instead of that, we see, he received the Appeal of Apiarius. But,
for this, a rare Answer is given, viz. that though the Presbyters were
forbidden to appeal, yet the Pope was not forbidden to receive them, if they
did appeal. But, to what purpose then were such prohibitions made, if the Pope
might by his open encouragement of them upon their Appeals to him, make them
not value such Canons at all; for they knew, if they could but get to Rome,
they should be received for all them.

Notwithstanding all which has been said, you tell us, That in the Council of
Africa it was acknowledged,. 14.
that Bishops had power in their own cause, to appeal to Rome; for which you
cite in your Margent, part of an Epistle of the Council to Boniface. But, with
what honesty and integrity you do this, will appear by the story. Apiarius then
appealing to Zosimus, he sends over Faustinus to Africa, to negotiate the
business of Appeals, and to restore Apiarius, for which he pleads the Nicene
Canons (an account of which will be given afterward) the Fathers all protest
they could find no such thing there, but they agree to send Deputies into the
East, to fetch the true Canons thence (as has been related already) in the
mean time Zosimus dies, and Boniface succeeds him; but for the better
satisfaction of the Pope, the Council of Carthage dispatch away a Letter to
Boniface, to give him an account of their proceedings; in which Epistle (extant
in the African Code of Canons) after they have given an account of the business
of Apiarius, they proceed to the instructions which Faustinus brought with him
to Africa, the chief of which is that concerning Appeals to be made to Rome,
and then follow those words which you quote, in which they say, That in a
Letter written the year before to Zosimus, they had granted liberty to Bishops,
to appeal to Rome; and that therein they had intimated so much to him. Ut Romam
liceat Episcopis provocare and ut Clericorum causae apud suarum provinciarum
episcopos finiant^r, jam priore anno etiam literis nostris ad eundem
ven^rabilis memoriae Zosimum episcopum datis, insinuari curavimu^, etc.

Ut ea servare sine ulla ejus injuria paulisper sinerem^s, usque ad
exquisitionem statutorum Concilii Niceni.


Thus far you are right; but there is usually some mystery couched in your,
etc. for you know very well, where to cut off sentences; for, had you added but
the next words, they had spoiled all your foregoing; there being contained in
them, the full reason of what went before, viz. that because the Pope pretended
that the Appeals of Bishops were contained in the Nicene Canons, they were
contented to yield that it should be so, till the true Canons were produced.
And is this now all their acknowledgement, that Bishops might in their own
causes appeal to Rome, when they made only a Provisional decree, What should be
done till the matter came to a resolution? But if you will thoroughly understand
what their final judgment was in this business, I pray read their excellent
Epistle to Pope Celestine, who succeeded Boniface; after they had received the
Nicene Canons out of the East. Which being so excellent a Monument of
Antiquity, Praesato itaque debitae Salutationis officio, Impendio deprecamur,
ut deinceps ad vestras aures hinc venientes non facilius admittatis, nec a
nobis excommunicatis in communionem ultra velitis excipere; quia hoc etiam
Nicaeno Concilio definitum facile advertet Venerabilitas tua. Nam et si de
inferioribus Cleric^s vel de Laicis videtur ibi praecaveri, quanto magis hoc de
episcopis voluit observari, ne in sua provincia a communione suspensi a tua
Sanctitate praepropere, vel indebite videantur communioni restitui.
Presbyterorum quoque and sequentium Clericorum improbaref^gia, sicut te dignum
est, ^epellat sanctitas tua, quia and nulla Patrum definitione hoc ecclesiae
derogatum est Africanae, and decre^^ Nicena sive inferioris gradus Ciericos
sive ipsos episcopos suis Metropolitanis apertissime commiserunt. Prudentissime
enim justissimeque viderunt, qu^ cunque negotia in suis locis, ubi o^^a sunt,
finicuda; nec unicuique provinciae gratiam Sancti Spiritus defuturam: quae
aequitas a Christi Sacerdotibus, and prudenter videatur, and constantissime
teneatur: maxim quia unicuique concessum est, si jud^c^o offensus suerit
cognitorum, ad Concilia suae provinciae, vel etiam Universale provocare. Nisi
forte quisquam est qui credat, unicuilib^t posse Deum nostrum examinis
inspirare justitiam; and innumerabilibus co^gregatis in Concili^^ Sacerdotibus
denegare. Aut quomodo ipsum transmarinum judicium ratum erit, ad quod testium
necessariae personae vel propter sexus, vel pro^ter senectutis infirmitatem,
vel multis aliis impedimentis adduci non poterunt? Nam ut aliqui tanquam a tu^
sanctitatis latere mittantur, nulla invenimus Patrum Synodo constitutum. Quia
illud quod pridem per eundem cocpiscopu^ Faustinum tanquam ex part Niceni
Concilii exinde transmisistis, in Conci^iis verioribus qua accipiuntur Ni^^ni,
a S. Cyrill^ coepiscopo nostro Alexandrinae Ecclesiae, and a venerabili Attico
Constantinopolitano Antistite, ex authentico missis, quae etiam ante hoc per
Innocentium Presbyterum and Marcellum Subdiaconum, per quos ad nos abiis
directa sunt, venerabilis memoriae Bonifacio episcop^ dec^ssori vestro a nobis
transmissa sunt, in quibus tale aliquid non potuimus invenire. Executores etiam
Clericos vestros quibusque petentibus nolite mittere, ne ^umosum typhum seculi
in Ecclesiam Christi quae lucem simplicitatis and humilitatis d^^m, Deum videre
cupientibus praefert, videamur inducere. Nam de fratre nostro Faustino (amoto
jam, pro suis nefandi^ n^quit^is, de Christi Ecclesia dolendo Apiario) securi
sumus, quod cum probitate ac moderatione tuae sanctitatis, salva fraterna
charitate ulterius Africa minime patiatur. Council. Carthag. Epist. ad
Caelestinum.
and giving so great light to our present Controversy, I shall at large recite
and render it, so far as concerns this business. After our bounden duty of
Salutation, we earnestly beseech you, that hereafter you admit not so easily to
your ears those that come from hence, and that you admit no more into
communion, those whom we have cast out: for your Reverence will easily
perceive, that this is forbid by the Council of Nice. For if this be taken care
for, as to the Inferior Clergy and Laity, How much more would it have it to be
observed in Bishops; that so they who are in their own Province suspended from
communion, be not hastily or unduly admitted by your Holiness. Let your
Holiness also reject the wicked refuges of Priests and Inferior Clerks; for no
Canon of the Fathers has taken that from the Church of Africa; and the decrees
of Nice has subjected both the Inferior Clergy, and Bishops, io their
Metropolitans. For they have most wisely and justly provided, that every
business be determined in the place where it begun: and that the Grace of the
Holy Spirit will not be wanting to every Province, that so equity may be
prudently discovered, and constantly held by Christ's Priests. Especially
seeing that it is lawful to every one, if he be offended, to appeal to the
Council of the Province, or even to an Universal Council. Unless perhaps some
body believe that God can inspire to every one of us, the justice of
examination of a cause, and refuse it to a multitude of Bishops assembled in
Council. Or, How can a judgment made beyond the Sea be valid, to which the
persons of necessary witnesses cannot be brought, by reason of the infirmity of
their sex and age, or of many other intervening impediments. For this sending
of men to us from your Holiness, we do not find commanded by any Synod of the
Fathers. And as for that which you did long since send to us by Faustinus our
Fellow-Bishop, as belonging to the Council of Nice, we could not find it in the
truest Copies of the Council, sent by holy Cyril our Colleague, Bishop of
Alexandria, and by the venerable Atticus Bishop of Constantinople: which also
we sent to your predecessor Boniface, of happy memory, by Innocent a Presbyter,
and Marcellus a Deacon. Take heed also of sending to us any of your Clerks for
executors, to those who desire it, lest we seem to bring the swelling pride of
the world into the Church of Christ, which bears the light of simplicity, and
the brightness of humility before them that desire to see God. And concerning
our Brother Faustinus (Apiarius being now for his wickedness cast out of the
Church of Christ) we are confident, that our brotherly love continuing through
the goodness and moderation of your Holiness, Africa shall no more be troubled
with him. Thus I have at large produced this noble Monument of the prudence,
courage, and simplicity of the African Fathers; enough to put any reasonable
man out of the fond conceit of an Universal Pastorship of the Bishop of Rome. I
wonder not that Baronius says, There are some hard things in this Epistle,
that Perron sweats and toils so much to so little purpose, to enervate the
force of it; for, as long as the records of it last, we have an impregnable
Bulwark against the Usurpations of the Church of Rome. And methinks you might
blush for shame to produce those African Fathers, as determining the Appeals of
Bishops to Rome, who, with as much evidence and reason, as courage and
resolution, did finally oppose it. What can be said more convincingly against
these Appeals, than is here urged by them: That they have neither authority
from Councils, nor any Foundation in Justice and Equity; that God's presence
was as well in Africa as Rome (no doubt then they never imagined any
Infallibility there) that the proceedings of the Roman Bishop were so far from
the simplicity and humility of the Gospel, that they tended only to nourish
swelling pride, and secular ambition in the Church. That the Pope had no
authority to send Legates to hear causes, and they hoped they should be no more
troubled with such as Faustinus was. All these things are so evident in this
testimony, that it were a disparagement to it to offer more at large to explain
them. I hope then, this will make you sensible of the injury you have done the
African Fathers, by saying, that they determined, the causes of Bishops might
be heard at Rome.

Your Answer to the place of S. Gregory,. 15.
which his Lordship produces concerning Appeals, Greg. l. 11. Indict* 6. ep. 54
viz. that the Patriarch is to put a final end to those causes, which come
before him by Appeal from Bishops and Archbishops, is the very same, that it
speaks only of the Inferior Clergy, and therefore is taken off already. But
you wonder his Lordship should expose to view the following words of S.
Gregory, where there is neither Metropolitan, nor Patriarch of that Diocese,
there they are to have recourse to the Sea Apostolic, as being the Head of all
Churches. Then surely it follows, say you, the Bishop of Rome 's Jurisdiction,
is not only over the Western, and Southern Provinces, but over the whole
Church, whither the Jurisdiction of Patriarchs and Metropolitans never
extended. See how well you make good the common saying, That Ignorance is the
cause of Admiration; for, Wherefore should you wonder at his Lordships
producing these words; if you had either understood, or considered the abundant
Answers which he gives to them? P. 171.
1. That if there be a Metropolitan, or a Patriarch, in those Churches, his
judgment is final, and there ought to be no Appeal to Rome. 2. It is as plain,
that in those ancient times of Church Government, Britain was never subject to
the Sea of Rome (of which afterward.) 3. It will be hard for any man to prove,
that there were any Churches then in the world, which were not under some
either Patriarch or Metropolitan. 4. If any such were, it is gratis dictum, and
impossible to be proved, that all such Churches, wherever seated in the
world, were obliged to depend on Rome. And, Do you still wonder why his
Lordship produces these words? I may more justly wonder why you return no
Answer to what his Lordship here says. But still the Caput omnium Ecclesiarum
sticks with you; if his Lordship has not particularly spoken to that, it was,
because his whole discourse was sufficient to a man of ordinary capacity, to
let him see, that no more could be meant by it, but some pre-eminence of that
Church above others in regard of order and dignity, but no such thing as
Universal Power and Jurisdiction was to be deduced from it. And if Gregory
understood more by it, as his Lordship says, It Is gratis dictum, and Gregory
himself was not a person to be believed in his own cause. But now, as you
express it, his Lordship takes a leap from the Church of Rome, P. 188.
to the Church of England: No, neither his Lordship, nor we, take a leap from
thence hither; but you are the men who leap over the Alps, from the Church of
England, to that of Rome, We plead as his Lordship does truly, That in the
ancient times of the Church, Britain was never subject to the Sea of Rome, but
being one of the Western Dioceses of the Empire, it had a Primate of its own.
This, you say, his Lordship should have proved, P. 189.
and not merely said. But, What an unreasonable man are you, who would put his
Lordship to prove Negatives; if you challenge a right which the Pope has over
us, it is your business to prove it; his Lordship gave a sufficient reason for
what he said, in saying that Britain was one of the Dioceses of the Empire, and
therefore had a Primate of her own. This you deny not, but say, this only
proves, That the Inferior Clergy could not appeal to Rome. What again? but
this subterfuge has been prevented already. But to pass by what without any
shadow of proof you say of the Patriarch of Constantinople 's being subject to
the Pope; and Pope Urban 's calling Anselm the Patriarch of the other world;
which we are far from making the least ground to make Canterbury a Patriarchal
See; which, as far as concerns the rights of Primacy, was so long before the
Synod of Bar in Apulia; we come to that which is more material, viz. your
attempt to prove, That Britain was anciently subject to the Sea of Rome; for
which you instance in Wilfrid Archbishop of York appealing to Rome, about A.
D. 673. who was restored to his Bishopric by virtue of the sentence passed in
his behalf at Rome; Ibid. n. 5. Bed. l. 5. c. 20.
and so being a second time expelled, appealed as formerly, and was again
restored. To which I shall return you a clear and full Answer in the words of
another Archbishop, the late learned L. Primate of Ireland. Bramhall Just.
Vindication. c. 4. p. 60.
The most famous, says he, (I had almost said the only) appellant from England
to Rome that we read of before the Conquest, was Wilfride Archbishop of York,
who, notwithstanding that he gained sentence upon sentence at Rome in his
Favor; and notwithstanding that the Pope did send express Nuncio's into
England, on purpose to see his sentence executed; yet he could not obtain his
restitution or the benefit of his sentence for six years during the Raigns of
King Egbert and Alfrede his son. Yea King Alfrede told the Popes Nuncio's
expressly, That he honored them as his Parents for their grave lives and
honorable aspects; but he could not give any assent to their Legation, because
it was against reason, Spelman. Council. An. 705.
that a person twice condemned by the whole Council of the English should be
restored upon the Popes letter. If they had believed the Pope to be their
competent Judge, either as Universal Monarch, or so much as Patriarch of
Britain, or any more then an honorable Arbitratour (which all the Patriarchs
were, even without the bounds of their proper jurisdictions) How comes it to
pass that two Kings successively, and the great Councils of the Kingdom, and
the other Archbishop Theodore with all the prime Ecclesiastics, and the flower
of the English Clergy, did so long and so resolutely oppose so many sentences
and messages from Rome, and condemn him twice whom the Pope had absolved?
Consider that Wilfride was an Archbishop, not an Inferior Clerk; and if an
appeal from England to Rome had been proper or lawful in any case, it had been
so in this case. But it was otherwise determined by those who were most
concerned. Malmsbury supposes, either by Inspiration, or upon his own head,
that the King and the Archbishop Theodore, were smitten with remorse before
their deaths, for the injury done to Wilfride, and the slighting the Popes
sentence, letter, and Legates. But the contrary is most apparently true; For
first, it was not King Alfrede alone, but the great Council of the Kingdom
also; not Theodore alone, but the main body of the Clergy, that opposed the
Popes letter, and the restitution of Wilfride in that manner as it was decreed
at Rome. Secondly, after Alfrede and Theodore were both dead, we find the Popes
sentence, and Wilfrides restitution, still opposed by the surviving Bishops in
the Reign of Alfredes son. To clear the matter past contradiction, let us
consider the ground of this long and bitter contention; Wilfride the Archbishop
was become a great Pluralist, and had engrossed into his hands too many
Ecclesiastical Dignities. The King and the Church of England thought fit to
deprive him of some of them, and to confer them upon others. Wilfride appealed
from their sentence to Rome. The Pope gave sentence after sentence in favor of
Wilfride. But for all his sentences, he was not, he could not be restored,
until he had quitted two of his Monasteries which were in Question,
Hongestilldean, and Ripon, which of all others he loved most dearly, and where
he was afterward interred. This was not a Conquest, but a plain waving of his
sentences from Rome, and yielding of the Question; for those had been the chief
causes of the Controversy. So the King and the Church after Alfredes death
still made good his conclusion, That it was against reason, that a person twice
condemned by the whole Council of the English, should be restored upon the
Popes Bull. And as he did not, so neither did they give any assent to the Popes
Legation. This I hope may suffice as a most sufficient Answer to your Objection
from Wilfrides Appeal.

But you would seem to urge yet further for the ancient subjection of Britain
to the Church of Rome, in these words, Again,. 16.
is it not manifest out of him (Bid), Bed l. 1. c. 29*
that even the Primitive original Institution of our English Bishops is from
Rome? And for this you cite a letter of Pope Gregory 1. to Augustine the Monk,
whom you call our English Apostle; in which Gregory grants to him the use of
the Pall, the proper badge or sign of Archiepiscopal Dignity, and that he
condescended, that he should ordain twelve Bishops under his jurisdiction, etc.
Behold here, say you, the original Charter, as I may say, P. 190.
of the Primacy of Canterbury; in this Letter and Mandate of the Pope it is
founded; nor can it with any color of reason be drawn from other origin. And
by virtue of this Grant, have all the succeeding Bishops of that See enjoined
the Dignity and Authority of Primats of this Nation. From whence you very
civilly charge his Lordship, either with gross Ignorance if he knew it not; or
with great Ingratitude if he knew it. To which I Answer; that his Lordship
knowing this no doubt very well, that Gregory sent Austin into England, etc.
could not from thence think himself bound to submit to the Roman Bishop; and it
had been more pertinent to your purpose, not to charge him with Ingratitude,
but with Disobedience. For that was it which you ought to prove hence, that the
Archbishop of Canterbury ought still to be subject to the Bishop of Rome,
because Gregory 1. made Augustine the first Archbishop of Canterbury. A
wonderful strong Argument no doubt! which out of charity to you, we must
further examine; for you tell us, The Original Charter of the Primacy of
Canterbury is contained in that Grant. To satisfy you as to this, two things
are to be considered, the Primacy it self, and the exercise of it by a
particular person in some particular place. If you speak of the Primacy it
self, i. e. the independent right of Governing the Churches within the
Provinces of Britain, then we utterly deny that this was contained in that
Grant. For Britain having been a Province before, in which Bishops did Govern
Independently on any Foreign Bishop, no Foreign Bishops could take away that
Privilege from it. I will not stand here to deduce the History of the Bishops
of Britain, before Augustines coming into England; but it is as certain that
there were such, as it is that St. Augustine ever came hither. For not only all
our own Historians and Bid himself confess it; but it is most evident from the
subscriptions of three of them to the first Council of Arles, Eborius of York,
Restitutus of London, and Adelfius de civitate Colonia Londinensium (which some
will have to be a mistake for Colonia Camaloduni, whether by that, Colchester,
Maldon, or Winchester be meant as it is differently thought) from the presence
of some of them at the Sardican Synod and the Council of Ariminum, as appears
by Athanasius and others; but this I suppose you will not deny, that there were
Bishops in England before Austin came. And, that these Bishops had then no
dependence on the Sea of Rome, if it were not sufficiently evident from other
Arguments, the relation of the proceedings in Bid himself between Austin and
them, about submission, would abundantly discover, as likewise that there was
then an Archbishop with Metropolitical power over them, whose ancient seat had
been Caerleon. But I consider not this Primacy now as in any particular place,
but in general as belonging to the Provinces of Britain, which I say had a
Primacy belonging to it, (whether at York or London is not material) at the
time of the Council of Nice (according to what has been formerly said about
the state of Churches then) now the Council of Nice takes care that the
privileges of all Churches should be preserved, i. e. That where there had
been a Primacy it should so continue. Now therefore I ask, How came this
privilege of Britain to be lost, which was not only confirmed with others by
the Nicene Council, but by that of Chalcedon and Ephesus, in which the ancient
privileges of Churches are secured? what right had Austin the Monk to cassate
the ancient Metropolitical power of the Britannick Church, and to require
absolute subjection to himself? If the Pope made him Archbishop of Canterbury,
by what right was he Primate over the Britain Church? How came the Archbishop
then in being to lose his Primacy by Austins coming into England? Was it
because the Britannick Church was then overrun with Pagan-Saxons, and the
visible power of it confined to a narrow compass? Yet I doubt not, but there
were many British Christians living here among the Saxons, though oppressed by
them, as they were after by the Normans (for, Where is it that any conquest
has carried away all the inhabitants?) and that these did many of them retain
their Christianity, though not daring publicly to own it, there are many not
improbable circumstances to lead us to suppose. But we will grant that the face
of the Britannick Church was only in Wales; what follows thence? that the whole
Province had lost its right? Let us suppose a case like this; as that the
Church of Rome should be overrun with a Barbarous people (as it was by the
Goths and Vandals) and the inhabitants destroyed; these Barbarous people
continuing in possession of it, and that a Bishop should have been sent from
Britain to convert them to the Faith, and upon their Conversion to Govern those
Churches, and should be made Bishop of that place by the British Bishops;
Whether would he be bound to continue always in subjection to them or no? If
not; but you say, by his succession in the Sea of Rome he enjoyes the
privileges of that See, though the inhabitants be altered; the same I say of
the Britannick Churches, though the inhabitants were altered, and Saxons
succeeded the Britains, yet the privilege of the Church remains still as to
its Primacy and Independency. And therefore the Popes making Augustine
Archbishop, so as to give him withal the Primacy over the Churches in the
Province of Britain, was an Usurpation upon the rights of our Church, which had
an absolute and Independent Primacy within it self; as it was in the case of
the Cyprian Bishop. As supposing those ancient Sects of Churches which are
overrun with Turks should again be converted to Christianity, the Bishops of
those Churches as of Ephesus or the like would enjoy the same rights which the
ancient Bishops had; so we say it was in our case, though the Nation was then
overspread with Paganism, yet Christianity returning, the privileges of our
Churches did return with it; and whosoever were rightly consecrated Bishops of
them would enjoy the same rights which they did before. So that Gregory might
make Austin a Bishop and send him to convert this Nation, by which he was
capable to Govern the Churches here which he did convert, but he could not give
to him the right over these Churches, which Gregory had no power over himself;
neither could Austin or any other Archbishop of Canterbury give away the
Primacy of England by submitting himself to the Roman See. What therefore is
Gregory's Grant to Austin, to the Primacy of England? If you ask then, How the
Archbishops of Canterbury come to be Primates of England? I Answer, 1. This
Primacy must be lodged somewhere; and it is not unalterably fixed to any
certain place, because the Primacy belongs to the Church and not to a
particular See. 2. It is in the power of Princes to fix the Metropolitan See in
what place is judged most convenient; thence have been the frequent removes of
Episcopal and Archiepiscopal See's; as is evident in many examples in
Ecclesiastical history, particularly in Justiniana Prima made a Metropolis by
Justinian. 3. Where ever the Primacy is lodged it retains its ancient
privileges; so that there is no need of a succession of our Archbishops from
the British Archbishops of Caerleon to preserve the British Primacy; but that
See being removed by the Power of Princes; the Primacy still remains the same,
that it was in the British Metropolitans. And thus I hope I have shown you,
that the Original Charter of the Archbishop of Canterbury's Primacy, was not
contained in the Popes grant to Austin.

. 17.
From hence we proceed again to the case of the African Churches; for (as his
Lordship says) the African Prelates finding that all succeeding Popes were not
of Melchiades his temper, P. 172.
set themselves to assert their own liberties, and held it out stoutly against
Zozimus, Boniface 1, and Caelestine 1. who were successively Bishops of Rome.
At last, it was concluded in the sixth Council of Carthage, (wherein were
assembled two hundred and seventeen Bishops, of which St. Augustine himself was
one) that they would not give way to such a manifest encroachment upon their
rights and liberties; and thereupon gave present notice to Caelestine to
forbear sending his Officers amongst them, lest he should seem to induce the
swelling pride of the World into the Church of Christ. And this is said to have
amounted into a formal separation from the Church of Rome; and to have
continued for the space of somewhat more then one hundred years. For which his
Lordship produces two public instruments extant among the ancient Councils;
the one an Epistle from Boniface 2. in whose time the reconciliation to Rome is
said to be made by Eulalius then Bishop of Carthage; but the separation,
instigante Diabolo, by the Temptation of the Devil. The other is an exemplar
precum, or Copy of the Petition of the same Eulalius, in which he damns and
curses all those his Predecessors which went against the Church of Rome. Now
his Lordship urges from hence; Either these Instruments are true, or false. If
they be false, then Boniface 2. and his Accomplices at Rome, or some for them
are notorious forgers, and that of Records of great consequence to the
Government and peace of the whole Church of Christ, and to the perpetual Infamy
of that See, and all this foolishly and to no purpose: On the other side, if
these instruments be true; then it is manifest that the Church of Africa
separated from the Church of Rome; which separation was either unjust, or just;
if unjust then St. Austin, Eugenius, Fulgentius, and all those Bishops and
other Martyrs which suffered in the Vandalike persecution, dyed in actual and
unrepented Schism, and out of the Church; If it were just, then is it far more
lawful for the Church of England by a National Council to cast off the Popes
Usurpation, as she did, than it was for the African Church to separate; because
then the African Church excepted only against the Pride of Rome in case of
Appeals, and two other Canons less material; but the Church of England excepts
(besides this grievance) against many corruptions in Doctrine, with which Rome
at that time was not tainted. And St. Austin and those other famous men durst
not thus have separated from Rome, had the Pope had that powerful Principality
over the whole Church of Christ, and that by Christ's own Ordinance and
Institution as A. C. pretends he had. This is the substance of his Lordships
discourse to which we must consider what Answer you return. Which in short is,
That you dare not assert the credit of those two Instruments, P. 191.
but are very willing to think them forgeries; but you say, the Schismatical
separation of the African Church from the Roman is inconsistent with the truth
of story, and confuted by many pregnant and undeniable instances, which prove
that the Africans notwithstanding the context in the sixth Council of Carthage
touching matter of Appeals, were always in true Catholic Communion with the
Roman Church, even during the term of this pretended separation. For which you
produce the Testimony of Pope Caelestine concerning St. Austin, the proceeding
of Pope Leo in the case of Lupicinus, the Testimonies of Eugenius, Fulgentius,
Gregory, and the presence of some African Bishops at Rome. To all which I
Answer; that either the African Fathers did persist in the decree of the
Council of Carthage, or they did not: if they did persist in it, and no
separation followed; then the casting off the Usurpations of the Roman See
cannot incur the guilt of Schism; for these African Bishops did that, and it
seems continued still in the Roman Communion; by which it is evident that the
Roman Church was not so far degenerated then as afterward, or that the
Authority of those persons was so great in the Church, that the Roman Bishops
durst not openly break with them, which is a sufficient account of what
Caelestine says concerning St. Austin, that he lived and dyed in the Communion
of the Roman Church. If you say the reason why they were in Communion with the
Roman Church was because they did not persist; you must prove it by better
instances then you have here brought; for some of them are sufficient proofs of
the contrary. As appears by the case of Lupicinus an African Bishop appealing
to Leo, Leo. ep. 87. c. 2.
who indeed was willing enough to receive him; but what of that? Did not the
African Bishops of Mauritania Caesariensis excommunicate him notwithstanding
that appeal, and ordained another in his place; and therefore the Pope very
fairly sends him back to be tried by the Bishops of his Province. Which
instance as it argues the Popes willingness to have brought up Appeals among
them, so it shows the continuance of their stoutness in opposing them. And even
Pope Gregory so long after, Greg. l. 1 ep. 75
though in his time the business of Appeals was much promoted at Rome; yet he
dares not challenge them from the Bishops of Africa, but yields to them the
enjoyment of those privileges which they said they had enjoyed from the
Apostles times. And the testimonies of Eugenius, and Fulgentius imply nothing
of subjection to Rome, but a Praeeminence which that Church had above all
others, which it might have without the other; as London may I hope be the
Head-City of England, and yet all other Cities not express subjection to it.
But if after that Council of Carthage the Bishops of Rome did by degrees
encroach upon the liberties of the African Churches, there is this sufficient
account to be given of it; that as the Roman Bishops were always watchful to
take advantages to inhance their power, and that especially when other Churches
were in a suffering condition, so a fit opportunity fell out for them to do it
in Africa; For not long after that Council of Carthage, fell out that dismal
persecution of the African Churches by the irruption of the Vandals; in which
all the Catholic Bishops were banished out of Africa, or lived under great
sufferings; and by a strict edict of Gensericus, no new Bishops were suffered
to be ordained in the places of the former. This now was a fair opportunity for
the Bishop of Rome to advance his Authority among the suffering Bishops; St.
Peter's pretended Successor loving to fish in troubled waters, and it being
fatal to Rome from the first Foundation of it, to advance her self by the ruins
of other places.

But we are called off from the ruins of other Churches,. 18.
to observe the methods whereby the Popes grew great under the Emperors which
his Lordship gives an account of from Constantines time to Charles the Great,
about five hundred years, which begins thus, So soon as the Emperors became
Christian, the Church began to be put in better order; P. 175. n. 12*
For the calling and Authority of Bishops over the Inferior Clergy, that was a
thing of known use and benefit for preservation of Unity and Peace in the
Church. Which was confessed by St. Hierom himself, and so settled in men's minds
from the very Infancy of the Church, that it had not been to that time
contradicted by any. The only difficulty then was to accommodate the places and
precedencies of Bishops, among themselves, for the very necessity of order and
Government. To do this the most equal and impartial way was, that as the Church
is in the Commonwealth, not the Commonwealth in it, (as Optatus tells us) So
the Honors of the Church should follow the Honors of the State; and so it was
insinuated if not ordered (as appears) by the Canons of the Councils of
Chalcedon and Antioch. And this was the very Fountain of the Papal Greatness;
the Pope having his Residence in the great Imperial City. But Precedence is one
thing, and Authority another; It was thought fit therefore, that among Bishops
there should be a certain subordination and subjection. The Empire therefore
being cast into several Divisions (which they called Dioceses) every Diocese
contained several Provinces, every Province several Bishoprics; The chief of a
Diocese was called (...), and sometimes a Patriarch; the chief of a Province a
Metropolitan; next the Bishops in their several Dioceses (as we now use that
word), among these there was effectual subjection respectively grounded upon
Canon, and Positive Law, in their several Quarters; but over them, none at all:
all the Difference there, was but Honorary not Authoritative. To all this part
of his Lordships Discourse, you only say, That it is founded upon his own
conjectural presumptions more then upon any thing else; P. 192.
and that you have showed a far different Fountain of the Popes Authority from
Tu es Petrus, and super hanc Petram, etc. The meaning of what you say, is, That
his Lordships Discourse has too much Truth and Reason to be Answered solidly;
but because it is against the Popes interest you defy him, and cross your
self, and cry, Tu es Petrus, etc. and think, this will prevent its doing you
any harm. For if we look for one dram of Reason against it, we must look
somewhere else then in your Book, though you tell us, You have often evidenced
the contrary; but when and where I must profess my self to seek, and I doubt
shall continue so to the end of your Book. P. 177.
But his Lordship proceeds. If the ambition of some particular persons did
attempt now and then to break these bounds, it is no marvel: For no calling can
sanctify all that have it. And Socrates tells us, that in this way the Bishops
of Alexandria and Rome advanced themselves to a great height (...) even beyond
the quality of Bishops. Now upon view of story it will appear, that what
advantage accrewed to Alexandria, was gotten by the violence of Theophilus
Patriarch there. A man of exceeding great Learning and no less violence; and he
made no little advantage out of this, that the Empress Eudoxia used his help
for the casting of St. Chrysostom out of Constantinople. But the Roman Prelates
grew by a steady and constant watchfulness upon all occasions to increase the
honor of that See. Interposing and assuming to themselves to be Vindices
Canonum (as Greg. Naz. speaks) Defenders and Restorers of the Canons of the
Church, which was a fair pretense and took extremely well. But yet the world
took notice of this their aim. For in all Contestations between the East and
West, which were not small, nor few, the Western Bishops objected Levity to the
Eastern; and they again arrogance to the Bishops of the West, as Bilius
observes, and upon very warrantable testimonies. For all this, the Bishop of
Rome continued in good obedience to the Emperor, enduring his censures and
judgments: and being chosen by the Clergy and people of Rome, he accepted from
the Emperor, the ratification of that choice. Insomuch, that about the year
579. when all Italy was on fire with the Lombards, and Pelagius the second
constrained through the necessity of the times contrary to the example of his
Predecessors, to enter upon the Popedom without the Emperors leave, St.
Gregory then a Deacon was shortly after sent on Embassy to excuse it. To all
these things you give one general Answer, P. 193.
by calling them impertinencies, which is a general name for all that you
cannot Answer. The Popes obedience to the Emperors you say was constrained,
their ratifications of Popes elections only declaring them Canonical, Socrates
was a Heretic, the Eastern Bishops partial: This is the substance of all you
say; whereof the two former are manifestly contrary to the truth of stories
(as, when you desire it, may at large be manifested) and the two latter the
pitiful shifts of such who have nothing else to say.

But, though you cannot answer particulars,. 19.
you can overthrow his whole design (though you cannot Fiddle, it seems you can
conquer Cities, but they must be very weak then.) His main design, you tell us,
P. 193. n. 9.
is to overthrow the Pope's Supremacy, by showing, it was not lawful to appeal
to Rome; but Catholic Authors (to be sure you are in the number) frame an
unanswerable argument for his Supremacy, even from the contrary, thus; it was
ever held lawful to appeal to Rome in Ecclesiastical affairs, from all the
parts of Christendom; therefore, say they, The Pope must needs be Supreme Judge
in Ecclesiastical matters. This is evidenced out of the 4, and 7, Canons of the
Council of Sardica, accounted anciently an Appendix of the Council of Nice, and
often cited as the same with it.

Will you give us leave to come near and handle this unanswerable argument a
little? for persons of your profession use to be very shie of that. But
however, since it is exposed to common view, we may take leave to do it. And
seriously, upon consideration of all the parts and circumstances of it, I am of
your mind, without flattering you, that it is an unanswerable argument, but
quite to another purpose than you brought it for, even against the Pope's
Supremacy, as I shall presently discover; so that those Catholic Authors have
served you just as Lazarillo did his blind Master, in bidding him leap over the
water, that he might run his head full butt against the tree. For that which
your best Authors shun as much as may be, and use their best arts to get
besides it, you run blindly, and therefore boldly upon it, as though it were an
excellent argument to your purpose. You say, The evidence for Appeals, is from
the Canons of the Sardican Synod, but if this be an unanswerable argument for
the Pope's Supremacy. 1. How come these Appeals to be pleaded from the Sardican
Synod? 2. How come these Appeals to be denied, notwithstanding the Canons of
it? The former will prove that the Supremacy, if granted from hence, was not
acknowledged from Divine Right; the latter, that it was not universally
acknowledged by the Church after; and therefore both of them will make an
unanswerable argument against that which you would prove, viz. the Pope's
Supremacy. First, If the Pope's Supremacy be evidenced from hence. 1. How comes
it at all to depend on the Canons? 2. Why no sooner than the Canons of Sardica?
3. Why not at all mentioned in them? 1. How comes the Pope's Supremacy, if of
Divine Right, to depend at all upon the Canons of the Church? We had thought it
had been much more to your purpose, not to have mentioned any Canons at all of
the Church about it, but to have produced evidences, that this was constantly
acknowledged as of Divine Institution. But we must bear with you, in not
producing that which is not to be found. For nothing can be more apparent, than
that when the Popes began to pierk up, they pleaded nothing but some Canons of
the Church for what they did, as Julius to the Oriental Bishops, Zosimus to the
African, and so others. If it had been ever thought then, that this Supremacy
was of Divine Right; What senseless men were these, to make use of the worst
pleas, and never mention the best. For, supposing they had such a Supremacy
granted them by the Canons of the Church, Does not this imply that their
authority did depend upon the Churches grant? and, what the Church might give
for her own convenience, she might take it away, when she saw it abused to her
apparent prejudice. And therefore if they had thought that God had commanded
all Churches to be subject to them, it was weakly done of them to plead nothing
but the Canons of the Church for it. 2. Why no sooner than the Canons of
Sardica? Was the Church of Rome without her Supremacy till that time? Will no
Canons of the Church evidence it before them? When this Council was not held
till eleven years after the death of Constantine. Had the Pope no right of
Appeals till it was decreed here? Yes, Zosimus pleads the Nicene Canons for it;
But upon what grounds, will appear suddenly. 3. Why is not the Pope's Supremacy
mentioned as the ground of these Appeals then? Certainly those Western Bishops,
who made those Canons, should have only recognized the Divine Right of the
Pope's Supremacy; and not made a Canon in such a manner as they do; that would
make any one be confident they never knew the Popes Supremacy. For their decree
runs thus; That in case any Bishop thought himself unjustly condemned; if it
seem good to you, (...) -- (...). Council. Sardic. c. 3.
let us honor the memory of Peter the Apostle, that it be written by those who
have judged the cause, to Julius the Bishop of Rome; and if it seem good, let
the judgment be renewed, and let them appoint such as may take cognizance of
it. Were these men mad to make such a Canon as this, if they believed the Popes
Supremacy of Divine Institution? What a dwindling expression is that, for the
Head of the Church, to call him Bishop of Rome only, when a matter concerning
his Supremacy is decreeing? And why to Julius Bishop of Rome, I pray? Had it
not been better to S. Peter's successor, whosoever he be? so it would have
been, no doubt, if they had intended a Divine or Universal Right. And why for
the honor of S. Peter 's memory? Had it not been more becoming them to have
said, out of obedience to Christ's Commands, which made him Head of the Church?
And all this come in with an (...), if it please you? What, if it please you,
Whether the Pope should be Universal Pastor, or no? If it please you, Whether
the Church should be built super hanc Petram, or no? If it please you, Whether
the Bishop of Rome succeeds S. Peter, or no? Are these the men that give such
evidence for the Popes Supremacy? You had better by far never mention them; for
if that was the Lesson they had to say, never any Boys at School said their
Lesson worse than they do. They wanted such as you among them, to have penned
their Canon for them; and no doubt it had run in a better strain; For as much
as our Lord and Savior did appoint S. Peter Head of the Church, and the Bishop
of Rome to succed him as Christ's Vicar upon earth; these are to let you know
that he has an absolute power by Divine Right over all persons and causes, and
that men are bound to obey him upon pain of eternal damnation. This had been
something like, if you could have found in some Canons of the Church; but, to
produce a poor sneaking, If it please you, What do you else but betray the
Majesty and Grandeur of your Church? And yet after all this, no such thing as
absolute Appeals to Rome are decreed here neither, but only that the Bishop of
Rome should have power to review the case; and in case it was thought
necessary, that other persons should be appointed to examine it. But, How much
a Review differs from an Appeal, and that nothing but a power to review cases
is here given to the Bishop of Rome; are fully manifested by Petrus de Marca,
to whom I again referr you. De Concord. sacerd. and Imp. l. 7. c. 3. sect. 6,
7, etc. l. 7. c. 4. sect. 2.
So that we see from hence you have very comfortable evidence for the Pope's
Supremacy.

2. Suppose it had been decreed here, you had not gained much by it; Because,
notwithstanding this decree, it was far from being acknowledged by the
Universal Church. Which I prove from hence,. 20.
That the Sardican Canons were not received by the Church: Nothing can be more
evident, than that these Canons were not so much as known by the African
Bishops, when Pope Zosimus fraudulently sent them under the name of the Nicene
Canons; insomuch that Cusanus questions, Concord Cathol. l. 2. c. 15
Whether ever any such thing were determined by the Sardican Synod or no: And
it appears by S. Austin, that the Council of Sardica was of no great credit in
Africa; for when Fortunius the Donatist-Bishop would prove that the Sardican
Synod had written to some of their party, because one Donatus was mentioned in
it; Aug ep. 163.
S. Austin tells him, It was a Synod of Arrians; by which it seems very
improbable, that they had ever received the decrees of the Western, Contra
Cresc. l. 3. c. 34. l. 4. c. 44.
but only of the Eastern part of it, which adjourned to Philippopolis. Neither
was this ever acknowledged for an Ecumenical Council, for although it was
intended for such by the Emperors, Constans, and Constantius, yet but 70. of
the Eastern Bishops appeared to 300. of the Western; and those Eastern Bishops
soon withdrew from the other, and decreed things directly contrary to the
other. So that Balsamon and Zonaras, as well as the elder Greeks, say, The
decrees of it can at most only bind the Western Churches; and the arrogating of
this power of reviewing causes decided by the Eastern Churches by Western
Bishops, was apparently the cause of the divisions between them: the Eastern
and Western Churches being after this divided by the Alps Succiae between
Illyricum and Thracia. And, although Hilary and Epiphanius expressly call this a
Western Council, yet it was a long time, before the Canons of it were received
in the Western Church. Which is supposed to be the reason, Why Zosimus would
not mention the Sardican, but called them the Nicene Canons; which forgery was
sufficiently detected by the African Bishops. And it is the worst of all
excuses, to lay the blame of it (as you do) on the Pope's Secretary; for, Do
you think Pope Zosimus was so careless of his business, as not to look over the
Commonitorium, which Faustinus carried with him? Do you think Faustinus would
not have corrected the fault when the African Bishops boggled so at it? What
made him so unwilling that they should send into the East to examine the Nicene
Canons, but entreated them to leave the business wholly with the Pope, if he
were not conscious of some forgery in the business? But, you say, as a further
plea in Zosimus his excuse, That the Council of Sardica was an Appendix to the
Nicene Council rather than otherwise. P. 195*
An excellent Appendix, made at two and twenty years distance from the other,
and called by other Emperors, consisting of many other persons, and assembled
upon a quite different occasion. If this had been an Appendix to the Nicene
Council, How comes that to have but twenty Canons? How came Atticus and
Cyrillus not to send these with the other? How come all the Copies of Councils
and Canons to distinguish them? How came they not to be contained in the Code
of Canons, produced in the Council of Chalcedon, in the cause of Bassianus and
Stephanus? If this were the same Council, because some of the same things were
determined, How comes that in Trullo not to be the same with the 6.
Ecumenical? How comes the Council of Antioch not to be an Appendix to the
Council of Nice, if this was; when it was celebrated before this, and the
Canons of it inserted in the Code of Canons owned by the Council of Chalcedon?
So that by all the shifts and arts you can use, you cannot excuse Zosimus from
Imposture in sending these Sardican under the name of the Nicene Canons. And,
on what account the Pope satisfied the Canons then, is apparent enough, viz.
for the advancing the Interess of his See; and this the African Fathers did as
easily discern afterward, as we do now. But by this we see, What good
Foundations the Pope's claim of Supremacy had then, and what arts (not to say
frauds) they were beholding to for setting it up, even as great as they have
since made use of to maintain it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Title of Universal Bishop.
In what sense the Title of Universal Bishop was taken in Antiquity. A
threefold acceptance of it; as importing 1. A general care over the Christian
Churches, which is attributed to other Catholic Bishops by Antiquity, besides
the Bishop of Rome, as is largely proved. 2. A peculiar dignity over the
Churches within the Roman Empire. This accounted then Ecumenical, thence the
Bishops of the seat of the Empire called Ecumenical Bishops: and sometimes of
other Patriarchal Churches. 3. Nothing Universal Jurisdiction over the whole
Church as Head of it, so never given in Antiquity to the Bishop of Rome. The
ground of the Contest about this Title between the Bishops of Rome and
Constantinople. Of the proceedings of the Council of Chalcedon, about the Popes
Supremacy. Of the Grammatical and Metaphorical sense of this Title. Many
arguments to prove it impossible that S. Gregory should understand it in the
Grammatical sense. The great absurdities consequent upon it. S. Gregory's
Reasons proved to hold against that sense of it which is admitted in the Church
of Rome. Of Irenaeus his opposition to Victor. Victor's excommunicating the
Asian Bishops, argues no authority he had over them. What the more powerful
principality in Irenaeus is. Ruffinus his Interpretation of the 6. Nicene Canon
vindicated. The Suburbicary Churches cannot be understood of all the Churches
in the Roman Empire. The Pope no Infallible successor of S. Peter, nor so
acknowledged to be by Epiphanius. S. Peter had no Supremacy of Power over the
Apostles.

. 1
HIs Lordship having undertaken to give an account, How the Popes rose by
degrees to their Greatness under the Christian Emperors; in prosecution of
that, necessarily falls upon the Title of Universal Bishop affected by John the
Patriarch of Constantinople, and condemned by Pelagius 1. and Gregory 2. This
you call a trite and beaten way, because I suppose the truth is so plain and
evident in it; but withal, you tell us, This Objection has been satisfied a
hundred times over; if you had said, the same Answer had been repeated so often
over, you had said true; but if you say, that it has been satisfied once, you
say more than you are able to defend, as will evidently appear by your very
unsatisfactory Answer, which at last you give to it. So that if none of your
party have been any wiser than your self in this matter; I am so far from being
satisfied with what they say, that I can only pity those persons, whose
interest swayes their understandings so much (or at least their expressions) as
to make them say any thing that seems to be for their purpose, though in it
self never so senseless or unreasonable. And I can scarce hold my self from
saying with the Orator, when a like Objection to this was offered him, because
multitudes had said so, Quasi vero quidquam sit tam valde, quam nihil sapere,
vulgar, That truth and reason are the greatest Novelties in the world. For
seriously, Were it possible for men of common understanding, to rest satisfied
with such pitiful shifts as you are fain to make, if they would but use any
freedom in enquiring, and any liberty of judging when they had done? But when
once men have given (not to say sold away) the exercise of their free reason,
by addicting themselves to a particular interest, there can scarce any thing be
imagined so absurd, but it passes currently from one to another, because they
are bound to receive all blindfold, and in the same manner to deliver it to
others. By which means it is an easy matter, for the greatest nonsense and
contradictions to be said a hundred times over. And, Whether it be not so in
the present case, is that we are now to enquire into. And for the same ends
which you propose to your self, viz. that all obscurity may be taken away, and
the truth clearly appear; I shall in the first place set down, What his
Lordship says, and then distinctly examine What you reply in Answer to it.
Thus then his Lordship proceeds. About this time brake out the ambition of John
Patriarch of Constantinople, affecting to be Universal Bishop. P. 178.
He was countenanced in this by Mauricius the Emperor, but sowrely opposed by
Pelagius, and S. Gregory: Insomuch that S. Gregory plainly says, That this
Pride of his shows that the times of Antichrist were near. L. 4. ep. 78.
So as yet (and this was near upon the point of six hundred years after Christ)
there was no Universal Bishop; no one Monarch over the whole Militant Church.
But Mauricius being deposed and murdered by Phocas; Phocas conferred upon
Boniface the third, that very Honor which two of his predecessors had
declaimed against as monstrous and blasphemous, if not Antichristian. Where, by
the way, either these two Popes, Pelagius and S. Gregory erred in this weighty
business, about an Universal Bishop over the whole Church: Or, if they did not
err, Boniface and the rest, which after him took it upon them, were in their
very predecessors judgment Antichristian. Before you come to a particular
Answer, you think it necessary to make a way for it, by premising two things.
1. That the Title of Universal Bishop, was anciently attributed to the Bishops
of Rome; P. 196. n. 1, ^
but they never made use of it. 2. That the ancient Bishops of Constantinople
never intended by this usurped Title, to deny the Popes Universal Authority,
even over themselves. These two things I shall therefore consider, because they
tend much to the clearing the main Controversy. I begin therefore with the
Title of Universal Bishop attributed to the Bishop of Rome; and before I answer
your particular allegations, we must more fully consider, in what sense that
title of Universal Bishops was taken in Antiquity, and in what manner it was
attributed to him. For when titles have different senses, and those senses
evidently made use of by the ancient Writers, it is a most unreasonable thing
merely from the title to infer one determinate sense, which is the most
contrary to the current of Antiquity. The title then of Universal Bishop, may
be conceived to import one of these three things. 1. A general care and
solicitude over all the Churches of the Christian world. 2. A peculiar dignity
over the Churches within the Empire. 3. Universal Jurisdiction over all
Churches, so that all exercise of it in the Church is derivative from him as
Universal Pastor and Head of the Church. This last is that which you attribute
to the Pope; and though you find the name of Universal Bishop a hundred times
over, in the records of the Church, yet if it be taken in either of the two
former senses, it makes nothing at all to your purpose. Our business is
therefore now, to show, that this title was used in the Church in the two
former senses; and that nothing from hence can be inferred for that Ecumenical
Pastorship, which you say, does, of Divine Right, belong to the Bishop of Rome.

. 2.
I begin with the first, as this Title may import a general care and solicitude
over all the Christian Churches: and I deny not but in this sense this title
might be attributed in Antiquity to the Bishop of Rome; but then I assert, that
nothing peculiar to him can be inferred from hence, because expressions
importing the same care, are attributed to other Bishops, especially such who
were placed in the greater Sees, or were active in promoting the Churches
interest. For which we must consider, that power and authority in the Bishops
of the Church, is given with an immediate respect to the good of the whole
Church; so that if it were possible that every particular Bishop could take
care of the whole Church, they have authority enough by their Function to do
it. But it not only being impossible that every Bishop should do it, but it
being inconsistent with peace and order, that all should undertake it;
therefore it was necessary that there should be some restraints and bounds set,
for the more convenient management of that authority which they had. From hence
came the Original of particular Dioceses, that within such a compass they might
better exercise that power which they enjoyed. As if many lights be placed in a
great Room, though the intention of every one of these is to give light to the
whole Room; yet that this might the better be done, these lights are
conveniently placed in the several parts of it. And this is that which S.
Cyprian means in that famous expression of his, That there is but one
Bishopric in the whole world, a part of which is held by every Bishop; For the
Church in common is designed as the Diocese of all Bishops, which is set out
into several appartiments for the more advantageous governing of it. As a flock
of many thousand sheep, being committed to the care of many Shepherds, these
all have an eye to the good of the whole Flock, but do not therefore sit
altogether in one place to over-see it; but every one has his share to look
after, for the benefit of the Whole: But yet so, that upon occasion, one of
them may extend his care beyond his own division, and may be very useful for
the whole, by counsel and direction. Thus we shall find it was in the Primitive
Church; though every Bishop had his particular Charge, yet still they regarded
the common good of the whole Church, and upon occasion did extend their counsel
and advice far beyond their particular Churches; and exercised their Functions
in other places besides those, which the Churches convenience had allotted to
them. Hence it was, that, dissentions arising between the Asian and Roman
Churches, Polycarp comes to Rome, and there, Eusebius. l. 5. cap. 24. Not. in l.
as Eusebius from Irenaeus tells us, He exercised with Anicetus his consent,
his Episcopal Function. For, as Valesius observes, it cannot be understood, as
Franciscus Florens would have it, of his receiving the Eucharist from Anicetus,
but something of honor is implied in the word (...), whereas there was nothing
but what was common in the other. Hence the several Epistles of Ignatius,
Polycarp, Irenaeus, and others, for the advising, confirming, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 25
and settling Churches. Hence Irenaeus concerned himself so much in the
business between Victor and the Asian Churches, either to prevent, or repeal
his sentence of Excommunication against them. Hence S. Cyprian writes into
Spain about the deposing Basilides and Martialis, Cyprian. ep. 68
two Apostatizing Bishops, and checks Stephen Bishop of Rome, for his
inconsiderate restoring them. Hence, Faustus Bishop of Lions writes to S.
Cyprian, in the case of Martianus of Arles, Cypr. ep. 67.
and he writes to Stephen as being nearer, and more concerned in the business
of Novatianism (for the honor of his predecessors) in order to his Deposition;
yet so, as he looks on it as a common cause belonging to them all (cui rei
nostrum est consulere and subvenire, frater charissime) in which they were all
bound to advise and help. Hence S. Cyprian writes to the Bishop of Rome, as his
Brother and Colleague, without the least intimation of deriving any
Jurisdiction from him, but often expressing that charge which was committed to
every Bishop, which he must look to as mindful of the account he must give to
God. Hence Nazianzen says of S. Cyprian, Nazian. Orat. 18. p. 281.
That he not only governed the Churches of Carthage and Africa, but all the
Western parts, and even almost all the Eastern, Southern, and Northern too, as
far as his fame went. Athanas. Ap. ad Imp. Constable. p. 786. Tom 1. Nazianz. Orat.
21. p. 392. Basil. ep. 52. Tom. 3. p. 79. Chrysostom. Tom. 5. p. 631. ed Savil.
Hence Arsenius writes to Athanasius, We embrace Peace and Unity with the
Catholic Church, over which thou, through the Grace of God, do preside.
Hence Gregory Nazianzen says of Athanasius, That he made Laws for the whole
earth. Hence S. Basil writes to him, That he had care of all the Churches, as
of his own; and in the same Epistle calls him, The Head and chief over all.
Hence S. Chrysostom in the praise of Eustathius the Patriarch of Antioch,
says, That he was instructed by the Divine Spirit, that he was not only to
have care of that Church over which he was set, but of the whole Church
throughout the world. Hence came the great endeavors of Theophilus and Cyril,
Patriarchs of Alexandria, Hieron. ep. 71. Ruffin. l. 11. c. 27, 30, 31.
of Eusebius Vercellensis, Hilarious Pictaviensis, and several others, for
rooting out of Heresies; not confining themselves to those Provinces allotted
to them, but extending their care over other Churches. Theodoret. l. 5. c. 4.
Hence came frequent ordinations of persons out of their own Dioceses, as of
Paulinus at Antioch by Lucifer Caralitanus, of many Bishops in Syria and
Mesopotamia by Eusebius Samosatenus; and of a Presbyter at Bethleem by
Epiphanius; who when he was quarreled at by John of Jerusalem for it, Hieron.
ep. 60
he defends his action by this saying, That, In Sacerdotio Dei nulla est
diversitas, i. e. wherever a Bishop was, he might exercise his power as such,
although the Churches prudence had set limits to their ordinary Jurisdiction.
From these things then we see, that a general care and solicitude of the
Universal Church, does belong to every Bishop, and that some of them have been
expressly said to have had the care of the whole Church, which in other terms is
to say, They were Universal Bishops. So that from this sense of the Title, you
gain nothing to your purpose, though the care of the Universal Church be
attributed to the Bishop of Rome, though he acts and calls Councils, and orders
other things out of his own Province, yet all this proves not the Supremacy you
intend; for this is no more than other Bishops did, whom you will not
acknowledge to be Heads of the Church, or Universal Bishops in that sense.

2. An Universal Bishop denotes a peculiar dignity over the Churches within the
Roman Empire: For which, two things will be sufficient to manifest it.. 3.
1. That the Roman Empire was then accounted Universal. 2. That some Bishops in
the Great Churches, were on that account called Ecumenical or Universal
Bishops. 1. That the Roman Empire was then accounted Universal; for which
multitudes of testimonies might be cited, in which orbis Romanus, and orbis
humanus were looked on as Synonymous; thence Trebellius Pollio in Macrianus,
qui ex diversis partibus orbis Romani restituant: and as Salmasius witnesses
in those writers of the Imperial History; Not. in Hist. August. p. 306
most of the ancient M S S. for orbis Romanus have orbis humanus; for, as he
says, Ea gloria fuerunt Romani, ut totum orbem suum vocarent; hinc orbis
Romanus passim apud auctores reperitur pro universo orb; thence they called
the Roman people, omnium gentium victorem; and from hence Ammianus Marcellinus
calls Rome, Amm. Marcel. l. 14. l. 16.
caput mundi (the head of the world) and the Roman Senate, Asylum mundi totius
(the Sanctuary for the whole world;) thence Spartianus says of Severus,
Spartian. in Severo.
orbem terrarum Romamque despexit, when, as Casaubon observes, he speaks only
of the Roman Provinces. And from hence, whatever was out of the Roman Empire,
was called Barbaria, thence the rura vicina Barbariae in Lampridius, Lamprid.
in Alex. Sev. Marcel. l. 18. Justel. Not. in Cod. Afric. Can. 58.
for the Marches which lay next to the enemies Country; thence Marcellinus,
visus est in Barbarico miles, and in the Imperial Constitutions, as Justellus
observes, Barbari vocantur; quicunque Imperio Romano non parebant (all were
called barbarous out of the Roman Empire) and in the same sense barbaricum is
used in the 58. Canon of the African Code, and in the 206. Canon of the Code of
the Universal Church, that the Bishops (...), Cod. Eccles. Uni Can. 206. and
ibi Justel.
i. e. out of the Roman Empire, should be ordained by the Patriarch of
Constantinople. Now, since the Roman Empire was called orbis Romanus, and in
Greek, (...), (as appears, in that Augusius, Luke 2.1. is said to tax (...),
the whole world, which could be only the Roman Empire; and the famine in the
same, is said to be (...), Act. 11.28.) it is no wonder if these Bishops who
enjoyed the greatest dignity in the Roman Empire were called Ecumenical; and
those Councils so too, which consisted of the Bishops within those bounds. I
come therefore to the second thing, That some Bishops in the Great Churches in
the Roman Empire, were called Ecumenical, as that relates to the (...), viz.
the Roman Empire. For which we may consider, the primary ground of the
advancement of the Patriarch of Constantinople, was the greatness of the City,
as is undeniably manifest by the proceedings of the Councils of Constantinople,
and Chalcedon about him; wherein it was decreed, since that was New-Rome, that
it should enjoy equal privileges with the old. And in all probability the
ground of the Patriarch of Constantinople's usurping the title of Ecumenical
Patriarch was but to correspond with the greatness of his City, which at the
time of the contest between Pope Gregory, and him, was in a better condition
than Rome it self; being the seat of the Empire, and therefore he thought it
suitable thereto, to be called Ecumenical Patriarch. But besides this
peculiarity of Constantinople, it was no unusual thing for the Bishop of the
Patriarchal Churches, to have expressions given them, tantamount to the title
of Universal Bishop in any sense but that of the Universal Jurisdiction; which
I shall prove as to the three Patriarchs of Alexandria, Antioch, and
Constantinople. First, Of Alexandria: So Greg. Nazianzen says of Athanasius,
(...). Nazianzen. 21. p. 377.
being made Bishop there, he had the Government of that people committed to
him, which is as much as to say, of the whole world; and John of Jerusalem, Tu
quidem ut homo Dei and Apostolica ^rnatus gratia curam omnium Ecclesiarum
sustines. Apud Hieronym. ad Pammach. To. 2. ep. 61. c. 15.
writing to Theophilus Patriarch of Alexandria, says, That he had the care of
all the Churches. And St. Basil writes to Athanasius about the establishing of
Meletius as Patriarch of Antioch, (...). Basil. ep. 50.
that so he might govern as it were the whole body of the Church. But most
clear and full to that purpose is the testimony of Theodoret concerning
Nestorius being made Patriarch of Constantinople. He was entrusted with the
Government of the Catholic Church of the Orthodox at Constantinople, (...).
Theodoret. haeret. fabul. l. 4. c. 12. p. 245. To. ^. oper.
and thereby of the whole world. What work would you make with so illustrious a
testimony in Antiquity for the Bishop of Rome as this is for the Patriarch of
Constantinople? Use therefore and interpret but these testimonies as kindly as
you do any for the Roman See, and will you not find as large a power over the
Church attributed to the other Patriarchs as you do to the Bishop of Rome? What
is it then you would infer from the title of Universal Bishop being attributed
to him? Will the very title do more then what is signified by it? Or must it of
necessity import something more when given to the Bishop of Rome then it does
when given to other Bishops? if it does, you must prove it from some other
Arguments, and not barely from the title being attributed to them. Thus you
see, though the title were granted to be attributed to him, there is nothing
new, nothing peculiar in it.

But we must further examine, Who they are that attribute this title to him,
and what the account is of their doing it. For this,. 4.
you cite the Council of Chalcedon in a letter inserted in the Acts of it, P.
196.
the Council of Constantinople sub Mena, John Bishop of Nicopolis, Constantinus
Pogonatus the Emperor, Basil the younger, and Balsamon himself. To the first I
Answer. 1. That this title was not given by the Council of Chalcedon. 2. If it
had, no more was given to the Bishop of Rome, then to the Bishops of other
Patriarchal Churches. 1. That this title was not given by the General Council
of Chalcedon; this I know Gregory 1. in his Epistles about this subject repeats
usque ad nauseam, that the title of Universal Bishop was offered to the Bishop
of Rome by the Council of Chalcedon and that he refused it; but there is as
little evidence for the one as the other. That the title of Ecumenical
Patriarch was attributed to the Bishop of Rome by some Papers read and received
in that Council I deny not, but we must consider the persons who did it, and
the occasion of it. The persons were such who came to inform the Council
against Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria, Council. Chalced. Act. 3. part 3.
p. 243.
and they were no other then Athanasius a Presbyter, Theodorus and Ischyrion
two Deacons, and Sophronius a Laick of Alexandria: now these persons not in a
letter (as you relate it) but in their bills exhibited to the Council against
Dioscorus give that title of Ecumenical Patriarch or Archbishop to Leo the
Bishop of Rome. And is this now the offer made of the title of Universal Bishop
by the Council of Chalcedon? But you say, This was inserted into the Acts of
the Council? I grant it was, but on what account? not with any respect to the
title, but as containing the Accusations against Dioscorus. But where do any of
the Bishops of that Council attribute that title to Leo? which of them mentions
it in their subscriptions to the Deposition of Dioscorus, though many of them
speak expressly of Leo and Anatolius together with the same titles of honor to
them both. Why did not the Council superscribe their Synodical Epistle to Pope
Leo with that title? so indeed Binius rather supposes they should have done,
Bin. not. in Chalced. Con. Tom. 3. Council. p. 562.
then proves they ever did it: and that only from Gregory's Epistle (not Leo's
as he mistakes it) to Eulogius where he mentions this offer, but upon what
grounds we have seen already. But suppose, 2. We should grant, that the Council
of Chalcedon should have offered the title of Ecumenical Patriarch or Bishop,
to the Bishop of Rome; there are none who understand any thing of the nature of
that title, or the proceedings of that Council, who can imagine they should
intend any acknowledgement of the Popes Supremacy by it. For the title it self
as to the importance of it was common to other Bishops, especially of the
Patriarchal Sees, as I have proved by some instances already, and might do yet
by more; but I shall content my self with the ingenuous confession of Sim.
Vigorius; That when the Western Fathers, Et harum rerum ignari Andabatae
nostri, non advertunt, cum Occidentales Patres, Pontifices Romanos vocant,
universalis Ecclesiae Episcopos, id more suarum Ecclesiarum facere, and ea
notione, non quod putent totius orbis universalis, universales esse Episcopos,
sed eadem qua Constantinopolitanus, Alexandrinus, Antiochenus,
Hierosolymitanus, dicuntur Universales: aut ut universales Ecclesiarum quae
sunt sub eorum Patriarchatu: aut quod in Conciliis Oecumenicis toti Ecclesiae
praesint. Vigorius Comment. ad Resp. Synodal. Council. Basil. p. 36.
call the Roman Bishops, Bishops of the Universal Church, they do it from the
custom of their Churches, not that they look on them as Universal Bishops of
the whole Church, but in the same sense that the Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Antioch, Alexandria, Jerusalem, are called so; or as they are Universal over
the Churches under their Patriarchate; or that in Ecumenical Councils they
preside over the whole Church. And after acknowledges, that the title of
Universal or Ecumenical Bishop makes nothing for the Popes Monarchy in the
Church. And if it does not so when given by the Western Fathers, much less
certainly when given by the Eastern, especially those who met in the Council of
Chalcedon; For it is evident by their 16 Session, the 28 Canon, and their
Synodical Epistle to Pope Leo, they designed the advancement of the Sea of
Constantinople to equal privileges with that of Rome. And therefore if they
gave the Pope the title of Ecumenical Patriarch, or Bishop, it was that he
might be willing that the Patriarch of Constantinople might be called so too.
And if, as Gregory says, the Bishops of Rome would not accept the title of
Universal Bishop, the truest account I know of it, is, lest the Patriarch of
Constantinople should share with him in it; but we see when the great
Benefactor to your Church the Benign Phocas, as Gregory himself styles him,
gave it to the Bishop of Rome alone, then hands and heart and all were ready to
receive it. And I much fear Leo 1. and St. Gregory himself would have been
shrewdly tempted to receive it, if it had been offered them upon those terms,
that no one else should have it besides them; but they scorned it till they
could have it alone. And for all their declamations against the pride of
Anatolius and John, Patriarchs of Constantinople, they must look very
favorably on the actions of those two Popes, that discern not their own Pride
in condemning of them for it. For usually men show it as much in suspecting or
condemning others for it, as in any other way whatsoever. Thus it was in these
persons; they thought the Patriarchs of Constantinople proud and arrogant,
because they sought to be equal with them. But, Was it not their own greater
Pride, that they were able to bear no equals? and it is to be feared, it was
their desire to advance their own Supremacy which made them quarrel so much
with Anatolius, and John, and Cyriacus. For would they but have been contented
to truckle under the Roman Bishops they had been accounted very meek and humble
men. And St. Gregory himself, would not sure have thought much to have called
them so, who most abominably flatters that monster Phocas, after the murder of
Mauricius and his Children: for he begins his Epistle to him with, Gloria in
excelsis Deo: Glory to God on high, Greg. l. 11. ep. 36. Ind. 6.
who, according to what is written, changes times and transfers Kingdoms: and
after, in such notorious flattering expressions congratulates his coming to the
Throne, that any one who reads them would think Phocas the greater Saint; he
rejoices, that the benignity of his piety was advanced to the Imperial Throne,
nay (laetentur coeli and exultet terra) let the heavens rejoice and the earth
be glad, and all the people which has been hitherto in much affliction, revive
at the benignity of your actions. O rare Phocas! Could he do any less then
pronounce the Bishop of Rome Universal Bishop after this, when poor Cyriacus at
Constantinople suffered for his opposing him for the execrable murder of his
Master? Therefore these proceedings of Leo and Gregory yield shrewd matter of
suspicion, what the main ground of their quarrel against the Patriarchs of
Constantinople was. For before, the Emperors stood up for the honor of
Constantinople as being the seat of their Empire, and Rome began to sink, the
Empire decaying there; but now, there was a fit time to do something for the
honor of the Roman See; Cyriacus was in disgrace with the Tyrant Phocas; and
no such time as now to fall in with him and caresse him: and we see Gregory did
it pretty well for a Saint, but he lived not to enjoy the benefit of it; but
Boniface did however.

After the Patriarchate of Constantinople was erected,. 5.
the Popes had a double game to play, to advance themselves, and depress that,
which it was very hard for them to do, because all the Eastern Bishops, as well
as the Emperor favored it. But after equal privileges were decreed to the
Patriarch of Constantinople with the Bishop of Rome, by the Council of
Constantinople, they could no longer dissemble their choler; but had no such
occasion ministered to them to express it as after the Canon of the Council of
Chalcedon, (wherein were present 630 Bishops) which confirmed the former. For
then Leo fumes and frets and writes to Martianus, and Pulcheria, to Anatolius
and the Bishops of the East; but still pretends that he stood up for the
privileges of the other Patriarchs and the Nicene Canons, and what not? but
one might easily discern what it was that pinched him, viz. the equalling the
Patriarch of Constantinople with himself. Which it is apparent he suspected
before, by the instructions he gave his Legates Paschasinus and Lucentius, to be
sure to oppose whatever was proposed in the Council concerning the Primacy of
that See. And accordingly they did; and complained that the Canon was
surreptitiously made. Which they were hugely overseen in doing while the
Council sat, for upon this the whole matter is reviewed, the Judges scan the
business, the Bishops protest there were no practices used; that they all
voluntarily consented to it; and all this in the presence of the Roman Legates?
How comes it then to pass that this should not be a regular and Conciliar
action? Were not the Bishops at age to understand their own privileges? Did
not the Bishop of Antioch know his own interest as well as Pope Leo? Must he be
supposed more able to understand the Nicene Canons then these 630 Bishops? Why
then was not this Canon as regular as any other. Why forsooth, The Pope did not
consent to it. So true is that sharp censure of Ludovicus Vives, that, those
are accounted lawful Canons and Councils which make for their interest, Itaque
illa demum eis videntur edicta and concilia quae in rem suam faciunt, reliqua
non pluris aestimanda, quam conventum muliercularum in textrina vel thermis.
Lud. Vives in Aug. de Civit. Dei I. 20. cap. 26.
but others are no more esteemed then a company of tattling Gossips. But what
made the Pope so angry at this Canon of the Council of Chalcedon? He pretends
the honor of the Nicene Canons, the preserving the privileges of other
Patriarchs; But Binius has told us the true reason of it; because, they say,
Bin. not. in Chalced. Con^ p. 561.
that the Primacy of Rome came, by its being the seat of the Empire; and
therefore not by Divine right: and since Constantinople was become the seat of
the Empire too, therefore the Patriarch there should enjoy equal privileges
with the Bishop of Rome. If Rome had continued still the sole seat of the
Empire, this reason would not have been quarrelled at; but now Rome sinking and
Constantinople rising, this must not be endured, but all the arts and devices
possible must be used to keep it under. And this is the true account of the
pique which the Bishops of Rome had to the Patriarchs of Constantinople: From
whence we may easily, guess how probable it is that this Council of Chalcedon
did acknowledge the Pope Ecumenical Bishop in any other sense then they
contended the Patriarch of Constantinople was so too. And the same answer will
serve for all your following Instances. For, as you pretend that the Council of
Constantinople sub Menna did call Pope Agapetus Ecumenical Patriarch, so it is
most certain that it called Mennas the Patriarch of Constantinople so too. And
which is more, Adrian 1. in his Epistle to Tharasius of Constantinople in the
second Nicene Council calls him Universal Bishop. If therefore the Greek
Emperors and Balsamon call the Pope so, they import nothing peculiar to him in
it, because it is most evident they called their own Patriarch so likewise. So
that you find little advantage to your cause from this first thing which you
premise, viz. that the Pope was anciently called Universal Bishop. But you say
further, P. 196. n. 2.
2. That the Bishops of Constantinople never intended to deny by this usurped
title, the Popes Universal Authority even over themselves. This is ambiguous,
unless it be further explained what you mean by Universal Authority; for, it
may either note some kind of prae-eminence and dignity which the Bishop of Rome
had as the chief Patriarch, and who on that account had great Authority in the
Church, and this your instances prove that the Patriarchs of Constantinople did
acknowledge to belong to the Pope: but if by Universal Authority be meant
Universal Jurisdiction over the Church as appointed the head of it by Christ,
then not one of your instances comes near the shadow of a proof for it.

Thus having considered what you premise, we come to your Answer it self.. 6.
P. 197. n. 3.
For which you tell us, We are to take notice, that the term [Vniversal Bishop]
is capable of two senses; the one Grammatical, the other Metaphorical. In the
Grammatical sense it signifies Bishop of the Universal Church, and of all
Churches in particular, even to the exclusion of all others from being properly
Bishops; and consequently displaceable at his pleasure; as being only his, not
Christ's officers; and receiving authority from him, and not from Christ. In the
Metaphorical sense, it signifies only so high and eminent a dignity above all
other Bishops throughout the whole Church, that though he, who is styled
Universal Bishop, has a true and real Superintendency, Jurisdiction, and
Authority over all other Bishops, yet that they be as truly and properly
Bishops in their respective Provinces and Dioceses as he himself. This being
cleared (say you) it is evident that St. Gregory when he inveighs against the
title of Universal Bishop, N. 4.
takes it in the literal and Grammatical sense; which you very faintly
endeavor to prove out of him, as I shall make it presently appear. This being
then the substance of that Answer which you say has been given a hundred times
over, must now once for all pass a strict and severe examination. Which it
shall receive in these two Enquiries, 1. Whether it be possible to conceive
that St. Gregory should take Universal Bishop in the literal and Grammatical
sense? 2. Whether all the Arguments which he uses against that title, do not
hold against that Universal Jurisdiction which you attribute to the Pope as
Head of the Church?

1. Whether it be possible to conceive that St. Gregory should take Universal
Bishop in the literal and Grammatical sense which you give of it? And he which
can think so, must have some other way of understanding his meaning then by his
words and arguments, which I confess I do not pretend to. But if we examine
them, we shall find how impossible it is that St. Gregory should ever think
that John pretended to be the sole Bishop of this world. 1. Because Gregory
says, That same title which John had usurped was offered to the Roman Bishops
by the Council of Chalcedon, Greg. ep. l. 4. ep. 32.
but none of them would ever use it, because it seemed to diminish the honor
of other Bishops. Now I pray think with your self, whether ever 630 Bishops
would consent together to give away all their power and Authority in the
Church? For you say, The literal sense of Universal Bishop does suppose him to
be Bishop of all particular Churches, to the exclusion of all others from being
properly Bishops, and are displaceable at his pleasure. Can it now enter into
your mind that Gregory should ever think that these Bishops should all make
themselves the Popes Vassals of their own free choice? We see even under the
great Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome since, though they pretend (for all
that I can see) to be Ecumenical Bishops in a higher sense then ever John
pretended to, that yet the Bishops of the Roman Communion are not willing to
submit their office wholly to the Papal Jurisdiction; witness the stout and
eager contests of the Spanish Bishops in the Council of Trent about the Divine
Institution of the Episcopal office, against the pretenses of the Italian
Party. And shall we then think when the Pope was far from that power which he
has since Usurped, that such multitude of grave and resolute Bishops should
throw their Miters down at the Popes feet and offer him in your literal sense,
to be sole Bishop of the World. That they would relinquish their power, which
they made no question they had from Christ, and take it up again at the Popes
hands? But whether you can imagine this of so many Bishops or no, Can you
conceive that Gregory should think so of them? and he must do it, if he took
the title of Universal Bishop in your literal sense; and yet this Gregory
says, Greg. l. 4. ep. 36
Hoc Vniversitatis nomen oblatum est, That very name of Universal Bishop was
offered to the Pope by the Council of Chalcedon; Sed nullus unquam Decessorum
meorum hoc tam prophano Vocabulo uti consensit. Nothing then can be more plain,
then that John took that which the Pope refused. And he that can believe that
this title should ever be offered in this literal sense, I despair without the
help of Physic to make him believe any thing. 2. This very title was not
usurped wholly by John himself, but was given him in a Council at
Constantinople. This Gregory confesses in his Epistle to Eulogius and
Anastasius, the Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria, Ibid.
that about eight years before, in the time of Pelagius his predecessor, John
called a Council at Constantinople in which he endeavors to be called
Universal Bishop; so Gregory: Greg. ep. l. 4. ep. 34.
but he confesses elsewhere that he effected it. And it appears by the Epistle
of Pelagius himself writ on that occasion, that it was more then a mere
endeavor, and that they did consent to it; else, Why does Pelagius say,
Quicquid in vestro conventiculo statuistis, Pelag. 2. ep. 8. apud Bin. To. 4*
Council.
Whatever they had determined in their Conventicle (as on this account Pelagius
calls it, because it wanted his approbation)? And it is evident from Gregory's
zealous writing to the other Patriarchs about it, that they did not ^ook on
themselves as so much concerned about it. Now in this Council which met at
Constantinople, Evagr. hist. l. 6. c. 7.
which was called together in the case of Gregory the Patriarch of Antioch, all
the Patriarchs either by themselves or substitutes were present, as Evagrius
tells us, and not only they but several Metropolitans too; now if they had
taken this in the literal sense, Can you think they would have yielded to it?
Were not they much more concerned about it then either Pelagius or Gregory
were? for they were near him, and were sure to live under this usurped power of
his, and to smart by it, if it were so great as you suppose it to be. But it is
apparent by their yielding to it, they looked on it, to be sure, not in the
Literal sense, and it may be as no more than the Honorary Title of Ecumenical
Patriarch.

. 7.
3. How comes it to pass, that none of the successors of John and Cyriacus did
ever challenge this Title in the Literal sense of it? For we do not see that
they quitted it, for all Phocas gave it to Pope Boniface, since by your own
confession, in the Greek Canon Law, Sisinnius, German, Constantine, Alexius,
and others are called Ecumenical Patriarchs: And it appears by the Epistles of
Pelagius and Gregory, that was the Title which John had then given him. Ibid.
Si summus Patriarcha Vniversalis dicitur, Patriarcharum nomen caeteris
denegatur, says Pelagius. Si enim hoc dici licenter permittitur, honor
Patriarcharum omnium negatur, says Gregory. From which words I think it most
probable, that the main ambition of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, was not
merely that they would be called Ecumenical Patriarchs, but that Title should
properly belong to them as excluding others from it, which was it that touched
the Bishops of Rome to the quick; because then Constantinople flourished, as
much as Rome decayed by the oppressions of the Lombards; and Gregory complained
of this to Constantia the Empress, that for seven and twenty years together
they had lived in Rome, L. 4. ep. 34.
inter Longobardorum gladios (among the swords of the Lombards) and this made
them so jealous, that the honor of the Roman See was then sinking, and
therefore they stickle so much against this Title, and draw all the invididious
consequences from it possible, the better to set the other Patriarchs against
it; and because that would not extend far beyond the Patriarchs themselves,
they pretend likewise, that this was to make himself Universal Bishop. But not
certainly in your Literal sense; for then Gregory would have objected some
actions consequent upon this Title; in depriving Bishops of their Jurisdiction,
and displacing some, and putting in others at his pleasure; which you say, is
the natural effect of this Literal sense of Universal Bishop. But we read of
nothing of this nature done either by John or Cyriacus; they acted no more than
they did, only enjoyed a higher Title. And this is proved further,

4. By the carriage of the Emperor Mauricius in this business. Gregory writes
a pitiful moaning Letter to him about it, and uses all the Rhetoric he had to
persuade the Emperor, that he would either flectere, or coercere, incline, or
force him to lay aside that arrogant Title: But for all this it appears by
Gregory's Letter to the Empress, That the Emperor had checked him for meddling
in it, and was so far from opposing the Patriarchs Title, Triste mihi aliquid
sere^issimus Dominus innuit, quod non eum corripuit qui superbit, sed me magis
ab intention med declinare studuit. Greg. l. 4. ep. 34.
that in effect he bid him trouble himself no more about it: Which poor S.
Gregory took very ill. And afterward, when Cyriacus succeeded John in
Constantinople, the Emperor being somewhat fearful, lest Gregory at the coming
in of a new Patriarch, might, on the account of this new Title, deny his
Communicatory Letters, he dispatches a Letter to him to quicken him about it.
And he takes it very unkindly that the Emperor should suspect his indiscretion
so much, that for the sake of this Title, which he says, Greg. l. 6. ep 30.
had sorely wounded him, he should deny Communion in the Faith with him; and
yet in the same Epistle says, That whosoever took the Title of Universal
Bishop upon him, was a forerunner of Antichrist. But if this name had been
apprehended in that which you call, The Literal and Grammatical sense, Would
not the Emperor (being commended by Gregory too for his Piety) have rather
encouraged him in it? where as he plainly tells him, It was a contest about a
frivolous name, and nothing else; De qua re mihi in suis jussionibus pietas
praecepit dicens, ut pro appellatione frivoli nominis inter nos scandalum
generari non debeat. Greg. ibid.

Sed rogo ut imperiatis pietas penset, quia alia sunt frivola valde innoxia,
alia valde nociva. Ibid.


and that there ought to be no scandal among them about it. Upon which Gregory
is put to his distinctions of two sorts of frivolous things, some that are very
harmless, and some that are very hurtful, i. e. frivolous things are either
such as are frivolous,, or such as are not; for, Who ever imagined, that such
things as are very hurtful, are frivolous? But however, S. Gregory speaks
excellent sense; for his meaning is, that the Title it self may be frivolous,
but the consequences of it may be dreadful, and so we have found it since his
time. So that this appears to be the true state of the business between them;
the Patriarch of Constantinople, he challenges the Title of Ecumenical
Patritriarch or Bishop, as belonging of right to him, being Patriarch of the
chief Seat of the Empire, but in the mean time challenges no Universal
Jurisdiction by virtue of this Title: On which account the Emperor and Eastern
Bishops admit of it: On the other side, the Bishops of Rome, partly looking at
their own interest in it (for so it appears by one of Gregory's Epistles to the
Emperor, that he suspected it to be his own interest which he stood so much up
for) and partly foreseeing the dangerous consequences of this, Nunquid ego hac
in re pessime Domine propriam causam desendo? nunquid specialem injuriam
vindico? Id. l. 4. ep. 32.
if Universal Jurisdiction were challenged with it, they resolutely oppose it,
not merely for the Title sake, but for that which might follow upon that Title,
taking it not in your Literal, but in your Metaphorical sense, as I shall show
presently. But neither party was so weak and silly, as to apprehend it in your
Literal sense; for then neither would the Emperor have slighted it, nor the
Popes opposed it on those terms which they do, and on such grounds which reach
your Metaphorical sense.

5. The same Title in the same sense which Gregory opposed it, did Boniface
accept of, from the Emperor Phocas. This you confess your self, when you say,
That all that Phocas did, P. 199. n. 5.
was but to declare that the Title in contest did of right belong to the Bishop
of Rome only; therefore the same Title which the Patriarch of Constantinople
took to himself before, was both given by Phocas, and taken by Pope Boniface.
This then being confessed by you, let me now seriously ask you, Whether the
Title of Universal Bishop, which Pope Gregory opposed, was to be taken in the
Grammatical or Metaphorical sense? Take now, Whether of them you please; if in
the Metaphorical, all his arguments hold against the Popes present Universal
Jurisdiction, by your own confession; if in the Literal and Grammatical, then
Pope Boniface had all those things belonging to him, which Gregory condemns
that Title for. Then by your own confession Pope Boniface must be the
forerunner of Antichrist, he must equal himself to Lucifer in pride, he must
have that name of blasphemy upon him, and all those dreadful consequences must
attend him and all his followers, who own that Title of Universal Bishop, in
that which you call the Literal or Grammatical sense of it.

6. Lastly, it appears from S. Gregory himself,. 6.
that the Reasons which he urges against the Title of Universal Bishop, are
such as hold against that which you call the Metaphorical sense of it; which in
short is, An Universal Pastor exercising Authority and Jurisdiction over the
whole Church. And It is scarce possible to imagine, that he should speak more
clearly against such an Universal Headship than he does; and urges such
arguments against it, which properly belong to that Metaphorical sense of it.
As when he says to John the Patriarch, What will thou answer to Christ the
Head of the Universal Church in the day of judgment, Tu quid Christo
universalis sc. Ecclesiae capiti, in extremi judicii examine dicturus es, qui
cuncta ejus membra tibimet conaris universalis appellatione supponere. Greg. l.
4. ep. 38.
who do endeavor to subject all his members to thee, under the name of
Universal Bishop? What is there in these words which does not fully belong to
your Metaphorical sense of Head of the Church? Does he not subject all Christ's
members to him? Does he not challenge to himself proper Jurisdiction over them?
What then will he be able to answer to Christ the Head of the Universal Church,
as St. Gregory understands it exclusive of any other? Does not he arise to that
height of singularity, Ad culmen conatus est singularitatis cr^mpere, ut and
nulli subesse, and solus omnibus praeesse videretur. Id. ib.
that he is subject to none, but rules over all? yet these are the very words
he uses; and, Can any more expressly describe your Head of the Church than these
do? Yet herein he says, He imitates the Pride of Lucifer, who, according to
St. Gregory, endeavored to be the Head of the Church Triumphant, as the Pope
of the Church Militant. And follows that parallel close, That an Universal
Bishop imitates Lucifer in exalting his Throne above the Stars of God: For
(says he) What are all the Brethren the Bishops of the Universal Church, Quid
enim fratres tui omnes universalis Ecclesiae Episcopi, nisi astra coeli sunt?
Ib.
but the Stars of Heaven? and after parallels them with the Clouds, and so
this terrestrial Lucifer ascends above the heights of the clouds. And again,
says he, Surely the Apostle Peter, was the first member (not the Head) of the
Holy and Universal Church. Paul, Andrew, and John, Certe Petrus Apostolus
primum membrum sanctae and universalis Ecclesiae est. Paulus, Andreas,
Johannes, quid aliud quam singularium sunt plebum capita? Et tamen sub uno
capite omnes sunt membra Ecclesiae. Ibid.
What are they else but the Heads of particular Churches? And yet they are all
members of the Church under one Head. Can any thing be more clear against any
Head of the Universal Church, but Christ himself? when St. Peter is
acknowledged to be only a prime member of the Church? How then come his
successors to be the Heads of it? And, as he goes on, The Saints before the
Law, and under the Law, and under Grace, who all make up the body of our Lord,
they were all but members of the Church, and none of them would be called
Universal. And, I pray, let his Holiness consider his following words, Let your
Holiness acknowledge what pride it is to be called by that name, Vestra autem
Sanctitas agnoscat, quantum apud se tumeat, quae illo nomine vocari appetit,
quo vocari nullus praesumpsit, qui veraciter sanctus fuit. Ibid.
which none that was truly holy was ever called by. And, Do you think now that
these expressions do not as properly reach your Head of the Church, as if they
had been spoken by a Protestant against that Doctrine which you all own? What
is there in all this, that implies that others should be no Bishops, but only
titular? yes, they may be as much Bishops as you acknowledge them to be, i. e.
as to their power of Order, but not as to their Jurisdiction. For this, you say
and defend, comes from the Head of the Church; or else your Monarchical
Government in the Church signifies nothing. Do not you make the Pope Universal
Pastor of the Church, in as high a sense as any of these expressions carry it?
And when St. Gregory urges so often, That if there be such an Universal Bishop,
if he fails, the Church would fail too; Do you deny the consequence as to the
Pope? Does not Bellarmine tell us, when he writes of the Pope, he writes de
summa rei Christianae, Of the main of all Christianity, and surely then the
Church must fail if the Popes Supremacy does? And I pray now consider with your
self, Whether this Answer which you say has been given a hundred times over,
can satisfy any reasonable man? Nay, Does it not appear to be so absurd and
incongruous, that it is matter of just admiration, that ever it should have
been given once; and yet you are wonderfully displeased that his Lordship
should bring this Objection upon the stage again. But, Do you think your
Answers, like your Prayers, will do you good by being said so often over?
Indeed therein they are alike, that they are both in an unknown tongue. Your
Literal sense of Universal Bishop being in this case no more intelligible than
your Latin-Prayers to a Country Congregation.

These things being thus clear, I have prevented my self in the second Enquiry,
in that I have proved already,. 9.
that the Reasons which St. Gregory produces hold against that sense of
Universal Bishop, which you own and contend for, as of right belonging to the
Bishop of Rome. Although it were no difficult matter to prove, that, according
to the most received Opinion in your Church, viz. that all Jurisdiction in
Bishops is derived from the Pope (which opinion you cannot but know is most
acceptable at Rome, and was so at the Council of Trent) that that which you
call the Literal sense, does follow your Metaphorical, i. e. If the Pope has
Universal Jurisdiction as Head of the Church, then other Bishops are not
properly Bishops, nor Christ's Officers, but his. For what does their power of
order signify as to the Church without the power of Jurisdiction? And
therefore, if they be taken only in partem solicitudinis, and not in
plenitudinem potestatis, according to the known distinction of the Court of
Rome, it necessarily follows, that they are but the Pope's Officers, and are
taken just into so much authority as he commits to them, and no more. Bellarm.
de Pontif. l. 4. cap. 24. Hist. Council. Trid. l 7. p. 611
And this Bellarmine proves from the very form of the Pope's consecration of
Bishops, whereby he commits the power of governing the Church to him, and the
administration of it in spirituals and temporals. And you may see by the speech
of Father Laynez, in the Council of Trent, How stoutly he proves that the power
of Jurisdiction was given wholly to the Bishop of Rome, and that none in the
Church besides has any spark of it but from him; that the Bishop of Rome is
true and absolute Monarch, with full and total power and Jurisdiction, and the
Church is subject unto him, as it was to Christ. And, as when his Divine
Majesty did govern it, it could not be said that any of the faithful had any
the least power or Jurisdiction, but mere, pure, and total subjection; so it
must be said in all perpetuity of time, and so understood, that the Church is a
Sheepfold and a Kingdom. And, that he is the Only Pastor, is plainly proved by
the words of Christ, when he said, He has other sheep which he will gather
together, and so one Sheepfold should be made, and one Shepherd. What think you
now of the Literal sense of Universal Bishop, for the Only Bishop? Are not the
Only Bishop, and the Only Pastor all one? Will not all those words of St.
Gregory reach this, which any of you make use of to prove, that he takes it in
the worst and Literal sense; nay, it goes higher. For Gregory only argues, that
from the Title of Universal Bishop he must be sole Bishop, and others could not
be any true Bishops; Greg. l. 4. ep. 34. l. 7. ep. 69.
but here it is asserted in plain terms, that the Bishop of Rome is the only
Pastor, and that as much as if Christ himself were here upon earth; and
therefore if your Literal sense has any sense at all in it, Consentive in hoc
scelesto vocabulo, est fidem perdere. Greg. l. 4. ep. 39. Absit a cordibus
Christianorum nomen istud blasphemiae, in quo omnium Sacerdotum honor adimitur
dum ab uno sibi dementer arrogatur. l. 4. ep. 32.
it is much more true of the Bishop of Rome, than ever it could be of the
Patriarch of Constantinople. And therefore I pray think more seriously of what
he says, That to agree in that profane word, is to lose the Faith; That such
a blasphemous name should be far from the hearts of Christians, in which, by
the arrogance of one Bishop, the honor of all is taken away. Neither will it
serve your turn to say (which is all that you have to say) that this is not the
definitive sentence of your Church, but that many in your Church hold
otherwise, That there is power of Jurisdiction properly in Bishops. For,
although these latter are not near the number of the other, nor so much in
favor with your Church, but are looked on as a discontented party, as appears
by the proceedings in the Council of Trent; yet that is not it, we are to look
after, What all in your Church are agreed on, but what the Pope challenges as
belonging to himself. Was not Father Laynez his Doctrine highly approved at
Rome, as well as by the Cardinal Legates at Trent, and all the Italian party?
Were not the other party discountenanced and disgraced as much as might be?
Does not the Pope arrogate this to himself, to be Ecumenical Pastor, and the
sole Fountain of all Jurisdiction in the Church? If so, all that ever St.
Gregory said against that Title, falls most heavily upon the Pope. For, St.
Gregory does not stand upon what others attributed to him, but what he
arrogated to himself, that therein, he was the Prince of Pride, the forerunner
of Antichrist, using a vain, new, rash, foolish, proud, profane, erroneous,
wicked, hypocritical, singular, Greg. l. 4: ep. 32, 34, 38, 39. l. 6. ep. 2.34.
presumptuous, blaspemous Name. For all these goodly Epithets does S. Gregory
bestow upon it; and, I believe, if he could have thought of more, and worse, he
would as freely have bestowed them. If therefore John the Patriarch was said by
him to transgress God's Laws, violate the Canons, dishonor the Church, despise
his Brethren, imitate Lucifer, How much more does this belong to him, that not
only challenges to be Ecumenical Patriarch, but the sole Pastor of the
Church, and that all Jurisdiction is derived from him? And by this time I hope
you see, that the Answer you say has been given a hundred times over, is so
pitifully weak, absurd and ridiculous, that you might have been ashamed to have
produced it once, and much more to repeat it without saying any more for it
than you do. For, your other discourse depends wholly upon it, and all that
being taken away, the rest does fall to the ground with it.

We must now therefore return to his Lordships discourse, in which he goes on
to give an account of the rise of the Pope's Greatness.. 10.
As yet, says he, The right of Election, or ratification of the Pope,
continued in the Emperor: P. 179.
but then the Lombards grew so great in Italy, and the Empire was so infested
with Saracens, and such changes happened in all parts of the world, as that
neither for the present, the homage of the Pope was useful for the Emperor;
nor the protection of the Emperor available for the Pope. By this means the
Bishop of Rome was left to play his own game by himself. A thing which as it
pleased him well enough, so both he and his Successors made great advantage by
it. For, being grown to that Eminence by the Emperor, and the greatness of
that City and place of his abode; he found himself the more free, the greater
the Tempest was, that beat upon the other. And then first he set himself to
alienate the hearts of the Italians from the Emperor. Next he opposed himself
against him. And about A. D. 710. Pope Constantine 1. did also first of all
openly confront Philippicus the Emperor, in defense of Images; as Onuphrius
tells us. After him Gregory 2. and the 3. did the same by Leo Isaurus. By this
time the Lombards began to pinch very close, and to vex on all sides, not Italy
only, but Rome also. This drives the Pope to seek a new Patron. And very fitly
he meets with Charles Martell in France, that famous warrior against the
Sarazens. Him he implores in defense of the Church against the Lombards. This
address seems very advisedly taken, at least it proves very fortunate to them
both. For in short time it dissolved the Kingdom of the Lombards in Italy,
which had then stood two hundred and four years, which was the Popes security.
And it brought the Crown of France into the house of Charles, and shortly after
the Western Empire: And now began the Pope to be great indeed. For by the
bounty of Pepin Son of Charles, that which was taken from the Lombards, was
given to the Pope. So that now of a Bishop, he became a Temporal Prince. But
when Charles the Great had set up the Western Empire, then he resumed the
ancient and original power of the Emperor, to govern the Church, to call
Councils, to order Papal Elections. And this power continued in his posterity.
For this right of the Emperor was in force and use in Gregory the seventh's
time. Who was confirmed in the Popedom by Henry the fourth, whom he afterward
deposed. And it might have continued longer, if the succeeding Emperors had
had abilities enough to secure, or vindicate their own Right. But the Pope
keeping a strong Council about him, and meeting with some weak Princes, and
they oft-times distracted with great and dangerous wars, grew stronger till he
got the better. So this is enough to show, How the Popes climed up by the
Emperors, till they over-topt them, which is all I said before, and have now
proved. And this was about the year 1073. Yet was it carried in succeeding
times with great changes of fortune and different success. The Emperor
sometimes plucking from the Pope, and the Pope from the Emperor, winning and
losing ground, as their spirits, abilities, aids, and opportunities were, till
at the last the Pope settled himself upon the grounds laid by Gregory 7. in the
great power which he now uses in and over these parts of the Christian world.
To all this you return a short Answer, in these words; We deny not but that in
Temporal power and Authority the Popes grew great by the Patronage of Christian
Emperors. But what is this to the purpose? P. 200.
If he would have said any thing material, he should have proved that the Popes
rose by the Emperors means to their Spiritual Authority and Jurisdiction over
all other Bishops throughout the whole Catholic Church; which is the only
thing they claim jure divino, and which is so annexed to the dignity of their
office by Christ's institution, that, were the Pope deprived of all his
Temporalties, yet could not his Spiritual Authority suffer the least diminution
by it. But 1. Does his Lordships discourse only contain an account of the Popes
temporal greatness by the Patronage of Christian Emperors? Does he not plainly
show, How the Popes got their power by rebelling, and contesting with the
Emperors themselves, How they assumed to themselves a power to depose
Emperors: and, Do they claim these things jure Divino too? 2. What you say of
the Popes Spiritual Authority, will then hold good when it is well proved; but
bare asserting it, will never do it. We must therefore have patience till you
have leisure to attempt it.

But in the mean time we must consider, How you vindicate the famous place of
Irenaeus concerning, as you say,. 11.
the Pope's Supreme Pastoral Authority, from his Lordships interpretation. Yet,
before we come to the Authority, it self, there are some light skirmishes (as
you call them) to be passed through; and those are, concerning Irenaeus
himself. For his Lordship says, That his Adversary is much scanted of ancient
proof, if Irenaeus stand alone; besides, Irenaeus was a Bishop of the Gallican
Church, P. 181. n. 13.
and a very unlikely man to captivate the liberty of that Church under the more
powerful principality of Rome. And how can we have better evidence of his
judgment, touching that principality, then the actions of his life? When Pope
Victor excommunicated the Asian Churches, (...), all at a blow, was not
Irenaeus the chief man that reprehended him for it? A very unmeet and undutiful
thing sure it had been in Irenaeus, in deeds to tax him of rashness and
inconsiderateness, whom in words A. C. would have to be acknowledged by him,
the Supreme and Infallible Pastor of the Universal Church. To which you
Answer, 1. To the liberty of the Gallican Church; As if (forsooth) the so much
talked of liberties of the Gallican Church, had been things known or heard of
in St. Irenaeus his time; P. 201. n. 6.
as though there were no difference between not captivating the Liberty of that
Church to Rome, and asserting the Liberties of the Gallican Church in her
obedience to Rome, yet these two must be confounded by you to render his
Lordships Answer ridiculous; which yet is as sound and rational as your cavil
is vain and impertinent But this you pass over and fix, 2. Upon his
reprehending Pope Victor, where (you say) that Eusebius has not a word
importing reprehension, but rather a friendly and seasonable persuasion: his
words are (...) etc. he exhorts him after a handsome manner, as reflecting on
the Popes dignity, and clearly shows that the Pope had of right some Authority
over the Asian Bishops, and by consequence over the whole Church. For otherwise
it had been very absurd in St. Irenaeus to persuade Pope Victor, not to cut off
from the Church so many Christian Provinces had he believed (as Protestant,
contends he did) that the Pope had no power at all to cut them off. Just as if
a man should entreat the Bishop of Rochester, not to excommunicate the
Archbishop of York and all the Bishops of his Province; over whom he has not
any the least pretense of Jurisdiction. I Answer, that if you say, that
Eusebius has not a word importing reprehension, it is a sign you have not read
what Eusebius says. For, does not he expressly say, That the Epistle of some of
the Bishops are yet remaining, (...), etc. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24,
in which they do severely rebuke him? Among whom (says he) Irenaeus was one,
etc. It seems, Irenaeus was one of those Bishops who did so sharply reprehend
him; but it may be, you would render (...) kissing his Holiness feet, or,
exhorting him after a handsome manner; and indeed, if they did it sharply, they
did it (...) suitably enough to what Victor deserved for his rash and
inconsiderate proceedings in this business. But withal to let you see how well
these proceedings of his were resented in the Christian world, Eusebius tells
us before, That Victor by his letters did declare those of the Eastern Churches
to be excommunicate: (...). Eusebius. ibid.
and he presently adds, But this did no ways please all the Bishops; wherefore
((...)) they countermanded him, that he might mind the things of peace and
unity and brotherly love. And will you still render that word too, by exhorting
him after a handsome manner, when even Christopherson renders it by magnopere
adhortabantur, Valesius by ex adverso hortati sunt: and although these seem not
to come up to the full emphasis of the word, yet surely they imply somewhat of
vehemence and earnestness in their persuading him as well as their being hugely
dissatisfied with what Victor did. I grant that these persons did reflect (as
you say) on the Pope, but not as you would have it on his dignity, but on his
rashness and indiscretion, that should go about to cast the Asian Churches out
of Communion, for such a trifle as that was in Controversy between them. But
you are the happiest man at making inferences that I have met with: for,
because Irenaeus in the name of the Gallican Bishops, writes to Victor, not to
proceed so rashly in this action thence you infer, that the Pope had of right
some Authority over the Asian Bishops, and by consequence over the whole
Church. Might you not every jot as well infer, that when a man in passion is
ready: to kill those that stand about him; whoever persuades him not to do it,
does suppose he might lawfully have done it, if he would. But if those Bishops
had so venerable an esteem (as you would persuade us they had) then of the
Bishop of Rome, How come they to dispute his actions in so high a manner as
they did? If they had looked on him as Universal Pastor of the Church, it had
more become them to sit still and be quiet, then severely to reprehend him who
was alone able to judge what was fit to be done and what not in those cases. If
the Pope had called them to Council to have known their advise, it might have
been their duty to have given it him in the most humble and submissive manner
that might be. But for them to intrude themselves into such an office as to
advise the Head of the Church what to do in a matter peculiarly concerning him,
as though he did not know what was fit to be done himself; methinks you should
not imagine that these men did act (...), as became them, in doing it. Could
they possibly in any thing more declare, how little they thought it necessary
for all Churches to conform to that of Rome, when they plead for dissenters in
such a matter which the Pope had absolutely declared himself about? And how
durst any of them slight the thunderbolts which the Pope threatened them with?
Yet not only Polycrates and the Asian Bishops who joined with him profess
themselves not at all affrighted at them; but the other Churches looked not on
themselves as obliged to forsake their communion on that account. If this be
such an evidence of the Popes power in one sense, I am sure it is a greater
evidence of his weakness in another: It seems the Head of the Church began
betimes to be troubled with the fumes of passion; and it is a little unhappy,
that the first Instance of his Authority should meet with so little regard in
the Christian world. If the Pope did begin to assume so early, you see it was
not very well liked of by the Bishops of other Churches. But it seems he had a
mind to try his power and the weight of his Arm; but for all his haste, he was
fain to withdraw it very patiently again. Valesius thinks that he never went so
far as to excommunicate the Asian Bishops at all, Vales. not. in Eusebius. l. 5.
c. 24,
but the noise of his threatening to do it being heard by them, (it seems the
very preparing of his thunderbolts amazed the world) Irenaeus having called a
Synod of the Bishops of Gaul together, does in their name write that Letter, in
Eusebius, to Victor to dissuade him from it, and that it wrought so effectually
with him, that he gave it over. And this he endeavors to prove. 1. Because
Eusebius says, he only endeavored to do it. But Cardinal Perron supposes
Eusebius had a worse meaning then so in it; i. e. that though the Pope did
declare them excommunicate, yet it took no effect because other Bishops
continued still in communion with them; and therefore he calls Eusebius an
Arrian and an enemy to the Church of Rome, when yet all the records of this
story are derived from him. 2. Because the Epistles of Irenaeus tend to
persuade him not to cut them off; whereas, if they had been excommunicate, it
would have been rather to have restored them to Communion; and that Photius,
says that Irenaeus writ many letters to Victor to prevent their
excommunication. But because Eusebius says expressly, That he did by letters
pronounce them out of the Communion of the Church, Eusebius. ibid.
the common opinion seems more probable, and so Socrates understands it;
Socrat. l. 5. c. 2^
but still I am to seek for such an Argument of the acknowledgement of the
Popes Authority then, as you would draw from it. Yes, say you, because they do
not tell him, He had no Authority to do what he did; which they would have done
if they could without proclaiming themselves Schismatics ipso facto and
shaking the very Foundation of the Churches Discipline and Unity. But all this
proceeds from want of understanding the Discipline of the Church at that time;
for excommunication did not imply any such authoritative act of throwing men
out of the Communion of the whole Church, but only a declaring that they would
not admit such persons to communion with themselves. And therefore might be
done by equals to equals, and sometimes by Inferiors to Superiors. In equals
it is apparent by Johannes Antiochenus in the Ephesine Council excommunicating
Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria; and I suppose you will not acknowledge it may be
done by Inferiors, if we can produce any examples of Popes being
excommunicated; and what say you then to the African Bishops excommunicating
Pope Vigilius as Victor Tununensis an African Bishop himself relates it:
Africani Antistites Vigilium Romanum Episcopam damnatorem trium capitulorum
Synodaliter a Catholic^ communione, reservat^ ei poenitentiae loco, recludunt.
Victor Tununens. Chronic. p. 10.
Will you say now that Victors excommunicating the Asian Churches argued his
authority over them, when another Victor tells us, that the African Bishops
solemnly excommunicated the Pope himself? And I hope you will not deny but the
Bishop of Rochester might as well excommunicate the Archbishop of York, as
these Africans excommunicate the Bishop of Rome. What say you to the expunging
the name of Felix Bishop of Rome out of the Diptychs of the Church, by Acacius
the Patriarch of Constantinople? What say you to Hilary's Anathema against Pope
Liberius? If these excommunications did not argue just power and authority over
the persons excommunicated, neither could Pope Victors do it. For it is
apparent by the practice of the Church that excommunication argued no such
superiority in the persons who did it; but all the force of it lay in the sense
of the Church; for by whomsoever the sentence was pronounced, if all other
Churches observed it, (as most commonly they did while the Unity of the Church
continued) then they were out of the Communion of the Catholic Church; if not,
then it was only the particular declaration of those persons or Churches who
did it. And in this case the validity of the Popes excommunication of the Asian
Bishops depended upon the acceptance of it by other Churches, which most
consenting to it, he could not throw them out of the communion of the whole
Church, but only declare, that if they came to Rome, he would not admit them to
communion with him. And therefore Ruffinus well renders that place in Eusebius
out of Irenaeus his Epistle to Victor, (...): by these words, Nunquam tamen ob
hoc repulsi sunt ab Ecclesiae societate, aut venientes ab illis partibus non
sunt suscepti, so that (...) may as well signify not to receive as to cast
out; for the Churches not receiving, is her casting out. Thus, I hope, it is
evident that his Lordship has received no injury by these lighter skirmishes.

We now follow you into hotter service; For you say, he ventures at last to
grapple with the Authority it self,. 12.
P. 201.
alleged by A. C. out of St. Irenaeus; where, in the first place, you wink
and strike; and let your blows fall besides him, for fear he should return
them, or some one for him. You quarrel with his translation of the Authority
cited by him: but that the ground of this quarrel may be understood; we must
first enquire what his Lordship has to say for himself. The place of Irenaeus
is, To this Church (he speaks of Rome), propter potentiorem principalitatem,
for the more powerful Principality of it, it is necessary that every Church,
that is the faithful undique round about, Ad hanc Ecclesiam propter potentiorem
principalitatem, necesse est omnem convenire Ecclesiam, i. e. eo^ qui sunt
undique fideles: In qua semper ab ^is qui sunt undique, conservata est ea quae
est ab Apostolis traditio. Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
should have recourse. Now for this, (his Lordship says) there was very great
reason in Irenaeus his time, that upon any difference arising in the faith,
Omnes undique Fideles, all the faithful, or, if you will, all the Churches
round about, should have recourse, that is, resort to Rome being the Imperial
City, and so a Church of more powerful Principality, then any other at that
time in those parts of the world. But this (his Lordship says) will not exalt
Rome to be Head of the Church Universal. Here your blood rises, and you begin a
most furious encounter with his Lordship for translating undique round about,
as if (say you) St. Irenaeus spoke only of those neighboring Churches round
about Rome, and not the Churches throughout the world; whereas undique as
naturally signifies, every where, and, from all parts: witness Thomas
Thomasius, where the word undique is thus Englished, From all parts, places,
and corners, every where. Can you blame me now if I seek for a retreat into
some strong-hold, or if you will, some more powerful Principality when I see so
dreadful a Charge begun, with Thomas Thomasius in the Front? You had routed us
once before with Rider, and other English Lexicons; but it seems Rider had done
service enough that time, now that venerable person Thomas Thomasius must be
upon duty, and do his share for the Catholic Cause. You somewhere complain how
much Catholics are straightened for want of Books, Would any one believe you that
find you so well stored with Thomas Thomasius, Rider, and other English
Lexicons? You would sure give us some cause of suspicion that there is some
Jesuits School taught in England, and that you are the learned Master of it, by
your being so conversant in these worthy Authors. But although the Authority
of Th. Thomasius signify very little with us, yet that of the Greek Lexicons
might do much more if we had the original Greek of Irenaeus instead of his
barbarous Latin Interpreter. For now it is uncertain what word Irenaeus used,
and so it is but a very uncertain conjecture which can be drawn from the
signification of (...), unless we knew, which of them was the genuine word in
the Greek of Irenaeus. But you say, all of them undeniably signify, from all
parts Universally: and that because they are rendered by the word undique. So
that this will make an excellent proof, undique must signify from all parts;
because (...) do signify so in Greek; and that these do undeniably signify so
much, appears because they are rendered by undique. And I grant they are so: for
in the old Glossary which goes under the name of Cyril, undique is rendered by
(...), and ^ully (than whom we cannot possibly desire a better Author in this
case) renders (...) by undique. For in his Book de Finibus, De Finib. l. 2. v.
Hen* Steph. Lexicon Ciceron. p. 55.
he translates that of Epicurus (...) by undique complerentur voluptatibus; and
so he renders that passage in Plato's Timaeus (...) by undique aequabilem,
although as Hen. Stephanus notes, that be rather the signification of (...)
then (...), but still there is some difference between (...), and (...), and so
(...) in Greek Authors notes ex omni part terrae, but (...) only ex quavis
part; so that the one signifies Universally, the other indefinitely: undique
relating properly to the circumference, as undique aequalis, on all sides it is
equal, so that qui sunt undique fideles, are, those which lie upon all quarters
round about. And so it does not imply that all persons were bound to come, but
that from all quarters some did come; as Herodian speaks of Rome, Herod. hist.
l. 1. p. 18.
(...), that it was very populous, and did receive them which came from all
parts; which does very fitly explain the sense of Irenaeus, that to Rome being
the Imperial City, men came from all quarters. But the sense of this will be
more fully understood by a parallel expression in the ninth Canon of the
Council of Antioch, Council. Antioch. Can. 9.
in which it is decreed that the Metropolitan should have the care of all the
Bishops in his Province, (...), because all persons who have business from all
parts, resort to the Metropolis: here (...), is the very same with the undique
convenire, in Irenaeus; so that it relates not to any Obligation on Churches to
resort thither, but that being the Seat of the Empire, all believers from all
parts did make their recourse thither. Which is most fully expressed by Leo,
speaking of S. Peter's coming to Rome, Leo Sermon. de S. Petro and Paulo.
Cujus nationis homines in hac Vrbe non essent? aut quae uspiam gentes
ignorarent, quod Roma didicisset? And so, if I grant you that it extends to all
parts, I know not what advantages you will get by it: for Irenaeus his design
is, to show that there was no such secret Tradition left by the Apostles, as
the Valentinians pretended. And for this he appeals to the Church of Rome,
which being seated in the Imperial City, to which Believers from all parts did
resort, it is impossible to conceive that the Apostles should have left such a
Tradition, and it not to be heard of there: which is the plain, genuine meaning
of Irenaeus his words. Not as you weakly imagine, That all Churches in all
doubts of Faith, were bound to have their recourse thither, P. 202.
as to their constant guide therein. For Irenaeus was not disputing, What was
to be done by Christians in doubts of Faith; but was enquiring into a matter of
fact, viz. Whether any such Tradition were ever left in the Church, or no; and
therefore nothing could be more pertinent or convincing, than appealing to that
Church to which Christians resorted from all parts; for it could not be
conceived, but, if the Apostles had left such a Tradition any where, it would
be heard of at Rome. And you most notoriously pervert the meaning of Irenaeus,
when you would make the force of his argument to lie in the necessity of all
Christians resorting to Rome, because the Doctrine or Tradition of the Roman
Church was, as it were, the touchstone of all Apostolical Doctrine. But, I
suppose you deal in some English Logicians, as well as English Lexicons, and
therefore I must submit both to your Grammar and Logic: but your ingenuity is
as great as your reason; for you first pervert his Lordships meaning, and then
make him dispute ridiculously, that you might come out with your triumphant
language, Is not this fine Meandrick Logic, well beseeming so noble a
Labyrinth? Whereas his Lordships reasoning is so plain and clear, that none but
such a one as had a Labyrinth in his brains, could have imagined any Meanders
in it: As appears by what I have said already, in the explication of the
meaning of Irenaeus.

But that I may see the strength of your Logic out of this place of Irenaeus,.
13.
I will translate undique and semper, as fully as you would have me, and give
you the words at large, in which, by those who come from all places, the
Apostolical Tradition is always conserved. What is it you infer hence? From
the Premises you argue thus: All the faithful every where, must of necessity
have recourse to the Church of Rome, P. 203^
by reason of her more powerful principality. This is S. Irenaeus his
proposition. But there could be no necessity they all should have recourse to
that Church, by reason of her more powerful principality, if her said power
extended not to them all. This is evident to reason. Ergo, this more powerful
principality of the Roman Church, must needs extend to all the faithful every
where, and not only to those of the Suburbicary Churches, or Patriarchal
Diocese of Rome, as the Bishop pleads. Now I see, you are a man at arms, and
know, not only how to grapple with his Lordship, but with Irenaeus to boot. But
we must first see, How Irenaeus himself argues, that we may the better
understand the force of what you deduce from him. The Question, as I have told
you already, was, Whether the Apostles left any such Tradition in the Church,
as the Valentinians pretended: Irenaeus proves they did not, because, if there
had been any such, the Apostolical Churches would certainly have preserved the
memory of it; but because it would be too tedious to insist on the succession
of all Churches; he therefore makes choice of the most famous, the Church of
Rome, in which the Apostolical Tradition had been derived by a succession of
Bishops down to his own time; and by this (says he) we confound all those who
through vain glory, or blindness, do gather any such thing. For (says he) to
this Church for the more powerful principality all Churches do make resort, i.
e. the believers from all parts, in which by those who come from all parts the
Apostolical Tradition is always preserved. We must now see, How Irenaeus
argues according to your sense of his words. If all the faithful every where,
must of necessity have recourse to the Church of Rome, for her more powerful
principality; then there is no secret Tradition left by the Apostles. But,
Where lies the connection between these two? What had the Valentinians to do
with the power of the Church of Rome over other Churches? That was not the
business they disputed; their Question was, Whether there were no such
Tradition as they pretended? And Rome might have never so great power over all
Churches, and yet have this secret Tradition too. For now we see, when she
pretends to the greatest power, nay, to Infallibility, she pretends the highest
to Traditions. Where then lies the force of Irenaeus his argument? Was it in
this, that the Valentinians did acknowledge the Infallibility of the Church of
Rome then, in Traditions? This were indeed to the purpose, if it could be
proved; Or, Does Irenaeus go about to prove this first? But by what argument
does he prove it so, that the Valentinians might be convinced by it? Yes, say
you, he says, That all the faithful must of necessity have recourse to the
Church of Rome? This is your way of proving indeed, to take things for granted;
but, How does this necessity appear? because, say you, she has the more
powerful principality: But, What principality do you mean? over all Churches?
But that was the thing in Question. So that if you will make Irenaeus speak
sense, and argue pertinently, his meaning can be no other than this. If there
be such a Tradition left, it must be left somewhere among Christians: if it be
left among them, it may be known by enquiry, Whether they own any such or no.
But because it would be troublesome searching of all Churches, we may know
their judgment more compendiously; there is the Church of Rome near us, a
famous and ancient Church, seated in the chief City of the Empire, to which all
persons have necessities to go; and among them, you cannot but suppose, but
that out of every Church some faithful persons should come, and therefore it is
very unreasonable to think, that the Apostolical Tradition has not always
been preserved there, when persons come from all places thither. Is not every
thing in this account of Irenaeus his words very clear and pertinent to his
present dispute? But in the sense you give of them, they are little to the
purpose, and very precarious and inconsequent. And therefore since the more
powerful principality is not that of the Church, but of the City; since the
necessity of recourse thither, is not for doubts of Faith, but other occasions:
therefore it by no means follows thence, That this Churches power did extend
over the faithful every where; thus by explaining your Proposition, your
Conclusion is ashamed of it self, and runs away. For your argument comes to
this; If English men from all parts be forced to resort to London, then London
has the power over all England; or if one should say, If some from all
Churches in England must resort to London, then the Church at London has power
over all the Churches in England; and if this consequence be good, yours is;
for it is of the same nature of it; the necessity of the resort, not lying in
the Authority of the Church, but in the Dignity of the City, the words in all
probability in the Greek, being (...), and so relate to the dignity of Rome, as
the Imperial City.

From whence we proceed to the Vindication of Ruffinus, in his Translation of
the 6. Canon of the Council of Nice.. 14.
The occasion of which is this. His Lordship says, Supposing that the powerful
principality be ascribed to the Church of Rome, yet it follows not that it
should have power over all Churches; for this power was confined within its own
Patriarchate and Jurisdiction; P. 183.
and that (says he) was very large, containing all the Provinces in the
Diocese of Italy (in the old sense of the word Diocese) which Provinces the
Lawyers and others term Suburbicaries. There were ten of them; the three
Islands, Sicily, Corsica, and Sardinia, and the other seven upon the firm Land
of Italy. And this, I take it, is plain in Ruffinus. For he living shortly
after the Nicene Council, as he did, and being of Italy, as he was, he might
very well know the bounds of the Patriarchs Jurisdiction, as it was then
practiced. And he says expressly, that according to the old custom, the Roman
Patriarchs charge was confined within the limits of the Suburbican Churches.
Apud Alexandriam ut in Urbe Roman, vetusta consuetudo servetur, ut ille Aegypti
ut hic Suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum solicitudinem gerat. Ruffin. Eccles. hist.
l. 1. c* 6.
To avoid the force of this testimony, Cardinal Perron lays load upon
Ruffinus. For he charges him with passion, ignorance, and rashness. And one
piece of his ignorance is, that he has ill translated the Canon of the Council
of Nice. Now, although his Lordship does not approve of it as a Translation;
yet he says, Ruffinus living in that time and place, was very like well to
know and understand the limits and bounds of that Patriarchate of Rome, in
which he lived. This (you say) is very little to his Lordships advantage, since
it is inconsistent with the vote of all Antiquity, P. 203. n. 7.
and gives S. Irenaeus the lie; but if the former be no truer than the latter,
it may be very much to his advantage, notwithstanding what you have produced to
the contrary. What the ground is, Why the Roman Patriarchate was confined
within the Roman Diocese, I have already showed in the precedent Chapter, in
explication of the Nicene Canon. We must now therefore examine the Reasons you
bring, Why the notion of Suburbicary Churches must be extended beyond the
limits his Lordship assigns; that of the smalness of Jurisdiction compared with
other Patriarchs, I have given an account of already, viz. from the
correspondency of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Government; for the Civil
Dioceses of the Eastern part of the Empire did extend much farther than the
Western did; and that was the Reason, Why the Patriarchs of Antioch and
Alexandria, had a larger Metropolitical Jurisdiction than the Bishop of Rome
had. But you tell us, That Suburbicary Churches must be taken as generally
signifying all Churches and Cities any ways subordinate to the City of Rome;
which was at that time known by the name of Urbs, or City, (...), by way of
excellency; not as it related to the Prefect or Governor of Rome, in regard
of whose ordinary Jurisdiction, we confess it commanded only those few places
about it in Italy; but as it related to the Emperor himself; in which sense
the word Suburbicary, rightly signifies all Cities or Churches whatsoever
within the Roman Empire; as the word Romania also anciently signified the whole
Imperial Territory, as Card. Perron clearly proves upon this subject. But, this
is one instance of what men's wits will do, when they are resolved to break
through any thing: For, whoever that had read of the Suburbicary Regions and
Provinces in the Code of Theodosius, or other parts of the Civil Law, as
distinguished from other Provinces under the Roman Empire, Cod. Theodos. l. 11.
tit. 1. c 9. tit. 16. c. 12. tit. 28.12
and those in Italy too, could ever have imagined that the notion of
Suburbicary Churches had been any other than what was correspondent to those
Regions and Provinces. Adventor. p. 2. de Eccles. suburbic. c. 1.
But let that be granted which Sirmondus so much contends for, That the notion
of Suburbicary may have different respects, and so sometimes be taken for the
Churches within the Roman Diocese, sometimes for those within the Roman
Patriarchate, and sometimes for those, which are under the Pope as Universal
Pastor; yet, How does it appear that ever Ruffinus took it in any other than
the first sense? No other Provinces being called Suburbicary, but such as were
under the Jurisdiction either of the Roman Prefect within a hundred miles of
the City (within which compass, references and appeals were made to him) or at
the most, to the Lieutenant of the Roman Diocese, whose Jurisdiction extended
to those ten Provinces which his Lordship mentions. It is not therefore, In
what sense words may be taken, but in what sense they were taken, and what
Evidence there is that ever they were so understood. Never was any Controversy
more ridiculous, than that concerning the extent of the Suburbicary Regions or
Provinces, if Suburbicary were taken in your sense for all the Cities within
the Roman Empire. But this extending of the Suburbicary Churches, as far as the
Roman Empire, is like the art of those Jesuits, who in their setting forth
Anastasius de vitis Pontificum, in Stephanus 5. turned Papa Vrbis into Papa
Orbis: for that being so mean and contemptible a title, they thought much it
should remain as it did; but Papa Orbis was magnificent and glorious. I wonder
therefore, that instead of extending the signification of Suburbicary Churches,
you do not rather pretend that it ought to be read Suborbicary, and so to suit
exactly with the Papa Orbis, as importing all those Churches which are under
the power of the Universal Pastor. For, Why should you stop at the confines of
the Roman Empire; How comes his Jurisdiction to be confined within that? By
what right did he govern the Churches within the Empire, and not those without?
Surely not, as Primate, Metropolitan, or Patriarch of the Roman Empire, for
those are titles yet unheard of in Antiquity; if as Head of the Church, How
comes the Jurisdiction of that to be at all limited? Were there no Churches
without the Empire then? I hope you will not deny that: If there were, To whom
did the Jurisdiction over them belong? to the Pope, or not? If not, How comes
he to be Head of the Church, and Universal Pastor? If they did, Why were not
these Suburbicary Churches, as well as those within the Empire? Besides, it is
confessed by the learnedest among you, that when the notion of Suburbicary is
extended beyond the Suburbicary Provinces, it is not out of any relation to the
City, but to the power of the Bishop of the City, and therefore the Suburbicary
Churches may be larger than the Suburbicary Provinces. But if this be true (as
it is the only probable evasion) then it is impossible for you, to confine the
Suburbicary Churches within the Roman Empire, without confining the
Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop within those bounds too. For if the enlarging
the notion of Surburbicary Churches depends upon the extent of his power, the
fixing the limits of those Churches, determines the bounds of his power too.
Which is utterly destructive to your pretenses of the Pope's being Head of the
Universal Church, and not barely of the Churches within the Roman Empire. But
if it had been Ruffinus his design to express by Suburbicary Churches, all
those within the Roman Empire, surely he made choice of the most unhappy
expression to do it by, which he could well have thought of. For, it being then
so well known what the Suburbicary Provinces were, that in the Code of
Theodosius, where they are so often mentioned, they are not distinctly
enumerated, because they were then as well understood as the African, Gallican,
or Britannick Provinces; How absurd were it for him, to take a word in common
use, and so well known, and apply it to such a sense, as no example besides can
be produced for it. For if any one at that time should have spoken of the
African, Gallican, or Britannick Churches, no one would have imagined any other
than those which were contained in the several Provinces under those names.
What reason is there then, that any thing else should be apprehended by the
Suburbicary Churches? I know the last refuge of most of your side, instead of
explaining these Suburbicary Churches, has been to rail at Ruffinus, and call
him Dunce and Blockhead, and enemy to the Roman Church (instances were easy to
be given, if it were at all necessary) but besides that, it were easy to make
it appear, that Ruffinus was no such fool, as some have taken him for: (And if
they think so, because S. Hierom gives him such hard words, they must think so
of all whom S. Hierom opposed) he is sufficiently vindicated in this
translation by the Ancient Vatican Copy of the Nicene Canons, out of which this
very Canon is produced by Sirmondus, and the very same word of Suburbicary
therein used. And that in such a manner, as utterly destroies your sense of the
Suburbicary Churches, De primatu Ecclesiae Romana and aliarum civitatum
Episcopis. Antiqui moris est, ut Episcopus Urbis Romae habeat Principatum; ut
Suburbicaria loca, and omnem Provinciam suam sollicitudine gubernet. Codex
Vaticanus apud Sirmond. de Region. and Eccles. Suburb.
for such as are within the Roman Empire; for that Copy calls them, Loca
Suburbicaria; and, Will you say, those are the Provinces within the Roman
Empire too? Can any one rationally think that any other places should be called
Suburbicary, but such as lie about the City; And by the same interpretation
which you here use, you may call all England the Suburbs of London; because
London is the City, (...), as you speak; and therefore all the Churches of
England must be Suburbicary to London. But if you think this incongruous, you
may on the same account judge the other to be so too: It appears then, that the
Suburbicary places in the Vatican Copy (and in that very Ancient Copy which
Justellus had, which agrees with the Vatican) are the same with the Suburbicary
Churches in Ruffinus; and, if you will explain these latter of the Roman
Empire, you must do the former too. But not only the Vatican Copy, but all
other different Versions of the Nicene Canon utterly overthrow this Opinion of
Cardinal Perron, that the Suburbicary Churches must be taken for those within
the Roman Empire. For in the Arabic Version published by Turrianus, it is thus
rendered, Siquidem similiter Episcopus Romae, i. e. successor Petri Apostoli,
potestatem habet omnium civitatum, and locorum quae sunt circa eam. Are all the
Cities and places in the Roman Empire, circa eam, about the City of Rome? If
not, neither can the Churches be? And in that Arabic paraphrase, which
Salmasius had of the famous Peireskius, it is translated much more agreeably to
the Nicene Canon in these words; Propterea quod Episcopus Romanus etiam hunc
morem obtinet, and hoc ei adjunctum est, ut potestatem habeat supra civitates,
and loca quae prope eam sunt. Which is yet more full, to show the absurdity of
your exposition, for these Suburbicary Churches must be then in places near the
City of Rome. And agreeably to these, Aristinus, the Greek Collector of the
Canons has it, (...), which Ruffinus his Suburbicary does exactly render. By
whom now, must we be judged, What is meant by these Suburbicary Churches? by
you who make a forced and strained interpretation of the word Suburbicary to
such a sense, of which there is no evidence in Antiquity, or Reason, and is
withal manifestly repugnant to the design of the Canon, which is to proportion
the Dioceses of the Bishops of Antioch and Alexandrina, by the example of Rome
(which had been very absurd if these Suburbicary Churches did comprehend the
Dioceses of Alexandria and Antioch, and all other Provinces, as you make them)?
or else must we be judged by the ancient Versions of the Nicene Canon, Latin
and Arabic, and by other Greek Paraphrases, all which unanimously concur to
overthrow that Figment, that the Suburbicary Churches are all those within the
Roman Empire. And this the learned Petrus de Marca was so sensible of, that he
says, De Concordi^ Sacerdot. and Imp. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 6.
Ruffinus did rectissime and ex usu recepto, very agreeably both to reason and
custom, compare the Alexandrian and Roman Bishop in this, that he should have
the power over the Diocese of Egypt, by the same right that the Bishop of Rome
had over the Vrbicary Diocese; or, says he, ut Ruffinus-eligantissime
loquitur, In Ecclesiis Suburbicariis, id est, in iis Ecclesiis quae december
Provinciis Suburbicariis continebantur; as Ruffinus most elegantly speaks (sure
then he thought him no such ignorant person, as Perron and others from him have
reproached him to be) In the Suburbicary Churches, that is, in those Churches
which are contained in the ten Suburbicary Provinces. For, as as he goes on,
the calling of Synods, the ordination of Bishops, the full administration of
the Churches in those Provinces, did belong to the Bishop of Rome; as to the
Bishop of Alexandria in the Egyptian Diocese, and to the Bishop of Antioch in
the Oriental. Which he likewise confirms by the ancient Latin Interpreter of
the Nicene Canons, who, he says, was elder than Dionysius Exiguns; in whose
interpretation, he makes the Suburbicaria loca to contain the four Regions
about Rome, which made the proper Metropolitan Province of the Roman Bishop
comprehending sixty nine Bishoprics; and that which he calls his Province, to
be the Vrbicary Diocese, contained in those ten Provinces which his Lordship
mentions.

But the Pope's being Universal Bishop having so little evidence elsewhere,. 15.
his Lordships adversary at last has recourse to this, That the Bishop of Rome
is S. Peter 's successor, and therefore to him we must have recourse. To which
his Lordship answers; The Fathers I deny not, P. 185. n. 14.
ascribe very much to S. Peter; but it is to S. Peter in his own person. And
among them Epiphanius is as free and as frequent in extolling S. Peter, as any
of them: And yet did he never intend to give an absolute principality to Rome
in S. Peter 's right; which he at large manifests by a place particularly
insisted on, in which he proves, that the building of the Church on S. Peter in
Epiphanius his sense, is not as if he and his successors were to be Monarchs
over it for ever: but it is the edifying and establishing the Church in the
true Faith of Christ, by the Confession which S. Peter made. And so, says he,
he expresses himself elsewhere most plainly, that Christ's building his Church
upon this Rock, was upon the Confession of S. Peter, and the solid Faith
contained therein. And that Epiphanius could not mean that S. Peter was any
Rock or Foundation of the Church, so as that he and his successors must be
relied on in all matters of Faith, and govern the Church like Princes and
Monarchs, he proves not only by the Context, but because he makes S. James to
succeed our Lord in the principality of the Church. And Epiphanius, says he,
was too full of learning and industry, to speak contrary to himself in a point
of this moment. This is the sum of his Lordships discourse: to which you
answer, That it is clear even by the Texts of Epiphanius, that this promise by
Christ to S. Peter, is derived to his successors; P. 204. n. 9.
which you prove from hence, because he says, That by the Gates of Hell,
Heresies and Heretics are understood; now this, say you, cannot be understood
of S. Peter 's person alone; for then, Why not Heresies and Heretics prevail
against the Church after S. Peter 's death; yea so far as utterly to extinguish
the true Faith? But, Cannot God preserve the Church from being extinguished by
Heresies, though S. Peter has no Infallible Successor? Is not the promise,
That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against the Church? It does not say,
That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against any that shall pretend to be
his Successors at Rome: For if Heresies be those Gates, they have too often
prevailed against him. And, Is this your way indeed to secure the Church, by
providing S. Peter such successors, which may be Heretics themselves? But much
more wisely did S. Gregory say, If one pretends to be Universal Bishop, then
upon his falling, the Church must fall too; much more wisely the Council of
Basil in their Synodal Epistle, object this as the necessary consequent of the
Doctrine of the Pope's Supremacy, that, errante Pontifice, quod saepe contigit
and contingere potest, tota erraret Ecclesia; that, in case the Pope err,
which often has happened, and often may, the whole Church must err too. And
yet this is your way to secure the Church from errors and heresies. If you
designed to ruin it, you could not do it in a more compendious way, than to
oblige the whole Church to believe the dictates of one, who is so far from that
Infallibility which S. Peter had, that he follows him in nothing more than his
Falls: I wish he would in his Repentance too, and that would be the best way to
secure the Church from Errors and Heresies. Which she can never be secured
from, as long as one pretends to be her Head, who may not only err himself,
but propound that to be believed infallibly, which is notoriously false. For
that Popes as Popes may err, and propound false Doctrine to the Church, not
only Protestants, but some of your own Communion have abundantly proved;
particularly Sim. Vigorius in his defense of Richerius in his Commentary on the
forecited Synodal Epistle of the Council of Basil. Vigorius Com. in ep. Synod.
Council. Basil. c. 7. p. 63.
And calls that opinion, That the Pope may err as a private Doctor, but not as
Pope, ineptissimam opinionem, a most foolish opinion. For otherwise, as he
says, it would be most absurd to say, That the Pope might be deposed for
Heresy; for he is not deposed as a private Doctor, but as Pope. And this he
proves by the contradictious decrees of Adrian 3. to Adrian 1. and Leo 7. and
so of Formosus, Martinus, Romanus, to Johannes, Stephanus, and Sergius; Nay, he
instanceth in that famous decree of Boniface 8. in pronouncing so definitively,
that it was de necessitate salutis, subesse Romano Pontifici (necessary to
salvation to be subject to the Pope) and that he decreed this as Pope, appears
by those words, Declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronunciamus, omnino esse*
de necessitate salutis; than which words, nothing can be more express and
definitive, and yet Pope Innocent 3. asserts, that the King of France has no
superior upon earth. Is not the Church like then to be well secured from
Heresies, when her Infallible Heads may so apparently contradict each other,
and this acknowledged by men of your own Communion. Nothing then can be more
absurd or unreasonable, than to say, That the Church cannot be preserved from
being extinguished by Heresy, unless the Pope be S. Peter's successor, as Head
of the Church. To his Lordships testimonies out of Epiphanius, that S. James
succceded our Lord in the principality of the Church, P. 205.
you answer, 1. That in the places he alleges, there is not a word of the
Churches principality. 2. That he only implies that he was the first of the
Apostles made Bishop of any particular place, viz. at Jerusalem, which is
called Christ's Throne, as any Episcopal Chair is in ancient Ecclesiastical
Writers. But, whosoever will examine the places in Epiphanius, will find much
more intended by him, than what you will allow: For not only he says, that he
first had an Episcopal Chair, Epiph. haeres. 78. p. 1039.
but that our Lord committed to him (...), his Throne upon Earth, which surely
is much more than can be said of any mere Episcopal Chair; and I believe you
will be much to seek where Jerusalem was ever called Christ's Throne upon
earth after his Ascension to Heaven. Besides, if it were, it is the strongest
prejudice that may be against the principality of the Roman See; if Jerusalem
was made by Christ his Throne here. And, that a principality over the whole
Church is intended by Epiphanius, seems more clear by that other place which
his Lordship cites, wherein he not only says, That James was first made
Bishop, Haeres. 29. p. 119.
but gives this reason for it, because he was the Brother of our Lord; and if
you observe, How Epiphanius brings it in, you will say, he intended more by it,
than to make him the first Bishop. For he was disputing before, How the Kingdom
and the Priesthood did both belong to Christ, and that Christ had transfused
both into his Church, (...), but his Throne is established for ever in his holy
Church; consisting both of his Kingdom and Priesthood, both which he
communicated to his Church; quare Jacobus primus omnium est Episcopus
constitutus, as Petavius renders it, so that he seems to settle James in that
principality of the Church, which he had given to it; and what reason can you
have to think, but that Christ's Throne, in which Epiphanius, says James, was
settled in the other place, is the same with his Throne in the Church which he
mentions here? And, What would you give for so clear a testimony in Antiquity
for Christ's settling S. Peter in his Throne at Rome, as here is for his
placing S. James in it at Jerusalem?

His Lordship goes on. And he still tells us, the Bishop of Rome is S. Peter 's
successor. Well, suppose that, What then? What? Why then,. 16.
he succeeded in all S. Peter 's prerogatives which are ordinary, P. 187. n. 15.
and belonged to him as a Bishop, though not in the extraordinary, which
belonged to him as an Apostle. For that is it which you all say, but no man
proves. Yes, you say, Bellarmine has done it in his disputations on that
subject. For this you produce a saying of his, That when the Apostles were
dead, the Apostolical Authority remained alone in S. Peter 's successor. I see
with you still, saying and proving are all one. But since you referr the Reader
to Bellarmine for* proofs, I shall likewise referr him to the many sufficient
Answers which have been given him.

You argue stoutly afterward, That because Primacy in the modern sense of it
implies Supremacy, P. 206.
therefore wherever the Fathers attribute a Primacy to Peter among the
Apostles, they mean his Authority and power over them. I see, you are resolved
to believe that there cannot be one, two, and three; but the first must be Head
over all the rest. A Primacy of Order, his Lordship truly says, was never
denied him by Protestants; and an Universal Supremacy of power was never
granted him by the Primitive Christians. Prove but in the first place that S.
Peter had such a Supremacy of power over the Apostles, and all Christian
Churches, and that this power is conveyed to the Pope, you will do something.
In the mean time we acknowledge as much Primacy, Reynolds against Heart. c. 5.
div. 3.
Authority, and Principality in S. Peter, as D. Reynolds proves in the place
you cite; none of which come near that Supremacy of power which you contend
for, and we must deny till we see it better proved than it is by you. Hieronym.
l. 1. Jovin. c. 14.
But you offer it from S. Hierom, because he says, The Primacy was given to
Peter for preventing Schism, but a mere precedence of order is not sufficient
for that. But, Does not S. Hierom in the words immediately before, say, That
the Church is equally built on all the Apostles, and that they all receive the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and that the firmness of the Church is equally
grounded on them; and, Can he possibly then mean in the following words any
other Primacy, but such as is among equals, and not any Supremacy of power over
them? And certainly you think the Apostles very unruly, who would not be kept
in order by such a Primacy as this is, unless a S. Peter's full jurisdiction
over them. And since it is so evident, that S. Hierom can mean no other but
such a pre-eminence as this for preventing Schism, you had need have a good
art, that can deduce from thence a necessity of a Supremacy of power in the
Church for that end. For, say you, Whatsoever power or jurisdiction was
necessary in the Apostles time for preventing Schisms, must, a fortiori, be
necessary in all succeeding ages; but still be sure to hold to that power or
jurisdiction which was in the Apostles times, and we grant you all you can
prove from it. You still dispute gallantly, when you beg the Question, and
argue as formally as I have met with one, when you have supposed that which it
most concerned you to prove; Which is, that God has appointed a Supremacy of
power in one particular person, always to continue in the Church for
preservation of Faith and Unity in it. For, if you suppose the Church cannot be
governed, or Schism prevented without this, you may well save your self a
labor of proving any further. But, so far are we from seeing such a Supremacy
of power as you challenge to the Pope to be necessary for preventing Schisms,
that we are sufficiently convinced that the Usurping of it has caused one of
the greatest ever was in the Christian world.

CHAP. VII. The Popes Authority, not proved from Scripture, or Reason.
The insufficiency of the proofs from Scripture acknowledged by Romanists
themselves. The impertinency of Luke 22.32. to that purpose. No proofs offered
for it but the suspected testimonies of Popes in their own cause. That no
Infallibility can thence come to the Pope as St. Peter's successor, confessed
and proved by Vigorius, and Mr. White. The weakness of the evasion of the Popes
erring as a private Doctor, but not as Pope, acknowledged by them. John 21.15.
proves nothing toward the Popes Supremacy. How far the Popes Authority is
owned by the Romanists over Kings. T. C's. beggings of the Question, and
tedious repetitions, past over. The Argument from the necessity of a living
Judge, considered. The Government of the Church not Monarchical, but
Aristocratical. The inconveniences of Monarchical Government in the Church
manifested from reason. No evidence that Christ intended to institute such
Government in his Church, but much against it. The Communicatory letters in the
primitive Church argued an Aristocracy. Gersons Testimony from his Book de
Auferibilitate Papae, explained and vindicated. St. Hieromes Testimony full
against a Monarchy in the Church. The inconsistency of the Popes Monarchy with
that of Temporal Princes. The Supremacy of Princes in Ecclesiastical matters,
asserted by the Scripture and Antiquity, as well as the Church of England.

WE are now come to the places of Scripture insisted on for the proof of the
Popes Authority;. 1.
which you have been so often and successfully beaten out of, by so many
powerful assaults of our Writers, that it is matter of admiration that you
should yet think to find any shelter there. For those which you yet account
Fortresses and Bulwarks for your cause, have not only been triumphed over by
your Adversaries, but have been slighted by the wisest of your party, and
deserted as most untenable places. As I shall make it appear to you in the
progress of this dispute: In which I shall not barely show the palpable
weakness of your pretended proofs, but bring unanswerable arguments against
them from persons of your own Communion. For the force of that reason by which
the Protestants have prevailed over you in this dispute has been so great,
that it has brought over some of the learned of your party, not only to an
acknowledgement of the insufficiency of these proofs, but to a zealous
opposition against that very Doctrine which you attempt to prove by them. But
such is the fate of a sinking cause, that it catches hold of any thing to save
it self, though it be the Anchor of the ship which makes it sink the sooner.
Thus it will appear to be in these baffled Proofs, which you only bring into
the Field to show what streights you are in for help; and no sooner appear
there, but they fall off to the conquering side, and help only to promote your
ruin. But since they are in the place where Arguments should be, we must in
civility consider them, as if they were so. The first place then is, Luke
22.32. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not. What would a Philosopher
think, were he chosen as Vmpire between us, (as once one was between Origin and
his Adversaries) to hear this place produced to prove the Popes Authority and
Infallibility? And when a reason is demanded of so strange an Inference (from a
promise of recovery to St. Peter, to an impossibility of falling in the Pope)
nothing else produced, but the forged Epistles of some Popes, and the partial
Testimonies of others in their own cause? Could he think otherwise, but that
these men loved their cause dearly, and would fain prove it, if they could tell
how: but since there was neither evidence in reason or more indifferent writers
in it, yet to let them see how confident they were of the Popes Infallibility,
they would produce their Infallible Testimonies, to prove they were Infallible.
For we ask, What evidence is there that the privilege obtained for St. Peter,
whatever it is, must descend to his Successors; if to his Successors, whether
to all his Successors, or only to some; if only to some, why to those at Rome
more then at Antioch or any other place; if to them at Rome, why it must be
understood of a Doctrinal and not a saving Faith, as it was in St. Peter; if of
Doctrinal, why not absolutely, but only conditionally, if they teach the
Church? For all these and several other enquiries of this nature, we are told,
It must be so understood; but if you ask Why, all the Answer we can get is,
Because seven Popes at one time or other said so.

But at this you grow very angry; and tell us, 1. That Bellarmine, besides
these,. 2.
P. 208.
gives several pregnant reasons from the Text it self. What were it worth, to
have a sight of them? If you had thought them so pregnant you are not so
sparing of taking out of Bellarmine, but you would have given them us over
again. Bellarmins excellent proofs are two or three sine Dubio's. Bell de
Pontif. l. 4. c. 3.
Sine dubio, says he, hic Dominus speciale aliquid Petro impetravit. And who
denies it? but we grant, it was so special to him that it never came to his
Successors; and again, Sine dubio, ipsis praecipue debeat esse nota suae sedis
auctoritas, speaking of the Popes Testimonies for themselves, Without all doubt
they knew best their own Authority. They were wonderfully to blame else; but
all the difficulty is, to persuade others to believe them sine dubio, when they
speak in their own Cause. And for that I can find no pregnant reason in him at
all. Well, but we have a third sine dubio yet, which may be more to the purpose
than either of the other two. For Bellarmin distinguishes of two privileges
which Christ obtained for St. Peter, the first is, That himself should never
lose the true Faith though he were tempted of the Devil; and this his Lordship
grants, that it was the special grace which Christ's prayer obtained, that,
notwithstanding Satan's sifting him, and his threefold denial of his Master, he
should not fall into a final Apostasy: The second privilege is, That he, as
Bishop, should not be able to teach any thing against the Faith, sive, ut in
sede ejus nunquam inveniretur qui doceret contra veram fidem, or, that there
should be none found in his See who should do it. Is not here an excellent
conjunction disjunctive in this Sive, Or? that he should not do it himself, or,
that his Successors should not do it? Does not this want pregnant proofs? and
we have them in the next words. The first of these, it may be (very modestly!)
did not descend to his Successors; but secundum, sine Dubio, manavit ad
posteros sive successores; the second, without all doubt, did descend to his
Successors. Are not these pregnant reasons; three sine dubio's given us by
Cardinal Bellarmin? For when he comes to confirm this last sine dubio, he
produces nothing but those Testimonies, which his Lordship excepts against, as
not fit to be Judges in their own Cause. If these then be Bellarmins pregnant
reasons out of the Text, no wonder that his Lordship was not pleased to Answer
them. But yet you are displeased, that his Lordship should think that Popes
were interessed persons in their own Cause. No, no; all that ever sat in that
See, were such holy, meek, humble, self-denying men, that they would not for a
world, let a word fall to exalt their own Authority in the Church. And we are
mightily to blame to think otherwise of them. Is it possible to think that
Felix 1, and Lucius 1, should speak for their own interest; though the Epistles
under their names be such notorious counterfeits, that all sober men among you
are ashamed of them? Is it possible that Leo 1. should do it, who was so humble
a man that he contended with 630. Bishops of the Council of Chalcedon about the
Primacy of his See; and whose Epistles breathe so much of self-denial in all
the contests he had about it? And although Pope Agatho and the rest be of later
standing, when the Popes did begin a little more openly to take upon them; yet,
Can the Protestants think that these men were biased with their proper
Interest? Are not these weak pretenses for them to reject their Authority upon?
For your part (you say), you could never understand this proceeding of
Protestants. The more a great deal is the pity; and if we could help your
understanding and not endanger our own, we would willingly do it. Well, but
though Bellarmins pregnant reasons prove so abortive, and though the Popes
Authorities should not be taken, yet his Lordship must needs wrong Bellarmin,
in saying, That he does upon the matter confess, that there is not one Father
in the Church disinteressed in the Cause, who understands this Text as
Bellarmin does, before Theophylact. And the reason is, because, though
Bellarmin cite no more, P. 209,
yet there might be more for all that: for, must he needs confcss, there are no
more Authors citable in any subject, but what he cites himself? As though
Bellarmin were wont to leave out any authorities which made for his purpose,
especially in so weighty a subject as this? Do you think he was so weak a
person to run to Popes Authorities, if he could have found any other? and when
he produces no more, is it not a plain confession he found no more to his
purpose? But I am weary of such great Impertinencies: and would fain meet with
some thing of matter that might hold up the Readers patience as well as mine.
All that ever I can meet with, that has any thing of tendency that way, is,
That this privilege of the Indeficiency of St. Peter's Faith does not belong to
him as an Apostle, but rather as he was Prince of the Apostles, and appointed
to be Christ's Vicar on earth after him. Very handsomely begged again! but where
is the proof for all this? Have you no Popes stand ready again to attest the
truth of it? For none else that have any reason would ever say it? did St.
Peter deny Christ as Prince of the Apostles? Indeed it was then much for his
honor that the Captain should fly from his colors first? and Christ's Vicar
upon earth should the most need to have his Faith prayed for, that it should
not fail? I had thought St. Peter had been head of the Apostles, and not Simon:
if Christ had spoke to him as his Vicar, he would sure have called him Peter,
Peter, and not Simon, Simon. But it seems he did not attend, that Peter was the
Rock, on which his Church must be built: or else he minded it so much, that he
thought that name improper when he mentions his falling; You have therefore
stoutly and unanswerably (not proved, but) demonstrated that these words were
spoken of St. Peter, not as an Apostle, but as Christ's Vicar upon earth.

But suppose it were so; what is this to those who pretend to be his
Successors? Yes very much. For (say you),. 3.
Whatever our Savior intended should descend by virtue of that prayer of his,
did effectively so descend. You might have put one of Bellarmins sine dubio's
to this. For, Whoever was so senseless as to question that? But you confess, It
is a very disputable question, Whether every thing which Christ by his prayer
intended and obtained for St. Peter, was likewise intended by him to descend to
St. Peter's Successors. Yet that some special privilege was to descend to
them, is, you say, manifest by Bellarmins Authorities and Reasons. If from
nothing else, I dare confidently say, no man in his wits will believe it
manifest. And what that is, neither you, nor any one else can either prove or
understand. Yes (say you) it is, that none of his Successors should ever so
far fall from the Faith, as to teach Heresy, in Pontificalibus, or, as you
speak with Bellarmine, any thing contrary to Faith tanquam Pontifex; i. e. in
virtue of that Authority which they were to have in the Church as St. Peter's
Successors. Here then we fix a while to see this proved; but our expectation
is again frustrated: For instead of proofs we meet with the old Mumpsimus, of
the Popes erring as private Doctor, but not as Pastor of the Church: A
distinction so ridiculous, that many among your selves deride it, as will
appear presently. And therefore put in your tanquam Pontifex as long as you
please, P. 210.
you will gain no great matter by it. When you can prove that Christ did intend
in that one prayer, some part of the Gift personally and absolutely to St.
Peter, and another part conditionally to his Successors, I will grant it no
absurdity to say, that perhaps some part of the Gift did not belong to either
of them. But these are such strange fetches out of a plain Scripture, that
those may admire your subtilty, who cannot be convinced by your reason. Yet to
let you see that these things are not so clear as you would have them, I shall
bring you some Arguments out of your own Writers against your interpretation of
this place, and I pray Answer them at your leisure. Vigorius therefore proves
that this place cannot be understood of St. Peter and his Successors, Comment.
in ep. Synod Council. Basil. c. 7. sect. 3.
that their Faith should not fail; for then says he. 1. The Canons had decreed
to no purpose that a Pope might be deposed in case of Heresy; for those that
suppose that he may fall into Heresy, do doubtless suppose that his Faith
fails. Now here is a witness against you, from your own Church and that out of
your Canons too; and that is better worth then twenty Testimonies of Popes for
you. 2. If this were understood of St. Peter's Successors, they who succeeded
him at Antioch would enjoy this privilege as well as those at Rome; for they
are, says he, as well St. Peter's Successors as the other. And, says he, if
they understand this of one and not of the other totis faucibus se deridendos
propinarent, they expose themselves to contempt and laughter. 3. If this were
true of St. Peter's Successors at Rome, then the decrees of one Pope could not
be revoked by the other; because, it is impossible they should err in making
those decrees. But it is not Vigorius alone who has showed the weakness of
your Arguments from this place; for our learned Countryman Mr. White has more
fully and largely discovered the weakness of all your pretenses from Scripture,
Fathers, and Reason, concerning the Popes succeeding St. Peter in his
Infallibility. And particularly as to this place he says, Tabulae suffr. ^ab.
10. p. 111.
that either it concerns the present danger St. Peter was in, or else does
represent what was to be afterward in the Church: and that it does primarily
and directly relate to St. Peter's imminent tentation, all the circumstances
persuade us; first, because he is called by his private name Simon, and not by
his Apostolical name Peter. 2. Because Christ immediately subjoyns after St.
Peter's answer his threefold denial of him. 3. The event it self makes it
appear, by the Apostles flight, St. Peter's temptation and fall, his conversion
and tears when Christ looked on him; and by his confirming the Disciples after
Christ's resurrection. But (says he), if this place be taken as respecting the
future times of the Church, the same thing must be expected in St. Peter's
Successors, which fell out in St. Peter himself, viz. that either through
fear, or some other motive they may be drawn into the show of Heresy, or into
Heresy it self; but so, as either in themselves or their Successors, they
should be restored to the Catholic Faith. But what reason there is for this
latter interpretation (though destructive to the Popes infallibility) neither
does that person acquaint us, nor can I possibly understand. All the evasion
that you have to avoid the force of what ever is brought against you out of
this place, is by conjuring up that rare distinction of the Popes not erring
when he defines any thing as matter of Faith. But see what that same person
says of this distinction of yours, Excipiunt aliqui, says he, Papam posse
esse haereticum, sed non posse haeresim promulgare. Tabul. suffrag. p. 145.
Adeo quidlibot effutire pro libidine, etiam licitum est. Some Answer, that the
Pope may be a Heretic, but cannot promulge or define Heresy: So far do men
think it lawful to say what they please. But can any man, says he, be guilty
of so much incogitancy, as not to see that these things are consequent upon
each other; It is a Pear tree, and therefore it will bear Pears: It is a Vine,
and therefore it will bring forth Grapes. Christ says, An evil tree cannot
bring forth good fruit; but these say, an evil tree cannot bring forth bad
fruit. The Apostle says, the wisdom of the Flesh cannot be subject to God; but
these say, it cannot but be subject to God. And then he further presses, That
they would declare from what Author they brought this contradiction into the
Church of God, lest men should believe they were inspired by the Father of lies
when they made it. Nay he goes further yet in these stinging expressions, An
putatis licere, in re quae totum Ecclesiae statum a^vivum tangit, novitatem
adeo inauditam, adeo rationi adversantem, adeo excedentem omnem fidem, ex
somniis cerebri vestri infer? Do you think it lawful, in a matter which
touches the whole state of the Church to the quick, to produce so unheard of a
novelty, so repugnant to reason, so far above all Faith, out of the dreams of
your own brain? Go now, and answer these things among your selves; complain not
that we account such evasions silly, absurd, and ridiculous; you see they are
accounted so by some of your own Communion (or, at least, who pretend to be so)
and those no contemptible persons neither. But such as have seen so much of the
weakness and absurdity of your common doctrine, that they openly and
confidently oppose it, and that upon the same grounds that Protestants had done
it before them. And I hope, this is much more to our purpose to show the
insufficiency of these proofs, than it was for you to produce the Testimonies
of several Popes in their own Cause. Which was all the proof that Bellarmin or
you had, that these words are extended to St. Peter's Successors, when we bring
men from among your selves, who produce several reasons, that they ought not to
be so interpreted.

But yet there is another place as pertinent as the former; the celebrated
Pasce oves and agnos, John 21.15, 16, 17. But sheep and Lambs, say you,. 4.
P. 211.
are Christ's whole flock. So there are both these, says his Lordship, in every
flock that is not of barren Weathers; and every Apostle, P. 191.
and every Apostles successor has charge to feed both sheep and Lambs; that
is weaker and stronger Christians, not people and Pastors, subjects and
Governors, as A. C. expounds it, to bring the necks of Princes under the Roman
Pride. No (say you), no such charge is given to any other Apostles, in the
places his Lordship cites, Matthew. 28.19. Matthew. 10.17. for these speak of
persons unbaptized, but that place of St. John, of those who were actually
Christ's Flock; and the words being absolutely and indefinitely pronounced, must
be understood generally and indefinitely of all Christ's sheep and Lambs, that
is, of all Christians whatsoever, not excepting the Apostles themselves; unless
it appear from some other place, that the other Apostles had the feeding of all
Christ's sheep, as universally and unlimitedly committed to them, as they were
here to St. Peter. But all this is nothing, as Vigorius speaks about the
solvere, ligare, pascere, but dudum explosis cantilenis aures Christianorum
obtundere, to bring us those things over and over, Vigor. p. 61.
which have been answered as often as they have been brought. For how often have
you been told, that these words contain no particular Commission to St. Peter,
but a more vehement exhortation to the discharge of his duty, and that pressed
with the quickness of the question before it, Love thou me? How often, that
the full Commission to the Apostles was given before? John. 20.21.
As the Father has sent me, so send I you. And that, as Christ was by his
Fathers appointment the chief Shepherd of the Sheep and Lambs too; so Christ
by this equal Commission to all the Apostles gives them all an equal power and
authority to govern his Flock: How often, that nothing appears consequent upon
this, whereby St. Peter took this office upon him? but that afterward we find
St. Peter called the Apostle of the Circumcision, which certainly he would
never have been, Gal. 2 7.
had he been looked on as the Universal Pastor of the Church; we find the
Apostles sending St. Peter to Samaria, Acts 8.14.
which was a very unmannerly action, if they looked on him as Head of the
Church. How often, that these indefinite expressions are not exclusive of the
Pastoral charge of other Apostles over the Flock of Christ? when they are not
only bid to preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 6.16.
but even those Bishops which they ordained in several Churches are charged to
feed the Flock; Acts 20.28.
and therefore certainly the Apostles themselves had not only a charge to
preach to unbaptized persons (as you suppose) but to govern the Flock of those
who were actually Christ's Sheep and Lambs, as well as St. Peter? How often, I
say, have you been told all these and several other things in Answer to this
place; and have you yet the confidence to object it, as though it had never
been taken notice of, without ever offering to take off those Answers which
have been so frequently given? But you must be pardoned in this, as in all
other things of an equal impossibility.

. 5.
Well, but his Lordship objects a shrewd Consequence from this Universal
Pastourship; that this brings the necks of Princes under the Roman Pride. P.
191.
And if Kings be meant, (his Lordship says) yet the command is, pasce, feed
them; but deponere, or occidere, to depose or kill them, is not pascere in any
sense; Lanii id est, non Pastoris, that is the Butchers, not the Shepherds
part. This, you call, his Lordships winding about, and falling upon that odious
Question of killing and deposing Kings. Ibid.
An odious Question indeed, whether we consider the grounds, or the effects and
consequents of it. But yet you would seem to clear your selves from the odium
of it. First, By saying that it is a gross fallacy, to argue a negatione
speciei ad negationem generis, which is a new kind of Logic. It is indeed, for
it is of your own coining; for his Lordship argues ab affirmatione generis ad
affirmationem speciei, and I hope this is no new Logic, unless you think he
that says, He has power over all living creatures, has not thereby power
over men too. His Lordship therefore does not argue against the Popes Universal
Supremacy from the denial of that, but deduces that as a consequence from your
assertion, and explication of what you mean by Sheep and Lambs. But this is but
a slight Answer in comparison of what follows; Secondly, we answer, P. 212.
That the point of Killing Kings, is a most false and scandalous Imputation;
scandalous enough indeed, if false: and though your Popes have not given
express warrant for the doing it, yet it is sufficiently known, How the Pope in
Consistory could not contain his joy when it was done, in the case of Henry 3.
of France. And it has been sufficiently confessed and lamented by persons of
your own communion, How much the Doctrine of the Jesuits has encouraged those
Assassinations of those two successive Henryes of France. Will you, or dare you
vindicate the Doctrines of Mariana, and others, which do not obscurely deliver
their judgment, as to that very thing of Killing Haeretical Princes? But, if
we should grant you this, That the Pope may not command to kill, What say you
to that of deposing Princes; which seldom falls much short of the other? As to
this, you dare not cry, It is a false and scandalous imputation, as you did to
the other; but you answer, It Is no point of your Faith, that the Pope has
power to do it; and therefore you say it is no part of your task to dispute it.
Is this all the security Princes have from you, that it is no point of your
Faith, that the Pope has power to do it? Is it not well enough known, that
there are many things which are held undoubtedly by the greatest part of your
Church, which yet you say, are no points of Faith? And yet in this you are
directly contradicted by one who knew what were points of Faith among you, as
well as you, and that was Father Creswell; Philopator. sect. 157. p. 149.
whose testimony I have cited already; and he says expressly, Certum est, and
de fide, It is a thing certain, and of Faith: that the subjects of an
Haeretical Prince, are not only freed from Allegiance, but are bound, ex
hominum Christianorum dominatu ejicere, to cast him out of his power, which
certainly is more than the deposing of him. And Sanders plainly enough says,
De visib. Monarch. l. 2, c. 4.
That a King that will not submit to the Popes Authority, is by no means to be
suffered, but his subjects ought to do their utmost endeavor that another may
be placed in his room. Indeed, he says not, as the other does, That this is de
fide, but that is the only reserve you have when a Doctrine is odious and
infamous to the world, to cry out, It is not de side, when yet it may be as
firmly believed among you, as any that you account de fide. And if you believe
the Duke of Alva in his Manifesto at the siege of Pampelona, when the Pope had
deposed the King of Navarre to whom that City belonged, he says, Nebrissens.
de bello Navarr. l. 1. c. 6.
That it is not doubted but the Pope had power to depose Heretical Princes. And
if you had been of another opinion, you ought to have declared your self more
fully than you do. If you had said, that indeed some were of that opinion, but
you abhorred and detested it, you had spoken to the purpose; but when you use
only that pitiful evasion, That it is not of Faith, etc. you sufficiently show,
What your judgment is, but that you dare not publicly own it. It seems, you
remember what was said by your Masters in reference to Emanuel Sa, Non fuit
opus ad ista descendere, There was no need to meddle with those things. It
seems, if there had been, there was no hurt in the Doctrine, but only that it
was unseasonable. I pray God keep us from that time, when you shall think it
needful to declare your selves in this point. But you conclude this with a most
unworthy and scandalous reflection on Protestants, in these words; But what
Protestants have both done and justified in the worst of these kinds, is but
too fresh in memory. But, Were those the practices and principles of
Protestants? Were they not abhorred and detested in the highest manner by all
true Protestants, both at home and abroad? It will be well, if you can clear
some of your selves from having too much a hand in promoting both those
principles and practices. I suppose you cannot but have heard, Who it was is
said to have expressed so much joy at the time of that horrid execution; What
counsels and machinations are said to have been among some devoted Sons of the
Church of Rome abroad about that time: Therefore clear your selves more than
yet you have done, of those imputations, before you charge that guilt on
Protestants, which they express the highest abhorrence of. And let the names of
such who either publicly or privately abett or justify such horrid actions be
under a continual Anathema to all Generations.

. 6.
After all this discourse about the Popes Authority, A. C. brings it at last
home to the business of Schism. For, he says, The Bishop of Rome shall never
refuse to feed and govern the whole Flock in such sort, as that neither
particular man nor Church shall have just cause, under pretense of Reformation
in manners of Faith, to make a separation from the whole Church. This (his
Lordship says) by A. C 's favor, P. 191. n. 18.
is mere begging the Question. For this is the very thing which the Protestants
charge upon him; namely, that he has governed, if not the whole, yet so much
of the Church as he has been able to bring under his power, so as that he has
given too just cause of the present continued Separation. And, as the
corruptions in the Doctrine of Faith, in the Church of Rome, were the cause of
the first Separation; so are they at this present day the cause why the
Separation continues. And the oppression of the Church of Rome, he further
adds, is the great cause of all the errors in that part of the Church which is
under the Roman Jurisdiction. And for the Protestants, they have made no
separation from the General Church properly so called, but their Separation is
only from the Church of Rome, and such other Churches as by adhering to her,
have hazarded themselves, and do now miscall themselves the whole Catholic
Church. Nay, even here the Protestants have not left the Church of Rome in her
essence, but in her errors; not in the things which constitute a Church, but
only in such abuses and corruptions, as work toward the dissolution of a
Church. Let now any indifferent Reader be judge, Whether his Lordship, or A. C.
be the more guilty in begging the Question. P. 212.
For all the Answer you can give, is, That his Lordship begs it, in saying that
the Roman Church is not the whole Catholic Church, and that the Roman
Catholic Church may be in an error; but the former we have proved already,
and I doubt not but the latter will be as evident as the other, before our task
be ended. But, as though it were not possible for you to be guilty of begging
the Question, after you have said that the Roman Church cannot err, you give
this as the reason for it, Because she is the unshaken Rock of Truth; and that
she has the sole continual succession of lawfully-sent Pastors and Teachers,
who have taught the same unchanged Doctrine, and shall infallibly continue so
teaching it to the worlds end. Now, Who dares call this, Begging the Question?
No, it must not be called so in you, it shall be only Taking it for granted.
Which we have seen, has been your practice all along, especially when we
charge your Church with errour^; for then you cry out presently, What, your
Church err? No, you defy the language. What, the Spouse of Christ, the
Catholic Church err? that is impossible. What, the unshaken Rock of Truth to
sink into errors? the Infallible Church be deceived? she that has never
taught any thing but Truth, be charged with falsehood? she, that not only never
did err, but, it is impossible, nay, utterly impossible, nay, so impossible,
that it cannot be imagined, that ever she should err? This is the sum of all
your arguments, which, no doubt, sound high to all such who know not what
confident begging the Question means, or, out of modesty, are loath to charge
you with it.

Much to the same purpose do you go on, to prove, that Protestants have
separated not from the errors, but the essence of your Church. And if that be
true, which you say, That those things which we call Errors are essential to
your Church, we are the more sorry for it; for we are sure, (and, when you
please, will prove it) that they are not, cannot be, essential to a true
Church; and if they be to yours, the case is so much the worse with you, when
your distempers are in your vitals, and your errors essential to your Churches
Constitution. What other things you have here, are the bare repetitions of what
we have often had before in the Chapters you refer us to. And here we may thank
you for some ease you give us in the far greatest remaining part of this
Chapter, which consists of tedious repetitions of such things which have been
largely discussed in the First part, where they were purposely and designedly
handled; as that concerning Traditions, chap. 6. that concerning necessaries to
salvation, N. 6.
chap. 2, 3, 4. that concerning the Scriptures being an Infallible Rule, N. 8.
throughout the Controversy of Resolution of Faith; and that which concerns
the Infallibility of General Councils, we shall have occasion at large to
handle afterward; N. 57.
and if there be any thing material here, which you omit there, it shall be
fully considered. But I know no obligation lying upon me to answer things as
often as you repeat them, especially since your gift is so good that way. It is
sufficient that I know not of any material passage, which has not received an
Answer in its proper place.

That which is most pertinent to our present purpose, is that which concerns
the necessity of a Living Judge,. 7.
besides the Scriptures for ending Controversies of Faith. As to which his
Lordship says, That, supposing there were such a one, and the Pope were he, P.
198. n. 6.
yet that is not sufficient against the malice of the Devil, and impious men,
to keep the Church at all times from renting even in the Doctrine of Faith, or
to soder the Rents which are made. For, oportet esse Haereses, 1 Cor. 11.19,
Heresies there will be, and Heresies there properly cannot be but in the
Doctrine of Faith. To this you answer, That Heresies are not within, but
without the Church, P. 218.
and the Rents which stand in need of sodering, are not found among the true
members of the Church, who continue still united in the Faith, and due
obedience to their Head; but in those who have deserted the true Church, and
either made or adhered to Schismatical and Heretical Congregations. A most
excellent Answer! His Lordship says, If Christ had appointed an Infallible
Judge besides the Scripture, certainly it should have been for preventing
Heresies, and sodering the Rents of the Church. So it is (say you) for if there
be any Heresies, it is nothing to him, they are out of the Church; and if there
be any Schisms, they are among those who are divided from him: That is, he is
an Infallible Judge only thus far, in condemning all such for Heretics and
Schismatics, who do not own him. And his only way of preventing Heresies and
Schisms, is the making this the only trial of them, that whatever questions his
Authority, is Heresy; and whatever separation be made from him, is Schism.
Just as Absalom pretended that there was no Judge appointed to hear and
determine causes, and that the Laws were not sufficient without one, 2 Samuel
15.2.
and therefore he would do it himself; so does the Pope by Christ, he pretends
that he has not taken care sufficient for deciding Controversies in Faith,
therefore there is a necessity in order to the Churches Unity, he should take
it upon himself. But now, if we suppose in the former case of Absalom, that he
had pretended he could infallibly end all the Controversies in Israel, and keep
all in peace and unity; and yet abundance of Controversies to arise among them
by what right and power he took that office upon him, and many of them cry out
upon it, as an Usurpation, and a disparagement to the Laws and Government of
his Father David; and upon this, some of the wiser Israelites should have asked
him, Whether this were the way to end all Controversies, and keep the Nation in
peace? Would it not have been a satisfactory Answer for him to have said, Yes,
no doubt it is the only way; For, only they that acknowledge my power, are the
Kings lawful subjects, and all the rest are Rebels and Traitors. And, Is not
this just the same Answer which you give here? That the Pope is still appointed
to keep peace and unity in the Church, because all that question his Authority,
be Heretics and Schismatics. But, as in the former case, the surest way to
prevent those Consequences, were to produce that power and authority which the
King had given him, and that should be the first thing which should be made
evident from authentic records, and the clear testimony of the gravest
Senators; so, if you could produce the Letters Pattents, whereby Christ made
the Pope the great Lord Chancellor of his Church, to determine all
Controversies of Faith, and show this attested by the concurrent voice of the
Primitive Church, who best knew what order Christ took for the Government of
his Church; this were a way to prevent such persons turning such Heretics and
Schismatics, as you say they are, by not submitting themselves to the Popes
Authority. But for you to pretend that the Popes Authority is necessary to the
Churches Unity, and when the Heresies and Schisms of the Church are objected,
to say, That those are all out of the Church, is just as if a Shepherd should
say, That he would keep the whole Flock of sheep within such a Fold, and when
the better half are showed him to be out of it, he should return this Answer,
That those were without, and not within his Fold; and therefore they were none
of the Flock that he meant. So that his meaning was, those that would abide in,
he could keep in, but for those that would not, he had nothing to say to them.
So it is with you, the Pope he ends Controversies, and keeps the Church at
Unity; How so? They who do agree, are of his Flock, and of the Church; and
those that do not, are out of it. A Quaker or Anabaptist will keep the Church
in Unity after the same way, only the Pope has the greater number of his side;
for, they will tell you, If they were hearkened to, the Church should never be
in pieces; for all those who embrace their Doctrines, are of the Church, and
those who do not, are Heretics and Schismatics. So we see upon your
principles, What an easy matter it is to be an Infallible Judge, and to end
all Controversies in the Church; that only this must be taken for granted, that
all who will not own such an infallible Judge, are out of the Church, and so
the Church is at Unity still, how many soever there are who doubt or deny the
Popes Authority. Thus we easily understand what that excellent harmony is,
which you cry so much up in your Church; that you most gravely say, That, had
not the Pope received from God the power he challenges, he could never have
been able to preserve that peace and unity in matters of Religion, that is
found in the Roman Church: Of what nature that Unity is, we have seen already:
And surely you have much cause to boast of the Popes faculty of deciding
Controversies, ever since the late Decree of Pope Innocent, in the case of the
five Propositions. For, How readily the Jansenists have submitted since, and
what Unity there has been among the dissenting parties in France, all the
world can bear you witness. And, whatever you pretend, were it not for Policy
and Interest, the Infallible Chair would soon fall to the ground; for it has
so little footing in Scripture or Antiquity, that there had need be a watchful
eye, and strong hand to keep it up.

But now we are to examine the main proof which is brought for the necessity of
this Living and Infallible Judge;. 8.
which lies in these words of A.C. Every earthly Kingdom, when matters cannot
be composed by a Parliament (which cannot be called upon all occasions) has,
besides the Law Books, some living Magistrates and Judges, and above all one
visible King, the highest Judge, who has Authority sufficient to end all
Controversies, and settle Unity in all Temporal Affairs. And, Shall we think
that Christ, the wisest King, has provided in his Kingdom the Church, only the
Law Books of holy Scripture, and no living visible Judges, and above all one
chief, so assisted by his Spirit, as may suffice to end all Controversies for
Unity and Certainty of Faith? which can never be, if every man may interpret
Holy Scripture, the Law Books, as he list. This his Lordship says, P. 199. n.
7.
is a very plausible argument with the many; but the Foundation of it is but a
similitude, and, if the similitude hold not in the main argument, is nothing.
And so his Lordship at large proves that it is here. For whatever further
concerns this Controversy concerning the Popes Authority, is brought under the
examination of this argument; which you mangle into several Chapters, thereby
confounding the Reader, that he may not see the coherence or dependence of one
thing upon another. But having cut off the superfluities of this Chapter
already, I may with more convenience reduce all that belongs to this matter
within the compass of it. And that he may the better apprehend his Lordships
scope and design. I shall first sum up his Lordships Answers together, and
then more particularly go about the vindication of them. 1. Then, his Lordship
at large proves that the Militant Church is not properly a Monarchy, and
therefore the foundation of the similitude is destroyed. 2. That supposing it a
Kingdom, yet the Church Militant is spread in many earthly Kingdoms, and cannot
well be ordered like one particular Kingdom. 3. That the Church of England
under one Supreme Governor, our Gracious Sovereign, has, besides the Law-Book
of the Scripture, visible Magistrates and Judges, Archbishops and Bishops to
govern the Church in Truth and Peace. 4. That as in particular Kingdoms there
are some affairs of greatest Consequence as concerning the Statute Laws, which
cannot be determined but in Parliament; so in the Church, the making such
Canons which must bind all Christians, must belong to a free and lawful General
Council. Thus I have laid together the substance of his Lordships Answer, that
the dependence and connection of things may be better perceived by the
intelligent Reader.

We come now therefore to the first Answer. As to which his Lordship says, It
is not certain that the whole Church Militant is a Kingdom; P. 200.
for they are no mean ones which think, our Savior Christ left the
Church-Militant in the hands of the Apostles, and their Successors, in an
Aristocratical, or rather a mixed Government; and that the Church is not
Monarchical, otherwise than the Triumphant and Militant make one body under
Christ the Head. And in this sense indeed, and in this only the Church is a
most absolute Kingdom. And the very expressing of this sense, is a full Answer
to all the places of Scripture, and other arguments brought by Bellarmine to
prove that the Church is a Monarchy. But the Church being as large as the
world, Christ thought fittest to govern it Aristocratically, by diverse, rather
than by one Viceroy. And I believe, says he, this is true. For so it was
governed for the first three hundred years, and somewhat better; the Bishops of
those times carrying the whole business of admitting any new consecrated
Bishops or others to, or rejecting them from, their Communion. And this, his
Lordship says, He has carefully examined for the first six hundred years even
to, and within, the time of S. Gregory the Great. Now to this you answer. 1.
That though A. C. urges the argument in a similitude of a Kingdom only, P. 219.
yet it is of force in any other kind of settled Government, as in a
Commonwealth. But by this A. C. seems a great deal the wiser man, for he knew
what he did when he instanced in in a Kingdom; for he foresaw that this only
would tend to his purpose concerning the Popes Supremacy; but though there be
the same necessity of some Supreme Power in a Commonwealth, yet that would do
him no good at all, for all that could be inferred thence, would be the
necessity of a General Council. And by this you may see, How little your
similitude will hold any other way than A.C. put it. Therefore, 2. You answer,
That the Government of the Church is not a pure, but a mixed Monarchy, i. e. the
Supreme Government of the Church is clearly Monarchical, you confess: yet
Bishops within their respective Dioceses and Jurisdictions are spiritual
Princes also, that is, chief Pastors and Governors of such a part of the
Church in their own right. How far this latter is consonant to your principles,
I have already examined, but the former is that we dispute now, concerning the
Supreme Government of the Church, Whether that be Monarchical or no, and this
is that which his Lordship denies; and, for all that I see, we may continue to
do so too, for any argument you bring to the contrary.

Although you produce your Achilles in the next paragraph, viz. that since the
Government of one in chief,. 9.
P. 220.
is by all Philosophers acknowledged for the most perfect, What wonder is it
that Christ our Savior thought it fitter to govern the Church by one Viceroy,
than Aristocratically, or by many, as he would have it? But, Are you sure
Christ asked the Philosophers opinions, in establishing a Government in the
Church? The Philosophers judged truly that of all Forms of Civil Government,
Monarchy was the best, i. e. most conducing to the ends of Civil Government:
for the excellency of such things must be measured by their respect to the
ends. Now, if we apply this to the Church, we must not measure it by such ends,
as we fancy to our selves, or such as are only the ends of mere Civil
Societies; but all must be considered with a respect to the chief design of him
who first instituted a Church. And from thence we must draw our Inferences, as
to what may tend most to the Peace and Unity of it. Now it appearing to be the
great design of Christ, that mankind should be brought to eternal Happiness, we
cannot argue from hence, as to the necessity of any manner of Government,
unless one of them has in it self a greater tendency to this than another
has. For in Civil Governments, the whole design of the Society, is the Civil
Peace of it; but it is otherwise in the Church, the main end of it, is to order
things with the greatest convenience for a future life: Now this being the main
end of this Society, and no manner of Government having in it self a greater
tendency to this than other: It was in the power of the Legislator, to appoint
what Government he pleased himself. But when we consider that he intended this
Church of his should be spread all over the world, and this to be his immediate
errand he sent his Apostles upon, to preach to every creature, and to plant
Churches in the most remote and distant places from each other; we can have the
least ground to fancy he should appoint an Universal Monarchy in his Church of
any Government whatsoever. For if we will take that boldness you put us upon,
to enquire, What form is fittest for a Society dispersed into all parts of the
world, and that are not bound, upon their being Christians, to live nearer
Rome, than Mexico or Japan,; Could any one imagine it would be, to appoint one
Viceroy to superintend his Church at such a place as Rome is? Suppose all the
East and West Indies consisted of Christian Churches, What advantage, in order
to the Government of those Churches, could the Popes Authority be? What
Heresies and Schisms might be among them before his Holiness could be
acquainted with them? These are therefore very slender and narrow Conceptions
concerning Christ's Institution of a Government over his Catholic Church, as
though he should only have regard to these few adjacent parts of Europe,
without any respect to the good of the whole Church. But since we see, Christ
designed such a Church which might be in most remote and distant places from
each other, and yet at such a distance might equally promote the main ends,
wherefore they became Churches, it is very unreasonable to think he should
appoint one Viceroy to be Head over them all. For which, let us suppose, that
Europe might be (as the Eastern Churches have been) overrun with the Turkish
Power, and only some few suffering Christians left here, and the Pope much in
the same condition with the Patriarch of Constantinople: But on the other side,
that Christianity should largely spread it self in China, and the East Indies,
and the Christian Church flourish in America, Could any Philosopher think that
fixing a Monarchy at Rome, or elsewhere, were the best way to Govern the
Catholic Church, which consists of all these Christian Societies? For that is
certainly the best Government which is suited to all conditions of that
Society, which it is intended for; now it is apparent the Christian Church was
intended to be so Catholic, that no one Viceroy can be supposed able to look
to the Government of it. If Christ had intended merely such a Church which
should have consisted of such persons which lay here near about Rome, and no
others, the supposition of such a Monarchy in the Church would not have been
altogether so incongruous (though liable to very many inconveniences:) but
when he intended his Religion for the universal good of the world, and that in
all parts of it, without obliging them to live near each other, it is one of
the most unreasonable suppositions in the world, that he should set up a
Monarchical Government over his Catholich Church in such a place as Rome is.
But now, if we suppose only an Aristocratical Government in the Church under
Christ as the alone Supreme Head; nothing can be more suitable to the nature of
the Church, or the large extent of it, than that is. For wherever a Church
is, there may be Bishops to govern it, and other Officers of the Church to
over-see the lesser parts of it, and all join to promote the Peace and Unity of
it, which they may with the more ease do, if no one challenge to be Supreme
Head, to whom belongs the chief care of the Church. For by this means they
cannot with that power and authority redress abuses, and preserve the Churches
Purity and Peace, which otherwise they might have done. So that considering
barely the nature of things, nothing seems more repugnant to the end for which
Christ instituted a Catholic Church, than such a Monarchy as you imagine; and
nothing more suitable than an Aristocracy; considering that Christian Churches
may be much dispersed abroad, and that where they are, they are incorporated
into that Civil Society in which they live (according to the known saying of
Optatus, Ecclesia est in republica, etc.) and therefore such a Monarchy would
be unsuitable to the civil Governments in which those Churches may be. For it
were easy to demonstrate, that such a Monarchy as you challenge in the Church,
is the most inconvenient Government for it, take the Church in what way, or
sense you please; Whether, as to its own peace and order, or to its spreading
into other Churches, or to the respect it must have to the civil Government it
lives under. And, if we would more largely enquire into these things, we might
easily find, that those which you look on as the great ends, wherefore Christ
should institute such a Monarchical Government in his Church, are things
unsuitable to the nature of a Christian Church; and which Christ, as far as we
can judge, did never intend to take care, that they should never be: which are,
freedom from all kind of Controversies, and absolute submission of Judgment to
the decrees of an Infallible Judge. We no where find such a state of a
Christian Church described or promised, where men shall all be of one mind
(only that peace and brotherly love be continued, is that, all Christians are
bound to); much less certainly, that this Unity should be by a submission of
our understandings to an Infallible Judge, of whom we read nothing in that Book
which persuades us to be Christians: and without which freedom of our
understandings (which this pretended Infallibility would deprive us of) we
could never have been judicious and rational Christians.

. 10.
But granting that wise men have thought Monarchy the best Government in it
self; What is this to the proving, what Government Christ has appointed in his
Church? For that is the best Government for the Church, not which Philosophers
and Politicians have thought best, but which our Savior has appointed in his
Word. For he certainly knew best, what would suit with the conveniences of his
Church. And these are bold and insolent disputes, wherein those of your side
argue, That Christ must have instituted a Monarchy in his Church, because all
Philosophers have judged That the most perfect Government. I need not tell you
what these speeches imply Christ to be, if he does not follow the Philosophers
judgment. Will you give him leave to judge what is fittest for his Church
himself? or do you think he has not wisdom enough to do it, unless the
Philosophers instruct him? Let us therefore appeal to his Laws to see what
Government he has there appointed. And now I shall deal more closely with you.
You tell me, therein Christ has appointed this Monarchical Government. But I
may be nearer your mind, when you will Answer me these following Questions.
When, and where did any wise Legislator appoint a matter of so vast concernment
to the good of the Society, as the Supreme Government of it, and express no
more of it in his Laws, than Christ has done of this Monarchical Government of
the Church? Is there not particular care taken in all Laws about that, to
express the rights of Sovereignty, to hinder Usurpations, to bind all to
obedience, to determine the way of Succession by descent or election? And has
Christ instituted a Monarchy in his Church and said nothing of all these
things? When the utmost you can pretend to, are some ambiguous places, which
you must have the power of Interpreting your selves, or they signify nothing
to your purpose. So that none of the Fathers, or the Primitive Church for
several Centuries, could find out such mysteries in super hanc Petram, dabo
tibi Claves, and pasce oves, as you have done. If such a Monarchy had been
appointed in the Church, what should we have had more frequent mention of in
the Records of the Church, than of this? Where do we meet with any Histories
that write the affairs of Kingdoms for some hundred of years, and never mention
any Royal Acts of the Kings of them? If St. Peter's being at Rome had settled the
Monarchy of the Church there, what more famous act could have been mentioned in
all Antiquity then that? What notice would have been taken by other Churches of
him whom he had left his Successor? What addresses would have been made to him
by the Bishops of other Churches? What testimonies of obedience and submission;
what appeals and resort thither? And it is wonderful strange that the Histories
of the Church should be silent in these grand Affairs, when they report many
minute things even during the hottest times of persecution. Did the Christians
conspire together in those times not to let their posterity know, Who had the
Supreme Government of the Church then? Or were they afraid the Heathen
Emperors should be jealous of the Popes, if they had understood their great
Authority? But then methinks they should have carried it however among
themselves with all reverence and submission to the Pope, and not openly oppose
him as soon as ever he began to exercise any Authority, as in the case of Victor
and the Asian Bishops. But of all things, it seems most strange and
unaccountable to me, that Christ should have instituted such a Monarchy in his
Church, and none of the Apostles mention any thing of it in any of the Epistles
which they writ, in which are several things concerning the Peace and
Government of the Church: nay, when there were Schisms and divisions in the
Church, and that on the account of their Teachers, among whom Cephas was one
(by that very name on which Christ said he would build his Church) and yet no
mention of respect more to him, then to any other: no intimation of what power
St. Peter had for the Government of the Church, as the Head and Monarch of it:
no references at all made to him by any of the divided parties of the Church at
that time: no mention at all of any such power given him in the Epistles
written by him, but he writes just as any other Apostle did, with great
expressions of humility; and, as if he foresaw what Usurpations would be in the
Church, he forbids any Lording it over Gods heritage, and calls Christ the
chief Pastor of the Church. And this he does in an Epistle not writ to the
Catholic Church, which had been most proper for him if Head of the Church, but
only to the dispersed Jews in some particular Provinces. Can any one then
imagine he should be Monarch of the Church, and no act of his, as such,
recorded at all of him; but carrying himself with all humility, not fixing
himself as Head of the Church in any Chair, but going up and down from one
place to another, as the rest of the Apostles for promoting the Gospel of
Christ? To conclude all; Is it possible to conceive there should be a Monarch
appointed by Christ in the Church, and yet the Apostle when he reckons up those
offices which Christ had set in the Church, speak not one word of him: he
mentions Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers; but the chief
of all is omitted, and he to whom the care of all the rest is committed; Ephesians. 4
12.
and in whose Authority the welfare, peace, and unity of the Church is secured.
These things to me seem so incredible, that till you have satisfied my mind in
these Questions, I must needs judge this pretended Monarchy in the Church to be
one of the greatest Figments ever were in the Christian world. And thus I have
at large considered your Argument from Reason, Why there should be such a
Monarchy in the Church; which I have the rather done, because it is one of the
great things in dispute between us, and because the most plausible Argument
brought for it, is, The necessity of it in order to the Churches peace, which
Monarchy being the best of Governments would the most tend to promote. To
return now to his Lordship.

. 11.
He brings an evidence out of Antiquity against the acknowledgement of any such
Monarchy in the Church from the literae communicatoriae which certified from
one great Patriarch to another, P. 201.
Who were fit or unfit to be admitted to their Communion, upon any occasion of
repairing from one See to another. And these were sent mutually, and as freely
in the same manner from Rome to the other Patriarchs, as from them to it. Out
of which (says his Lordship) I think this will follow most directly, that the
Church Government then was Aristocratical. For had the Bishop of Rome been then
accounted sole Monarch of the Church, and been put into the definition of the
Church (as he is now by Bellarmin) all these communicatory Letters should have
been directed from him to the rest, as whose admittance ought to be a rule for
all to communicate; but not from others to him, at least not in that even equal
brotherly way, as now they appear to be written. For it is no way probable the
Bishops of Rome, which even then sought their own greatness too much, would
have submitted to the other Patriarchs voluntarily, had not the very course of
the Church put it upon them. P. 220.
To this you Answer, That these literae communicatoriae do rather prove our
assertion, being ordained by Sixtus 1, in favor of such Bishops as were called
to Rome, or otherwise forced to repair thither; to the end they might without
scruple, be received into their own Diocese at their return: having also
decreed, that without such letters communicatory, none in such case should be
admitted. But that these letters should be sent from other Bishops to Rome in
such an even, equal, and brotherly way, you say, is one of his Lordships
Chimaera's. But this difference, or inequality you pretend to be in them; that
those to the Pope were merely Testimonial; those from him were Mandatory,
witness (say you) the case of St. Athanasius and other Bishops restored by the
Popes communicatory letters. But supposing them equal, you say, it only showed
the Popes humility; and ought to be no prejudice to his just authority, and his
right and power to do otherwise if he saw cause. But all this depends upon a
mere fiction, viz. That these communicatory letters were ordained by Sixtus 1,
in favor of such Bishops as were called to Rome, than which nothing can be
more improbable. But I do not say, that this is a Chimaera of your own Brains,
Baron Annal. A.D. 142. s. 6. Bin. Council. T^. 1. p. 74.
for you follow Baronius in it: for which he produces no other evidence, but
the Author of the lives of the Popes: but Binius adds that which seems to have
been the first ground of it, which is the second decretal Epistle of Sixtus 1,
in which that Decree is extant: But whosoever considers the notorious forgery
of those decretal Epistles (as will be more manifested where you contend for
them) on which account they are slighted by Card. Perron, Baron. An. 865. sect.
5.8.
and in many places by Baronius himself, will find little cause to triumph in
this Epistle of Sixtus 1. And whoever reflects on the state of those times in
which Sixtus lived, will find it improbable enough, that the Pope should take
to himself so much Authority to summon Bishops to him, and to order that none
should be admitted without Communicatory letters from him. It is not here a
place to enquire into the several sorts of those letters which passed among the
Bishops of the Primitive Church, whether the Canonical, Pacifical,
Ecclesiastical, and Communicatory, were all one; and what difference there was
between the Communicatory letters granted to Travelers, in order to their
Communion with foreign Churches, and those letters which were sent from one
Patriarch to another. But this is sufficiently evident, that those letters
which were the tessera hospitalitatis, as Tertullian calls it, the Passport
for Communion in foreign Churches, had no more respect to the Bishop of Rome,
than to any other Catholic Bishop. Therefore the Council of Antioch passes
two Canons concerning them; one, Council. Antioch. can. 7, 8.
That no Traveller should be received without them; another, That none but
Bishops should give them. And that all Bishops did equally grant them to all
places, Aug. Epist. 163.
appears by that passage in St. Austin, in his Epistle to Eusebius and the
other Donatists, relating the conference he had with Fortunius a Bishop of that
party; wherein St. Austin asked him, Whether he could give communicatory
letters whither he pleased? for by that means it might be easily determined
whether he had communion with the whole Catholic Church, or no. From whence it
follows, that any Catholic Bishop might without any respect to the Bishop of
Rome grant Communicatory letters to all foreign Churches. And the enjoying of
that Communion which was consequent upon these letters, is all that Optatus
means in that known saying of his, that they had Communion with Siricius at
Rome, commercio formatarum, Optat. l. 2,
by the use of these communicatory letters. But besides these, there were other
letters, which every Patriarch sent to the rest upon his first installment,
which were called their Synodical Epistles, and these contained the profession
of their Faith; and the answers to them did denote their Communion with them.
Since therefore these were sent to all the Patriarchs indifferently, and not
barely to the Bishop of Rome; there appears no difference at all in the letters
sent to or from him and the other Patriarchs on this occasion. As for your
instance of the Popes restoring Athanasius, I have sufficiently answered it
already; and if the Popes letter were never so Mandatory (as it was not) yet we
see it took no effect among the Eastern Bishops: and therefore they were of his
Lordships mind, That the Government of the Church was not Monarchical, but
Aristocratical. I did expect here to have met with the pretended Epistle of
Atticus of Constantinople about the manner of making formed letters, wherein
one P is said to be for the honor of St. Peter; but since you pass it over, on
this occasion, I hope you are convinced of the Forgery of it.

In the beginning of your next Chapter (which because of the coherence of the
matter I handle with this) you find great fault with his Lordship for a
Marginal citation out of Gerson,. 12.
P. 221.
because he supposes that Gersons judgment, was, that the Church might
continue without a Monarchical head, because he writ a Tract de Auferibilitate
Papae; whereas, you say, Gersons drift is only to show how many several ways
the Pope may be taken away, that is, deprived of his office, and cease to be
Pope as to his own person, so that the Church, pro tempore, till another be
chosen shall be without her visible Head. But although the truth of what his
Lordship proves, does not at all depend upon this Testimony of Gerson, which
was only a Marginal citation; yet since you so boldly accuse him for a false
allegation, we must further examine how pertinent this Testimony is to that
which his Lordship brought it for. The sentence to which this Citation of
Gerson refers, is this. For they are no mean ones, P. 220.
who think our Savior Christ left the Church-militant in the hands of the
Apostles, and their Successors, in an Aristocratical, or rather a mixed
Government; and that the Church is not Monarchical, otherwise than the
Triumphant and Militant make one body under Christ the Head. Over against these
words, that Tract of Gerson de Auferibilitate Papae is cited. If therefore so
much be contained in that Book as makes good this, which his Lordship says; he
is not so much guilty of false alleging Gerson, as you are of falsely accusing
him. To make this clear, we must consider what Gersons design was in writing
that Book, and what his opinion therein is concerning the Churches Government.
It is well known, that his Book was written upon the occasion of the Council of
Constance in the time of the great Schism between the three Popes; and that the
design of it, is, to make it appear that it was in the power of the Council to
depose the Popes, Gerson de Auferibilitate Papae Consider. 10
and suspend them from all Jurisdiction in the Church. Therefore, he says,
That the Pope may not only lose his office by voluntary cession; but that in
many cases he may be deprived by the Church, or by a General Council
representing the Church, whether he consent to it or no: Nay, in the next
consideration, he says, That he may be deprived by a General Council which is
celebrated without his consent or against his will; And, in the following
consideration adds, That this may be done not only declaratively, but
juridically: the Question now comes to this, Whether a person who asserts these
things, does believe the Government of the Militant Church to be Monarchical,
and not rather Aristocratical and mixed Government? And I dare appeal to any
man's reason, whether that may be accounted a Monarchical Government, where he
that is Supreme may be deposed and deprived of his office in a Juridical
manner, by a Senate that has Authority to do these things? For it is apparent,
the Supreme power lies in the Senate and not the Prince, and that the Prince is
only a Ministerial Head under them. And this is plainly Gersons opinion as to
the Church; although therefore he may allow the supreme Ministerial Authority
to be in the Pope, (which is all your Citations prove) yet the radical and
intrinsecal power lies in the Church, which being represented in a General
Council, may depose the Pope from his Authority in the Church. And the truth
is, this opinion of Gerson makes the Fundamental power of the Church to be
Democratical, and that the Supreme exercise is by Representatives in a General
Council, and that the Pope at the highest, is, but a Ministerial and
accountable Head. And therefore Spalatensis truly observes, That this opinion
of Gerson (which is the same with that of the Paris Divines, of which he
speaks) does only in words attribute supreme Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to the
Pope, Spalat. de Rep. Eccles. Tom. 1. l. 4. c. 7. sect. 5.
but in reality it takes it quite away from him. And this is the same Doctrine
which then prevailed in the Council of Constance, and afterward at Basil, as
may be seen at large in their Synodical Epistle, defended by Richerius,
Vigorius, and others. Now let any man of reason judge, whether, notwithstanding
your charge of false citation, (from some expressions intimating only a
Ministerial Headship) his Lordship did not very pertinently cite this Tract of
Gersons, to prove that no mean persons did think the Church Militant, not to be
Governed by a Monarchical, but by an Aristocratical or mixed Government?

But no sooner is this marginal citation cleared, but the charge is renewed
about another,. 13.
P. 222.
viz. St. Hierom; yet here you dare not charge his Lordship with a false
allegation, but you are put to your shifts to get off this Testimony as well as
you can. For, St. Hierom saying expressly in his Epistle to Evagrius, Vbicunque
fuerit Episcopus, sive Romae, sive Eugubii, sive Constantinopoli, sive Rhegii,
etc. ejusdem meriti est, ejusdem est and sacerdotii; his Lordship might well
infer, That doubtless he thought not of the Roman Bishops Monarchy. For what
Bishop, says he, is of the same merit or the same degree in the Priesthood
with the Pope, as things are now carried at Rome? To this you Answer, That he
speaks not of the Pope, as he is Pope, or in respect of that eminent Authority,
which belongs to him as St. Peter's Successor, but only compares him with
another private Bishop, in respect of mere character or power of a Bishop, as
Bishop only. But though this be all which any of your party ever since the
Reformation have been able to Answer to this place; yet nothing looks more like
a mere shift than this does. For had St. Hierom only compared these Bishops
together in regard of their order, was not Sacerdotium enough to express that
by; if St. Hierom had said only, that all Bishops are ejusdem sacerdotii, there
might have been some plausible pretense for this distinction; but when he adds
ejusdem meriti too, he wholly precludes the possibility of your evading that
way. For, What does merit here stand for as distinct from Priesthood, if it
imports not something besides what belongs to Bishops as Bishops? What can
merit here signify, but some greater Power, Authority, and Jurisdiction given
by Christ to one Bishop above another. St. Hierom was not so senseless, as not
to see that the Bishops of Rome, Constantinople, and Alexandria, had greater
Authority, and larger Jurisdiction in the Church, then the petty Bishops of
Eugubium, Rhegium, and Tanis; but all this he knew well enough came by the
custom of the Church, that one Bishop should have larger power in the Church
then another. But (says he) if you come to urge us with what ought to be
practiced in the Church, then, says he, Orbis major est urbe, it is no one
City, as that of Rome (which he particularly instanceth in) which can prescribe
to the whole world; For (says he) all Bishops are of equal merit, and the same
Priesthood wheresoever they are, whether at Rome or elsewhere. So that it is
plain to all, but such as wilfully blind themselves, that St. Hierom speaks not
of that, which you call, the Character of Bishops, but of the Authority of
them; for that very word he uses immediately before, Si authoritas quaeritur,
orbis major est urbe. And where do you ever find merit applied to the Bishops
Character? They who say, It is understood of the merit of good life make St.
Hierom speak nonsense. For are all Bishops of the same merit of good life? But
we need not go out of Rome for the proper importance of merit here. For in the
third Roman Synod under Symmachus, Council. Romans 3. sub Symmacho. To. 3. p. 688.
that very word is used concerning Authority and Principality in the Church;
ejus sedi primum Petri Apostoli meritum sive principatus, deinde Conciliorum
venerandorum authoritas, etc. where Binius confesses an account is given of
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome, the first ground of which St. Peter's merit
or principality; apply now but this sense to S. Hierom, and he may be very
easily understood, All Bishops are ejusdem meriti sive principatus, of the same
merit, Dignity or Authority in the Church. But you say, he speaks not of the
Pope, as he is Pope: good reason for it, for St. Hierom knew no such Supremacy
in the Pope, as he now challenges. And can you think, if St. Hierom had
believed such an authority in the Pope as you do, he would ever have used such
words as these are, to compare him with the poor Bishop of Agobio in Merit and
Priesthood. I cannot persuade my self you can think so, only something must be
said for the cause you have undertaken to defend. And since, Bellarmine, and
such great men, had gone before you, you could not believe there were any
absurdity in saying as they did. Still you say, He does not speak of that
Authority which belongs to the Bishop of Rome, as S. Peter 's Successor. But if
you would but read a little further, you might see that S. Hierom speaks of all
Bishops, whether at Rome, or Eugubium, etc. as equally the Apostles Successors:
For, it is neither (says he) riches or poverty which makes Bishops higher or
lower. Caeterum omnes Apostolorum successores sunt; but they are all the
Apostles Successors; therefore he speaks of them with relation to that
Authority which they derived from the Apostles. And never had there been
greater necessity for him to speak of the Popes succeeding S. Peter in the
Supremacy over the Church than here, if he had known any such thing, but he
must be excused, he was ignorant of it. No, that he could not be (say you
again) for he speaks of it elsewhere, and therefore he must be so understood
there, as that he neither contradict nor condemn himself. But if the Epistle to
Damasus be all your evidence for it, a sufficient account has been given of
that already: therefore you add more, and bid us go find them out, to see,
Whether they make for the purpose or no. I am sure your first does not out of
his Commentary on the 13. Psalm, because it only speaks of S. Peter's being Head
of the Church, and not of the the Popes, and that may import only dignity and
pre-eminence, without authority and jurisdiction: besides, that Commentary on
the Psalms is rejected as spurious by Erasmus, Sixtus Senensis, and many others
among your selves. Your second, ad Demetriadem Virginem, is much less to your
purpose; for that only speaks of Innocentius coming after Anastasius at Rome,
qui Apostolicae Cathedrae and supradicti viri successor and filius est, Who
succeeded him in the Apostolical Chair; But, Do you not know that there were
many Apostolical Chairs besides that of Rome, and had every one of them supreme
authority over the Church of God? What, that should be on the 16. of S.
Matthew, I cannot imagine, unless it be that S. Peter is called Princeps
Apostolorum, which honor we deny him not, or that he says, Aedificabo
Ec^lesiam meam super te: But how these things concern the Popes Authority,
unless you had further enlightened us, I cannot understand. That ep. 54. ad
Marcellam, is of the same nature with the last, for the words which I suppose
you mean, are, Petrus super quem Dominus funda^it Ecclesiam; and if you see,
what Erasmus says upon that place, you will have little cause to boast much of
it. Your last place is, l. 1. Cont. Lucifer; which I suppose to be that
commonly cited thence; Ecclesiae salus in summi Sacerdotis dignitate pendet;
but there even Marianus Victorius will tell you, it is understood of every
ordinary Bishop, Thus I have taken the pains to search those places you nakedly
refer us to in S. Hierom, and find him far enough from the least danger of
contradicting or condemning himself, as to any thing which is here spoken by
him. So that we see S. Hierom remains a sufficient testimony against the Popes
Monarchical Government of the Church.

His Lordship further argues against this Monarchy in the Church from the great
and undoubted Rule given by Optatus;. 14.
P. 200.
that wheresoever there is a Church, Optat. l. 3.
there the Church is in the Commonwealth, and not the Commonwealth in the
Church. And so also the Church was in the Roman Empire. Now from this ground
(says his Lordship) I argue thus. If the Church be within the Empire, or other
Kingdom, it is impossible the Government of the Church should be Monarchical.
For no Emperor or King will endure another King within his Dominion, that
shall be greater than himself, since the very enduring it makes him that
endures it upon the matter no Monarch. P. 223.
Your answer to this, is, That these two Kingdoms are of different natures, the
one spiritual, the other temporal: the one exercised only in such things as
concern the worship of God, and the Eternal Salvation of souls; the other in
affairs that concern this world only. Surely you would persuade us, we had
never heard of much less read Bellarmin's first Book de Pontifice, about the
Popes Temporal Power, which was fain to get license for the other four to pass
at Rome; and although he minces the matter as much as may be, and much more
than Baronius and others did, who pleaded downright for the Popes Temporal
Power; yet he must be a very weak Prince, who does not see how far that
indirect and reductive power, may extend, when the Pope himself is to be Judge,
What comes under it, and what not. And, What may not come under it, when
deposing of Princes shall be reduced under that you call The Worship of God?
and absolving subjects from their obedience, tend to promote their Eternal
Salvation? But if the Pope may be Judge, What temporal things are in ordine ad
spiritualia, and bring them under his power in that respect, Why may not the
Prince be Judge what spiritual things are in ordine ad temporalia, and use his
power over them in that respect too? But in the mean time, Is not a Kingdom
like to be at peace then? If the Pope challenged no other authority but what
Christ or the Apostles had, his Government might be admitted, as well as that
authority which they had; but, What do you think of us the mean while, when you
would persuade us, that the Popes Power is no other than what Christ or the
Apostles had? you must certainly think us such persons as the Moon has wrought
particularly upon, as you after very civilly speak concerning his Lordship.
Your instance from the Kings of France and Spain, his Lordship had sufficiently
answered, by telling you, That he that is not blind may see if he will, of what
little value the Popes Power is in those Kingdoms, further than to serve their
own turns of him, which they do to their great advantage. And when you would
have this to be upon the account of Faith and Conscience, Let the Pope exercise
his power apparently against their Interest, and then see, on what account they
profess obedience to him. But, as long as they can manage such pretenses for
their advantage, and admit so much of it, and no more, they may very well
endure it, and his Lordship be far enough from contradicting himself. When you
would urge the same inconvenience against the Aristocratical Government of the
Church, you suppose that Aristocratical Government wholly Independent on, and
not subordinate to, P. 224.
the Civil Government; whereas his Lordship and the Church of England assert
the Kings Supremacy in Government over all, both persons and causes
Ecclesiastical: And therefore this nothing concerns us. And if from what has
gone before, it must, as you say, remain therefore fully proved, that the
external Government of the Church on earth is Monarchical. It may for all that
I see, remain as fully proved, that you are now the man who enjoy this
Monarchical Power over the Church. And whatever you style the Pope, Whether the
Deputy, or Vicar General of Christ, or Servus servorum, or what you will; it is
all one to us as long as we know his meaning, whatever fair words you give him.
As though men would take it one jot the better to have one usurp and Tyrannize
over them, because he does not call himself King or Prince, but their humble
servant. Is it not by so much the greater Tyranny? to have such kind of
Ecclesiastical Saturnalia, when the servus servorum must, under that name,
tyrannize over the whole world?

We have already at large showed, How destructive this pretended Supremacy is
to that Government of the Church by Bishops, which, his Lordship proves from
the ancient Canons and Fathers of the Church, P. 202.
does of right belong to them, viz. from several Canons of the Councils of
Antioch and Nice, and the testimonies of S. Augustine and S. Cyprian. To all
this you only say, That you allow the Bishops their portion in the Government
of Christ's Flock: But it is but a very small portion of what belongs to them,
P. 224.
if all their Jurisdiction must be derived from the Pope; which I have showed
before to be the most current Opinion in your Church: And I dare say, you will
not dispute the contrary. His Lordship was well enough aware, to what purpose
Bellarmine acknowledged that the Government of the Church was ever in the
Bishops; for he himself says, It was to exclude temporal Princes; but then he
desires A. C. to take notice of that, when Secular Princes are to be excluded,
then it shall be pretended, that Bishops have power to govern: but when it
comes to sharing stakes between them and the Pope, then hands off; they have
nothing to do any further than the Pope gives them leave. What follows
concerning the impossibility of a right executing of this Monarchy in the
Church has been already discussed of, and you answer nothing at all to it that
has any face of pertinency; for when you say, it will hold as well against the
Aristocratical Form, I have plainly enough showed you the contrary.

. 15.
That which follows about the design of an Universal Monarchy in the State, as
well as the Church; about Pope Innocent 's making the Pope to be the Sun, and
the Emperor the Moon, the Spanish Friars two Scutchions, Campanella 's
Eclogue, P. 225, 227.
since you will not stand to defend them, I shall willingly pass them over. But
what concerns the Supremacy of the Civil Power, is more to our purpose, and
must be considered. His Lordship therefore says, That every soul was to be
subject to the higher power, Romans 13.1. And the higher Power there mentioned,
P. 205.
is the Temporal. And the ancient Fathers come in with a full consent, that
every soul comprehends all without exception: All spiritual men, even to the
highest Bishop, even in spiritual causes too, so the Foundations of Faith and
good Manners be not shaken: And where they are shaken, there ought to be prayer
and patience, there ought not to be opposition by force. Nay, Emperors and
Kings are custodes utriusque Tabulae; They to whom the custody and preservation
of both Tables of the Law, for worship to God, and duty to man, are committed.
A Book of the Law was by Gods own command in Moses his time, to be given to the
King, Deuteronomy. 17.18. And the Kings under the Law, but still according to it, did
proceed to necessary Reformation in Church-businesses; and therein commanded
the very Priests themselves, as appears in the Acts of Hezekiah and Josiah, who
yet were never censured to this day for usurping the Highpriests office. Nay,
and the greatest Emperors for the Churches honor, Theodosius the elder, and
Justinian, and Charles the Great, and diverse others, did not only meddle now and
then, but enact Laws to the great settlement and increase of Religion in their
several times. Now to this again, you answer, That the civil and spiritual are
both absolute and independent powers, though each in their proper Orb, the one
in spirituals, the other in temporals. But, What is this to that which his
Lordship proves, That there can be no such absolute independent spiritual
power; both because all are bound to obey the Civil Power, and because the
Civil Power has a right to meddle in Ecclesiastical matters? And, though you
express never so much honor to civil authority, yet still you limit it to the
administration merely of civil affairs; and how far that is, is well enough
known. You tell us plainly, That it does not belong to the Emperor to order
the affairs of the Church; But why do you not answer the Reasons and Instances
which his Lordship brings to the contrary? Yet you yield, That in case of
notorious and gross abuses, manifestly contrary to Religion, and connived at by
the Pastors of the Church, Christian Princes may lawfully and piously use their
Authority, in procuring the said abuses to be effectually redressed by the said
Pastors, P. 226.
as the examples of Ezekias and Josias prove. But in case the High Priest would
not have yielded to such a reformation, Might not those Princes, by the
assistance of other Priests, have effected it? This is the case you were to
speak to: For whereas you fly out, and say, That Princes may not take the
Priests office upon them. Whom do you dispute against in that? Not his Lordship
certainly, nor any of the Church of England, who never said they might, though
they have been most injuriously calumniated, as though they did. That which we
assert, is, That Princes may enact Laws concerning Religion, and reform abuses
in Divine Worship, but we do not say, they may take the Pastoral office upon
them; and therefore you say no more in that than we do our selves. But when you
say, They may not reform Religion in the substance of it, I cannot well tell
How to understand you. If you mean, not so reform Religion, as to take away any
of the substance, that is a Reformation to purpose; but if you bring it ad
hypothesin, we utterly deny that any of the substance of Religion was taken
away upon our Churches Reformation: If you mean, not reform abuses which go
under the name of the substance of Religion, that will be to make the most
unsufferable abuses the most incurable. But, when you add, That nothing must be
enacted pertaining to Religion by their own Authority without, or contrary to
the Priests consent (the High Priest, I suppose you mean) show us, Where the
Kings of Israel were bound, not to reform in case the High Priest did not
consent: and if you could do this, you must prove such a High Priest now, and
that Princes are bound to wait his leisure for reforming abuses in Religion,
when his pretended Authority is upheld by maintaining them. As for your
commendations of Pope Hildebrand, and Innocent the Third, for very prudent men,
and worthy Champions of your Church, we see, What prudence is with you, and
what a worthy Church you have. But it is still an excellent evasion, P. 227.
That they never endeavored to subject the Emperor to themselves in temporal
matters; no nor Alexander the Third neither, when he trod upon the Emperors
neck? But the proceedings of these Popes with the Emperors, as likewise Adrian
4. Lucius 3. and others, are so gross, that it had been more for your Interest
with Christian Princes, to disown them, than to go about to palliate them with
such frivolous distinctions, that his Understanding must be as blind as his
Obedience, that does not see thorough them. You are much concerned, that his
Lordship should seem to give a lash to those mortified self-denying men, the
Jesuits, in bidding them leave their practicing to advance the greatness of the
Pope and Emperor; for, Who could believe they should deprive themselves of the
riches and pleasures of the world upon such designs? Undoubtedly you are one of
the number, for I never heard that any other Order among you, did ever give
them half so good words, but condemned them as much for their practicing, as we
do our selves. And, What holy men they are, and what excellent Casuistical
Divinity about both the riches and pleasures of the world, if we did not
otherwise know, the Mysteries of Jesuitism would sufficiently discover. To what
his Lordship says further, P. 211.
That there is no necessity of one Supreme Living Judge, to keep the Church in
peace and unity, but that the several Bishops under their Sovereign Princes,
are sufficient in order to it; you only say, That he quotes Occham for it. But,
Does he nothing else but quote Occham? Why do you not answer to the thing, and
not barely to Occham? You have very good reason for it; for you have little to
say to the thing it self; but for Occham, you have enough to tell him in his
ear. 1. That he is in the Index of forbidden Books; a good testimony for the
man's honesty. 2. That he sided with the Emperor; a crime beyond an Index
Expurgatorius at Rome. 3. That if there were such a Government as Occham
supposes, all those Governors must be Infallible, or else there would be mere
Anarchy in the Church: And, Why not as well in the State, without Infallibility
there? You say, For want of this Infallibility, those Countries where it is not
acknowledged, are in Schisms: And we say, The pretense of this Infallibity has
caused the greatest of them. 4. You say, Occham speaks only de possibili, of
what might have been, if our Savior had pleased; but Occhamsayes, There is no
necessity there should be one chief Governor under Christ, and we say, You can
never prove that Christ has appointed that there shall be one; and therefore
this is more than disputing a bare possibility.

But now, as though all your beggings the Question had been arguments, all your
sayings proofs, and all your proofs demonstrations, with as much authority as
if you were in Cathedra, you conculde; Remain it therefore a settled Catholic
Principle, that the Pope has power over the whole Church of God; But you leave
out something which should be at the end of it, among all those who can believe
things as strongly without reason, as with it. And for the greater solemnity of
the Sentence you give it in the words of the Ecumenical Council at Florence:
And I must needs say, You have fitted them very well, for that was just as much
an Ecumenical Council, as the Pope is Ecumenical Pastor: but, that neither
the one nor the other is so, I have sufficiently proved already.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Council of Trent.
The Illegality of it manifested, first from the insufficiency of the Rule it
proceeded by, different from that of the first General Councils, and from the
Popes Presidency in it. The matter of Right concerning it, discussed. In what
Cases Superiors may be excepted against as Parties. The Pope justly excepted
against as a Party, and therefore ought not to be Judge. The Necessity of a
Reformation in the Court of Rome, acknowledged by Roman Catholics. The matter
of fact enquired into, as to the Popes Presidency in General Councils. Hosius
did not preside in the Nicene Council as the Popes Legate. The Pope had nothing
to do in the second General Council. Two Councils held at Constantinople,
within two years; these strangely confounded. The mistake made evident. S.
Cyril not President in the third General Council as the Popes Legate. No
sufficient evidence of the Popes Presidency in following Councils. The justness
of the Exception against the place, manifested; and against the freedom of the
Council from the Oath taken by the Bishops to the Pope. The form of that Oath
in the time of the Council of Trent. Protestants not condemned by General
Councils. The Greeks and others unjustly excluded as Schismatics. The
exception from the small number of Bishops cleared and vindicated. A General
Council in Antiquity not so called from the Popes General Summons. In what
sense a General Council represents the whole Church. The vast difference
between the proceedings in the Council of Nice, and that at Trent. The
exception from the number of Italian Bishops, justified. How far the Greek
Church and the Patriarch Hieremias may be said to condemn Protestants; with an
account of the proceedings between them.

HAving thus far considered the several grounds on which you lay the charge of
Schism upon us,. 1.
and showed at large the weakness* and insufficiency of them, we should now
have proceeded to the last part of our task, but that the great Palladium of
the present Roman Church, viz. the Council of Trent must be examined, to see
whether it be (...), or no; whether it came from Heaven, or was only the
contrivance of some cunning Artificers. Hist. Council of Trent. l. 1. p. 132.
And the famous Bishop of Bitonto in the Sermon made at the opening the Council
of Trent, has given us some ground to conjecture its original by his comparing
it so ominously to the Trojan-horse. Although therefore that the pretenses may
be high and great, that it was made Divina Palladis art, the Spirit of God
being said to be present in it, and concurring with it, yet they who search
further will find as much of Artifice in contriving, and deceit in the managing
the one as the other. And although the Cardinal Palavicino uses all his art, to
bring this Similitude off, without reflecting on the honor of the Council; yet
that Bishop, who in that Sermon pleaded so much, That the Spirit of God would
open the mouths of the Council, as he did once those of Balaam and Caiaphas,
was himself in this expression an illustrious Instance of the truth of what he
said. For he spoke as true in this, as if he had been High Priest himself that
year. But, as if you really believed your self the truth of that Bishops
Doctrine, That whatever spirit was within them, yet being met in Council, the
Spirit of God would infallibly inspire them, you set your self to a serious
vindication of the proceedings of that Council; and not only so, but triumph in
it, as that which will bring the cause to a speedy Issue. And therefore we must
particularly enquire into all the pretenses you bring to justify the
lawfulness and freedom of that Council; but, to keep to the Bishops Metaphor,
Accipe nunc Danaum Insidias; and crimine ab uno Disce omnes.

And when we have thoroughly searched this great Engine of your Church, we shall
have little reason to believe, that ever it fell from Heaven. His Lordship then
having spoken of the usefulness of free General Councils, for making some Laws
which concern the whole Church; His Adversary thinks presently to give him a
Choak-pear, P. 229.
by telling him, That the Council of Trent was a General Council; and that had
already judged the Protestants to hold errors. This you call, Laying the Axe
to the Root of the Tree; that Tree, you mean, out of which the Popes Infallible
Chair was cut: for the management of this dispute about the Council of Trent,
will redound very little to the honor of your Church or Cause. But you do well
to add, That his Lordship was not taken unprovided: P. 213.
for he truly answered, That the Council of Trent was neither a Legal, nor a
General Council. Both these we undertake to make good, in opposition to what
you bring by way of answer to his Lordships Exceptions to them.

. 2.
That which we begin with, is, That it was not a Legal Council, which his
Lordship proves: First, Because that Council maintained publicly, that it is
lawful for them to conclude any Controversy, and make it to be de Fide, and so
in your judgment fundamental, though it have not a written word for its
warrant; nay, so much as a probable testimony from Scripture. The force of his
Lordships argument I suppose lies in this, that the Decrees of that Council
cannot be such as should bind us to an assent to them; because according to
their own principles, those Decrees may have no foundation in Scripture: And
that the only legal proceeding in General Councils, is, to decree according to
the Scriptures. Now to this you answer, That the meaning of the Council, or
Catholic Authors, is not, that the Council may make whatever they please
matter of Faith, P. 230.
but only that which is expressed or involved in the Word of God written or
unwritten; and this you confess, is defined by the Council of Trent, in these
terms, that in matters of Faith we are to rely not only upon Scripture, but
also on Tradition: which Doctrine (you say) is true, and that you have already
proved it: And I may as well say, It is false, for I have already answered all
your pretended proofs. But it is one thing, Whether the Doctrine be true or no;
and another, Whether the Council did proceed legally in defining things upon
this principle. For upon your grounds you are bound to believe it true, because
the Council has defined it to be so: But if you will undertake to justify the
proceedings of the Council as legal, you must make it appear that this was the
Rule which General Councils have always acted by, in defining any thing to be
matter of Faith. But if this appear to be false; and that you cannot instance
in any true General Council, which did look on this as a sufficient ground to
proceed upon, then though the thing may, since that Decree, be believed as
true, yet that Council did not proceed legally in defining upon such grounds.
Name us therefore, What Council did ever offer to determine a matter of Faith
merely upon Tradition? In the four first General Councils it is well known,
What authority was given to the Scripture in their definitions; and I hope you
will not say, That any thing they defined, had no other ground but Tradition.
But suppose you could prove this, it is not enough for your purpose, unless you
can make it appear, that those Fathers in making such Decrees, did acknowledge
they had no ground in Scripture for them. For if you should prove that really
there was no foundation but Tradition, yet all that you can infer thence, is,
That those Fathers were deceived in judging they had other grounds, when they
had not. But still, if they made Scripture their Rule, and looked on nothing
else as a Foundation for their definitions but the written word of God, then
the Council of Trent did not proceed legally, in offering to define matters of
Faith, on such grounds which were not acknowledged by the Primitive Church, to
be sufficient Foundation for such Definitions. Cardinal Cusanus at large gives
an account of the method of proceeding in the Ancient General Councils, and
therein tells us, Causanus de Concord. Cath. l. 2. c. 6.
not only that the Word of God was placed in the middle among those who sat in
Council, but gives this as the only Rule of their proceeding, quod secundum
testimonia Scripturarum decrevit Synodus; that they decreed according to the
testimonies of Scripture. Now if another Council shall go according to a
different Rule from what the Church has esteemed the only true and adaequate
Foundation for definition of Faith, that Council breaks the inviolable Laws of
Councils, and therefore its proceedings cannot be legal. As for Instance;
Supposing a Parliament not to have power to make new Laws, but to declare only
what is Law, and what not (for that is all you pretend to, as to General
Councils) and that all other former Parliaments have all along professed this
to be their Rule, viz. that they search into the body of the Laws; and if any
thing be controverted, Whether it be a Law or no, they make a diligent search
into it, and examine all circumstances concerning it, for their own
satisfaction, and according to the evidence they find of its being contained in
this body of Laws, they declare themselves: but many things growing much in use
among a prevailing party, which have no color of being in the written Laws,
but yet tend much to the Interest of that party; and these being opposed by
such, who stand up for the ancient and known Laws, the other are forced to make
use of as good an Expedient as they can, to preserve their interest and credit
together. To which end they pack together a company of such, who are most
concerned to maintain the things in Question, and among these, the great
Innovator sits as President among them, and suffers none to come there, but
such as are obliged by Oath to speak nothing against his Interest; and these,
when met together, seeing how unable they are to manage their business
according to former Precedents; the first thing they do, is to declare, That
customs and usages have as much the force of Laws among them, as any contained
in the body of them; and having established this their Rule, according to it
they decree all the matters in difference, to be true and real Laws. Would any
man say, That these men proceeded legally, who first make the Foundation they
are to go on, contrary to all former Precedents, and then define according to
that? Yet this, in all particulars, is exactly the case of the Council of
Trent; but the last part is that we are now about; that they should, contrary
to the proceedings of all General Councils in matters of Faith, first make
their Rule, and then bind all men to all those Decrees which are made according
to it. And therefore, though the Council of Trent may be thought to act wisely
in advancing Traditions to an equality with Scripture in the first place, yet
he must have a great deal of confidence and little judgment, who says, that
in decreeing matters of Faith from Tradition, it acted legally; i. e. according
to the rules of the undoubted General Councils. I cannot therefore say, whether
you have more of the one, or less of the other, when you tell us without
offering to prove it, That the Council did not proceed in a different manner,
from other lawful General Councils whilst she grounded her definitions, partly
on Scripture, partly on Tradition, even in matters not deducible by any
particular or Logical Inference from Scripture. The absurdity of which Doctrine
in it self, I have at large discovered already in our discourse of the
Resolution of Faith, where it is showed in what sense his Lordship says, That
Apostolical Tradition is the Word of God; But that this was a legal way of
proceeding in the Council of Trent, to define matters of Faith by such
Traditions as have no ground in Scripture, had need be better proved, than by
your bare Affirmation. And if that be a Tradition too, I am sure it is one that
is neither contained in, nor deducible from, the Scripture.

2. His Lordship justly excepts against the Council of Trent, from the Popes
sitting as President in it.. 3.
For, says he, Is that Council legal, where the Pope the chief person to be
reformed shall sit President in it, and be chief Judge in his own cause against
all Law, Divine, Natural, and Humane. To this you return an Answer, P. 230, 231.
both to the matter of Right, and the matter of Fact. To the matter of Right,
you say, That the Pope not being justly accusable of any crime, but such as
must involve, not only the Council, but the whole Church as well as himself,
the Protestants had no just cause to quarrel with the Popes presiding in it.
Nay, that it is conformable to all Law, Divine, Natural, and Humane, that the
Head should preside over the members: and to give Novellists liberty to decline
the Popes judgment, or the judgment of any other their lawful Superiors upon
pretense of their being parties, is in effect to exempt absolutely such people
from all legal censure; and to grant there is no sufficient means effectually
to govern the Church, or condemn Heresy, Schism, and other offenses against
Religion. But is it not unanswerable on the other side, that this plea of yours
makes it impossible, that the errors and corruptions of a Church should be
reformed, in case the Governors of the Church do abett and maintain them? If
you say, That it is not possible the Governors of the Church should do so, we
have nothing but your bare word for it, and reason and experience manifest the
contrary. In case then there be a vehement presumption at least, in a
considerable party of the Church, that the Church is much degenerated and needs
reformation, but those who call themselves the lawful Superiors of the Church
utterly oppose it; What is to be done in this case? must the Church continue as
it did, merely because the Superiors make themselves parties? Nay, suppose
that which you would call Idolatry be in the Church, and the Pope and a Council
of his packing declare for it; must there be no endeavors of a Reformation,
but by them who pronounce all Heretics who oppose them? But you say, The Head
must preside over the members: an excellent Argument to defend all usurpations
both in Church and State; for doubtless, they who are in power will call
themselves the Heads of all others, if that will secure them from any danger.
But this will exempt them from all legal censure: so will your principles, all
Governors of the Church though guilty of Heresy, Blasphemy, Idolatry, or what
crime soever. For still, I hope, the Head must be over the members; and you
say, it will bring the Church to confusion, if any shall except against their
Superiors as parties. You must therefore absolutely and roundly assert, that
it is impossible that the Superiors in the Church may be guilty of any error
or corruption; or that, if they be, they must never be called to an account for
it; or else that it may be just in some cases to except against them as
parties. And if in some cases, then the question comes to this, whether the
present be some of those cases or no? and here if you make those Superiors
Judges again, what you granted before comes to nothing. This will be more clear
by a parallel case: Suppose the setting up the Calves at Dan and Bethel had
been done without such an open separation as that of Jeroboam was, but that the
people had sensibly declined from the worship of God at Jerusalem, and had
agreed to assemble at those places, the High Priest, and the Priests and
Levites having deserted Jerusalem, and approving this alteration of Gods
worship: But although this might continue for many years; yet some of the
Inferior Priests and others of the people reading the Book of the Law, they
find the worship of God much altered from what it ought to be, which they
publish and declare to others, and bring many of the people to be of their
mind; but the High Priest and his Clergy (foreseeing how much it will be to
their prejudice to bring things into their due order) they resolutely oppose
it. I pray tell me now, what were to be done in this case? Must the people
stand wholly to the judgment of those Superior Priests, who have declared
themselves to be utterly averse from any Reformation? And if a Council be
called, is it reasonable or just, that he should sit as President in it,
because he pretends to be the Head over the members? and that if Superiors be
once accused as parties, all order and peace is gone? Is there any way left or
no, whereby the Church of Israel might be reformed? Yes, say you, by a General
Council; but, Must it be such a General Council, wherein the High Priest sits
as President, and all who sit with him sworn to do nothing against him? Is this
a Free and General Council likely to reform these things? And is it not all the
Justice in the world, that such a Council should be truly Free and General, and
those freely heard who complain of these as great corruptions? and that before
the most equal and indifferent Judges; or, in case such cannot be assembled,
that by the Assistance of the civil power, the Church may be reformed by its
parts: so that still these parts be willing to give an account of what they do
before any Free and General Council, where the main party accused sits not as
President in it? But what then, may you say? will you allow all Inferiors to
proceed to a Reformation, in case the Superiors do not presently consent? No:
but men ought first to exhibit their complaints of abuses, and the reasons
against them, to those who are actually the Superiors of the Church; and that
with all due reverence to Authority; but if, notwithstanding this, they declare
themselves willful and obstinate in defense of those things, by the concurrence
of the Supreme power they may lawfully and justly proceed to a Reformation.

Well, (but you say), all this comes not to your case,. 4.
for the Pope was not justly accusable of any crime; for you deny not, P. 231.
but that other Bishops in Council may proceed against the Pope himself, if the
case do necessarily require it, as if he be a Heretic. If you will then grant,
that in some cases, as in that of Heresy, the Pope may be excepted against as
a Party, you destroy all that ever you say besides. For when the Pope is
accused for Heresy in a Council, Who must sit as President in that Council?
the Pope himself, or not? If the Pope must sit as President, (for the Head, you
say still, must be over the members) Do you think he will ever be condemned for
Heresy, if he has the supreme management of the Council? If he may not sit as
President then, by the same reason he ought not to do it, when he is accused of
error or Usurpation; but the other Bishops of the Church, met together by the
Assistance of Christian Princes in a Free and General Council, ought to be
Judges in that case, as well as the former. And this is no more then is
agreeable to the Doctrine and practice of the Councils of Constance and Basil;
for if they had suffered the Popes to have been Presidents in them, or have had
that power over them, which the Popes had in the Council of Trent, Do you think
they could have done so to the present Popes as they did? But the Popes were
grown wiser afterward; they had these examples fresh in their memory, and
therefore they were resolved never to be ridden by General Councils more. And
thence came that continual opposition to all proposals of the Emperor for a
General Council, till necessity put the Pope upon yielding to it: thence came
the resolution at Rome, not to venture any more Councils in Germany, for that
place breathed too much freedom for the Popes interest, though this were most
vehemently desired by, both the Emperor, and German Princes and Bishops:
Thence, when a Council must be called, he summons it first at Mantua, then at
Vicenza, and when none would come thither, at last he yields it should be at
Trent, a most inconvenient place for the Germans to come to: when they were
there, though all art possible was used to prevent the mention of any thing of
Reformation, yet sometimes some free words breaking out, troubled the Legates,
who dispatch notice of it to Rome, and receive instructions what to do; yet all
could not prevent their fears and jealousies, lest something concerning the
Popes Interest should be discussed; upon which to make all sure they translate
the Council to Bononia, and leave the Emperor's bishops to blow their fingers
at Trent. And when upon the Emperor and King of France's Protestations, the
Pope saw a necessity of removing it back to Trent again, though any fair
pretense would have been taken to have dissolved the Council; yet since that
could not be, the greatest care must be used to spin out the time, in hopes of
some occurrence happening, which might give a plausible pretext for breaking it
up. But to be sure nothing must pass, but what was privately dispatched to Rome
and approved there first, (a good sure way to prevent any mischief) and thence
the Holy Ghost came in a Portmantue once or twice a week, as the common byword
was then. But when, notwithstanding all this, the grand points of the Residence
and power of Bishops were so hotly debated by the Spanish Bishops, What arts
were used to divert them? when that would not do, How they bait them in Council
by the flouting Italians? what private Cabals were kept by the Legates, what
dispatching and posting to Rome, what numbers of jolly Italians are made
Bishops, and sent away to over-vote them? And when the French-Bishops were
come, what Spies did they keep upon them, what bones were thrown to divide the
French and Spanish Bishops, what caressing the Cardinal of Lorrain to bring him
off by the Court of Rome? And when any others durst speak freely what checks,
and frowns, and disgraces did they meet with? And all this to keep the Pope
safe, who was still in bodily fear till the Council was ended to his mind; and
then what rejoicing, that they had cheated the world so, that that which was
intended to clip the wings of the Court of Rome, had confirmed and advanced the
Interest of it. This was truly the Head's presiding over the members: for all
the life and motion they had, proceeded from the Influence of their Head, the
Pope: Call you this Presiding in a Council? It is rather riding of it, that by
the spurring some and bridling others, they may go just as the Pope would have
them. And that this is a true account of it, appears, notwithstanding whatever
your Cardinal Palavicino has been able to object against the impartial history
of it; whose two volumes pretended in Answer to it, consist of so many
impertinencies, and has so very little material in it, that a Roman Catholic
himself has declared to the world, Caesar Aquilinus de tribus historicis
Concilii Trident. P. 49, 51.
that he has done more disservice to the Church of Rome by his Answer, then
ever Father Paul did by his History: By whom, his two great Books are compared
to those Night-birds that make a great show, but are all Feathers and very
little Flesh. This then being the way of management of things at Trent, judge
you or any reasonable man, Whether the Protestants have not just cause to
except against the Presidentship which the Pope had in that Council; and name
you any General Council (that was truly accounted so) where ever he had any
thing like it? The particulars you mention, will be considered afterward.

But you say, All this was because the Pope was not justly accusable of any
crime, but what must involve not only the Council,. 5.
Ibid.
but the whole Church as much as himself. If so, there was the greater reason
that he should leave it to the Church in a Free Council to have impartially
debated things, without his acting and interposing so much as he did. But the
Pope was wiser then to think so; he knew there were many things in the Court of
Rome which many other Bishops struck at, as well as the Protestants; and that
they desired a Reformation of Abuses as well as the other, especially the
German, French, and Spanish Bishops. Nay, it is strange to see how much,
interest or prejudice blinds men, that they will not acknowledge now that there
was any such need of Reformation, when Pope Adrian 6, confessed at the Diet at
Norimberg, A.D. 1522. by Cheregatus his Legate, that the Popes themselves had
been the fountain and cause of all those evils in the Church; In these
remarkable words (part of which have been cited already on another occasion)
Scimus in hac sancta Sede, aliquot jam annis, multa abominanda fuisse, abusus
in Spiritualibus, excessus in mandatis, and omnia denique in perversum mutata.
Nec mirum, si aegritudo a capite in membra, a summis Pontificibus in alios
praelatos descenderit. Omnes nos (sc. praelati Ecclesiastici) declinavimus,
unusquisque in vi^s suas, nec fuit jamdiu, qui faceret bonum, non fuit usque ad
unum. Quamobrem necesse est, ut omnes demus gloriam Deo, and humiliemus animas
nostras ei: videat unusquisque nostrum unde exciderit, and se potius quilibet
judicet, quam a Deo in virga furoris sui judicari velit. Qua in re quod ad nos
pertinet, polliceberis, Nos omnem operam adhibituros, ut primum Curia haec,
unde forte omne hoc malum processit, reformetur: ut sicut inde corruption in
omnes inferiores emanavit, ita ab eadem sanitas and reformatio omnium emanet.
Ad quod procurandum nos tanto arctius obligatos reputamus, quando universum
mundum hujusmodi reformationem avidius desiderare videmus. Can you now for
shame say, There was no need of Reformation at that time, and that the Popes
were no more concerned then the whole Church? The whole Church was indeed
concerned, to see the Court of Rome reformed, and we see the Pope confesses,
that all the world desired a Reformation. Does not he ingenuously acknowledge,
That many abominable things had been for many years in the Holy See (and very
holy it was, the mean time) that all things were out of order. That the
distemper had fallen from the Head to the members, from the Popes to other
Prelates, that they had all gone out of the way, that for a long time there had
been none that did good, no not one. That therefore it was necessary, that all
should give glory to God, and humble their souls; and every one see whence he
was fallen, and judge himself, rather then be judged by God in the rod of his
fury. Wherefore (says he to his Legate) thou shall promise for us, that we will
use our utmost endeavor, that this Court, from whence all the mischief has
proceeded, may be reformed; that as the corruption has flowed from thence unto
inferiors, so the health and reformation of all may come from thence too. And
we look on our selves as the more obliged to procure this, because we see the
whole world does earnestly desire such a Reformation. Whom must we now believe,
the Pope or you? the Pope ingenuously and Christianly bemoaning the corruptions
that had been in Popes themselves, and from them had spread to others; or you,
who basely and untruly flatter the Popes, as though they needed no Reformation,
but what concerned the Council and Church, as well as them? And the Pope gives
you the true reason of it, Because the corruptions had been so great at Rome,
that from thence they had spread over all others. And can you think now, that
the Pope was not justly accused of any crime, but that he might sit as
President, and manage the affairs of the Council, as though there had been no
need at all of any Reformation? But I remember an observation of Baronius, that
the providence of God was so great in watching over the Roman Se^, that the
Popes who were unfit to Govern it, seldom continued long in it; which he makes
upon Siricius his favor to Ruffinus; and such a Pope was this Adrian
accounted; this confession of his being very distastful at Rome, he continued
not long after it. But yet I know you have another Answer ready at hand, That
all this concerned only some abuses in manners and management of affairs, but
nothing confessed to be amiss in Doctrine of Faith. However, since it belonged
to the Council to reform those abuses, the Pope as an interessed person ought
not to have presided there, had it not been his intention to have prevented any
real Reformation. For all the Decrees of the Council to that purpose were
merely delusory and nothing of Reformation followed upon them; and the most
important things to that end could never pass the Council. And if we gain this,
that the Pope ought not to be Judge, where himself is concerned, as to the
Reformation of abuses; your former assertion will make the other follow, viz.
that in case of Heresy, other Bishops may in Council proceed against the Pope,
and, by the same reason, when any errors in Faith are charged upon him, or
those who join in Communion with him; that such ought to be debated in a full
and free Council, where no one concerned may preside to over-aw the rest. But
such Presidents should be appointed as were in former General Councils, to whom
it belonged to manage the debates of the Council, without any such Power and
Jurisdiction over them, as the Pope pretended to have, over all those assembled
at Trent. And thus it appears, that what his Lordship said, was just and true,
That it is contrary to all Law, Divine, Natural and Humane, that the Pope
should be chief Judge in his own Cause. Your instances of Pope Leo at the
Council of Chalcedon, and Alexander at the Council of Nice, will be considered
in their due place.

. 6.
Which that we may come to, we must examine the matter of fact, as to the Popes
presidency in General Councils. His Lordship denying, that the Pope did preside
in the Council of Nice, either by himself or Legates, because Hosius was the
President of it; You Answer, That Hosius did preside in that Council, Ibid.
and so did likewise Vitus and Vincentius Priests of Rome, but (you say) they
all presided as the Popes Legates and not otherwise. This (you say) appears by
their subscribing the Conciliary Decrees in the first place of which no other
account can be given; and because Cedrenus and Photius confess that the Pope
gave authority to this Council by his Legates; and in the old preface to the
Council of Sardica, it is said expressly, that Hosius was the Popes Legate, and
the same acknowledged by Hincmarus, and Gelasius Cyzicenus, whom you prove that
Photius had read. These being then all the Evidences you produce for the Popes
Presidency at the Nicene Council, we are obliged to afford them a particular
consideration.

Your first argument, which Bellarmin and Baronius likewise insist on, is the
order of subscription, because the name of Hosius is set first; but, if we mark
it, this argument supposes that which it should prove. For thus it proceeds,
Hosius subscribed first, and therefore he was the Roman Legate; Hosius was the
Roman Legate, and therefore he subscribed first: For it supposes that the first
Subscription did of right belong only to the Roman Legate; which we may as well
deny, by an argument just like it, Vitus and Vincentius did not subscribe
first, and therefore the Roman Legates did not subscribe first. But you ask, Why
then did Hosius subscribe before the Patriarchs, and other Bishops, of greater
dignity than himself. I answer, Because Hosius was President of the Council,
and not they. But if you ask, Why they chose him President before others, the
Nicene Fathers must answer you, and not I. But you say, Cedrenus and Photius
confess, That the Pope gave Authority to the Nicene Council by his Legates; but,
How comes that to prove, that Hosius was one of those Legates? Photius I am sure
in his Book of the seven Synods (first published in Greek by Justellus out of
the Sedan Library) says no such thing, but only mentions the two Presbyters
who were there the Roman-Bishops Legates. And Cedrenus only mentions the Roman
Legates amongst those who were chief in that Council, reckoning up the several
Patriarchs. Your old preface to the Sardican Synod (supposed of Dionysius
Exiguus) is no competent testimony, being of a later Author, and a Roman too:
And Hincmarus is much younger than he, and therefore neither of their
testimonies has any force against the ancient Writers; neither has that of
Gelasius Cyzicenus, who lived under Basiliscus A. D. 476. And that you may not
think I do you wrong, to deprive you of his testimony, you may see, Baron. A.
D. 305. sect. 6.
How freely Baronius passes his censure upon those Acts under the name of
Nicene Council. Sed, ut libere dicam, somnia puto haec omnia; that I may speak
freely, I account them no better than dreams: And gives this very good reason
for it; because ever since the time of that Council, all persons have been so
extremely desirous of the Acts of that Council, and yet could never obtain
them. But that which comes in the rear, transcends all the rest, which is, That
Photius, though a Schismatical Greek, and bitter enemy of the Roman Church,
witnesses he had read this Book of Gelasius, and in it the above cited
testimony. And, I pray, What follows from thence? I hope Photius had read many
other Books in that excellent collection of his Bibliotheca besides this; and,
Will you say, that Photius believed all that he there says he had read? No,
but you say, That thereupon he confesses that the said Hosius was Legate for the
Bishop of Rome, at the Council of Nice. But you would have done well to have
told us, Where this Confession is extant: for you seem to insinuate, as though
it were in the same place where he mentions the reading this Book of Gelasius:
but he only says, That Gelasius affirms it, Photius in Biblioth. Cod. 88. p.
21.
adding nothing at all of his own judgment; and in his Book of the seven
Synods, where he declares his own mind, he only mentions Vitus and Vincentius,
Phot. de 7. Synod. etc. p. 163
as the Legates of the Roman See: And brings in Hosius afterward, not joining
him with Vitus and Vincentius, but with Alexander of Constantinople, and
Sylvester and Julius of Rome, and Alexander and Athanasius of Alexandria, whom
he makes the Chief in the Council. For if Photius had intended to have made
Hosius one of the Popes Legates; there was all the reason in the world he should
have set him before Vitus and Vincentius, who were only Presbyters. And that
the Pope had no other Legates there but these two Presbyters, we have the
consent of all the ancient Ecclesiastical Historians; Eusebius mentioning the
absence of the Roman Bishop, because of his Age adds, Eusebius. de vit ^ Constable. l.
3. c. 7. Theod. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 6.
(...), His Presbyters being present, supplied his place; so Theodoret the
Bishop of Rome could not be present, (...), but he sent two Presbyters with
power to give his assent; not to preside over the Council. To the same purpose
Sozomen, Sozom. l. 1. c. 16. Nicephor. l. 8. c. 14.
Nicephorus, Zonaras speak. And it is very strange not one of all these
Historians should mention this, if Hosius had presided there as Legate of the
Bishop of Rome; and much more, that Hosius should not subscribe first in that
capacity, but only as Bishop of Corduba; for the Popes Legates do not use to be
so forgetful of their place and honor. It seems then very plain, that the Pope
had no manner of Presidency at the Council of Nice: We come therefore to
following Councils.

You grant, That in the second General Council, Nectarius Bishop of
Constantinople was President,. 7.
P. 232.
and not the Pope or his Legates. But the reason (you say) was, because Pope
Damasus having first summoned that Council to be held at Constantinople, and
the Bishops of the Oriental Provinces being accordingly there met, the Pope,
for some reasons, altered his mind, and would have had them come to Rome, to
join with the Bishops he had there assembled: which the Prelates at
Constantinople refusing in a submissive manner, alleged such arguments as the
Pope remained satisfied with them. So the Council (you say) was upon the matter
held in two places, at Rome, and Constantinople. So that while the Pope
presided in the Council at Rome, and gave allowance to their proceedings at
Constantinople, and that by reason of their intercourse, they were looked on
but as one Council in effect, and the Pope to have presided therein. In all
this you discover, How much you take up things upon trust, and utter them with
great confidence, when they seem for your purpose, although they are built upon
notorious mistakes in Ecclesiastical History; as I shall make it plain to you
this Answer of yours is. For neither was the General Council at Constantinople
ever in the least summoned by the Pope, neither did it ^it at the same time
that the Council at Rome under Damasus did; neither were any Letters sent from
that Council to the Pope; and therefore certainly Pope Damasus could not in any
sense be said to preside there. These things, I know, make you wonder at first;
but I shall undertake to make it appear, How much your great Masters (I need
not name them to you) have abused your credulity in this story. We are to know
then, that the Emperor Theodosius having been newly admitted into a share of
the Empire by Gratian, and the Eastern parts of it being allotted to him, he
considering what a deplorable condition the Churches of those parts were in, by
reason of the factions and heresies which were among them, judges it the best
expedient to call a Council at Constantinople; to see if there were any hopes
to bring the Church to any peace. For this purpose 150. Bishops meet from the
several Provinces at Constantinople, who condemn Macedonius, publish a new
Creed, make several Canons, accept of Gregory Nazianzen's resignation of the Sea of Constantinople, choose Nectarius in his room, and on the death of
Meletius at Antioch, elect Flavianus to succeed him, make a Synodical Epistle
to the Emperor Theodosius, giving him an account of their proceedings, and so
dissolve. This is the short of the narration of it in Theodoret, Socrates, and
Sozomen. Theodoret. Eccles. hist. l. 5., c. 8. 9. Socrat. l. 5. cap. 8.
Sozomen. l. 7. c. 12.
But as soon as the report of their actions was come into the Western parts,
great discontents are taken at their proceedings, especially at the election of
Flavianus to the Sea at Antioch; because the Church of Rome had declared it
self in favor of Paulinus at Antioch, during the life of Meletius, and
therefore by no means would they now yield to the succession of Flavianus. Upon
this, Damasus sollicits the Emperor Gratian for a General Council, that the
cause might be heard; and, that the Eastern Bishops might meet too, he sends
other Letters to Theodosius to the same purpose; upon the intimation of which,
the Eastern Bishops, who either were detained at Constantinople by several
occurrences there, or were sent again out of their Provinces thither, assemble
together, and write a Synodical Epistle to Damasus, Ambrosius, Britton,
Valerian, etc. wherein they give an account, Why they could not come to Rome,
because the Eastern Churches could not, in so divided and busy a time, be left
destitute of their Bishops, and therefore they desire to be excused; but
however, they had sent Cyriacus, Eusebius, and Priscianus, as their Legates
thither. This excuse the Emperor Theodosius accepted of, and Damasus and his
Council were fain to rest satisfied with it; only some of Paulinus his party
met him there, as Epiphanius and S. Hierom (although S. Hierom being no Bishop,
could only show his good will, and take that opportunity of returning to Rome.)
What this Council did under Damasus, we are to seek; for both Baronius and
Binius confess, that the Acts of that Council, are wholly lost; only Baronius
thinks, Baron. Ann. 382. sect. 17.
that the condemnation of Apollinaris and Timotheus (which Theodoret mentions)
to have been done before; and that Paulinus was restored to the Sea of Antioch
by this Council: which seems the more probable, in that Paulinus the next year
returns to Antioch; and because the Bishops of Rome afterward took his part,
and defended his successor against Flavianus in the Sea of Antioch. This being
the true account of those proceedings, let now any indifferent person judge,
Whether you were not much put to it, when you are fain to confound two Councils
held at several times on several occasions, on purpose to blind the Reader, and
to make him believe that Pope Damasus had somewhat to do, in calling and
presiding in the General Council at Constantinople; because he requested the
meeting of the Bishops again the year after the General Council. And the truth
of this, is so plain, that Baronius and Binius confess the difference of these
two Councils, Annal. Ann. 381. sect. 17.
both as to the times and occasions of them. Baronius places the Ecumenical
Council at Constantinople A. D. 381. Eucherius and Syagrius being COSS. in May:
A. D. 382. sect. 4, etc.
but the other Council at Constantinople, he places the year after, A. D. 382.
Syagrius and Antonius COSS. at which time likewise the Council at Rome sat.
And so Binius reckons this Council as a second Council at Constantinople under
Damasus, and, in all things concerning the times of this and the former, Tom.
1. Council. p. 686.
follows Baronius exactly. So much are the two great Cardinals, Bellarmin and
Perron mistaken, Bellarm. de Council. l. 1. c 5.
when they would have the Council at Constantinople called Ecumenical on this
account, because there was a Council at Rome sitting under Damasus, Perrons
R^ply. l. 1. cap. 34.
at the same time approving what was done at Constantinople. Whereas the
occasion of the Council at Rome was given by some of the last Acts of the
Ecumenical Council, viz. the election of Flavianus. But that this could not
be, that those two Councils at Rome, and Constantinople, should sit together at
the same time, and on the same account, Bin. Tom. 1. Council. p. 665. Theod.
hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 9.
appears by the Synodical Epistle of the Council the year following sent to
Damasus, which is exemplified both in Binius and Baronius, and is originally
extant in Theodoret. Although Binius places it at the end of the Ecumenical
Council, but Baronius much more fairly in the next year, as being the Act of
the second Council. A D. 382. sect. 9.
Now there are two things in that Synodical Epistle by which I shall prove it
impossible, that either the Letters of Pope Damasus did concern the calling of
the Ecumenical Council, or that the sitting of the Council at Rome, and the
General one at Constantinople, could be at the same time. The first is from the
date of those Letters, which is thus expressed there: that they met together at
Constantinople, having received the Letters which were sent the year before
from them to the Emperor Theodosius, (...), after the Synod at Aquileia. Ann.
381. sect. 80.
Now the Synod at Aquileia by Baronius his computation, was held the same year
A. D. 381. in which the Ecumenical Council at Constantinople was held, and
much later in the year too, for this was held in the Nones of September, Tom.
1. Council. p. 682.
and the other in May; and so much is likewise confessed by Binius in his notes
on that Council. Now let me demand of you, Whether is it impossible that
Damasus should, by his Letters, summon the Ecumenical Council, when the date
of those Letters to Theodosius, is so long after the sitting of it? But besides
this, these Eastern Bishops in that Council, which sat after these Letters of
Damasus, clearly distinguished themselves from the Ecumenical Council of the
year foregoing: for, after they had given a brief account of their Faith, they
referr the Pope and Western Council to that declaration of Faith which had been
made the year before by the Ecumenical Council assembled at Constantinople,
(...)^ Is it possible then any thing should be more evident, than that this
Council assembled upon the Letters of Damasus to Theodosius, and sitting with
the Council at Rome, is clearly distinct from the Ecumenical Council of
Constantinople? And thus I hope I have dispelled those mists which you would
cast before the Readers eyes, by confounding these two Councils, and thereby
offering to prove that the Pope had some kind of very remote Presidency in the
second General Council. Which is so far from being true, that there is not any
intimation in any of the ancient Historians, Theodoret, Socrates, or Sozomen,
that the Pope, or any of the Western Bishops, had any thing at all to do in it.
But you will ask, How comes it then to be accounted an Ecumenical Council? For
this indeed Baronius would fain find out some hand that Damasus had in it, or
else he cannot conceive how it should become Ecumenical; but all the proof he
produces, is, Because in the Acts of the sixth Council it is said, that
Theodosius and Damasus opposed Macedonius: and so I hope he might do by
declaring his consent to the Doctrine decreed in this Council; not that thereby
his approbation made it Ecumenical. And, as that Doctrine was received, and
that Confession of Faith embraced all over the world, so that Council became
Ecumenical. For I cannot see but that if Damasus had stood up for Macedonius,
if the Decrees against him had been received by the Catholic Church, it had
been never the less Ecumenical in the sense of Antiquity: That testimony which
Baronius brings out of his own Library, and a Copy of the Vatican, expressing
that Damasus did summon the Council at Constantinople, is not to be taken
against the consent of the ancient Church-Historians; it being well known what
Interess those Roman Copies have a long time driven on. I deny not therefore
but that the Council of Constantinople was assented to by Damasus, and the
Western Bishops, in the matters of Faith there decided, but I utterly deny that
Damasus had any thing to do in the Presidency over that Council. So that we
find a Council always acknowledged to be Ecumenical, in which the Pope had no
Presidency at all; and this very Instance sufficiently refutes your Hypothesis,
viz. that the Popes Presidency is necessary to a General Council.

In the third General Council held at Ephesus A. D. 431. it is agreed on both
sides, that S. Cyril Patriarch of Alexandria, was the President of it:. 8.
but the Question is, In what capacity he sat there, whether in his own, or as
Legate of Celestine Bishop of Rome? All the proof you produce for the latter,
is, That it appears by a Letter written to him by the Pope, long before he sent
any other Legates to that Council: P. 232.
in which Letter he gives S. Cyril charge to supply his place, as is testified
by Evag^ius, Prosper, Photius, and diverse other Authors. But here again you
offer to confound two things, which are of a distinct nature: for you would
have your Reader believe, that this Letter was sent by Coelestine to Cyril, in
order to his Presidentship in the Council, whereas this Letter was sent the
year before, without any relation to the Council; as appears by the series of
the story: which is briefly this; the differences in the Eastern Churches
increasing about the Opinions broached by Nestorius, S. Cyril of Alexandria
chiefly appearing in opposition to them they both write (much about the same
time) to Pope Coelestine, impeaching each other of Heresy. But before
Coelestine had read the Letters from Nestorius in vindication of himself,
Possidonius a Deacon of Alexandria comes with several dispatches from S. Cyril,
wherein a large account is given of the heresy and actions of Nestorius; upon
which the Pope calls a Council at Rome, and therein examines the allegations on
both sides, which being done, the Council condemns Nestorius, and passes this
sentence on him, That ten days should be allowed him (after notice given) for
his repentance; and, in case of obstinacy, he should be declared excommunicate.
And for executing this sentence, Coelestine commits his power to Cyril; not as
though it belonged to the Pope only to do it, but that by this means there
might appear the Consent of the Western with the Eastern Bishops, in putting
Nestorius out of the communion of the Catholic Church. S. Cyril having
received these Letters by the return of Possidonius, Ann. 430. sect. 23, 24.
dated the third of the Ides of August, as appears by the Letters extant in
Baronius, calls a Council at Alexandria, in which four Legates are decreed to be
sent to Constantinople in pursuance of the sentence against Nestorius, they
deliver the Letters of Coelestine and Cyril to him, he returns them no answer
at all, but addresses himself to the Emperor Theodosius, and complains of the
persecutions of Cyril, which occasioned a very sharp Letter of the Emperor to
him, charging him with disturbing the Churches Peace. But this was not all; for
Cyril having with the Synodical Epistle of the Council of Alexandria, sent
twelve Anathematisms to be subscribed by Nestorius, he was so far from it, that
he charges Cyril with the heresy of Apollinaris in them, and sends them to
Johannes Antiochenus, who (with the Syrian Bishops of his Diocese) join with
Nestorius in the impeachment of Cyril. So that by this means the sentence
against Nestorius could not be put in execution, because of the dissent of the
Eastern Bishops, and that S. Cyril stood charged with Heresy as well as the
other. Things being grown to this height, Theodosius calls a General Council at
Ephesus, to be held the ensuing year, writes to all the Metropolitans to appear
there at the time appointed, and bring such Bishops with them, as they thought
convenient; but what contentions happened there between the two parties, is not
here our business to relate; but the Emperor foreseeing what disturbance was
like to be there, sent the Count Candidianus for better management of the
affairs of the Council. Now S. Cyril and his party having the advantage of the
other, both in number and forwardness of being there, Cyril sits as President
among them. The Question now is, Whether he sat there by virtue of that
Legantine Power he had for the excommunicating Nestorius the year before, or
not? or only as Patriarch of Alexandria, and chief of that party? But by what
authority he should challenge to be President of the Council, because he had
been deputed by Coelestine to act his part in the excommunicating Nestorius, I
think is somewhat hard to understand. Neither does any thing appear in the
Council which gives any ground for it; for Cyril subscribes to it merely as
Patriarch of Alexandria, the Council on all occasions call him, and Memnon of
Ephesus their (...), and when they speak of Coelestine, after his Legates came,
they say, He did only (...), assist together with them in Council: But, Why
should Coelestine send other Legates afterward, viz. Arcadius, Philippus, and
Projectus, if S. Cyril supplied the Popes place there already? Yet, although we
should grant, that before the Legates came, Cyril did supply the place of
Coelestine, yet it does not follow, that he sat President of the Council on
that account: but only to show the concurrence of Coelestine with the Council
in matter of Doctrine; and this there was good reason for, because Coelestine
had fully declared himself to Cyril concerning that already. And this was usual
in the Councils, as appears in this very Council by Flavianus Bishop of
Philippi; subscribing likewise in the place of Rufus of Thessalonica. So that
if we grant Cyril to sit in the Council as Legate of Coelestine, yet it does not
follow, that he was President of the Council in that capacity; for the other
was only to testify his consent, this required a particular Commission to that
purpose. So that he might give a vote in the Council for Coelestine, and yet
sit (as he did) President of the Council as Patriarch of Alexandria. Thus it
being manifested, that in the three first General Councils, the Pope sat not
either by himself or his Legates as President, it is sufficiently proved
thereby, that his Presidency is no necessary condition to a General Council;
and if not, then we say, It is unjust and unreasonable he should challenge it,
when he is the person mainly accused. But in the mean while it is not at all
necessary, that we should deny that ever he sat as President in any other
General Council; for being the Bishop of the chief See, Why should he in a case
of general concernment to the Church, as that of Chalcedon, not be allowed by
his Legates to have the prime place: But there wants sufficient evidence too,
that these were properly the Presidents of that Council. In the next at
Constantinople you grant, that Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople sat
President; but you say, That he acknowledged this privilege to be due to Pope
Vigilius. But, How came it to pass then, that he would not sit there, though
then at Constantinople? It appears by the many frivolous excuses he made, that
he durst not trust himself in the Council, for fear that authority should not
be given him which he expected. For that has always been the subtilty of the
Popes in those elder times, when they began to encroach, not to venture
themselves in presence in a General Council, for fear of opposition, but by
their absence they reserved to themselves a liberty to declare their dissent,
when any Acts passed which did not please them. As Leo did in the case of the
Council of Chalcedon. But however, this is evident from the fifth General
Council, that the Popes Presidency was not then thought at all necessary. What
was done in following Councils, is not material to our purpose, because it does
already sufficiently appear, that the Popes Presidency is not necessary to a
General Council, and therefore you conclude with a notorious falsity, in saying
with Bellarmin, That the Pope has been possessed full 1500 years of the right of
presiding in General Councils.

His Lordships third exception against the Council of Trent, is,. 9.
That the place was not free, but either in, or too near the Popes dominions.
To this you Answer, That certainly Trent is not within the Popes dominion: Ibid.
but it is well enough known, that Trent was under the sole jurisdiction of the
Bishop, and the Bishop to be sure was under the Popes dominion, having been
particularly obliged too, by receiving a Cardinal's Hat. And therefore it was
not without just reason that the place was protested against, not only by the
German Protestants, as being out of Germany where the States of the Empire had
often promised the Council should be; at the Diet at Norimberg 1524, at Auspurg
1526. Spire 1529. Ratisbone 1532, 1541. again at Norimberg 1543. and last of
all at Spire 1544. but as a most inconvenient place for them to come to; being
a weeks journey (as they say) from the borders of Germany, seated in a barren
and almost inaccessible place, having no freedom of passage almost amidst the
Alps; This place, I say, was not only protested against by them, as being
contrary to the promises made to them; but the German Bishops made it their
earnest request, that the Council might be held in Germany; for at Trent, they
said they could neither be present themselves, nor send any Legates thither: and
particularly instance in the unpassableness of the Alps between them and Trent;
and that it was rather in the borders of Italy then Germany. And the Pope
himself in his Answer to the German Bishops, and the Emperors Protestation
upon the removal of the Council from Trent to Bononia, insists upon the
inconvenience of Trent for the long residence of the Bishops there. And in
behalf of the Protestants declaring against this place in regard of the
unsafeness of it, the places about being all under the Popes authority: du
Ranchin tells you, That it is an exception allowable by the Doctors of the
Canon Law, who all agree, Review of the Council of Trent. l. 1. c. 7.
that an exception against the safety of the place is pertinent, and ought to
be admitted; that it is good, both by the Civil Law and the Law of Nature, that
a man summoned to a place where any danger threatens him, is not bound to
appear, nor to send his Proctour, and that a Judge is bound to assign the
parties a place of safety for the hearing of their cause, otherwise there is
just cause of appeal. That the Council of Pisa excepted against appearing at
Rome on the same accounts, and if they durst not venture to Rome upon the offer
of safe conduct, much less reason had the Protestants to do it, to such a place
as Trent, a City, by reason of the neighboring woods very subject to
treacheries and ambushments; that the very designing such a place yielded
ground of fear and suspicion, especially to such as had not forgotten the late
examples of John Husse, and Hierom of Prague at the Council of Constance. That
the States of Germany in the diet at Francford A. D. 1338. pleaded the nullity
of the Popes excommunication of Lewis 5, because he was cited to Avignon where
the Pope was Lord of the place; and the place being not free for him to appear
at, the summons were not Canonical, but void and invalid in Law. This and many
other instances are there brought by the same learned Author to justify the
Protestants in not appearing at Trent, because the place was not free nor safe;
although the Author seems not to have been one himself. All these things being
considered, he must have been an Infidel indeed, who would pronounce Trent to
have been the most indifferent place for both parties to meet at. For what you
say, That it might have been as unsafe for the Pope and his party, if it had
been in Germany: there is no reason at all for it, because of the Emperors
openly owning that Interest; but if you plead the wars of Germany which then
broke out, I hope that may serve as a further plea for the Protestants, who
were in a good condition to go to a free Council about matters of Religion,
when a war was already begun upon them upon the account of Religion, as most
evidently appears, not only by the supplies sent by the Pope, but by the
transactions afterward between the Pope and the Emperor, in some of which it
is expressly confessed.

But supposing the place had been never so free, there is another great
Exception remaining still,. 10.
viz. That none had suffrage, but such as were sworn to the Pope and Church of
Rome, and professed enemies to all that called for Reformation or a free
Council. To this you Answer, 1. That it is no new thing for Bishops to take an
oath of Canonical obedience to the Pope; P. 233.
for St. Gregory mentions it as an ancient custom in his time; and therefore
this objection would serve as much against ancient General Councils as this of
Trent. 2. That the Bishops oath does not deprive them of the liberty of their
suffrage; nay it does not so much as oblige them not to proceed and vote even
against the Pope himself, if they see just cause; but only that they will be
obedient to him, so long as he commands things suitable to the will of God and
the Sacred Canons of the Church. But what falsehood and fraud lies in both these
Answers, it will not take up much time to discover. Could you without blushing
offer to say, That no other oath was taken by the Bishops at the Council of
Trent then what was taken in ancient General Councils? for so much your words
imply, when you say, That the same objection would have held as well against
them as this of Trent. Why do you not produce some instance of any oath taken
to the Pope in any of the first General Councils? I dare challenge you to bring
any footsteps of any such thing in any ancient Council; and you must needs have
exceedingly hardened your forehead that durst let fall any thing tending that
way. It was in much later times before that oath of Canonical obedience from
Bishops to their Metropolitan came up; and when it did, no more took any such
oath to the Bishop of Rome, then such as were under his Metropolitical
jurisdiction. In your citation of Gregory, you would let us see how far you can
out-go Bellarmin himself in these things. De Council. l. 1. c. 22.
For Bellarmin only proves, that it is not new for Bishops to take an oath of
Canonical obedience to the Pope; but you say, That Gregory mentions it as an
ancient custom in his time, which is egregiously false. For there is not one
word in all that Epistle implying any thing of former custom, neither does it
contain an oath of Canonical obedience made by every Bishop at his
consecration, Greg. ep. l. 10. c. 31.
but only a Form of renunciation of Heresy by any Bishop who comes off from it
to the Catholic Church, and so the title of it is, Promissio cujusdam Episcopi
haeresin suam anathematizantis; and what is this, I pray, to the oath taken by
every Bishop at his consecration? wherein he swears, to defend and retain the
Roman Papacy, and the Royalties of St. Peter (so their new Pontifical has it,
whereas in the old one it was regulas Sanctorum Patrum) against all men. And
was this no more then a bare oath of Canonical obedience? The first mention we
meet with of any oath of Canonical obedience taken by men in Orders, is in the
eleventh Council of Toledo cap. 10. held, says Loaysa, A. D. 675. and therein
indeed they say it is expedibile, a matter they judge expedient, That those in
orders should, Promissionis suae vota sub cautione spondere, bind themselves by
promise to observe the Catholic Faith, and obey their Superiors: but here is
nothing at all concerning any oath to be taken by all Bishops to the Pope,
though Bellarmin produce it to that purpose. For that was much later then the
time of this Council, it beginning at the time of the contests between the
Popes and Princes about Investitures; then the Pope to secure as many as he
could to himself, binds them in oath of Fealty and Allegiance, rather then
Canonical obedience to himself: by which, as Spalatensis truly says, he makes
the Bishops his slaves and vassals. And therefore in another place, he justly
wonders, De Repub. Eccles. Tom. 1. l. 4. c. 7. sect. 52. Tom. 2. l. 6. c. 7. n.
102.
that any Christian Princes will suffer any Bishops to make that Homage by this
oath to the Pope, which is only due to themselves. For, says he, That oath
which was only of Canonical obedience before, they have turned it into absolute
homage to the Pope, so that none can be consecrated Bishops without it. But yet
you would persuade us, that notwithstanding this oath they may proceed and vote
against the Pope himself. Surely, Pope Pius 2 was of another mind, who (as the
Appendix to Vrspergensis tells us) in an Epistle to the Chapter at Mentz,
says, That to speak truth against the Pope, is to break their oath. But all
this will more evidently appear, if we produce the form of the Oath it self, I
mean not that in the old Roman Pontifical, but that which was taken in Julius
the third's time, which was in the time of the sitting of the Council of Trent.
In which, besides in the first place a promise of obedience to the Pope and his
Successors, and a promise of concealment of all his Councils, there are these
express words, Jura, honores, privilegia, Protestatio adversus Council. Trident.
p. 22. A.D. 1563.
and authoritatem Romanae Ecclesiae, Domini nostri Papae and successorum
praedictorum conservare, defendere, augere, and promovere curabo. I will take
care to preserve, defend, increase, and promote the rights, honors,
privileges, and authority of the Roman Church, and of our Lord the Pope and
his Successors aforesaid; but lest this should not be full enough, there
follows another clause, Nec ero in Concilio, in facto, seu tractatu, in quibus
contra Dominum nostrum, vel Romanam Ecclesiam, aliqua sinistra sive
praejudicialia personarum, juris, honoris, status, and potestatis eorum,
machinentur. Et, si talia a quibusdam tractari cognovero, aut procurari,
impediam hoc pro posse; and quantocyus potero commode significabo eidem Domino
nostro, vel alteri per quem ad ipsius notitiam possit pervenire. I will not be
in any Council, action, or debate, in which they shall plot or contrive any
thing to the prejudice of our Lord the Pope, or the Roman Church, or of any
persons, right, honor, state or power, belonging to them. Was not this now a
fit Oath to send Bishops to a free Council with? where the main thing to have
been debated had been the usurped power of the Pope and Church of Rome. He that
can believe a Council made up of such persons (who judge this Oath lawful) to
be Free, may think those men free to rebel against their Sovereign, who had
but just taken an Oath of Allegiance to him. Not that the Pope had any right or
power to impose it, or that the Oath is in it self lawful; but that those who
judged both these things true, could not possibly be more obliged, not to act
in any measure against the Pope then they were. And therefore the Pope knew
what he did, when he utterly denied to absolve the Bishops of this Oath, which
the States of the Empire pressed him to, as necessary in order to the Freedom
of the Council: No, said he, I do not mean to have my hands bound up so. He
knew well enough, how much his Interest lay at stake, if the Bishops were
released of this Oath, and therefore he was resolved to hold them fast enough
to himself by it. What restrictions or limitations can you now find out in this
Oath, whereby these Bishops might freely debate the power and authority of the
Bishop of Rome? They that swear, not to be in any Council or debate against the
Pope, are not like to make any Free Council about the matters then in dispute.
And, Do you think now the Protestants had no cause to except against this
Council, where all the Bishops were swore beforehand to maintain and defend
that which they most complained of. And, Were there nothing else but this Oath,
so unheard of a thing in all ancient Councils, so contrary to the ends of a
Free Council; this were enough to keep them from ever submitting to the
judgment of such a Council as that of Trent was.

And yet this is not all neither: for his Lordship adds, That the Pope himself,
to show his charity, had declared and pronounced the appellants Heretics,
before they were condemned by the Council. I hope, says he, an Assembly of
enemies are no lawful Council; and I think that the Decrees of such a one are,
omni jure nulla, and carry their nullity with them through all Law. All the
Answer you give to this, Ibid.
is, That the Pope did nothing therein but in pursuance of the Canons of the
Church which required him so to do, and of the Decrees of General Councils,
which had already condemned their Opinions for Heresy. You mend the matter
well: for it seems the Pope not only did so, but was bound to do so. For shame
then never talk of a Free and General Council, to debate those things which you
say were already condemned for Heresies by General Councils. One may now see,
What the Safe Conduct had been for the Protestants, if they had come to Trent;
for it seems they were condemned for Heretics before they came there, and
nothing then was wanting but execution. But if the Protestants Opinions were
condemned for Heresies before by General Councils, Why was the Council of Trent
at all summoned? Why was the world so deceived with the promises of a Free and
General Council? Why did they proceed to make new Decrees in these matters? In
what ancient General Councils will you show us the Popes Supremacy, the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome decreed, that those who held the contrary
should be accounted Heretics? Speak them out, that we may find our selves
therein condemned. Give us a Catalogue of the rest of your Tridentine Articles,
and name us the General Councils in which they were decreed as they are there?
But this is not a work for you to meddle in. However, What folly and madness
would it be to account that a Free Council, in which the things to be debated
are looked on as condemned Heresies already, and no liberty allowed to any
persons to debate them?

The last Exception you say of his Lordship, is, against the small number of
Bishops present at the Tridentine Council;. 11.
and in the first place he mentions the Greeks whom he takes (say you) to have
been unjustly excluded. Ibid.
To this you say, 1. The Pope called all who had right to come: (you should
say, all whom he would judge to have right to come.) 2. The Greeks, by reason
of their notorious Schism, had excluded themselves: And, Might not the Greeks
(if they were in condition) every whit as well hold a General Council among
themselves. and say, The Latins had excluded themselves by their notorious
Schism. You say, It is confessed that no known Heretic or Schismatic, has
right to sit in Council: but still you make your own selves Judges, Who are
Orthodox, and who Heretics and Schismatics; and, Might not the Greeks again
say the very same of you? and for all that I know, with much more truth and
reason. It was then very like to be a Genegeneral Council, when the Pope and
his party must sit as Judges, Who were to be admitted, and who not: Might not
the Donatists in Africa have called their Council of seventy Bishops an
Ecumenical Council upon the same grounds, because they accounted none to
belong to the Church, but such as were of their own party? And if they did not
belong to the Church, they could have no right to sit in Council. It seems, the
more uncharitable you are, the freer your Councils are; For the Pope may, by
pronouncing men Heretics and Schismatics, keep them from coming to Councils,
and appearing against him there: and the Council be never the less General for
all that. If the Greeks be not called to the Council, they may thank
themselves, they are notorious Schismatics, and, if we believe you, Heretics
too; If the Protestants be not admitted, it is their own fault they are
condemned Heretics; if none appear from any other more remote Churches, still
the same plea will serve to exclude them all. For my part I much approve the
saying of Eugenius in the Council of Florence, when they spoke of the paucity
of Bishops for a General Council, That where he and the Emperor, and the
Patriarch of Constantinople were present, there was a General Council, though
there were no more. And Pope Pius the fourth might have saved a great deal of
money in his purse, with which he maintained his Bishops Errant at that Council,
had he been of the same mind. But the scene of things was altered in Europe;
there were such clamours made for a General Council, that something must be
done to satisfy the world: and, as long as the Pope knew how to manage the
business, there would be nothing could breed so great danger in it. He
therefore barely summons a Council, without acquainting any of the Eastern
Patriarchs with it (as was the custom in the ancient General Councils) among
whom it was debated after the Emperors indicting of it; these summoned by the
Emperors order their Metropolitans, the Metropolitans the Bishops; the Bishops
they agreed among themselves, who should go to the Council, who on that account
might be said to represent those Churches from whence they came. What was there
like this in the Council of Trent? What messages were there sent to the Eastern
Patriarchs of Constantinople, Antioch, and Alexanandria? What Metropolitans
came thence? What Bishops by the consent of those Churches? And, if there were
nothing of all this, What boldness is it to call this a General Council? Just
by the same figure that your Church is called the Catholic Church; which is*
by an insufferable Catachresis. And must six fugitive Greek-Bishops give vote
here for all the Eastern Churches; and two fugitive English-Bishops for all the
Church of England? I do not then at all wonder, How easily this might be a
General Council, though there were so very few persons in most of the Sessions
of it. But you say, There was no need of any particular sending from the
Greeks, as the case then stood, and still continues; P. 234.
it is sufficient they were called by the Pope. Sufficient indeed for your
purpose; but not at all for a General Council; For if the Greek Churches had
been in condition to have sent an equal number of Eastern to Western Bishops,
the Popes would rather have lost all, than stood to the judgment of such a
Council. And this you know well enough, for all your saying, That the Greek
Church condemns the Protestants: You dread the Greek Churches meeting you in a
Free General Council; and therefore to prevent that, they must be called
Schismatics, and excluded as such, though you would never permit the debate of
the Schism in a Free Council. As the case then stood, and still continues,
there was no need of sending. And, Why so? Is it because those Churches were
then under persecutions, and are still, and therefore there is no hopes that
the Bishops should come to a General Council? But all that thence follows, is,
that as things stood then, and do still, there can be no truly General Council;
and that is a just inference: but I suppose you rather mean, because those
Churches were then in Schism, and are still, which still discovers what a
wonderful good opinion you have of your selves, and how uncharitable you are to
all others. And so great is the excellency of your Bishops, that one of them
may represent a whole Nation; and so about fifty will be more than sufficient
for the whole world. And therefore I rather wonder there were so many Bishops
at Trent; for, if the Pope pleased, as he made Patriarchs, Primats, and
Archbishops of such places where they never durst go (which he knew well
enough) it had been but appointing such to stand for such a Nation, and such
for another, and a small number might have served turn, without putting any to
the trouble of coming from any foreign Countries at all. For otherwise, if we go
about to examine the numbers of Bishops, by their proportions to the Churches
they come from, as it ought to be in General Councils, we shall find a most
pitiful account in the Council of Trent.

For as his Lordship says, Is it to be accounted a General Council, that in
many Sessions had scarce ten Archbishops,. 12.
or forty or fifty Bishops present? In all the Sessions under Paul 3. but two
Frenchmen, P. 215.
and sometimes none; as in the sixth, under Julius 3. when Henry 2. of France
protested against that Council. And from England but one or two (by your own
confession) and those not sent by Authority. And the French (he says) held off
till the Cardinal of Lorrain was got to Rome. As for the Spaniards, they
labored for many things upon good grounds, but were most unworthily overborn.
Now to this you have a double Answer ready, 1. That mission or deputation, is
not of absolute necessity, Ibid.
but only of Canonical provision, when time or state of the Countries whence
Bishops are sent, will permit; in other cases, it suffices they be called by
the Pope. 2. For those who were absent, the impediment was not on the Councils
part; and in the latter Sessions (wherein all that had been formerly desined by
the Council, was de Novo confirmed and ratified by the unanimous consent of all
the Prelates) it is manifest, the Council was so full, that in the number of
Bishops it exceeded some of the first four General Councils. I begin with your
first Answer, which necessarily implies, that a General Council is not so
called by representation of the whole Church, but by relation to the Popes
Summons. So that if the Pope make a General Summons, that must be called a
General Council, though none be present but such whom the Pope shall think fit
to call thither. But, Where do you find any such account of a General Council
in all Antiquity? I have given you instances already of General Councils, in
which the Popes had nothing at all to do with the summoning of them; nay, all
the four General Councils were called by the Emperor, and not by the Pope, as
any one may see, that does not wilfully blind himself. The Pope sometimes did
beseech and entreat the Emperor to call a Council, but never presumed to do it
himself in those days. And this is evident, not only from the Historians, but
from the authentic Acts of the Councils themselves; and Cardinal Perron's
distinction of the temporal and spiritual call of Councils, is as ill grounded
as the Popes temporal and spiritual power; there being no foundation at all in
Anquity, nor any reason in the thing, for two such several Calls, the one by
the Emperor, and the other by the Pope. But this is a mere evasion, the
evidence being so clear, as to the Emperors calling those Councils, the Nicene
by Constantine, the Constantinopolitan by Theodosius, the Ephesine by the
Junior Theodosius, the Chalcedonian by Martian and Valentinian: And this is so
clear, that Bellarmine in his Recognitions confesses his mistake about the
Constantinopolitan Council being called by the Letters of Pope Damasus; and
acknowledges that to be true, Recogniti. p. 46.
which I at large proved before, That the Synodical Epistle was not sent by the
General Council, but by another the year after. If then the calling of Councils
belongs not of right to the Pope, it is not his summoning which can make a
General Council, without mission and deputation from those Churches whom they
are to represent. And any other sense of a General Council is contrary to the
sense of Antiquity, and is forced, and unreasonable in it self. For it must be
either absolutely general, or by representation; none ever imagined yet an
absolutely General Council, and therefore it must be so called as it does
represent; if so, then there is a necessity of such a deputation. But here a
Question might arise, Whether those Deputies of Churches have power by their
own votes to oblige the Churches they are sent from, by conveying in a General
Council; or else only as they carry with them the sense of those Churches whom
they represent: and this latter seems more agreeable to the nature of a truly
General Council, whose acts must oblige the whole Church. For that can only be
said to be the act of the whole Church, which is done by the Bishops delivering
the sense of all particular Churches; and it is not easy to understand, How
the Universal Church can be obliged any other way; unless it be proved, that
General Councils are instituted by some positive Law of Christ; so that what is
done by the Bishops in them, must oblige the Catholic Church; and then we must
find out not only the Institution it self, but the way and manner how General
Councils should be called, of which the Scripture is wholly silent. And
therefore there is no reason that there should be any other General Council
imagined, but by such a representation; and in order to this, the consent of
all those Churches must be known by the particular Bishops, before they can
concur with others, so as to make a General Council. The most suitable way
then to a General Council, is, that the Summons of them being published by the
consent of Christian Princes, every Prince may call together a National Synod,
in which the matters to be debated in the Council, are to be discussed, and the
sense of that Synod fully declared, which those Bishops who are appointed by it
to go to the General Council, are to carry with them, and there to declare the
sense of their particular Church, and what all these Bishops so assembled do
all agree in, as the sense of the whole Church, may be called the decree of a
General Council. Or in case some great impediment happen, that such Bishops
cannot assemble from all Churches, but a very considerable number appearing and
declaring themselves, which upon the first notice of it, is universally
received by all particular Churches, that may ex post-facto be called a General
Council; as it was with the first four Ecumenical Councils. And yet that in
them there was such a deputation as this is, appears by that expression in the
Synodical Epistle of the Bishops of Constantinople before mentioned; for in
that they give this account, Why they could not do what the Western Bishops
desired, because they brought not with them the consent of the Bishops, who
remained at home to that purpose. Tom. 1. Council. p. 667.
(...). And concerning this only Council, viz. at Constantinople, have we
brought the consent of those Bishops which remain in the Provinces. So that
they looked on the consent of the other Bishops to be necessary as well as
their own. But now, if we examine your Council of Trent by this Rule, How far
is it from any appearance of a General Council? What Bishops were there sent
from the most of Christian Churches? Those that did appear, What equality and
proportion was there among them? For Voices in General Councils ought not to go
by the number of Bishops, but by the number of Churches; so that if six were
sent from the Church of England, or France, delivering the sense of that Church
they come from, they have equal Votes with the greatest number of Italian
Bishops. But here lay the great imposture of that Council; first, that the
Councils being general, depended upon the Popes general Summons, though never
so few Bishops appeared; next that the Decrees of the Council were to be
carried by most Voices, and the Bishops to give their bare placet; these things
being thus laid, when there was any fear that businesses would not go right, it
was but the Legates using some art in delaying it, and sending intelligence to
Rome, and forty Bishops are made together, and posted to Trent, to help out the
number of voices; and thus it was in the case of the Institution and Residence
of Bishops: And this is that you call, a General Council. 2. To your other,
That what was wanting in number at first, was made up at last when all former
Decrees were confirmed by a full number of Bishops; it is soon replied, That
this is, as all the rest of the proceedings of that Council was, Hist. Council
of Trent. l. 8. p. 804.
but a mere Artifice. For it appears by the History of that Council, that in
the last Session under Pius 4. a Proposition was made, that all the Decrees
under Paul and Julius should be approved; which was opposed, because they said
it would be a derogation to the Authority of the Council of those times, if it
should seem that the things then done had need of a new confirmation of the
Fathers, and would show, that this and that was not all one, because none can
confirm his own things. But upon the French Bishops earnest insisting upon it,
it was determined simply to read them, and no more. And, Do you call this a
confirming and ratifying them de novo? So that, for all appears by this last
Session, the Authority of those Decrees, must, as far as concerns the Council,
depend upon the number of the Bishops then present, which was but very small
certainly for a General Council, there being not so many in most of the
Sessions, as were in the Donatists Council in Africa; so far were they from the
number of the ancient General Councils.

But here comes your grand Objection in the way, That nothing is pretended by
us against the Council of Trent,. 13.
Ibid. n. 4.
which might not have been in effect as justly objected by the Arrians against
the Council of Nice. But, Is not there easily discernable a vast disparity
between these two, which way soever we conceive them? The one called by the
Emperor, who in person sat in the Council, to prevent all disorders and
clancular actions; the other by the Pope, who presided in it by his Legates, and
ordered all things by his directions. In that of Nice, the Arrian Bishops were
as freely admitted to debate, as any of the other; but it was far from being so
at the Council of Trent. In the Nicene Council, though Alexander was no further
a party as to the Doctrine than the other Bishops (no more was Leo at the
Council of Chalcedon, P. 230. n. 2.
or Cyril at Ephesus, though those are the three you instance in before) yet he
sat not as President of the Council, but the Emperor had the chief Inspection
for the right management of it, and for the Conciliar actions Hosius was
President: Would the Pope have been contented with such a Council in his case,
wherein the Emperor should have sat in chief, and some other person besides
the Pope to have presided? If not, never go about to parallel these two
Councils with each other. Again, in the Council of Nice, all the Bishops came
free, without any praeengagement to maintain the party of Alexander; but the
Bishops at Trent were all sworn to defend the Papal Interest. At Nice, the
Bishops themselves debated the matters in Controversy; at Trent, the Divines
dispute, the Bishops in their formalities give their Placet. At Nice, every one
was freely heard, none died for grief of checks being given them for their too
free speaking, as there did at Trent. And these, I hope, show, there was much
greater reason for the Protestants to except against the Council of Trent, than
for the Arrians against the Council of Nice. And yet, besides all these grounds
of disparity, those two remain good still, which his Lordship instanceth in,
viz. That the Council of Nice proceeded wholly by the Scripture, and that the
sentence of it has been universally received by the Church, P. 216.
both before and after it; neither of which can be said of the Council of
Trent. But to these two you offer something by way of Answer. To the first,
That both these Councils had the Scripture for their Rule, but not their only
Rule; P. 235.
for, you say, Theodoret expressly says, Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
that in condemning the Arrian Heresy, the Council of Nice grounded it self
upon Tradition. But Theodoret says no such thing; only out of an Epistle of
Athanasius, he says, When the Arrians objected that they used words not
contained in Scripture, they gave them this Answer, that so did they too; but
the words which they used, were such as their Fathers had used before them;
and, Do you call this the grounding the condemnation of them upon Tradition?
Yet, to do you right, I must suppose that either you took this upon trust,
without searching Theodoret; or, if you did, you looked no further than
Christophorsons Translation, which in things concerning the Papal
Controversies, does notoriously trip (to say no worse of it, as it were easy
to manifest from several examples) but we need no more than this present. For
whereas the words in Greek run thus, (...). Which Sirmondus faithfully renders,
Nam cum ipsi ex verbis non-scriptis impietatem suam adstruxerint: nusquam enim
scriptum reperias Ex non extantibus; aut, Erat quando non erat; accusant quod
per voces non-scriptas, pie tamen excogitatas, condemnati sint, i. e. Though
the Arrians made use of unwritten words themselves; yet they accused their
adversaries for condemning them by unwritten words; meaning the (...). But
Christophorson translates (...), afferunt, and there ends the sentence, and
then makes a new sentence. Quapropter ex non-scriptis vocibus, pie tamen
excogitatis, condemnati sunt. By this we see, What necessity there is of
searching your Citations in Antiquity, which you deliver with so much
confidence, as though none had ever looked into the Fathers but your selves.
But I find you so often tripping in your quotations, that where Bellarmine has
been used by the Latin Interpreter, you very securely follow him in it; as in
another place mentioned in this Chapter, where Christophorson renders (...),
mandato literarum, which Bellarmine confidently cites, as importing Damasus his
power to summon the Council of Constantinople, than which nothing can be
further from the meaning of those words. Thus you see, how vain your attempt
is, of proving that the Council of Nice grounded her definition on Tradition,
as the Council of Trent did, which is directly contrary to the advice of
Constantine, and the Proceedings of the Council, as his Lordship truly told
you. To the second concerning the consent of the Church, you answer, That the
like consent of the Church both is, and was, when Protestans first began. But,
Will this reach to a Parity, if it were granted? for his Lordship speaks of the
Consent of the Church in all ages, from the Primitive and Apostolical times. I
pray, prove your Mass, Invocation of Saints, Worship of Images, Purgatory, etc.
by such a Consent as this, and then you may say, There is no such disparity
between them: As to what you further add of the Council of Nice, condemning the
Quartodecimani for Heretics, I know not where you will find it, I am sure
Constantine is far from saying so in his Epistle persuading to union as to that
matter. Cannot the Council of Nice appoint time to celebrate Easter? or
determine, that those who come from Heretics, shall not be rebaptized, but
they must presently condemn all who do otherwise, for Heretics? But you must
be pardoned; you are proving a Parity between the Council of Nice and Trent,
and you know you could not do that sufficiently, unless they condemned all
dissenters in any punctilio, for Heretics.

. 14.
His Lordship further proves, That Trent could be no indifferent Council to the
Church, P. 218.
the Pope having made himself a strong party in it; because there were more
Italian Bishops there, than of all Christendom besides; yea more than double.
For where the number of Prelates is expressed that had suffrage and vote in
that Council, the Italians are set down to be a hundred eighty seven, and all
the rest make but eighty three, so that there were more Italian Bishops by a
hundred and four, than of all the rest of Christendom; sure (says he) the Pope
did not mean to be overreached in this Council. And whatsoever became of his
Infallibility otherwise, he might this way be sure to be Infallible in
whatsoever he would have determined. And this without all doubt is all the
Infallibility he has. P. 236.
To this you answer, That the Popes making a party, is disproved by the very
argument he brings to assert it, viz. the multitude of Italian Prelates; for,
Who knows not, that the Italians are more divided in point of Interest and
Dependence, than in any other Nation of Christendom, by reason of the many
Sovereign Principalities and States, into which Italy is divided? But, What is
this to the purpose, unless you could prove that the Italian Prelates were so
divided in point of Interest and dependence? Since therefore they have all
their dependence on the Pope, and not on those Principalities in which they
live; this evasion, though very slight, is yet the best your cause would bear.
And the greater you say, the number of Bishoprics is in Italy, the more
friends, I hope, the Pope must make by disposing them; and, Could they do the
Pope better service, than to help him in this grand business at Trent, wherein
they sought to outvy each other by promoting the Popes Interest. But not only
the Protestants complained of this, but the Emperor and other Princes, and all
impartial men in Germany, France; nay, and in some part of Italy too. But here
his Lordship encounters an Objection of Bellarmine, P. 220.
viz. that in the Council of Nice there were as few Bishops of the West
present, as were of the East at Trent, and manifestly shows the great disparity
between the the two Councils. 1. Because it is not a mere disparity in number
which he insists on, but with it the Popes carriage, to be sure of a major
part; but neither the Greek Church in general, nor any Patriarch of the East,
had any private interest to look to, in the Council at Nice. 2. It was not so
much a disparity between the Eastern and Western Bishops, but that there were
so many more Italians and Bishops obnoxious to the Popes Power, than of all
Germany, France, Spain, and of all other parts of the West besides. 3. Even in
the comparison of those two Councils, as to Eastern and Western Bishops, there
is this remarkable difference, that Pope Sylvester with 275. Bishops confirmed
the Council at Nice, but the Council at Trent was never confirmed by any
Council of Eastern Bishops. To the two first of these you Answer with your best
property, silence. Only you would fain persuade some silly people (if there be
any so weak in the world that enquire into such things) That the Pope had no
private interest at Trent, but what was common to him with other Bishops. You
should have done well to have commended the excellency of an implicit Faith,
before you had uttered a thing so contrary to the sense of the whole Christian
World. To the third you confess, It is some disparity, but nothing to the
purpose, because if the Pope himself had ratified them, P. 237.
the Council would have had as much Authority as by that accessory Assembly.
The more to blame was the Pope a great deal, for putting so many Bishops to so
needless a trouble. But you say further, This Council was not held just at the
same time. But Binius tells you, it was held as soon as might be, after the
notice of what was done at Nice; Tom. 1. Conc. p. 449.
show us the like of the Eastern Bishops at any time, and we will not quarrel
with you, because it was not at the same time: Though these Answers may pass
for want of better, they come not near your last, which is a prodigious one,
the sense of it being, That the Doctrine of Faith defined by the Council of
Trent was more universally received in the Church, then that of the Council of
Nice. For that of Trent, you say, was universally received by the whole
Catholic Church, and has been more constantly held ever since; whereas many
Provinces, Ibid.
either in whole or in part, deserted the Faith defined at Nice, and embraced
the Arrian Heresy. It seems then, the twelve good Articles of Trent have been
more generally received by the Catholic Church, then the eternal existence of
the Son of God; and consequently, that you are more bound to believe the
Doctrine of Purgatory, or Transubstantiation, then that the Son is of the same
substance with the Father: For your grounds of Faith being resolved into the
Churches Infallibility, you cannot believe that which has been so much
questioned in the Church, so firmly as that which has been universally
believed and constantly held. But the universal reception of the Doctrine of
the Council of Trent by the whole Catholic Church, is so intolerable a
falsehood, that you would scarce have vented it, unless it were your design to
write for the Whetstone.

To A. C's objection, That neither French, nor Spanish, nor Schismatical Greeks
did agree with the Protestants in those points which were defined by the
Council, his Lordship Answers, That there can be no certainty, who did agree,
and who not, P. 222.
(or who might have agreed before the Council ended) because they were not
admitted to a fair and free dispute. And it may be too, some Decrees would have
been more favorable to them, had not the care of the Popes Interest made them
sowrer. Here you complain, of his Lordships falling again to his Surmizes, of
the Bishops being overawed by the Popes Authority in the Council; which you
call an empty and injurious suspicion, an unworthy accusation, and arguing the
want of Christian charity. But usually when you storm the most, you are the
most guilty. Ibid. n. 8.
For if you call this an empty suspicion, etc. you charge many more with it
besides his Lordship, and those, the greatest of your own Communion; what meant
else, the frequent Protestations of the French and Spanish Ambassadors, in
which they often declared, that as things were managed, the Council was not
Free? What meant those words of the Emperor Ferdinand, in his Letters to the
Legates and the Pope? Hist. Council of Trent. l. 7. p. 683.
That the Liberty of the Council was impeached chiefly by three causes: one,
because every thing was first consulted of at Rome: another, because the Legates
had assumed to themselves only the liberty of proposing, which ought to be
common to all: the third, because of the practices which some Prelates
interested in the Greatness of the Court of Rome did make. The French
Ambassador, Monsieur de Lansac writ to the King his Master, That the Pope was
so much Master of this Council, that his Pensioners, whatsoever the Emperors
or we do remonstrate to them, will do but what they list. Several of the like
nature might easily be produced, so that it is not his Lordship only is guilty
of this want of charity (as you call it) but all impartial persons, who were
most acquainted with the Affairs of that Council. Whose judgment is certainly
much more to be taken then such who have sworn to defend it. But you have an
excellent Argument to prove the Council Free, because the Bishops of the
Council continued in the Faith and Doctrine of it as long as they lived. And
had they not good reason so to do, when they were sworn before hand to defend
the Pope, and having secured him from danger of reformation by the Council, and
subscribed the Decrees of it, they were as much bound to defend their own acts.
And although it is well enough known what practices were used to bring off the
French and Spanish Bishops; yet when they were brought off, what a shame would
it have been for them to have revolted from their own Subscriptions? But what
is this to that General freedom which was desired by the Roman Catholic
Princes for Reformation of the Court of Rome, and by Protestants both of the
Court and Church? Was the Council any thing the more free, because that party
which met there continued in what they had done? Just, as if a part of a
Common Council should suffer only such persons to come there whom they thought
fit, and suffer nothing to be debated, but what two or three of the leading men
should propound, and yet this be called a free Common Council, because they who
were of it, did after they had done, persist in it? And this is all you have to
plead for the Freedom of the Council of Trent.

. 15.
Touching the Greek Church and the writings of the Patriarch Hieremias, it is to
little purpose, to say, That they differ from us in several things, unless you
could prove, that they did agree with you in all. And if (as you say) they do
condemn Protestantism, you cannot but know they do much more condemn Popery;
and that in some of the main Articles of it. And therefore we have reason to
believe, that you more dread a Free Council, wherein the Greek Churches may be
admitted to equal votes with the Latin, then the Protestants do the judgment
of the Greek Church. For it is sufficiently known, how much the Greeks agree
with us in the opposition to the great points of the Popes Supremacy, and the
Infallibility of the Church of Rome; how far they are from the belief of
Purgatory in your sense, and several other things which are contained in the
Decrees of the Council of Trent: If the Patriarch Hieremias did not in all
things agree with the Lutheran Divines, does it thence follow, that he would
subscribe to the Council of Trent? But because you pretend to give us a full
account of the proceedings, between the Patriarch Hieremias, and the Lutheran
Divines, we must a little further enquire into them. You tell us then, That
about the end of the last Century, some eminent Protestants of the Lutheran
party, endeavored to feel the pulse of the Greek Church, P. 238.
to see if they could there find any Symptoms of their own disease. The design
was (you say) to close with the Greeks, for the better making out the pretended
perpetual succession of their Church; which Project they so hotly pursued,
though formerly in vain attempted, that they would not desist till the
Patriarch being settled in his Throne, they had sent him the sum of their
reformed belief, drawn up according to the Augustan Confession. After a long
intercourse of letters, answers, and replies mutually continued for some years,
and all Arguments used that might induce the Patriarch to receive them into his
communion, he could not be courted to so much as the least show of approving
their Doctrine: but did in all his Answers clearly confirm the Tenets of the
Roman Catholic Church, which those Lutherans endeavored to overthrow. In so
much, that the Patriarch tired with their importunity, gave them a rebuke for
their departure from the Doctrine of the Catholic Church, and desired them not
to trouble him any more with their writings. A very formal story! One would
expect the next news should have been, that the Patriarch had come to kiss his
Holiness's feet, or at least subscribed to the Council of Trent. But all your
stories out of the East have not so much truth as formality in them: witness
one for all, that solemn legation from Gabriel Patriarch of Alexandria, to Pope
Clement 8, wherein an acknowledgement was made of the Popes Supremacy as Head
of the Church; upon which, such joy was conceived at Rome, that Baronius
unmeasurably triumphs upon it, and says, it tends as much to the joy of
Catholics, as to the confusion of Heretics: and therefore has very solemnly
published the Legation it self; at the end of the sixth Tome of his Annals; but
upon a further examination of it, it was all found to be a mere fiction and
imposture of one Barton, as both Thuanus and Thomas a Jesu confess. But we must
suppose no such danger in this story, Thuan. hist: l. 114. ad A. 1595.

Thom. a Jesu de Convers. omn. gent. l. 7. c. 6. p. 364.


for you tell us, You have it from Spondanus, and he out of the writings of
those Protestants themselves: but I much rather believe by the circumstances of
your story, that either you, or Spondanus, had it from Socolovius their
virulent adversary, who having clancularly procured a Copy of the Patriarchs
Answer, he publishes it in Latin with the title of Censura Orientalis
Ecclesiae, and gives much the same account as you do here. In which there are
two grand mistakes, first, as to the design, which you say, was to be admitted
into Communion with the Greek Church: The second, as to the event which you say
was, That the Patriarch did not show the least approbation of their Doctrine,
but did in all his Answers confirm the Tenets of the Roman Catholic Church.
Both which, how notoriously false they are, will presently appear by a full
account of the circumstances of this affair. We must know then, that the news
of the Lutherans appearing in Germany against the Pope being spread at
Constantinople, great enquiry was made what their doctrine was, and they were
represented (by whose arts one may easily guess) as men holding strange
opinions, denying the Divinity of Christ, etc. as appears by a letter lately
published of a Divine about that time resident in Constantinople; and withal,
Hottinger. Archaiolog. Orie^t. cap. 3. p. 69.
that they were defamed generally as persons of no Religion at all, and of
wicked and flagitious lives: upon this, those German Divines send by Stephanus
Gerlachius Chaplain to the Emperors Ambassador, a Greek copy of the Augustan
Confession, Martinus Crusius having before sent a letter only of respect to the
Patriarch Hieremias; who by the means of Cantacuzenus was made Patriarch in the
room of Metrophanes, who was then deposed. Gerlachius, as appears by a letter
of his dated May 24* A. 1575. carries the copy of the Augustan Confession to
the Patriarch, who then had his Council about him, which with great joy and
delight, he says, he read in the presence of them, and delivered it to be read
to the Priests and Calogeri; but five points he selected out of it to be
further discussed, and when afterward he waited on the Patriarch to know his
judgment concerning it, Johannes Zygomalas, who was then the Rhetor
Patriarchicus a kind of Chancellor to him, told him, that having read it
almost all over, they approved almost all, except that about procession of the
Holy Ghost from the Son, and unleavened bread; but he particularly desired the
Patriarch to return an Answer to the Divines, who sent it with his judgment
upon it: and having spoken with the Metropolitan of Nice and others, they
seemed very much pleased with that Confession. With the Patriarchs letter
Johannes Zygomalas writes to Martin Crusius, and therein tells him, that though
in all things the Patriarch did not assent to them; yet it might be evident to
all (...), that they did agree in the most important Articles of Christian
Faith; Apud Chytrae. de statu Eccl. Orient. p. 122.
and that in other things they might easily agree, if they left the new and
strange customs and adhered to the Catholic Church with them, and there was
the greater hopes of it (...), Since neither part did agree with the Bishop of
old Rome, or the Church which joins with him, but both oppose the evil customs
and abuses which come by him: which bears the same date with the Patriarchs
first Answer to the Tubing Divines May 15. 1576. And the Patriarch in his
letter heartily wishes an union and conjunction between them. From hence we may
easily gather, how true both those things were, viz. That the intent of their
writing was, to be admitted into the communion of the Greek Church, and that
the Patriarch did not in the least approve their Doctrine, but confirmed the
Tenets of the Roman Catholic Church. But we must look further into the
writings themselves, to see how far they agreed, and wherein they differed. It
appears then, that the Patriarch did profess his consent with them in these
things, besides the Articles of the Creed, and the satisfaction of Christ,
Primum Patriar. Resp. p. 1.9.
and other more general points, viz. That the Sacrament was to be received in
both kinds, that the use of marriage was not to be absolutely forbidden the
Clergy, though their custom is, that they must be married before they take
Orders; besides the grand Articles of the Popes Supremacy, and the Roman
Churches Infallibility; Does he that joins with them in these things not in the
least approve their Doctrine, but confirm the Tenets of the Roman Catholic
Church? But withal, it must be confessed, that besides that common Article of
the Procession of the Spirit, wherein he disputes most earnestly; there are
five others, in which they dissented from each other, about Free will,
justification by Faith, the number of Sacraments, Invocation of Saints, and
Monastic life, and about these the remaining disputes were. In some of which
it is easy to discern how far the right state of the question was from being
apprehended, which the Lutheran Divines perceiving sent him a larger and fuller
explication of their mind in a body of Divinity in Greek; but the Patriarchs
troubles coming on, Cantacuzenus deposing him too, and other businesses taking
him off upon his restoration, he breaks off the Conference between them. But
although he differed from them in these things, yet he was far enough from
rebuking them for departing from the Roman Church, although he was desirous
they should have joined with them in the approbation of such things as were in
use among themselves. And in those things in which he seems to plead for some
practices in use in the Roman Church, yet there are many considerable
circumstances about them, wherein they differ from the Church of Rome, as has
been manifested by many others. As in the Article of Invocation of Saints, the
Patriarch says, They do not properly Invocate Saints but God, for neither
Peter nor Paul do hear us, upon which ground it is impossible to maintain the
Romish Doctrine of Invocation of Saints. And in most of the other, the main
difference lies in the want of a true State of the Questions between them. But
is this any such great matter of admiration, that the Patriarch upon the first
sight of their confession should declare his dissent from them in these things?
It is well enough known, how much Barbarism had crept into the Greek Church
after their being subdued by the Turks, the means of Instruction being taken
from them, and it being very rare at that time to have any Sermons at all, in
so much, that one of your Calogeri being more learned then the rest, and
preaching there in Lent, was thereby under great suspicion, and at last was by
the Patriarch himself sent out of the way. It is therefore more to be wondered
they should preserve so much of the Doctrine of Faith entire as they have done,
then that any corrupt practices should prevail amongst them. The most then,
which you can make of the judgment of the Patriarch Hieremias, is, that in
some things he was opposite to the Protestants, as in others to the Church of
Rome. But what would you have said, if any Patriarch of Constantinople had
declared his consent so fully with the Church of Rome, as the Patriarch Cyril
did afterward with the Protestants? who on that account suffered so much by
the practices of the Jesuits, of whom he complains in his Epistle to
Vtenbogard. Epist. Remons^. p. 412.
And although a Faction was raised against him by Parthenius who succeeded him,
yet another Parthenius succeeding him stood up in vindication of him. Since
therefore such different opinions have been among them about the present
Controversies of the Christian world, and there being no declared Confession of
their Faith which is owned by the whole Greek Church, as to these things; there
can be no confident pronouncing what their judgment is, as to all our
differences, till they have further declared themselves.

PART III. Of Particular Controversies.
CHAP. I. Of the Infallibility of General Councils.
How far this tends to the ending Controversies. Two distinct Questions
concerning the Infallibility, and Authority of General Councils. The first
entered upon, with the state of the Question. That there can be no certainty of
faith that General Councils are infallible; nor that the particular decrees of
any of them are so: which are largely proved. Pighius his Arguments against the
Divine Institution of General Councils. The places of Scripture considered,
which are brought for the Churches infallibility, and that these cannot prove
that General Councils are so; Matthew. 18.20. Acts 15.28. particularly answered.
The sense of the Fathers in their high expressions of the decrees of Councils.
No consent of the Church as to their infallibility. The place of St. Austin
about the amendment of former General Councils by latter, at large vindicated.
No other places in S. Austin prove them infallible, but many to the contrary.
General Councils cannot be infallible in the conclusion, if not in the use of
the means. No such infallibility, without as immediate a revelation as the
Prophets and Apostles had: taking Infallibility not for an absolute unerring
power, but such as comes by a promise of Divine Assistance preserving from
error. No obligation to internal assent, but from immediate Divine Authority.
Of the consistency of Faith and reason in things propounded to be believed. The
suitableness of the contrary Doctrine to the Romanists principles.

IF high pretenses and large promises were the only things,. 1.
which we ought to value any Church for, there were none comparable to the
Church of Rome. For there can be nothing imagined amiss in the Christian world,
but, if we believe the bills her Factours set up, she has an Infallible cure
for it. If any enquire into the grounds of Religion, they tell us, that her
testimony only can give them Infallible Certainty; if any are afraid of
mistaking in opinions, they have the only Infallible Judge of Controversies to
go to; if any complain of the rents and divisions of the Christian world, they
have Infallible Councils either to prevent or heal them. Who then would not run
into the bosom of such a Church as this, with whom there is nothing but what is
Infallible? Who but Scepticks, Heretics, and Schismatics would keep out of
her communion? for what is there, men can desire more in a Church then she
has, where every thing is so Infallible? Faith is Infallible, Tradition
Infallible, the Church Infallible, the Pope Infallible, General Councils
Infallible, and what not? But who are there that more cheat and deceive the
world, then those Mountebanks, who pretend to the most Infallible cures? For,
what is wanting in truth and reality must be helped out with the greater
confidence; and so we shall find it to be in these Infallible pretenders, who
fall short in nothing more then where they lay the highest claim to
Infallibility. Thus we have already manifested, that none have more weakened
Faith, then such who have given out, that they only could make it Infallibly
certain, none have brought more errors then that Church which arrogates to her
self, that she is Infallible; it now remains, that we discover that nothing is
further from promoting the Churches peace, then this present pretense of the
Infallibility of General Councils. For the ending of Controversies was the
occasion of this dispute; but this dispute it self has caused more. And will
do so, as long as men desire to see reason for what they do. For it cannot be
expected, that men should yield their judgments up to the decrees of every
such combination of men as shall call it self a General Council, unless it be
evidently proved, that it is impossible they should err in those decrees.
Where there be no other ways found out for the ending some great Controversies
of the Church, but by a free and General Council, all wise men will value the
Churches peace so far as not to oppose the determinations of it; it being the
highest Court of Appeal which the Church has. But there is a great deal of
difference between a submission for peace sake, in those things which are not
contrary to the Fundamentals of Faith, and the assent of the mind to all the
Decrees of such a Council as in themselves are Infallible. For, supposing them
subject to error, yet if that error be not such as does over-weigh the peace
of the Church, the authority of it may be so great as to bind men to a
submission to them. But where they challenge an internal assent by virtue of
such decrees, there must be first proved an impossibility of erring in them,
before any can look on themselves as obliged to give it. And while men contend
about this, that which was mainly aimed at, is lost by these contentions, which
is the Unity and Peace of the Church. For it is a most fond and unreasonable
thing, to suppose, there may not be as great divisions in the world, about the
ways to end Controversies as any other. Nay it is apparent, that the greatest
Controversies this day in the Christian world are upon this Subject. It is not
therefore any high challenge of Infallibility in any Person or Council which
must put an end to Controversies; for nothing but truth and reason can ever do
it, and the more men pretend to unreasonable ways of deciding them, instead of
ending one they beget many. For the higher the pretenses are, the more all wise
men are apt to suspect them, and to require the more clear and pregnant
evidence for what they say; and if they fail in that, they have reason to
question their Integrity much more then if they had contented themselves with
more moderate claims. For it is not saying Councils are infallible, will make
men yield the sooner to their determinations, unless you first convince their
reason by proving that they are so. But if you aim at nothing but the Churches
peace, you might save your selves this labor; persuade men to be meek and
humble, sober and rational, and I dare promise you the Church shall be more at
quiet, than if you could prove all the Councils in the world to be Infallible.
For, will that ever put a stop to the contentious Spirits of men? will that
alter their tempers, or make them delight in those things which are contrary to
them? No, you only offer to apply that Physic to the foreheads of men which
should be taken inwards; if you would endeavor to promote true piety and a
Christian Spirit in the world, that would tend more to the Churches peace then
all your contests about the Infallibility of General Councils. But since you
are resolved to contend, the nature of my task requires me to follow you, which
I shall more cheerfully do, because, in pretense at least, it is for peace sake.

This is then the first of those particular Controversies which this last part
is designed for the handling of, and which in the consequence of it,. 2.
brings in many of those particular errors, which we charge your Church with.
In handling of which, I must (as I have hitherto done) confine my self to those
lines you have drawn for me to direct my course by. Only in this first, to
prevent that confusion and tediousness which your discourse is subject to, I
find it necessary to alter the method somewhat. For there being two distinct
Questions treated of, viz. Whether General Councils be Infallible? and
supposing them not Infallible, How far they are to be submitted to? You have
intermixed these two so together, that it will easily puzzle the Reader to see
which of them it is you discourse of. And although I must confess his Lordship
has gone before you in it, as his occasion of entering into it required, yet
now the points coming to be more fully examined, it will be the most natural
and easy method to handle them apart, and to begin first with that of
Infallibility; for the other supposing the denial of it, it ought to follow the
reasons which are given for that denial. But although I thus transpose your
method, I assure you it is not with an intention to skip over any thing
material, but I shall readily resume the debate of it in its proper place. In
your entrance into this dispute, you give us very little hopes of any great
advantage is like to come by it, because, upon your principles, it is
impossible we should agree about the requisites to a General Council; for his
Lordship wishing that a lawful General Council were called to end
Controversies, you presently say, P. 222.
A pure one to be sure, if according to his wish. Yes, too pure a great deal
for you, to be willing to be tried by. And when his Lordship professes, P. 240.
That an easy General General Council shall satisfy him, that is lawfully
called, continued, and ended according to the same course, and under the same
conditions, which General Councils observed in the Primitive Church: You say,
It is too general to be Ingenuous; you mean, such a Council would be too
General for your purpose; for, you are resolved in your following words, not to
yield to such a Council wherein all excommunicate Bishops, Heretics and
Schismatics are not excluded; which is, in short, to tell us, You are resolved
to account none General Councils, but such as are wholly of your own pary, in
which the Pope shall sit as Judge, Who are admitted, and Who not; though this
be as contrary to sense and reason, as it is to the practice of the Primitive
Church, in those Councils which were then called. In which I have already
proved, that the Pope did not sit as President. And, as long as you hold to
such unreasonable conditions, it evidently appears, That your discourses of
General Councils, are merely delusory; and, to use your own words, Such a
General Council as you would have, is a mere nothing (as to a general and free
Council), an empty name to amuse silly people with; for, you require such
conditions in order to it, as are destructive both to the freedom, and Being of
a General Council. If therefore it be true, which you say, That morally
speaking such a General Council, as Protestants would have, is impossible to be
had; it is much more true, that such a General Council as you would have, it is
most unreasonable we should submit to. For, as long as you condemn all other
Bishops, but those of your own, P. 214.
Church for outlaws, and desertors of the Catholic Church; and give no other
reason for it, but because you say so; we thereby see, How absolutely averse
you are from any Free Council, and that without any show of justice, you
condemn all others but your selves, without suffering them to plead for
themselves in an Indifferent Council, where both parties may be equally heard.
But it was wisely said of Pope Clement 7. that General Councils are very
dangerous, when the Popes Authority is called in Question; and this you know
well enough; for, if a Free Council were held, the Pope himself might be found
with his party to be the greatest outlaws and desertors of the truly Catholic
Church. But in such packed Councils, where the Pope sits as President, and
orders all by his Legates, I shall desire you once more to ruminate over your
own words; What Rebel would ever be found criminal, if he might be allowed to
be his own Judge? But of such a kind of Council as you would have, I have
spoken sufficiently in the precedent chapter. That which we are now upon, is
not the Hypothesis, but the Thesis, in which we are to enquire, Whether such a
General Council as you suppose, be Infallible or no? His Lordship maintains the
negative, and you the affirmative. Your Opinion then is, That the Decrees of a
General Council confirmed by the Pope, are Infallible, and that the holding of
this, is a piece of Catholic Faith; and that it secures all the members of the
Church from erring in any matter of Faith. For you say, It is not de fide, that
the Pope without a Council is Infallible; but, that Pope and Council together
are Infallible, you all along above assert to be so; and that the Decrees of
General Councils fall nothing short in point of certainty of the Scripture it
self; and that the contrary opinion does actually expose and abandon all the
adherents to it, to an unevitable wavering and uncertainty in Faith. These are
your own words, in several places which I have laid together, the better to
discern the state of the Question. The main thing then whereon the use of
General Councils depends being, that this must be believed to be de fide, in
order to the certainty of men's Faith, and prevention of errors; that I may the
better show, how insignificant all this pretext of the Infallibility of General
Councils, is, I shall first prove from your own principles, that this cannot be
de fide, and then examine the grounds you insist on for the proof of their
Infallibility.

. 3.
I begin with the First, which will sufficiently demonstrate, to how little
purpose you talk of this Infallibility of Councils, for preventing uncertainty
of Faith, when you cannot have any certainty of Faith at all as to that
principle which must prevent it. For, supposing that really General Councils
are Infallible, if you cannot give me any reasons to believe that they are so,
their Decrees can have no power over my understanding, to oblige me to assent
to them. And since you say, this principle must be held de fide, if there be no
foundation at all for such an assent of Faith to it, I must needs be uncertain,
whatever the Decrees of those Councils be upon your own principles. If you
require an assent to the Decrees of Councils as Infallible, there must be an
antecedent assent to this Proposition, That whatsoever Councils decree, is
Infallible: As I cannot assent to any thing as Infallible, which is contained
in Scripture, unless I first assent to this, That the Scripture it self is
Infallible. If I therefore prove from your own principles, that none can have
an assent of Faith to this Proposition, That whatever General Councils decree,
is Infallible, then all your discourse comes to nothing, and men can have no
more certainty by their Decrees, than if they were not Infallible. And this I
shall prove by these things; 1. That you can have no certainty of Faith (I must
use your own terms) That the Decrees of General Councils in the general are
Infallible. 2. That you can have no such certainty as to the Decrees of any
General Council in particular.

1. That you cannot in the general have any certainty of Faith as to the
Infallibility of General Councils. For, 1. What Infallible Testimony have you
for this, without which, you say, No certainty of Faith is to be had? It is not
enough for you to say, That the Testimonies of Scripture you produce, are an
Infallible Testimony for it: for that were to make the Scripture the sole Judge
of this great Controversy, which you deny to be the sole Judge of any: And we
must consider this as a present Controversy, which divides the Church, Whether
General Councils be Infallible or no; In order to the ending which
Controversy, we desire you to assign the way to it; for, you tell us, you have
the only Infallible Way of putting an end to Controversies. Show us therefore,
which way this must be ended in the first place? Not by Scripture, for that
were to come wholly over to us; and if it may decide this Controversy, it may
as well all others. Who must then? The Pope? That cannot be, for we are not
bound to believe him Infallible, but only with a General Council, as you tell
us often. Must every one judge it by his reason? No, this is the private
Spirit, and would leave all to uncertainties. What then must do it? the Pope
and Council together? But that is it we are enquiring for, Whether we are to
believe Pope and Council, or no: And then the reason is, we must believe them,
because they say so. And, Can any thing be more ridiculous, than for you to
deny that the Scriptures are to be believed for themselves, and to assert, that
the Pope and Council are to be believed for themselves? If the Pope and Council
then should declare their Decrees Infallible, On what account are we bound to
believe them to be so? You have found it then an excellent way for ending all
other Controversies that are so far to seek for ending this; which you cannot
possibly do, without renouncing some of your principles, or an apparent
contradiction. But besides this, 2. Your very manner of asserting the
Infallibility of General Councils, destroys all certainty of Faith concerning
it. For, you say, That Councils are not Infallible, unless they be confirmed by
the Pope: which, to the apprehension of any reasonable man, is, that they are
not in and of themselves Infallible, but by virtue of the Popes confirmation.
And therefore to say that Councils are Infallible, and then make that
Infallibility depend upon the Popes Confirmation, is merely delusory: for, you
may as well say, that the Pope and Provincial Councils are Infallible. For,
Does the Decree receive any Infallibility from the Council, or not? If it does,
then the Decree is Infallible, whether the Pope confirm it or no: If it does
not, then the Infallibility is wholly in the Pope: And he may as well make a
Provincial Council Infallible, as a General. But, suppose it be some promise
which helps the Pope in a General Council, which does not in a lesser (though
there be no reason for that, for he is Head of the Church in one as well as in
the other) yet you cannot have any certainty of Faith, that the Council is
Infallible. For, you say, The Popes Confirmation is necessary to make it
Infallible, but that the Pope may infallibly confirm the Council is no matter
of Faith, and therefore the Infallibility of the Council can be none. For if
the Councils Infallibility depend on the Popes Confirmation, you can have no
greater certainty of the Councils Infallibility, then you have that the Pope
will infallibly confirm it: But you can have no certainty of Faith, that the
Pope will infallibly confirm the Council; therefore neither can you have any of
the Councils Infallibility. The assumption depends upon this, that you
acknowledge you can have no certainty of Faith, that the Pope is Infallible,
but when he decrees in a General Council, i. e. that the Decrees by Pope and
Council are Infallible. But you can have no certainty, that the Pope in the Act
of confirming them, is Infallible; for if so, you might assert it de fide, that
the Pope without a Council, is Infallible. For his Act of Confirmation is
distinct from that Infallibility which lies in the Decrees, which have passed
both Pope and Council. So that if the Infallibility of Councils lies wholly in
the Popes Confirmation, and you can have no certainty of Faith of the Popes
Infallibility, you can have no certainty of Faith of the Infallibility of
General Councils.

. 4.
But, suppose we should grant, that you might in general be certain of the
Infallibility of General Councils, when we come to instance in any one of them,
you can have no certainty of Faith, as to the Infallibility of the Decrees of
it. For you can have no such certainty, that this was a lawful General Council,
that it passed such Decrees, that it proceeded lawfully in passing them, and
that this is the certain meaning of them; and yet all these are necessary in
order to the believing those Decrees to be Infallible, with such a Faith as you
call Divine.

1. You can have no certainty of Faith, that this was a lawful General Council;
for that depends upon such things which you cannot say are de fide, as, that
the Bishops in the Council, are lawful Bishops, that the Pope who confirms them
is a lawful Pope; for, by your own explication afterward of your Doctrine,
concerning the intention of the Priest, you say, it can be but a moral
certainty, and that, you contend elsewhere, can be no ground for a Divine
Faith. Besides, you can have no more certainty, that is a lawful Council, whose
Decrees you assent to, than you have, that those Bishops who are excluded, are
Heretics or Schismatics; but, Can you be certain of that with Divine Faith?
and, Whereon is that Faith built?

2. You can have no such kind of certainty, of what Decrees were passed by
them, and whether those Decrees were at all confirmed by the Pope or no? For
Bellarmin confesses, No other certainty can be had of that, than that whereby
we believe there were such persons as Cicero, or Julius Caesar; and condemns
Vega for saying, The certainty of it depends upon the definitions of the
Council it self. Now this at the best, being but a humane or moral certainty,
you must contradict your self, if you say, That a Divine Faith may be built
upon it.

3. What certainty can you have, that may be a ground for Faith, that the
Council has proceeded lawfully; for, in case he does not, your own Authors
say, It may not be Infallible: For so Bellarmin answers in the case of the
Council of Chalcedon, Concilium legitimum posse errare in his quae non legitime
agit, De Council. l. 2. ^. 7.
that a lawful Council may err, in case it does not proceed lawfully. Now, Who
can assure one, that there have been no practices at all used to bring off some
men to give their Votes with them? It is hard to conceive such a body of men,
wherein some few do not sway and govern all the rest, and in that case, Can any
one say, that it was the Spirit of God which governed the Council? Especially
if one Preside in the Council, who has authority and power above all the rest,
and that others in the Council have any dependence on him; Who can then expect
that freedom which is requisite to a General Council? The Councils of Ariminum
and Seleucia, are condemned; because, though there were a very great number of
Bishops, yet some outwitted all the rest, and, by their subtilty, brought them
to subscribe that confession of Faith, which Pope Liberius afterward confirmed
by his own subscription. And if so great a Council as this, must be reprobated
on that account; Why not all others, where there are suspicions of the same
arts and subtilties? Nay, How can a man be sure there have not been such arts
used in Councils? for it is not to be expected, that such things should be much
known to the world, they being privately managed with the greatest secrecy that
may be. And yet it is in this case necessary to know, that the Council
proceeded with all simplicity and plainness; for otherwise their determinations
may not be Infallible. In order to which nothing is more requisite than that
there be no one, which has any great Authority over them: For if the second
Council of Ephesus, lawfully summoned, and the Popes Legates being present, be
therefore rejected, because Dioscorus the Patriarch of Alexandria did overruled
the rest; What assurance can we have of any fair dealing, where the Pope
himself presides, who has more ways both to terrify and oblige, than ever
Dioscorus could have? Besides, set aside this over-awing by some potent person,
suppose some active and subtle men perceiving how things are like to go in a
Council, use their wits to bring off some men, not of so deep reach as others,
to their own party, and it may be by the accession of a small number, they
over-vote the rest; Must we presently say, That the Spirit of God went off with
those few men to the other party? for the Decrees of Councils going by Votes,
and those Votes by the major part; Who does not see, how easy it is (when it
stands, it may be, upon a few Votes) to fetch off a number to the other side.
And I do not know, where the Spirit of God has promised, that where three or
four men may so much alter the Decrees of a General Council, those Decrees, if
they pass the major part, shall be infallible, and as certain as the Scripture.
To be sure then, there ought to be great confidence of the simplicity of the
Councils proceedings where a man must assent to them as Infallible: and to that
end men must be assured that they came thither without any prejudice upon their
minds; that when they were there, they sought nothing but the Truth and the
Honor of Christ; or else, to be sure, they are not gathered in his name, and
if not so, they cannot expect he should be in the midst of them. Now let any
one who understands the world, and humane nature, see if he can persuade
himself, that a Council can have no prejudices or by-ends upon them, that
nothing of interest and reputation, may sway upon them when they are met there,
that there shall be no heats or contentions among them; for if there be, let
him then see, Whether he can believe them to be Infallible? If you say, In a
matter so highly concerning the Church, the Spirit of God will not suffer them
to err: You must first show, where the Spirit of God has promised this; and
then, if you could, that those promises do not suppose the performance of some
conditions, which if they neglect, they may want the effect of them. In which
case, there can be no greater assurance of the Spirit's presence, than there is
of performance of the conditions, which is the thing I now aim at. Besides all
which, we have known, that when it has been a matter of as great concernment
to the Church, as any of those you can fancy, great numbers of Bishops at
Sirmium, Seleucia, Ariminum, Ephesus, have miscarried, and decreed that which
has been judged Heresy by the Church.

4. Suppose men could be assured of the proceedings of the Council, yet what
certainty of Faith can be had of the meaning of those decrees? for we see they
are as liable to many interpretations as any other writings. If the Scriptures
cannot put an end to Controversies on that account, how can General Councils do
it? when their decrees are as liable to a private sense and wrong
interpretation as the Scriptures are: Nay much more, for we have many other
places to compare, the help of original tongues, and the consent of the
Primitive Church to understand Scriptures by: when the Decrees of Councils are
many times purposely framed in general terms, and with ambiguous expressions to
give satisfaction to some dissenting parties then in the Council. Who knows
not, what disputes have been raised about the sense of some of the Decrees of
the Council of Trent? about which the several parties neither are, nor are like
to be, agreed. Nay, Who is so unacquainted with the proceedings of that
Council, as not to understand how much care was taken in many of the decrees to
pass them in such general terms, that each party might find their sense in
them. How fearful were they of declaring themselves, for fear of disobliging a
particular party? and are these the effects of an Infallible Spirit? Since we
know it has been thus in some Councils, Who dares venture his faith, it has
not been so in others? Who dare be confident, this or that is the meaning of
such a Decree, when it may be capable of several senses? Was it a sign, that
Council was Infallible, that was afraid to speak out in a case of great
consequence and necessity in the Church? the Council of Trent, I mean, in
determining, That due honor be given to Images, without assigning what that
due honor was, which was the most needful of all to be done. If the Decrees of
Councils were not ambiguous, what mean so many disputes still about them as are
in the world? And when at last, you say, That the Councils are Infallible when
the Pope confirms them, you say nothing more then if we should say, That
Councils are Infallible when Scripture confirms them. Nay, you say nothing near
so much; for all are agreed, that Scriptures are Infallible, but many among
your selves are far from believing, that the Pope is Infallible. And therefore
we are much nearer ending Controversies, in saying, Councils confirmed by
Scripture are Infallible, than you are in saying, Councils confirmed by the
Pope are so.

These things being thus in the General premised, we come now to the particular
handling this Controversy between his Lordship and you.. 5.
And for the greater clearness of proceeding, he premises some things by way of
consideration; whereof the first is, That all the power an Ecumenical Council
has to determine, P. 228 sect. 33.
and all the assistance it has, not to err in that determination, is all from
the Universal Body of the Church, whose representative it is. For the
Government of the Church being not Monarchical, but as Christ is head, this
principle is inviolable in nature; Every body collective, that represents,
receives power and privileges, from the body which is represented, else a
representation might have force without the thing it represents; which cannot
be. So, there is no power in the Council, no assistance to it, but what is in
and to the Church. But withal his Lordship adds, That the representative body
cannot be so free from error as the whole Church, because in all such
assemblies many able and sufficient men being left out, they which are present
may miss or misapply that reason and ground upon which the determination is
principally to rest. By which means the representative body may err, whereas
the represented, by virtue of those members which saw and knew the ground, may
hold the principle inviolated. All the Answer which you return to this, is,
That his supposition of the Churches not being Monarchical, is confuted
already, P. 245.
(and I say, whatever you have produced is Answered already) and that the power
and assistance of General Councils cannot possibly be communicated to them by
the Church, but must proceed from the same fountain now, it did in the Apostles
time, viz. the direction of the Holy Ghost; this spiritual power not being of
humane, but divine Institution; and not proceeding so much from the abilities
of the persons, as from the cooperation of the Holy Spirit with them. To which
I reply, that all this had need be more then thus barely asserted: it being
confessed by your selves (as his Lordship shows) that a General Council is a
representative of the whole Church, you ought to have showed us the Divine
Institution of this Representative, and the promises made to it under that
notion, or else we may still say with his Lordship, That all the power and
assistance it has, is by virtue of that body which it represents. But I need
not in this urge the Arguments of Protestants against you; for in this, as in
most other Controversies, we have enough from those of your own party to oppose
against these affirmations of yours. For Albertus Pighius not only asserts, but
proves, that General Councils are not of divine, but humane institution,
arising from a dictate of right reason; Hierarch. Eccles. l. 6.. c. 1.
that matters of doubt may be better debated by many prudent and experienced
persons then by a few. So that as the supreme authority for administration of
affairs belongs to one, so it is most agreeable to right reason, that debates
should be by many, This he proves at large, that nothing but humane reason is
the foundation of Councils in the Church; for, says he, In Scripturis
Canonicis nullum de iis verbum est; nec ex Apostolorum institutione, speciale
quicquam de illis accepit illa primitiva Christi Ecclesia. There is not a word
of them in Scripture, neither did the primitive Church receive any particular
order from the Apostles concerning them: which he from thence proves, because
in all the time of the primitive Church till the Nicene Council, there is no
mention at all of them. And at that time it did not receive any new revelation
concerning the celebrating General Councils, but the Emperor Constantines zeal
for the peace of the Church was the first cause and original of them. From
whence he concludes that they have no supernatural or divine Institution, sed
prorsus humanam, but altogether humane: for they are, says he, The invention
of Constantine sometimes useful, but not at all necessary. This man speaks
intelligibly, and not like those who jumble Pope and Council together to make
something Infallible between them. For he says, It is the better way by far to
go immediately to the Apostolical See and consult that, as the Infallible
Oracle, in all doubts of Faith. And very honestly tells us, That he believes
Constantine was ignorant of that privilege of the Holy See, when he first
instituted General Councils. Than which nothing could be spoken truer. If you
have then nothing more to say for the Divine Institution of General Councils,
then what you have acquainted us with, it would be much more wisdom in you to
contend with Pighius for the Popes Infallibility, and let that of General
Councils shift for it self.

His Lordships second Consideration you admit of, viz.. 6*
That though the Act which is hammered out by many together, must needs be
perfecter, then that which is but the child of one man's sufficiency; yet this
cannot be Infallible, unless it be from some special assistance of the Holy
Ghost. Therefore omitting your very impertinent addition to this consideration,
viz. So as to make its Decrees Infallible, (which is the thing in question): We
proceed to the third; which is, That the Assistance of the Holy Ghost is
without error, which (says he) is no question; P. 230.
and as little that a Council has it. But the doubt that troubles, is, whether
all assistance of the Holy Ghost be afforded in such a high manner, as to cause
all the definitions of a Council in matters fundamental in the Faith, and in
remote deductions from it, to be alike Infallible. From this last expression
you would very subtly infer contrary to his Lordships design, That he granted
General Councils to be Infallible in deductions, Ibid.
as well as fundamentals, but not to be alike Infallible: whereas it is plain,
his Lordship means no more by alike Infallible, then, Whether the assistance be
alike in both to make them Infallible. And this you might easily perceive, but
it would have prevented your cavil about a graduated Infallibility; which I
know none assert but your self. This Consideration brings on the main of the
battle, in those texts of Scripture, which are most insisted on to prove the
Infallibility of General Councils, viz. John 16.13. I will send you the Spirit
of Truth and he shall lead you into all Truth. John 14.16. This Spirit shall
abide with you for ever. Matthew. 28.20. Behold I am with you to the end of the
world. Matthew. 16.18. The founding of the Church upon the Rock against which the
gates of hell shall not prevail. Luke 22.32. Christ's prayer for St. Peter, that
his Faith should not fail. Matthew. 18.20. Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, I will be in the midst of them. Acts 15.28. It seemed good
to the Holy Ghost, and to us. All which places (except the two last) have been
already examined as far as concerns any promise of Infallibility in the
questions concerning the Churches and the Popes Infallibility: and there being
no reason at all given, why any Infallibility at all is promised by them to the
Church after the Apostles times, it may seem wholly needless to bestow a
particular consideration again upon all of them. For it is evident in those
places, all your drift and design, is only to prove a promise of Infallibility
in the Church, and to the Councils only by virtue of that. But having at large
before showed, that no such thing can be inferred from these or any other
places, that which is built upon it, is wholly taken away too. For the only
pretense that you have, why Councils should be proved hence Infallible, is,
because the Church has Infallibility promised by these texts, which must be
very well proved, and much better then you have done, either here, or
elsewhere, before the other can be deduced from hence. And yet supposing I
should grant, that Infallibility was promised to the Church, I see no such
necessary consequence from thence, that General Councils must be Infallible:
unless you can prove from Scripture, that the Infallibility of the Church is
meant of the Church representative and not diffusive; which is a new task which
you have not yet undertaken. For it is not enough to say, P. 254.
That the body of the Church is bound to believe and profess the doctrine
taught by the representative, and therefore the representative must be
Infallible, unless you could first prove, that there is a necessity of some
continued Infallible teaching by the Church representative: which I despair of
ever seeing done. I am so far therefore from thinking as you do, That these
texts are sufficiently clear in themselves to prove the Infallibility of
General Councils, that I believe a Philosopher might hear them repeated a
hundred times over without ever imagining any such thing as a General Council,
much less concluding thence, that they are Infallible. But because you again
cavil with another expression of his Lordships, in that he says, That no one
of them does infer, much less enforce Infallibility; P. 246.
from whence you not infer but enforce this consequence, that he was loath to
say all of them together did not; I shall therefore give you his Lordships
Answer from all of them together. Which is likewise sufficient for every one of
them. And for all the places together, says he, weigh them with indifferency,
P. 239.
and either they speak of the Church (including the Apostles) as all of them
do; and then all grant the voice of the Church is Gods voice Divine and
Infallible. Or else they are general unlimited, and appliable to private
assemblies as well as General Councils, which none grant to be Infallible, but
some mad Enthusiasts. Or else they are limited, not simply to all truth, but
all necessary to salvation; in which I shall easily grant a General Council
cannot err, suffering it self to be led by this Spirit of Truth in Scripture,
and not taking upon it to lead both the Scripture and the Spirit. For, suppose
these places or any other did promise assistance even to Infallibility, yet
they granted it not to every General Council, but to the Catholic body of the
Church it self, and if it be in the whole Church principally, then is it in a
General Council but by consequent, as the Council represents the whole. And
that which belongs to a thing by consequent, does not otherwise, nor longer,
belong unto it, then it consents and cleaves to that, upon which it is a
consequent. And therefore a General Council has not this assistance, but as it
keeps to the whole Church and Spouse of Christ, whose it is to hear his Word
and determine by it. And therefore if a General Council will go out of the
Churches way, it may easily go without the Churches truth. Which words of his,
contain so full an Answer to all these places together, that till that be taken
off there is no necessity at all to descend to the particular places,
especially those which are acknowledged by your selves to speak primarily of
the Churches Infallibility.

Yet for your satisfaction (more than any intelligent Readers) I shall add
somewhat further, to show the impertinency of the former places,. 7.
and then consider the force of the two last, which have not yet been handled.

1. There can be nothing drawn from promises made to the diffusive body, for
the benefit of the representative, unless the maker of those promises did
institute that representation. Therefore, supposing that Infallibility were by
these promises bestowed upon the Catholic Church, yet you cannot thence infer
that it belongs to a General Council, unless you prove that Christ did appoint
a General Council to represent the Church, and in that representation to be
Infallible. For this Infallibility coming merely by promise, it belongs only to
those to whom the promise is made, and in that capacity in which it is made to
it. For, Spiritual gifts are not bequeathable to Heirs, nor can be made over to
Assigns; if the Church be promised Infallibility, she cannot pass away the gift
of it to her Assigns in a General Council, unless that power of devolution be
contained in the Original Grant. For she can give no more then is in her power
to bestow; but this Infallibility being out of her disposal, the utmost that
can be given to a General Council is a power to oblige the Church by the acts
of it, which falls much short of Infallibility. Besides, this representation of
the Church by a General Council is a thing not so evident from whence it should
come, that from a promise made to one it must necessarily be understood of the
other. For, as Pighius says, It cannot be demonstrated from Theological
grounds, Hierarch. Eccles. l. 6. c. 4.
that a General Council which is so far from being the whole Church, that it is
not a thousandth part of it, should represent the whole Church. For either,
says he, it has this from Christ or from the Church: but they cannot produce
one tittle from Scripture, where Christ has conveyed over the power and
authority of the whole Church to a hundred or two hundred Bishops. If they say,
It is from the Church; there are two things to be showed, first, that it is
done; and secondly, that it is de jure or ought to be so done. First, it can
never be showed, that such a thing ever was done by the Universal Church; for
if it were, it must either be by some formal act of the Church or by a tacit
consent. It could not be by any formal act of the Church; For then there must
be some such act of the Universal Church, preceding the being of any General
Council; for by that act they receive their Commission to appear in behalf of
the Universal Church. And this could not be done in a General Council, because
that is not pretended to be the whole Church but only to represent it: and
therefore it must have this power to represent the Church by something
antecedent to its being. Else it would only arrogate this power to it self
without any act of the Church in order to it. Now that the Universal Church did
ever agree in any such act, is utterly impossible to be demonstrated, either
that it could be, or that it was. Yet such a delegation to a General Council
must be supposed in order to its representation of the whole Church; and this
delegation must not only be before the first General Council, but, for all that
I can see, before every one. For how can the Church by its act in one age bind
the Church in all ages succeeding to the acts of those several Councils which
shall be chosen afterward? If it be said, That such a formal act is not
necessary, but the tacit consent of the whole Church is sufficient for it: then
such a consent of the Church must be made evident, by which, they did devolve
over the power of the whole Church to such a representative. And all those must
consent in that act whose power the Council pretends to have, and so it cannot
be sufficient to say, That those who choose Bishops for the Council do it; for
then they could only represent those who chose them, and so their authority
will fall much short of that of the whole Church. But suppose such a thing were
done by the whole Church, of which no footsteps at all appear, we must further
enquire by what right or authority this is done, for the authority of the
Church being given it by Christ, it cannot be given from it self without his
commission for doing it. Which if we stay till it can be produced in this case,
we may stay long enough before we see any such Infallible Representative of the
Universal Church. The utmost then, that can be supposed in this case, is, that
the parts of the Church may voluntarily consent to accept of the decrees of
such a Council; and by that voluntary act, or by the Supreme authority
injoyning it, such decrees may become obligatory. But what is this to an
Infallibility in the Council because it represents the whole Church? For
neither is there evidence enough for such a representation, neither, if there
were, could any privilege of that nature belong to the representative body,
because of any promise made to the diffusive body of the Church.

. 8.
2. What belongs to the representative body of the Church by virtue of a promise
made to the diffusive, can in no other sense be understood of the
representative, then as it belongs to the diffusive. Because no further right
can be derived from any then they had themselves. Therefore supposing a promise
of Infallibility made to the Church, it is necessary to know in what way and
manner that promise belongs to it; for in no other way and manner can it belong
to the Council which represents it. If therefore the Churches Infallibility
lies only in Fundamentals, the Councils Infallibility can extend no further. If
the Churches Infallibility does not imply, that all the Church or the major
part should be Infallible, but that though the major part err, yet all the
Church shall not, then neither can it be true of a General Council, that all,
or the major part should be Infallible, but only that there should be no such
General Council, wherein all the Bishops should err. But then this is utterly
destructive to the Infallibility of the Decrees of General Councils, for those
must pass by the major part of the Votes: Which Canus, one of the acutest of
our adversaries, was sensible of, and grants, that the major part in a General
Council may err, and the lesser part hold the truth; but then, he says, That
the Pope is not bound to follow the major part. Canus loc. Theol. l. 5. c. 5*
Which is expressly to take away any pretext of Infallibility from the Decrees
of the Council, and place it wholly in the Pope: And, Why may not then the Pope
and a Provincial Council be as Infallible, as the Pope and the lesser part of a
General Council? What then do the promises of Infallibility to the Council
signify, if the major part may definitively err? And therefore Bellarmin
likes not this Answer, as being too plain and open, but gives another as
destructive to the Councils Infallibility, as this is. Which is, that in case
the major part does resist the better in a General Council, as in that of
Ariminum, and the second at Ephesus, Bellarm. de Council. l. 2. c. 9.
yet that it cannot conquer it. How so? Does it not conquer it when the Decrees
are passed by the major part? No, says he, for these Decrees are afterward
made void. Very good: But then, I suppose in the Council, the major part did
conquer, although not after. But by whom are they made void? By him to whom it
belongs to confirm his Brethren, says Bellarmin. Well, but the skill is, to
know who that is in this case, who can reverse the Decree of the representative
body of the Church under the plea of confirming his Brethren? If it be the
Pope, Who reversed the Decrees of the Council of Sirmium, to which the Pope
subscribed? And for that of Ariminum and Selencia, Hilary did more to reverse
it, than ever the Pope did. Therefore others say, It is in the Churches power
to make void the Decrees of General Councils, as she did the Decrees of the
Arrian Councils. If so, then we plainly see, the Infallibility does not lie in
the representative, but in the diffusive body of the Church still; if that has
the power to avoid and repeal the Decrees of General Councils. So that all the
Infallibility of Councils is merely probationary, and stands to the good liking
and consent of the d^ffusive body of the Church. By which means the Decrees of
a Provincial Council being accepted by the Church, are as Infallible as of a
General. But in all these ways, there is no proper Infallibility at all in the
major part of a General Council, but it wholly lies either in the Pope, or in
the diffusive body of the Church still.

3. If these places which mention a promise of Infallibility to the Church,
must imply the Infallibility of General Councils, as the Churches
representative, then it will thence follow, that the Decrees of General
Councils are Infallible, whether the Pope confirm them or no. For the
Infallibility is not promised at all mediante Papa, but virtute Ecclesiae; for
if they be infallible as representing the Church, they are Infallible, whether
there be any Pope or no: for the Pope does not make them more represent the
Church than they did before. And this is very well understood and proved by
those, who from these promises to the Church, and from that Infallibility
consequent upon it (by their adversaries confession) to a General Council, do
infer the Councils Authority to be above the Popes. Which is a just and
necessary consequence from this assertion, That the privileges of the
Universal Church, are by virtue of its representation in a General Council.
Which Doctrine was asserted by the Councils of Constance, and Basil, and by the
Sorbonne Doctors, till their being Jesuited of late. Who have therefore
asserted, that it might be as lawful to call in question the Decrees of the
Council of Trent, as of those two Councils. And whereas their adversaries
object, That this is not de fide: they answer, It is impossible but that it
should be de fide, since it is decreed by General Councils. For, say they, Were
the Fathers at Constance and Basil, acted by any other Spirit, than those at
Nicaea, and Ephesus? Why may not then the Council of Trent be opposed as well
as them? For if there be any difference, they had much the advantage. In the
Council of Constance (say they) two Popes were present, all the Cardinals, two
Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Antioch, and the Emperor himself, and the
Legates of all Christian Princes; and besides all this, it was confirmed by Pope
Martin, and the Acts of Confirmation extant in the 45. Session. And so the
Council of Basil was begun, according to the Decrees of the Councils of
Constance and Pisa, and by virtue of the Bulls of Martin and Eugenius; and the
Popes Legates were presidents in it. So that if General Councils be Infallible,
it must be de fide Catholica, that their Authority is above the Pope's: And if
so, their Infallibility cannot depend upon his Confirmation. Now, if we search
into the grounds on which they build this power of General Councils
independently on the Pope, we shall find they derive it wholly from those
places of Scripture, which speak so much concerning the Church and Councils, as
is agreed on both sides. And therefore Aeneas Sylvius (afterward Pius 2.)
says, Aeneas Sylv. de gest Council. Basil. l. 1.
That is not the less de fide, because it is contradicted by some, since it is
founded on the promises of Christ concerning the Church. Since therefore the
Pope himself is but Filius Ecclesiae, and the Church is Sponsa Christi; they
say, It is unreasonable that the Son of the Church should not be subject to the
Spouse of Christ. If therefore these promises concerning the Church, infer an
Infallibility in it, and that Infallibility be in a General Council, as
representing the Church; it follows thence, that Councils must be in themselves
Infallible, whether confirmed by the Pope or no. And we may see, how little
this Opinion of Infallibility of General Councils is like to stand between
them, by the Answers which are given by those of the other party, who mak^ ^he
Popes Confirmation necessary to the Infallibility of the Council. For Canus
expressly says, That the Council is said to be Infallible in no other sense
than the Church is, i. e. in those things wherein all agreed, and not the major
part. Bellarmin likes not this; For, says he, if the major part of the Council
err, De Council. l. 2. c. 11.
the Council must of necessity err; for that which properly belongs to the
Council, is, Passing judgment in matter of Faith, or making Decrees: now, if
that were not the lawful Decree of the Council, which is made by the major
part, there never could be a lawful Decree, for none passes without some
dissenting: and therefore he denies that the Council does fully represent the
Church without the Pope. So that on both sides we see, how pregnant these
proofs are for the Councils Infallibility, when one says, That if they be
understood of the Church, the Councils Infallibility does not want the Popes
Confirmation, the other to make the Popes Confirmation necessary, denies such
an absolute representation of the Church in the Council. If then the Council
does represent the Church, it is Infallible, although not confirmed by the
Pope, if it does not, then the promises made to the Church cannot belong to the
General Council. Thus I have showed you, how far these places concerning (as
you say) the Infallibility of the Church, are, from proving the Infallibility
of General Councils.

. 9.
But, though these general places concerning the Church, may not so clearly
prove the Infallibility of General Councils, yet, you say, There are some
particular places to this purpose. Which are, Mat. 18.20. and Act. 15.28. Which
not having been handled already, I must follow you more closely in the
examination of them. The first place is, Mat. 18.20. Where two or three are
gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them. The substance of
the argument from this place, his Lordship thus repeats from Bellarmin. The
strength of the argument is not taken from these words alone, P. 234.
but as they are continued with the former, and that the argument is drawn a
minori ad majus, from the less to the greater, thus. If two or three gathered
in my name, do always obtain that which they ask at Gods hands, viz. wisdom
and knowledge of those things which are necessary for them: How much more shall
all the Bishops gathered together in Council, always obtain wisdom and
knowledge, to judge those things, which belong to the direction of the whole
Church? To which his Lordship answers, That there is very little strength in
these words, either considered alone, being generally interpreted by the
Fathers, of consent in prayer, or with the argument a minori ad majus, 1.
Because, though that argument hold in natural or necessary things, yet not in
voluntary or promised things, or things which depend upon their institution. 2.
Because it follows not, but where, and so far as, the thing upon which the
argument is founded, agrees to the less: Now this Infallibility does not belong
to the lesser Congregation, and therefore cannot be inferred as to the greater.
3. Because it depends upon conditions here supposed of being gathered together
in the name of Christ, and therefore supposing Infallibility promised these
conditions here implied, must be known before such a Congregation can be known
to be Infallible. 4. Because Christ's promise of presence in the midst of them,
is only to grant, what he shall find to be fit for them, not infallibly
whatsoever they shall think fit to ask for themselves. 5. Because Gregory de
Valentia and Stapleton confess, that this place does not properly belong to
prove an Infallible certainty of any sentence in which more agree in the name
of Christ, but to the efficacy of consent for obtaining that which more shall
pray for in the name of Christ, if at least that be for their souls health. For
else it would hence follow, that not only the definition of a General Council,
but even of a Provincial; nay, of two or three Bishops gathered together, is
valid, and that without the Popes consent. The utmost I can make of your reply
to these Answers, lies in this, That you grant that primarily and directly our
Savior does not intend that particular Infallibility, and this is that which
Gregory and Stapleton assert; P. 252, 252.
but only that he signified in general, that he would be present with his
Church, and all faithful people gathered together in his name, so often, and so
far, as their necessities required his presence, they duly imploring it. But
yet the argument holds for the Infallibility of General Councils, and not
National or Provincial, because the necessities of the Church require one, and
not the other: and that it will follow a minori ad majus, in things promised,
as well as natural, where the motive is increased, and neither goodness nor
power wanting in the promiser. But all this depends on a false supposition,
viz. that there is a necessity of Infallibility to continue in the Church, and
that all persons are bound to believe the Decrees of the Councils to be the
Infallible Oracles of truth: but we say, neither of these are necessary in the
Church, and therefore you have no ground to extend this promise of Christ's
presence to the Infallibility of Councils. For you are not to extend the power
and goodness of Christ as far as you shall judge fitting, but as far only as he
has promised to extend it. For otherwise it would be far more for the peace
and unity of the Church, if every particular Congregation had this
Infallibility, than if only General Councils had it: Because by that means,
many disputes about the authority, calling, and proceedings of General Councils
would be prevented: Nay, it might be extended much further, for by this
argument from the goodness and power of Christ, you might, for all that I can
see, infer with more force, that every true Christian should be Infallible,
and so there be no need of any Councils at all. For, whatever argument you can
produce, why Christ's goodness should extend to make Councils Infallible, it
will much more hold as to the other; for the peace, and unity of the Church
would be far better secured this way. If you say that experience shows, Christ
never intended this by the errors of particular men in all ages: To the same
purpose we answer you as to Councils, that large experience shows, that when
Bishops have solemnly met in Council, they have been grossly deceived; as you
confess in all the Arrian Councils. If your argument would have ever held from
the power and goodness of Christ; Would it not have held at that time, when so
great a matter of Faith was under debate? If Christ therefore suffered so many
Bishops so grossly to err, in a matter of such importance, wherein the Church
was so highly concerned, How can you infer from his power and goodness, that
he will never suffer General Councils to err. If you answer, That these erred
for not observing the conditions requisite in order to Christ's hearing them,
viz. that they were not met in the name of Christ, did not come without
prejudice, nor rely on Divine Assistance. I pray take the same Answer as to all
other Councils, that we cannot know that Christ hears them, or that they are
Infallible, till we are assured of their performance of the conditions
requisite in order to that Infallibility. And when you can assure us, that such
a Council met together in the name of Christ, and came merely with a desire to
find out truth, and relied wholly on his assistance for it, we do not so much
distrust the power and goodness of Christ, as to think he will suffer them to
be deceived. For we know upon those conditions he will not suffer any good man
to err, much less an Assembly of them met in a General Council. But here you
have the hardest task of all lying upon you, which is, to prove that a General
Council has observed all these conditions, without which nothing can be
inferred from this place, as to Christ's being in any sense in the midst of them.

The last place mentioned for the Infallibility of General Councils, is that,
Act. 15.28.. 10.
Where the Apostles say of themselves, and the Council held by them; It seems
good to the Holy Ghost, P. 237.
and to us. And, says his Lordship, they might well say it. For they had
infallibly the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and kept close to his direction.
But there is a great deal of difference between them and succeeding Councils,
who never arrogated this to their definitions, though they presumed of the
assistance of the Holy Ghost; and though that form might be used, yet they did
not assume such an Infallibility to themselves, as the Apostles had. And
therefore it is little less than blasphemy in Stapleton, to say, That the
Decrees of Councils are the very Oracles of the Holy Ghost. And, that all
Councils are not so Infallible, as was this of the Apostles, nor the causes
handled in them, as there they were, is manifest by the ingenuous confession of
Ferus to that purpose. This is the substance of his Lordships Answer to this
place. Which you think to take off by saying, That there is no essential
difference between the certainty of the things determined by the Apostles, P.
253.
and those decided by a General Council, confirmed by the Roman Bishop: and
though after-Councils use not the same expression in terms, yet they do it in
effect, by enjoining the belief of their decisions under the pain of Anathema.
If this be the meaning of the Anathema's of Councils, there had need indeed be
no great difference between the Apostles Decrees, and theirs. But this had need
be very well proved; and so it is by you: for you produce several expressions
of Cyril, Athanasius, Austin, Leo, Gregory, and some others (out of Bellarmin)
in which they magnify the Decrees of General Councils, calling them a Divine
Oracle, a Sentence inspired by the Holy Ghost, not to be retracted, and some
others to the same purpose, by which you vindicate Stapleton, and tell us, he
said no more than the Fathers had done before him. Yet all this is far from any
vindication of Stapleton, or proving your assertion as to the equal certainty
of the Decrees of Councils, and of the Apostles. For the ground of all those
expressions, and several others of the same nature, was not the supposition of
any inherent Infallibility in the Decrees of General Councils, but their great
assurance of the truth of that Doctrine, which was determined by those first
General Councils. For although I am far enough from believing the Council of
Trent Infallible, yet if that had determined the same points of Faith, which
were determined in the first four General Councils, and nothing else; I might
have said, That the Decree of that Council was a Holy and Divine Oracle, a
Sentence inspired by the Holy Ghost, etc. not that I thought the Council in the
least Infallible, in determining these things; but that they were of themselves
Divine Truths, which the Council determined. And in this sense Athanasius might
well term the definition of the Nicene-Council against Arius, the word of our
Lord which endures for ever; and Constantine style it a celestial mandate;
and Gregory might reverence the four first Councils, as the four Gospels
(though Bellarmin tells you, that expression must be taken in a qualified
sense) yet all these, and any other of a like nature, I say, import no more
than that they were fully assured, the matters decreed by them, were revealed
by God in his Word, and not that they believed that they became such holy and
divine Oracles, merely by the Councils definition. For the contrary might be
abundantly manifested by many expressions in them quite to another purpose: and
if, instead of all the rest, you will but read Athanasius and Hilary concerning
Councils, you will find your self strangely deceived, if you believed they ever
thought them Infallible. What you add afterward, P. 254.
that it is sufficient that there be a real Infallibility, though not like to
that of the Apostles, will not be sufficient for me, till you can show me the
degrees of Infallibility; for, I will promise you, if you can once prove that
Councils are really Infallible, I shall not stick to say, That they are alike
Infallible with the Apostles. As for your discarding Ferus as a prohibited
Author, it only shows the great integrity of the man, who spoke too much truth
to be born by the tender ears of the Roman Inquisition.

Before I had proceeded any further, I had thought (because of a former
promise) to have looked back to the place, P. 249.
where you speak in vindication of the decretal Epistles; but because you only
referr to Turrianus his defense of them, I shall only return you an equal
courtesy, and referr you to the abundantly sufficient Answer to him by David
Blondel. One would have thought you should have been ashamed of so notorious an
imposture as those decretal Epistles are; but we see, what shifts a bad cause
puts you upon, that such men as Ferus, Cassander, Erasmus, are under an Index
Expurgatorius, but the decretal Epistles must be still justified; but he that
does not see the reasons of these proceedings, wants a greater Index
Expurgatorius for his brains, than ever they did for their Books.

We return therefore to our present subject, and having manifested,. 11.
how far the Infallibility of General Councils is from being grounded on the
veracity of Divine promises, as you pretend without ground; we now proceed to
the consent of the Church, as to this subject: which his Lordship speaks to in
the next Consideration. Which is, That all agree that the Church in general can
never err from the Faith necessary to salvation; P. 240.
but there is not the like consent that General Councils cannot err. Whether
Waldensis asserting, that General Councils may err, speak of such Councils as
are accounted unlawful or no, is not much material; since, as his Lordship
says, The Fathers having to do with so many Heretics, and so many of them
opposing Church authority, did never in the condemnation of those Heretics
utter this proposition, That a General Council cannot err. And supposing that
no General Council had erred in any matter of moment to this day, which will
not be found true, yet this would not have followed, that it is therefore
Infallible and cannot err. And to show that St. Augustine puts a manifest
difference between the rules of Scripture and the definitions of men, he
produces that noted place in him, wherein he so fully asserts the prerogative
of Scripture above all the writings of men or definitions of Councils: Which,
because it will be often referred to, I have cited at large in the margin, Quis
autem nesciat sanctam Scripturam canonicam, tam veteris quam novi Testamenti
certis suis terminis contineri, eamque omnibus posterioribus Episcoporum
literis ita praeponi, ut de illa omni o dubitari and disceptari non possit,
utrum verum, vel utrum rectum sit, quicquid in ea scriptum esse constiterit?
Episcoporum autem literas quae post confirmatum Canonem vel scriptae sunt vel
scribuntur, and per sermonem forte sapientiorem, cujustibet in ea re
peritioris, and per aliorum Episcoporum graviorem autoritatem, doctiorumque
prudentiam, and per Concilia licere reprehendi, si quid in eis forte a veritate
deviatum est. Et ipsa Concilia quae p^r singulas regiones vel provincias fiunt,
plenariorum Conciliorum autoritati, quae fiunt ex universo o be Christiano,
sine ull^s ambag^bus cedere, ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus
emendari, cum aliquo experimento verum aperitur quod clausum erat, and
cognos^itur q^od latebat, sine ullo typho sacrilegae superbi^, sine ulla
inflata cervice arrog^n^iae, sine ulla contentione livid^ invidi^, cum sancta
humilitate, cum pace Catholic^, cum cha^itate Christiana. August. l. 2. de
b^pt. c. Donatist. c. 3.
but his Lordship gives the sum of it in these words. That whatsoever is found
written in Scripture, may neither be doubted nor disputed, whether it be true
or right. But the letters of Bishops may not only be disputed, but corrected by
Bishops that are more learned and wise then they, or by National Councils; and
National Councils, by Plenary or General. And even Plenary Councils themselves
may be amended, the former by the latter. From whence he inferrs, That it seems
it was no news with St. Austin, that a General Council might err, and therefore
be inferior to the Scripture, which may neither be doubted nor disputed, where
it affirms. And if it be so with the definition of a Council too, where is then
the Scriptures Prerogative? But his Lordship adds, That there is much shifting
about this place, but it cannot be wraft off. And therefore undertakes
punctually to answer all the evasions of Stapleton and Bellarmin, who have
taken most pains about it. But before you come to particular answers, you are
resolved to make your way through them, by a more desperate attempt: P. 255.
which is, to prove that it cannot be St. Austins meaning in this place, that
general Councils may err in their definitions of Faith, because then St. Austin
must contradict himself, because he delivers the contrary in other places. This
is indeed to the purpose, if you go through with your undertaking; but we must
examine the places; The first is l. 1. c. 7. de baptism. c. Donatist. where you
say, he expressly teaches, that no doubt ought to be made of what is by full
decree established in a General Council. But here a great doubt may justly be
made, Whether ever you searched this place or no; for if you had, you would
have had little heart to produce it to this purpose. For St. Augustine is there
giving an account, why he would not insist upon any humane authorities, but
bring certain evidence out of Scripture for what he said; and the reason he
gives for it, is, because in the former times of the Church before the Schism
of Donatus brake forth, the Bishops and particular Councils did differ from
each other about the Question in hand, viz. rebaptizing Heretics, until that
by a General Council of the whole world, that which was most soundly held etiam
remotis dubitationibus firmaretur, was confirmed the disputes being taken away.
The utmost that can be drawn hence, is, that when this Controversy was decided
by a General Council, the disputes were ended among the Catholic Bishops. But
by what arts can you hence draw, that St. Austin thought the Council Infallible
in its definitions? When the business came to be argued in a free Council by
the dissenting parties, and they more fully understood each other, and agreed
upon one sentence, St. Austin says the former doubts were taken off: that is,
the reasons and Scriptures produced on the other side satisfied them: but he
does not say, that no doubt is to be made of what is by full Decree established
in a General Council; but, that no doubts were made after it. But if you say,
There could be no agreement unless the Councils definition were supposed
Infallible, you speak that which is contrary to the sense and experience of the
world; and even of that general Council where this decree is supposed by
Bellarmin to be made, viz. the Council of Nice. For, Will you say the Council
was Infallible in deciding the time of keeping Easter, because after that
Council the Asian Bishops submitted to the custom of other Churches? Is there
no way imaginable to convince men, but by Infallibility? If there be, their
doubts may be taken away by a General Council, and yet that Council not be
supposed Infallible. For if St. Augustine had meant so, nothing had been more
pertinent then to have insisted on the decree of that Council; and yet he there
leaves it, and calls all arguments of that nature humane arguments, and
therefore says, ex Evangelio profero certa documenta; I bring certain
evidences out of the Gospel. Which words doubtless he would never have so
immediately subjoyned to his former concerning a General Council, if he had
judged it Infallible, or its decrees as certain as the Scripture. In your
second place l. 7. c. 5. there is nothing has any shadow of pertinency to your
purpose; that which I suppose you may mean, is, l. 5. c. 17. where what he said
before was decreed by a General Council, he after says, was the judgment of
the Holy Catholic Church: from whence you may indeed infer that the Catholic
Church did approve that decree of the Council, but how it proves it Infallible
I cannot understand. Your last place is one sufficiently known to be far enough
from your purpose, Ep. 118. ad Januar. where he says, In case of indifferent
rites, it is insolent madness to oppose the whole Church; but you are an
excellent disputant, who can hence infer, that therefore General Councils are
Infallible in their definitions in matters of Faith. For any thing then you
have brought to the contrary St. Austin is far enough from the least danger of
contradicting himself. But if you could prove that he were of your mind, that
the definitions of Councils are Infallible as well as the Scriptures, never did
any man more expressly contradict himself then St. Augustine must do in a
multitude of plain places, wherein he says, That no other writing is
Infallible but the Scripture; Aug. ep. 19. ad Hierony^um c. Crescon. Grammat l.
2. c. 31. De Not. and Gratia c. 61. c. Faustum l. 11. c. 5. Epistol. 112.
That only according to them he judged freely of all other writings; and that
because he could yield an undoubted assent to none but them. That there is no
other writing wherein humane infirmities are not discovered but in them; that
men are at liberty to believe or not believe any thing besides the Scripture.
Can any man, who says these things be reasonably supposed to assert that the
decrees of General Councils are as certain as the Scripture is? You see then
what little advantage you have gained by this attempt of offering to make St.
Austin contradict himself, if in this place he should be supposed to assert
that General Councils may err: which he does plainly enough to any but those
who are resolved not to understand him.

. 12.
This prejudice being therefore removed, we come to the particular evasions of
this place; which you thus sum up, in order to the defense of them. P. 256.
That when he says, Former General Councils may be amended by the latter, it
is only to be understood in matters of fact, in precepts pertaining to manners
and discipline, or by way of more full and clear explication of what had been
delivered by former Councils. To both these, his Lordship offers very just
exceptions. To the first, that it is to be understood of precepts of manners
and discipline; he says, 1. That Bellarmin contradicts himself, because he had
said before, P. 241.
that General Councils cannot err in precepts of manners: No, (say you) this is
no contradiction, because these depend much upon circumstances of time, place,
person, etc. which varying, it often so falls out, that what at first was
prudently judged fit to be done, becomes afterward unfitting, and in this case
one General Council may be amended by another, and yet neither charged with
error. But do you suppose the mean while that St. Austin spoke pertinently to
this business, or no? If he did, he can be understood only of such a precept as
that relating to the baptism of Heretics. Suppose then one Council should
decree Heretics to be baptized, and another afterward correct this, and say,
They should not, Will you say that neither of these were in an error? So that
your Answer is wholly impertinent to the scope of St. Austins discourse. And so
his Lordship says, This whole Answer is concerning precepts of manners: for
St. Austin disputes against the error of St. Cyprian followed by the
Donatists, which was an error in Faith; namely, that true Baptism could not be
given by Heretics and such as were out of the Church. But you say, St. Austin
does not confine his discourse to St. Cyprians case only, P. 257.
but by occasion of his, and his Councils error, he lays down general
doctrine, touching the different authority of the writings of particular
Bishops, Provincial National and General Councils. Although I should grant you
this, it will make little for your purpose; for St. Austins main design is, to
set the Authority of Scripture far above all these, and that in point of
Certainty and Infallibility; and this being his main scope, whatsoever he says
of any of these, it is certain his purpose is to show that all of them fall
short of the Sacred Scripture, as to our yielding assent to them. For these in
the first place are set by themselves, as only being Infallible and deserving
an undoubted assent to all that is contained in them: which being supposed, he
proceeds to show what the extent is of all other authority besides this. For
the writings of Bishops, says he, they are so far from deserving such an
assent as we give to the Scriptures, that they may be corrected by others, or
by National Councils; and National Councils, by Plenary; and Plenary may be
amended, the former by the latter. In all which gradations two things must be
repeated (...) as running through the whole Discourse, which are, 1. The
difference of all these from the Scripture in regard of our yielding assent to
them; for that is it, which he begins with, that we are not in the least to
doubt, whether any thing contained therein be true or no: and then comes the
other in, by way of immediate Antithesis; but, the writings of Bishops, etc.
and although there be a gradation in all these, yet all of them are therein
different from Scripture, that whatsoever is found there may neither be doubted
nor disputed; but the writings of Bishops may be doubted or disputed of,
because they may be corrected by other Bishops or Councils. And those National
Councils may be, because they may be corrected by General; and even these
General Councils cannot require such an undoubted assent as the Scripture does,
because the former may be amended by the latter. So that if you take the scope
of S. Austin's discourse in this place, whether he speaks generally; or
particularly, nothing can be more evident, than that he puts this difference
between the Scriptures, and all other writings or Councils, that the one may
not at all be doubted or disputed of, but the other may: and the common reason
of all is, because none are so Infallible, but they may be corrected by
something besides themselves, which cannot be in any sense said of the
Scripture. 2. Although Saint Austin adds that clause, Si quid in eis forte a
veritate deviatum est, If they have erred from the truth, only where he speaks
of the writings of Bishops; yet the series of his discourse implies, that it
should be understood in what follows too: that, as the writings of Bishops may
be corrected by Councils, if they have erred, so National Councils may be
corrected by General, if they have erred; and so former General Councils by
latter on the same supposition still, that they have erred. For, as the errors
was supposed to be the ground of correction in the former, it must be likewise
of amendment here. And whatever is not so perfect, but that it may be amended,
cannot be supposed Infallible; for, if the persons had been Infallible, who had
made those Decrees in General Councils, they would have prevented any necessity
of further amendments by succeeding Councils. So that, take amendment in what
sense you will, either for supplying defects, or correcting errors, it is
destructive to your pretense, that the Decrees of General Councils are
Infallible, and as certain as the Scripture. Which is so repugnant to the scope
of this speech of S. Austin, as nothing can be more. Your Criticism then, from
the signification of emendare from menda, and menda from minus, and so
importing only the taking away any defect, yields you no relief at all: P. 252.
for that defect which is supposed in General Councils, which needs that
emendation, does sufficiently argue, there was no Infallible Assistance of the
Spirit of God in the Decrees of those Councils. For where Gods Spirit assists
infallibly, it leaves no such defects as are necessary to be amended
afterward, by some other Council which can pretend to no higher assistance
than the other had before. But your critical judgment is not extraordinary, if
you will have the signification of words taken from the conjectural Etymologies
of them, such as this of Scaliger is in the place where he corrects Varro's
Etymologies (at the end of his Conjectanea) but, besides that, all attempts of
that nature are but Conjectural Essays, it is but an ill way to judge of the
use of a word by the Etymology of it; for, What multitudes of words are carried
further in their sense, than their Originals would bear? His Lordship therefore
takes a far surer way to know S. Austin's meaning, than running to Martinius
for the signification of the word menda; which is, by producing a parallel
place in S. Austin, where it is taken for to correct, and supposes an evident
fault; aliud quod praecipere jubemur, C. Faustum* l. 20. c. 21.
aliud quod emendare praecipimur; where emendare is, plainly to amend something
amiss, not to supply something defective. So that Stapleton's sense of amending
by explication of something not fully known, and not by correction of something
erroneous, cannot here have place. For, as his Lordship well observes the
National Council, which S. Austin did in this dispute speak most of, was not
guilty merely of not fully explaining it self, but of a positive error, viz.
that under S. Cyprian, determining that Baptism of Heretics was no Baptism.
And therefore when S. Austin speaks of amendment, it is such an amendment as
does suppose error, and not barely defect. And so the words used before of
reprehension and yielding, do both imply more than a bare explanation; and
those which follow after, evince it fully, where S. Austin lays down the
cautions, whereby such amendments should be made, without sacrilegious pride,
or swelling arrogance, without contention of envy, and in holy humility, in
Catholic peace, in Christian Charity. All which words were very needless, if
he meant only an explanation of something not fully declared before; but are
very necessary, supposing it to be the amendment of some former error. All the
Answer you have, is, That these last words relate not in particular to General
Councils (by no means, Ibid.
although they follow them at the heels) but to the other several subjects,
viz. private Bishops, Provincial and National Councils; which are subject to
pride, arrogance, and contention in their emendations. But, Was not S. Austin
an unhappy man then at expressing himself, that he must needs set those Caveats
after he had spoken of General Councils, which referr to the particulars that
went before, without any reference to the immediate antecedents? For if they do
at all respect the proceedings of General Councils, (as doubtless they do, and
that most immediately, as appears to any one who reads them) then they imply
still, that this amendment of General Councils must be done without pride,
arrogance, and envy, and with the greatest humility, and peace, and charity;
which it is hard to conceive why S. Austin should add, unless he supposed some
errors to be amended in them. Nothing remains further for the clearing this
place, but only that his Lordship mentions that which he calls, P. 244.
The poorest shift of all in Bellarmin, viz. that he speaks of unlawful
Councils: and it is a sign it is so indeed, when you have nothing more to say
for it, but only, that it was given ex superabundanti, and with a Peradventure.
When his Lordship concludes, that the Popes Confirmation to make Councils
Infallible, is a mere trick, and unknown to the ancient Church; you have
nothing more to prove it to be grounded on the practice of Councils of the
Church, and of Reason, but to referr the Reader back to what you have said
about the Popes Supremacy; and therefore I must do so too, for an Answer to
what you have said on that subject.

. 13.
The next thing which belongs to this Question, is contained in his Lordships
sixth Consideration; P. 248.
which is, If the definition of a General Council be Infallible, then the
Infallibility of it, is either in the conclusion, and in the means that prove
it; or in the conclusion, not the means; or in the means, not the conclusion.
But it is Infallible in none of these. Not in the first; for there are diverse
deliberations in General Councils, where the conclusion is Catholic, but the
means by which they prove it, not Infallible. Not in the second; for the
conclusion must always follow the nature of the premises, or principles out of
which it is deduced; therefore if those which the Council uses, be sometimes
uncertain, the conclusion cannot be Infallible. Not in the third; for the
conclusion cannot but be true and necessary, if the means be so. Your Answer
is, That it is Infallible in the conclusion, that is, in the Doctrine defined,
though it be not Infallible in the means, or arguments upon which it proceeded
to the definition. P. 263.
And your reason is, because one is necessary for the Government of the Church,
but the other is not; for, Deus non deficit in necessariis, nec redundat in
superfluis. You mean, it is necessary for you to assert it, whether it has any
foundation in reason or no: for you have not yet proved, that the Infallibility
of General Councils is necessary for the Churches Government, and therefore
cannot thence infer so great an absurdity as this; that, where all the
premises are fallible and uncertain, yet the conclusion may be prophetical and
Infallible. But so involved and obscure are your discourses on this subject,
that while you pretend a General Council is seeing Visions, one might easily
believe you were dreaming dreams. For, I pray, speak out, and tell us, what you
mean by Councils being fallible in the use of means, and yet Infallible in the
conclusion drawn from those premises, which she was fallible in the deducing
the conclusion from? For the deducing the conclusion, is in the use of the
means; therefore how is it possible that the Council should be Infallible in
the conclusion, when it was fallible in making that Conclusion? But it may be I
do not yet fully apprehend what you would have, neither I doubt do you. For you
would fain be Infallible in the conclusion too, without so much as truth in the
premises. But I shall attempt to make you speak intelligibly; it must be one of
these two things you mean, when you say, Councils are Infallible in the
conclusion, either that they are Infallible in deducing the Conclusion, or in
assenting to the Conclusion. If Infallible in the deducing the Conclusion, then
it must be Infallible in the use of the means; for, unless it does infallibly
discern the connection of the premises, it is impossible it should be Infallible
in drawing the Conclusion from them. So that it is nonsense, and a
contradiction to say, That a Council is Infallible in the drawing a Conclusion,
and not Infallible in the use of the means: for, it is to say, It is
Infallible, and not Infallible at the same time, and about the same thing, and
in the same manner. For, What is drawing a Conclusion, but a discerning that
truth which results from the connection of the premises together? for that which
is concluded, has all its truth depending upon the evidence of the premises,
otherwise it is a simple Proposition, and not a Conclusion. If you had then
said, That the Spirit of God did immediately reveal to the Council the truth of
what was to be decreed; you had spoken that which might have been understood,
though not believed; but this you durst not say, for fear of the charge of
Enthusiasms, and new Revelations: but when you say, The Council must use means,
and make Syllogisms, as other fallible creatures do, but then it is Infallible
in the drawing the Conclusion from the premises (though it be fallible in the
connection of those premises) is an unparalleld piece of profound nonsense.
For, suppose the matter the Council was to determine, was the Popes
Infallibility; in order to the proving this, you say, The Council must use all
arguments tending to prove it; there comes in Christ's Prayer for S. Peter,
that his Faith should not fail, and that this must be extended to his
Successors, thence the argument is formed. Whomsoever Christ prayed for, that
his Faith should not fail, is Infallible; but Christ prayed for the Pope, that
his Faith should not fail; therefore he is Infallible. Now you say, The Council
is fallible in the use of the means for this Conclusion, i. e. it may not
infallibly believe the truth of the major or minor Proposition, but yet it may
infallibly deduce thence the Conclusion, though all the strength of the
Conclusion depends upon the truth of the premises. You must therefore either
assert that the Decrees of Councils are immediately revealed as Divine Oracl^s,
or else that they are fallible Conclusions drawn from fallible premises. And,
were it not for a little shame, because of your charging others with immediate
Revelations, I doubt not but you would assert the former; which you must of
necessity do, if you will maintain the Infallibility of General Councils: for
if there be any infirmity in the use of the premises, it must of necessity be
in the Conclusion too. But, suppose you mean an Infallible Assent to the matter
of the Conclusion, though it be fallibly deduced, you are as far to seek as
ever; for, Whereon must that Assent be grounded? It must be either upon the
truth of the premises, or something immediately revealed: If on the truth of
the premises, the Assent can be no stronger than the grounds are on which it is
built; if on something revealed, it must needs be still an immediate
Revelation. But I forget my self all this while, to urge you thus with
absurdities consequent from reason; for, in answer to his Lordship, you grant,
That it is a thing altogether unknown in nature, and art too, that fallible
principles can either as Father or Mother, beget or bring forth an Infallible
Conclusion; for, when his Lordship had objected this, you return him this
Answer, That this is a false supposition of the Bishop, Ib^d.
for the Conclusion is not so much the child of those premises (i. e. it is not
the Conclusion) as the fruit of the Holy Ghost, directing and guiding the
Council, to produce an Infallible Conclusion, whatever the premises be (true,
or false, certain, or uncertain, all is a case.) This is necessary for the
peace and unity of the Church (to believe Contradictions) and therefore not to
be denied, unless an impossibility be showed therein. (I doubt, believing
contradictions is accounted no impossibility with you.) But, I hope, no man
will attaque Gods Omnipotency, and deprive him of the power of doing this. Is
it come to that at last? Whatever you assert that is repugnant to the common
reason of mankind, and involves contradictions in it, that you call for Gods
Omnipotency to help you in. Thus Transubstantiation must be believed, because
God is Omnipotent; and that men may believe any thing, though not grounded on
Scripture, and repugnant to Reason, because God is Omnipotent. We acknowledge
God's Omnipotency, as much as you, but we dare not put it to such servile uses,
to make good any absurd imaginations of our brains. If you had said, It was
possible, for God to enlighten the minds of the Bishops in a General Council,
either to discern infallibly the truth of the premises, or immediately to
reveal the truth of the Conclusion, you had spoken intelligible falsehoods. But
to say, that God permits them to be fallible in the use of the means, and in
drawing the Conclusion from them; but to be Infallible in the Conclusion it
self, without any immediate Revelation, and then to challenge Gods Omnipotency
for it: I know not whether it be a greater dishonor to God, or reproach to
humane understanding. And if such incongruities as these are, do not discover
that you are miserably hampered, as his Lordship says, in this argument, I
know not what will.

. 14.
But we must proceed to discover more of them; two things his Lordship very
rationally objects against Stapletons assertion, P. 249.
That the Council is discursive in the use of the means, but prophetical in
delivering the Conclusion. 1. That since this is not according to principles of
nature and reason, there must be some supernatural Authority, which must
deliver this truth (which, says he, must be the Scripture.) For if you fly to
immediate Revelations; the Enthusiasm must be yours. But the Scriptures which
are brought, in the very exposition of all the Primitive Church, neither say
it, nor enforce it. Therefore Scripture warrants not your prophecy in the
Conclusion. Neither can the Tradition: Produce one Father, who says, This is
an Universal Tradition of the Church, that her definitions in a General Council
are prophetical, and by immediate Revelation: Produce any one Father that says
it of his own authority, that he thinks so. To all this you very gravely say
nothing; and we can shrewdly guess at the reason of it. 2. His Lordship proves,
That it is a repugnancy to say, That the Council is prophetical in the
Conclusion, and discursive in the use of the means; for no Prophet, in that
which he delivered from God as Infallible truth, was ever discursive at all in
the use of the means; Nay (says he) make it but probable in the ordinary
course of prophecy, and I hope you go no higher, nor will I offer at Gods
absolute power (but his Lordship was deceived in you, for you run to Gods
Omnipotency) that that which is discursive in the means, can be prophetical in
the Conclusion, and you shall be my great Apollo for ever. And this, he shows,
is contrary to what your own Authors deliver concerning the nature and kinds
of prophecy, and that none of them were by discourse. To this you answer, P.
264.
That both Stapleton and you deny that the Church is simply prophetical, either
in the premises or Conclusion, but rather the quite contrary; and that by the
definition of the Councils being prophetical in an Analogical sense, no more is
meant but that by virtue of divine assistance and direction, such a Conclusion
or definition, in regard of precise verity, is as infallibly true and certain,
as if it were a prophecy. But if you had a mind that we should understand, or
believe what you say, Why do not you come more out of the clouds, and show us
the difference between that which is simply prophetical, and that which is only
Analogically so, but as infallibly true and certain as the other? But, that you
may no longer blind the world with such insignificant discourses, I shall put
you upon speaking more distinctly, by enquiring into those ways, whereby God
may be supposed supernaturally to work upon the minds of men, in order to the
discovery of truth. These two ways we may conceive that God may make known
truth to the minds of men. 1. By the immediate discovery of something, which
could not otherwise be known but by immediate Revelation: And of this nature
were all those future events which were revealed to the Prophets, and this I
suppose you call simply prophetical; so likewise all those Doctrines which are
of pure Revelation, i. e. such as could never have been known, unless God had
revealed them: of which kind there are several in the Gospel. 2. God may
discover such things to the minds of men, which, though they might otherwise be
known, yet not with that degree of certainty, as by this immediate assistance
of Gods Spirit: Now this I suppose, is that you call Analogically prophetical,
which you assert to differ nothing at all from prophecy, in regard of
Infallible truth and certainty, being by virtue of divine assistance and
direction. And this you say a General Council has, but not the former.

Now to convince you of the absurdity of your assertions,. 15.
I shall show you these two things. 1. That this cannot be without an imm^diate
Revelation. 2. That being so, it cannot be discursive, as you say it is in the
use of the means. 1. That this cannot be without an immediate Revelation: for
which I need nothing but your own assertions, viz. that this is a higher
discovery of truth, than nature can ever attain to, or ordinary Grace; and that
it is such as obliges all men to an internal assent to it, when it is declared.
Now I shall desire you, or any of your party, to tell me, What difference there
is between this, and the Inspiration which the Apostles had in writing the
Books of Scripture. I mean not such as contain prophesies in them, but those
which deliver to us the Gospel of Christ: as for instance, in S. John's Gospel,
he does not pretend to deliver any thing which was not revealed before, but to
give an account of the Doctrine and life of Christ. And so that Inspiration was
not simply prophetical, as in writing the Prophecies in the Apocalypse, but
Analogically so, in that such an assistance of Gods Spirit, as made what he
writ, to be as infallibly true and certain, as if it were a Prophecy, which are
your own words concerning the Infallibility of Councils. Show us therefore any
rational difference between this kind of Infallibility, and that Inspiration by
which the Books of Scripture are written. If you say, the one was immediate and
the other not, you beg the Question: for I am proving that what you assert,
does necessarily imply, that it is as immediate as that which the Apostles had.
Nay I will go yet further, and say it is as immediate as that which the
Apostles themselves had in Council. For when they said, It seemed good to the
Holy Ghost and to us, Can any thing more possibly be understood, then that the
Spirit of God did so far assist their minds, that they should not err in their
Definitions? And therefore when of late you are grown (forsooth) somewhat
jealous of the word Infallibility, and you give us a grave advertisement at the
end of your Preface, that you do not mean by it an intrinsecal unerring power
in all things, in those whom you account Infallible, but only that they never
have erred, nor shall err in definitions of Faith; you do not at all advantage
your selves by it. For none of your considerate adversaries do charge you so
much with usurping Gods incommunicable attribute of Infallibility, (which is
thereby avoided because you pretend to derive it from him) but that you
challenge the same Infallibility which the Apostles had. And so must of
necessity assert as much of Divine Enthusiasm and immediate revelation in your
Church, as any of the Apostles themselves had. For what ever they had, came by
virtue of Christ's promise, and that is all you say for the Churches
Infallibility: but that does no more take it off from being an immediate
revelation in the Church, then it did in the Apostles. If you say, The Church
is only secured that it neither has erred, nor can err in definitions of
Faith, What more had the Apostles then this? And if this in them did require an
immediate inspiration, certainly it must do so in the Church too. But you say,
Neither Church nor Council do publish immediate revelations, Ibid.
nor create any new Articles of Faith, but only declare and unfold by their
definitions, that doctrine, which Christ and his Apostles in some manner first
delivered. But all this, supposing it true, does not hinder, but the Councils
Infallibility must imply an immediate revelation on the part of the Council,
though not of the Doctrine decreed by them. For granting the decrees of the
Council are no new Articles of Faith (which is yet contrary to your own
principles; for if by the definitions of Councils that may be de fide which was
not before, then the Councils do make new Articles of Faith, though not new
Doctrines) i. e. that the matter of them in some manner was before revealed,
yet since you say the Council in declaring them, has an Infallibility, equal
to Prophecy, it must be by immediate inspiration. For, Has the Council greater
certainty, and higher assistance then any ordinary believer has or not? if
not, it can be no more Infallible then an ordinary believer; if it has, it
must be immediate, because it has a higher degree of certainty, then can be
attained by the use of means. And to say this, as you do expressly, when you
assert the Council fallible in the use of means, but infallible in the
conclusion, is a most palpable Contradiction. For, it is to assert a certainty
beyond and above the use of means, and yet not immediate. But here lies your
perpetual mistake, as though nothing could be an immediate revelation, but what
is a revelation of some Doctrine never revealed before: whereas if there be a
further explanation of that Doctrine in as Infallible a manner as the Apostles
at first revealed it, that explanation is by as immediate a revelation, as the
first discovery of it. As is clear in the Council of the Apostles, for I hope
you will not deny, but the non-obligation of the ceremonial Law was in some
manner revealed to them before; and yet I hope you will not say, but the
Apostles had an immediate revelation as to what they decreed in that Council.
It is very plain therefore, that when you say, General Councils neither have
erred nor can err in their definitions, they usurp as great a privilege
thereby as ever the Apostles had, and in order to it must have as immediate an
inspiration. For, never was there any such Infallibility, either in the
Prophets or Apostles, as did suppose an absolute impossibility of error; but
it was wholly hypothetical in case of Divine assistance, which hindered them
from any capacity of erring so long as that continued with them and no longer.
For, inspiration was no permanent habit, but a transient act in them; and that
being removed, they were liable to errors as well as others; from whence it
follows, that where revelations were most immediate, they did no more then what
you assume to your Church, viz. preserve them from actual error in declaring
Gods will. So that nothing can be more evident then that you challenge as great
an Infallibility, and as immediate assistance of Gods Spirit in Councils as
ever the Prophets and Apostles had. And therefore that Divine was in the right,
of whom Canus speaks, Canus l. 5. c. 5.
who asserted, That since General Councils were Infallible, their definitions
ought to be equalled with the Scriptures themselves. And although Canus and
others dislike this, it is rather because of the odium which would follow it,
than for any just reason they give, why it should not follow. For they not only
suppose as great a Certainty or Infallibility in the Decrees of both, but an
equal obligation to internal assent in those to whom they are declared. Which
does further prove, that the revelation must be immediate: for if by virtue of
those definitions, we are obliged to assent to the Doctrines contained in them
as Infallibly true, there must be an immediate Divine Authority which must
command our Assent. For nothing short of that can oblige us to believe any
thing as of Divine revelation; now Councils require, that we must believe their
definitions to be Divine truths, though men were not obliged to believe them to
be so, before those definitions. For that is your express Doctrine, That though
the matters decreed in Councils were in some manner revealed before, yet not so
as to oblige all men with an explicit assent to believe them; but after the
definitions of Councils they are bound to do it. So that though there be not an
object newly revealed, yet there arises a new obligation to internal assent;
which obligation cannot come but from immediate Divine Authority. If you say,
The obligation comes not simply by virtue of the Councils definitions, but by a
command extant in Scripture, whereby all are bound to give this assent to the
decrees of Councils; I then say, we must be excused from it, till you have
discharged this new obligation upon your self, by producing some express
testimony of Scripture to that purpose: which is, I think, sufficient to keep
our minds at liberty from this internal assent to the definitions of General
Councils by virtue of any Infallibility in them. And thus having more at large
considered the nature of this Infallibility which you challenge to General
Councils, and having showed that it implies as immediate a revelation as the
Apostles had; the second thing is sufficiently demonstrated, That this
Infallibility cannot suppose discursiveness with fallibility in the use of the
means, because these two are repugnant to each other.

The next thing to be considered, is, Stapletons argument, why Councils must be
Prophetical in the conclusion;. 16.
because that which is determined by the Church is matter of Faith, and not of
knowledge, and the assent required else would not be an assent of Faith, but an
habit of knowledge. To which his Lordship Answers, That he sees no
inconvenience in it, if it be granted; for one and the same conclusion may be
Faith to the believer, that cannot prove; P. 251.
and knowledge to the learned, that can. Which he further explains thus: Some
supernatural principles which reason cannot demonstrate simply, must be
supposed in order to Faith; but, these principles being owned, reason being
thereby enlightened, that may serve to convert or convince Philosophers, and the
great men of reason in the very point of Faith where it is at the highest. This
he brings down to the business of Councils; as to which, he says, that the
first immediate, fundamental points of Faith, as they cannot be proved simply
by reason, so neither need they be determined by any Council, nor ever were
they attempted, they are so plain set down in Scripture. If about the sense and
true meaning of these, or necessary deduction out of the prime Articles of
Faith, General Councils determine any thing, as they have done at Nice and the
rest; there is no inconvenience, that one and the same Canon of the Council
should be believed as it reflects upon the Articles and grounds indemonstrable;
and yet known to the learned, by the means and proof, by which that deduction
is vouched and made good. And again the conclusion of a Council, suppose that
in Nice about the consubstantiality of Christ with the Father, in it self
considered, is indemonstrable by reason; there (says he) I believe, and assent
in Faith: but the same conclusion if you give me the ground of Scripture and
the Creed (for somewhat must be supposed in all whether Faith or knowledge) is
demonstrable by natural reason against any Arrian in the world. So that he
concludes, The weaker sort of Christians may assent by Faith, where the more
learned may build it on reason, the principles of Faith being supposed. This is
the substance of his Lordships Discourse. In Answer to which, you tell us, That
the Bishop seems to broach a new Doctrine, that the assent of Faith may be an
habit of knowledge. P. 265.
But surely (say you) Divine Faith is according to the Apostle, Heb. 11. an
Argument of things which do not appear, viz. by the same means, by which we
give this assent of Faith: otherwise our Faith would not be free and
meritorious. An Answer I must needs say, hugely suitable to your principles,
who are most concerned of all men to set reason at a distance from Faith; and
so you do sufficiently in this Discourse of it. For it is no easy matter to
understand what you mean, but that is not to be wondered at, since you make
obscurity so necessary to Faith. Divine Faith is (you say) an Argument of
things which do not appear, viz. by the same means, by which we give this
assent of Faith. Do you mean that the objects of Faith do not appear? or that
the reason of believing does not? If only the former, which is all the Apostle
means; that is nothing to your purpose, for we are not enquiring, whether men
may not believe the things which are not seen, but, whether the assent of Faith
may not be consistent with reason: which I am so far from thinking any strange
doctrine, that I cannot see how there can be an assent of Faith without reason.
And they must be such great meriters at Gods hands, as you are, who must think
to oblige him with believing what you cannot understand, or see any ground in
reason for. For, assent being an act of the mind cannot be elicited without
sufficient reason, persuading the mind to it; or else, it is so far from being
free, and as you (who are so loath to be beholding to God) call it,
meritorious, that it is brutish and irrational. Not that there are
demonstrations to be expected for every thing we believe, but there must be
sufficient reason for the mind to build its assent upon, and that reason is
evidence, and that evidence destroys that obscurity which you make necessary
to Faith. Evidence, I say, not of the object, but of the reason and obligation
to assent. When you say, That Faith, as Faith, cannot be Knowledge, his
Lordship grants it; but yet it does not thence follow, that what may be
believed by one may not be known by another: and though Christ (as you add) did
not set up a School of knowledge but of Faith, yet he did not set up a School
of blind implicit Faith, but such a one as consists of a rational and
discursive act of the mind. You must not therefore expect that we should
believe the definitions of Councils because they pretend to be Infallible, but
you must first convince our reasons that they are so, and then we shall assent
to them. But you have very well contrived your business, to have an obscure,
implicit Faith, for such Doctrines which are so far from any evidence of
Reason.

CHAP. II. Of the use and Authority of General Councils.
The denying the Infallibility of General Councils takes not away their use and
Authority. Of the submission due to them by all particular persons. How far
external obedience is required in case they err. No violent opposition to be
made against them. Rare Inconveniences hinder not the effect of a just power.
It cannot rationally be supposed, that such General Councils as are here meant
should often or dangerously err. The true notion of a General Council
explained. The Freedom requisite in the proceedings of it. The Rule it must
judge by. Great difference between external obedience, and internal assent to
the Decrees of Councils. This latter unites men in error, not the former. As
great uncertainties supposing General Councils Infallible as not. Not so great
certainty requisite for submission as Faith. Whether the Romanists Doctrine of
the Infallibility of Councils, or ours, tend more to the Churches peace? St.
Austin explained. The Keys according to him given to the Church. No
unremediable inconvenience, supposing a General Councilerr. But errors in
Faith are so, supposing them Infallible when they are not. The Church has
power to reverse the Decrees of General Councils. The power of Councils not by
Divine Institution. The unreasonableness of making the Infallibility of
Councils depend on the Popes confirmation. No consent among the Romanists about
the subject of Infallibility, whether in Pope or Council. No evidence from
Scripture, Reason, or Antiquity, for the Popes personal Infallibility.

THE first question being thus dispatched, I now come to the second,. 1.
which is, Of what Use and Authority General Councils are in the Church,
supposing them not Infallible? And here again two things are to be examined;
first, How far General Councils are to be submitted to. Secondly, Whether our
opinion or yours tend more to the peace of the Church; for both these his
Lordship handles distinctly, and so shall we. For the first, nothing is more
necessary then thoroughly to understand his Lordships meaning, which he most
fully delivers in these words. P. 245.
General Councils lawfully called and ordered and lawfully proceeding, are a
great and awful representation, and cannot err in matters of Faith, keeping
themselves to Gods rule, and not attempting to make a new one of their own; and
are with all submission to be observed by every Christian, where Scripture, or
evident demonstration, comes not against them. Two things you mainly object
against this opinion. 1. That in case such a Council err, it tends only to
unite men in error. 2. Who shall be Judge of all those conditions employed in
the Councils proceedings? to these two, all that I can find material scattered
up and down in your Discourse on this Subject, may be reduced. For the first,
we must consider the occasion of his Lordships entrance into this subject
concerning General Councils, how far they may err, or not, which he says, is a
question of great consequence in the Church of God. For to say they cannot err,
P. 223.
leaves the Church not only without remedy against an error once determined;
but also without sense that it may need a remedy, and so without care to seek
it, which is the misery of the Church of Rome at this day. To say they can err,
seems to expose the members of the Church to an uncertainty and wavering in the
Faith, to make unquiet Spirits not only to disrespect former Councils of the
Church, but also to slight and contemn whatsoever they may now determine. So
that, great inconveniences appearing on both sides, his Lordship endeavors to
steer his course so as not to dash on the rocks of either side, by betraying
the Churches Faith in asserting their Infallibility, or the Churches peace by
acknowledging them fallible. But as he could not see any reason to believe them
Infallible, so neither could he see any necessity that the Churches peace
should be broken, supposing them not to be so. And the most obvious objection
being, If a General Council be fallible, what is to be done in case it should
err? For that, he propounds this Expedient, That the determination of a General
Council erring was to stand in force, P. 224.
and to have external obedience at the least yielded to it, till evidence of
Scripture, or a demonstration to the contrary made the error appear; and
until thereupon another Council of equal authority did reverse it. And he
after explains what he means by this external obedience, P. 226.
viz. That which consists in silence, patience, and forbearance yielded to it:
which he builds on this reason, That Controversies arising in the Church must
have some end or they will tear all in sunder: therefore supposing a General
Council should err, and an erring Decree be by the Law it self invalid, I would
have it, (says he) wisely considered again (supposing the Council not to err
in Fundamental Verity) whether it be not fit to allow a General Council that
honor and privilege, which all other great Courts have; Namely that there be
a declaration of the invalidity of its decrees, P. 227.
as well as of the Laws of other Courts, before private men can take liberty to
refuse obedience. Therefore he concludes, That this seems most fit and
necessary for the peace of Christendom, unless in case the error be manifest
and intolerable, or that the whole Church upon peaceable and just complaint of
this error neglect or refuse to call a Council to examine it: and there come
in National and Provincial Councils to reform for themselves. These words
contain the full account of his Lordships opinion, which you charge with so
many interclashings and inconveniences. The first of which is, That it tends
only to oblige all the members of the Church to an Unity in error against
Scripture and demonstration, P. 242.
during their whole lives, or rather to the worlds end; since such an Utopian
rectifying Council as the Bishop here fancies, is morally impossible ever to be
had; and therefore you call it a strange (not not say an impious) doctrine,
advanced without authority of Gods Word, or Antiquity, nay contrary to all
solid reason.

This being a charge of the highest nature and managed with such unmeasurable
confidence,. 2.
we must somewhat further enquire into the grounds of his Lordships opinion, to
see whether it be guilty of these crimes or no. There are three things
therefore must be cleared in order to his Lordships Vindication. 1. The design
of his Discourse. 2. The suppositions he makes as to the proceedings of the
Council. 3. The obligation of its decrees supposing that it should err.

1. The design of his discourse is to be considered; which is to remedy a
supposable inconvenience, and to provide for the Churches peace. For the first
question in debate was, Whether a General Council might err, or no. In which
his Lordship gives sufficient evidence from Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason,
that it might. But then here comes an inconvenience to be removed; for his
Adversary objects, What are we then nearer to Unity after a Council has
determined, supposing it may err? To this his Lordship suits his Answer:
wherein we ought to consider, that the inconvenience objected is, on his
Lordships suppositions, one of the rara contingentia; and such a one ought not
to destroy a principle of Government in all other cases useful and necessary.
For there cannot possibly be any way thought of for peace and Government, but
there may be a supposition made of some notable inconvenience; but that not
being necessary, nor immediately consequent upon it, but something which may
happen and far more probably may not, it ought not to hinder the obtaining of
that, which is generally both useful and necessary. To give you a parallel case
to this: It is granted on all hands that the civil authority of a Nation is
Fallible, and therefore we may suppose it actually to err, and that so far as
to bind men by Law to something in it self unlawful. Will you say now, that the
intent of civil authority is to bind men necessarily to sin? I hope, you will
not: but by this you may easily see the fallacy of your arguing against his
Lordship; for it is an Inconvenience indeed supposable, but not at all
necessary; if he had said indeed, that General Councils must necessarily err,
your Argument had been strong against him; but as it is, it has no more force
against his assertion, then the supposition before made has against civil
authority. For that case may be easily put, that such a Law may pass; but, does
this hinder men from their obligation to duty and submission to a just
authority? or, Will you have men presently to renounce obedience, and to repeal
such a Law themselves, and not rather in all ways of duty and reverence to
authority make known their just complaints and desire a redress by the hands of
Supreme authority? And this is all which his Lordship aims at, that in case a
General Council should err (which is not easily imaginable upon his
suppositions) it tends more to the Churches peace for private men not to oppose
the Decrees of it, but to endeavor that another General Council be called to
repeal it, and till then to preserve the Churches peace, supposing the error
not manifest or intolerable. In this case then there are two inconveniences
put: the one of them is, That when a Council is supposed to err, every
particular man may be at liberty to oppose the Decrees of it, and so put the
Church into confusion; the other is, That though private men may know it to be
an error, yet they should be patient till the Church by another Council may
repeal it: now these two inconveniences being laid together, the question is,
Which is the greater? His Lordship with a great deal of reason judges the
former to be: because in the latter case it is only a silencing of some less
necessary truth for some time; but in the other it is an exposing the Church to
the fury of men's turbulent Spirits. But that which shows the unreasonableness
of your objection, That this is the way to bind the Church to an union in
error, is, that this does not necessarily follow from his Lordships opinion,
but is only a case supposable: and no rare Inconvenience ought to prejudice a
general good: And the peace of the Church in such a case ought to be preferred
before private men's satisfaction.

. 3.
But this will further appear, if we consider, secondly, the Suppositions his
Lordship makes; for by that we shall see, how rarely incident this case is:
for, I hope, the supposing that a General Council may err, does not suppose
that it must necessarily err; and granting those things which are supposed by
him, it is a rare case that it should err. For these things are by him
supposed. 1. That it must be a Council lawfully called and ordered; and so, not
such Councils as that of Trent was, or any like it; wherein the Pope gives only
a General Summons, and that it must be called a General Council on that
account, how few Bishops soever appear in it, nay, though the far greatest part
of the Christian world be excluded from it: but it must be such a Council as
may be acknowledged to be General, by the general Consent of the Christian
world. For that we would make our Judge in the case; as it was in the four
first General Councils. Not that we would stand upon Bishops being actually
present from every particular Church, but that such a number be present from
the greatest Churches, as may make it not be suspected to be merely a Faction,
packed together for the Interess of some potent Prelate; but that they do so
indifferently meet from all parts, that there may be no just ground of
suspicion, that they design any thing but the common good of the Christian
world. And therefore we acknowledge the first four General Councils to be truly
such, in our present sense; neither do we quarrel at them, because so few
Bishops were present, who lived out of the Roman Empire; for, supposing the
Church at the same freedom from particular Interesses that it was then, and so
great a number of Bishops assembled together, we look on it to be so great and
awful a Representation, that its determinations ought not to be opposed by any
factious or turbulent Spirits. And in case some Bishops be not present from
some Churches, whether Eastern or Western, yet if upon the publishing those
Decrees, they be universally accepted, that does, ex post-facto, make the
Council truly Occumenical. By this you see, what we mean by a General Council.
And, for the calling of it; though we say, it should be by the consent of the
chief Patriarchs, yet the right and custom of the ancient Church, clearly
carries it, that it ought to be summoned by the authority of Christian Princes:
for, nothing can be more evident to such, who will not shut their eyes against
the clearest evidence, than that the first General Councils (before the Pope
had got the better of the Emperors) were summoned by the Emperors command and
authority; and since the division of the Empire into so many Kingdoms and
Principalities, the consent of Christian Princes is necessary on the same
grounds. Neither ought it only to be a General Council, and lawfully called,
but lawfully ordered too, viz. that no Prelate challenge himself such a
Presidency not in, but over the Council, that his Instructions must be looked
on as the only Chart they must steer their course by; and that nothing be
debated, but proponentibus Legatis, as it was at Trent: for these things take
away utterly that Freedom which is necessary for a General Council. And
therefore his Lordship justly requires, 2. That the Council do proceed
lawfully; which it cannot do, if it be overawed, as the second Ephesine was by
Dioscorus and his party; or if practices be used, as at Ariminum: but there
must be the greatest freedom in debates, no canvasing for votes, but every one
suffered to deliver his judgment, without prejudice or partiality, that those
who give their judegements, deliver their reasons before, and not only appear
in Pontificalibus, to give their Placet. That the Bishops present, be men of
unquestionable abilities, and generally presumed to be well acquainted with the
matters to be debated there: For otherwise nothing would be more easy, than
for the more subtle men, under ambiguous expressions, and fair pretenses to
bring over a great number of the rest to them, who want either judgment or
learning enough to discern their designs. And this is supposed to be the case
of the Council at Ariminum, where the Occidental Bishops, for want of learning
were overreached by the subtilty of the Arrian party. 3. His Lordship
supposes, That this Council keeps it self to Gods Rule, and not attempt to make
a new one of their own: For in so doing they commit an error in the first
Concoction, which will be incorrigible afterward. And this is not only
reasonable, but just and necessary, because nothing can be a Rule of Faith, but
what is of immediate divine Revelation; and this has been the practice of the
first General Councils, which never owned or proceeded by any other Rule of
Faith but this. These things being supposed, May we not justly say, That an
erring determination of such a Council so proceeding, is a rare case? Since we
believe, that God will not deny to any particular person (who does sincerely
seek it) the knowledge of his truth, much less may we think he will do it to
such an awful Representation of the Church, when assembled together purposely
for finding out that truth, which may be of so great consequence to the
Christian world. For both the truth of Gods promises, the goodness of God to
his people, and his peculiar care of his Church, seem highly concerned, that
such a Council should not be guilty of any notorious error.

But, because we deny not, but such a Council is fallible, therefore we grant
the case may be put, that such a Council may err;. 4.
and the Question is, What is to be done then? Whether every particular person
may oppose such a determination, or submit till another Council reverse the
Decrees of it. His Lordship asserts the latter; and so we come to the effect of
such an erring Decree, which was the third thing to be spoken to. As to which,
these things must be considered, 1. That he does not assert, that men are bound
to believe the truth of that Decree, but not openly to oppose it. For so he
speaks expressly of external obedience, and at least so far as it consists in
silence, patience, and forbearance yielded to it. And therefore you are greatly
deceived, when with such confidence you assert, That this obliges all the
members of the Church to unity in error; for that is only consequent upon your
principle, that the Decrees of General Councils are to be believed by an
internal Assent: for this indeed would necessarily oblige them to unity in
error; but the most that is consequent on his Lordships Opinion, is, that in
such cases wherein a General Council has erred, men ought rather to be silent
for a time as to some truth, than to break the Churches peace. In the mean time
he does not deny, but that men may be bound to follow their own judgments in
the discovery of truth; nay, and they may use all means consistent with the
Churches peace, to promote that truth; for he allows that just complaints may
be made to the Church for reversing the decrees of the former Council, and this
cannot be without discovering the error of that Council. And I hope this
liberty of dissent and just complaint, is sufficient to keep all the members of
the Church from being united in Error. And, I pray Sir, What cause is there
now for such hideous outcries, that this is such a strange and impious
Doctrine, against Scripture, Antiquity, and solid Reason, which appears, for
all that I can see, very just and reasonable, taking it in the way which he
explains himself in. But, whereas you object, That this will keep men in error
to the worlds end, because such a Council is morally impossible; it is easy to
show you, that if the rectifying Council be impossible; the General erring
Council is equally impossible; therefore there is no danger coming that way
neither. And that such General Councils are grown such morally impossible
things, we may in a great measure thank your Church for it, which hates as much
such a true rectifying Council (as you call it) as the Court of Rome does a
through Reformation. For, all your design is, to persuade men, that those only
are General Councils, which have the Popes Summons, and wherein he rules, and,
in effect, does all; and to persuade men to believe the Decrees of such
Councils, is the most effectual way in the world to unite men in the belief of
errors to the worlds end. For, as long as the Popes Interest can carry it, to
be sure, all rectifying Councils, shall be (as you say) Vtopian too; for he
will prevent, if possible, their ever appearing in Europe. Therefore all this
discourse of his Lordship does suppose such a state of the Church, as that was
in the time of the Nicene Councils, and after; when there might be a liberty of
calling such Councils, that in case one errs, another might be summoned to
reverse it. But this is not to be expected in faece Romuli, in this state of
the Christian world, that there should be such a General Council so called, and
so proceeding as he supposes, and therefore there is no such danger of being
united in error, by virtue of its Decrees; but if the state of things would
bear such a Council so decreeing, we might as well think it would bear another
to reverse it, if need were, and then his Lordships supposition would come to
act, that in the interstice of those Councils, private men ought not to oppose
the Decrees of the former, but patiently wait till the latter reverse them.
But, as things are now in the Christian world, his Lordship does not suppose
that any Council has such a power to oblige, because it calls it self a
General Council; but a truly General Council being, as you say, morally
impossible, nothing is left but that the Church reform it self by parts, and
wait to give an account of its proceedings therein, till such a General Council
as we before described, be assembled in the Christian world. Thus we see, how
vain and empty your first Objection is, That from his Lordships opinion, it
would follow, that the Church must be united in error, which is only the
direct consequent of your own assertion, that men are bound to believe the
Decrees of those you call General Councils to be Infallible.

Your next great Objection is, That this Doctrine exposes all to
uncertainties;. 5.
for, Who shall be judge, whether it be a lawful Council, and proceeds
lawfully? Whether the errors be fundamental and intolerable or no? Whether
there be Scripture and demonstration against them or no? For, if every man be
judge, P. 242, etc. P. 260, etc.
there can be no such submission to any General Council. This is the force of
the many words, which, in several places, you spend upon this subject; and
therefore I shall consider them together. I answer therefore, 1. In general, if
this be so intolerable an inconvenience, it is unavoidable upon your own
principles: and therefore it is unreasonable to object that to another, which
you cannot quit your self of. For you say, That the Infallibility of General
Councils confirmed by the Pope, is the best way to end Controversies; but there
is not one term in the main Proposition, but is liable to the same uncertainty
which you here object to his Lordship; for, 1. You do not say, that all
Councils are Infallible, but only General Councils, Who then shall be judge,
whether the Council you would have me believe, be General or no? You do not
say, that all must be there to make a General Council, but the Popes General
Summons is sufficient: But, Who must be judge, whether that be sufficient or
no? You say so; but, I see no reason for it, Must you be my judge, or I my own?
If I may be my own judge, so must every one else, and so every man is left to
believe what Councils to be General he please himself. 2. You say, General
Councils are Infallible: Who must be judge of that too? Must the Council be
infallibly believed in it? But that is the thing in Question. Must the Pope be
judge? But no man (you say) is bound to believe him Infallible without the
Council. Must the Scripture be judge? But, Who must judge what the sense of the
Scripture is? 3. Who must be judge in what sense, and how far the Council is
Infallible? Who must judge, how the Council comes to be Infallible in the
Conclusion, that was fallible in the use of the means? And when any
Controversy arises concerning the meaning of the Decrees of the Council, Who
must be judge, which is the Infallible sense of them? for there is but one
sense Infallible, though the words may bear many, and unless I know which is
the Infallible sense, I am not bound to yield my assent to it. But, Who must
decide this? The Council cannot; for that leaves no exposition with the
decrees. The Pope cannot; for he is not Infallible without the Council. So that
still it falls to every man's private reason, to judge of it. 4. Who must be
judge, that the Popes Confirmation is necessary to make the Decrees Infallible?
Not the Council without the Pope, not the Pope without the Council; for, you
say, We are not bound to believe them Infallible, but as they are together. And
together they cannot, for that is the Question, Why not a Council without the
Popes Confirmation, as well as with it? and, When did Pope and Council
determine, that no Council without the Pope, is Infallible? but the contrary
has been determined by a Council, viz. that a Council is above the Pope, and
consequently needs not his Confirmation. So that for all your pretending to end
Controversies, you leave men at as great uncertainties as any whatsoever. Being
not able to resolve some of the most necessary Questions, in order to the
Churches peace, according to your own principles.

2. I answer more particularly, that his Lordships opinion does not expose near
to so great uncertainties as yours does; upon this reason,. 6.
because you requiring an internal assent to the Decrees of Councils, and
Infallible Certainty in all that men believe, must of necessity leave men in
the greatest perplexities, where you cannot give them that kind of Certainty on
which they may build their Faith; but, his Lordship only requiring external
obedience to the Decrees of Councils, a far less degree of Certainty will be
sufficient. That is, such a kind of Moral Certainty, as things of that nature
are capable of. You ask then, Who shall be judge, whether a Council were
lawfully called, and did lawfully proceed or no? I answer, let every man be
judge according to the general sense and reason of mankind. If there were
sufficient authority for calling them together, according to the known practice
of the Church; if there was no plain ground of suspicion of any practices by
the power of any particular Prelate; no complaints made of it, either in, or
after the Council; if there be no plain evidence that it takes any other Rules
for its Decrees, but the Scripture, then we say, They are bound to yield
external obedience to them, supposing the Council generally received in the
Christian world for a lawful and General Council. If you ask again, How should
it be known when errors are manifest and intolerable, and when not? We here
appeal to Scripture interpreted by the concurrent sense of the Primitive
Church, the common reason of mankind (supposing the Scripture to be the Rule of
Faith) the consent of wise and learned men; which certainly will prevent the
exorbitances and capricious humors of any fantastical Spirits, which may cry
out, That the most received truths, ever since Christianity was in the world,
are intolerable errors. If you are resolved yet further to ask, Who shall be
judge what a necessary reason or demonstration is? His Lordship tells you, I
think plain enough, from Hooker, what is understood by it, viz. such as being
proposed to any man, and understood, the mind cannot choose but inwardly assent
to it. And, Do you require any other judge but a man's own reason in this case?
But, you say, Others call their arguments demonstrations; but let them submit
to this way of trial, and they may soon be convinced that they are not. Still
you say, They will not be convinced, but will break the peace of the Church,
supposing they have sufficient evidence for what they say. But if men will be
unreasonable, who can help it? Can you, with telling them Councils are
Infallible? I doubt you would hear of more arguments than you could well
satisfy against that presently. We appeal then to the common reason of
mankind, Whether it be not a far probable way to end Controversies, to persuade
men in disputable matters, to yield external obedience to the Decrees of a
lawful General Council, than to tell them, they are bound to believe whatever
they decree to be infallibly true? And therefore you are very much mistaken, P.
262.
when you say, His Lordship declines the main Question, which is, of the
necessity of submitting to a living Judge, or a definitive sentence, in case
two parties, equal for learning and integrity, both pretend to equal evidence
for what they say; for his Lordship does not deny, but that in such a case the
submitting to a definitive sentence, may be a reasonable way to end the
Controversy; but then the difference between you lies in two things. 1. That
you would bind men to internal assent to the Decrees of a Council, as being
Infallible; but his Lordship says, They bind to external obedience, as being
the Supremest Judicatory can be expected in the Church. 2. You pretend, that
Councils called and confirmed by the Pope, are thus Infallible, and our Supreme
Judge in matters of Faith; his Lordship justly dedies that, and says, That a
Free General Council observing the same conditions which the first did, is the
only equal and indifferent Judge. So that the Question is not so much, Whether
shall be a living Judge? as, Who shall be he? and, How far the definitive
Sentence binds? and, What is to be done, in case there cannot be a free and
indifferent Judge? for in this case we say, Every Church is bound to regard her
own purity and peace, and, in case of corruptions, to proceed to a Reformation
of them.

. 6.
We now come to the remaining Enquiry, which is, Whether your Doctrine, or ours,
tends more to the Churches peace? For clearing of this, his Lordship premises
these things by way of Considerations, P. 253.
1. That there is n necessity of any such Infallibility in the Church, as was
in the Apostles. 2. That what Infallibility or Authority belongs to the Church,
P. 254.
does primarily reside in the whole body of the Church, and not in a General
Council. 3. That in case a General Council err, the whole Church has full
Authority to represent her self in another Council, P. 256.
and so to redress what was amiss either practiced, or concluded. And so upon
these principles his Lordship says, Here is a sufficient remedy for what is
amiss, and yet no infringing any lawful Authority in the Church; and yet he
grants, as the Church of England does, that a General Council may err. P. 257.
But he says, It does not follow, because the Church may err, therefore she
may not govern. For the Church has not only a Pastoral Power to teach and
direct, but a Praetorian also, to control and censure too where errors or
crimes are against points fundamental, or of great consequence. Thus he
represents the advantages which follow upon his opinion, after which he comes
to the disadvantages of yours. But we must first consider, what you have to
object against what his Lordship has here delivered. To the first you say
nothing, but that Stapleton and Bellarmin attribute more Infallibility to the
Church, than his Lordship does, P. 266.
which is an excellent way to prove the necessity of it, if you had first
proved those two Authors Infallible. To the second, your Answer is more large;
for his Lordship to confirm what he said, That the power and authority given by
Christ, lies in the whole Church, produces that saying of S. Austin, That S.
Peter did not receive the Keys of the Church, Aug. de Agone Chr^stiano. cap.
30.
but as sustaining the person of the Church; from whence he proves against
Stapleton, That it is not to be understood finally only for the good of the
Church, but that the primary and formal right is in the Church. For he that
receives a thing in the person of another, receives it indeed to his good and
use, but in his right too. To this you answer from Bellarmin, That there is a
twofold representing or bearing the person of another, The one Parabolical, De
Pontif. l. 1. c. 12.
and by way of mere figure and supposition only; as Agar represented the people
of the Jews under bondage of the Law, etc. The other historical and real, viz.
when the person representing, has right or relation a part rei, in and toward
the thing represented, by virtue whereof, it bears the person of the thing
represented: Now S. Peter, say you, sustained the person of the Church in this
latter sense, really and historically, and not parabolically, and in figure, i.
e. he received the Keys as Head of the Church; though that Reception were
ordained for the good of the whole Church. But Sir, our enquiry is not, How
many ways one may imagine a Representation to be made, but, What kind of
Representation that is, which is suitable to S. Austin's meaning? That there
may be an Allegorical Representation, no body denies: but I cannot imagine, How
it can belong to this place; or, Who ever meant that S. Peter stood here for an
Allegory of the Church, and therefore the members of your distinction are not
apposite. For those who assert, that S. Peter did sustain the person of the
Church, in his Lordships sense, do yet acknowledge that he did it historice,
and not parabolice, as you speak, i. e. the donation was really made to him;
but then the Question is, In what right or capacity it was made to him, Whether
in his personal or representative capacity? For, these are the two only proper
members of a distinction here. St. Austin says, not only in that place, but in
very many others, that S. Peter did sustain the person of the Church, when
Christ said to him, Aug in Psalm. 108. in Johan. tr. 124 Sermon. 30. de diverse.
Retract. l. 1. c. 21.
I will give thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven; Now the Question is, In
what sense he sustained the person of the Church? You say, In his own right as
Head of the Church; We say, As a public person representing the Church, not
parabolically (for that is no sustaining the person at all) but really and
historically. And that S. Austin means, As a public person, appears by the
other expressions in the places cited, that he did universam significare
Ecclesiam, signify the whole Church; and that those things which are spoken of
Peter, Non habent illustrem intellectum nisi cum referuntur ad Ecclesiam cujus
ille agnoscitur in figura gestasse personam, Have no clear sense, but when they
are referred to the Church, whose person he did bear. Can you say this of a
King, who receives the Keys of a Town, whereof he takes possession for
himself, though it be for the good of the Kingdom; that he signifies the whole
Kingdom in it, and that it cannot have any clear sense, but when it is applied
to the Kingdom which he represents? No, this cannot be; for the King takes
possession in his own full right, and it is not the possession, but the
administration, which is referred properly to the good of the Kingdom. But this
might be properly said of a Duke of Venice, that he takes possession of a Town
in the person of the State, and that the proper sense is, that the State took
possession, and he only representing it. So that the full right lies in the
body of the State, but he as chief member represents the whole. And this is
that which S. Austin means, when he says, That S. Peter represented the
Church, propter primatum, for the Primacy which he had amongst the Apostles, i
e. such a Primacy of order, whereby he was fittest to represent the whole
Church. For it is impossible to conceive that he should mean that S. Peter
should receive this as Head of the Church, when you acknowledge that he was not
Head of the Church, till after the Keys were given him. For, you say, The
performance of Christ's Promise, in making him Head of the Church, was not till
after his resurrection. But, Will you say, the Church had no power of the Keys
till then; and then only finally too, and not formally? What became then of the
power of the Keys at S. Peter's death, if only formally in him, and not in the
Church? What becomes of them at the death of every Pope? Will you say, as
Bellarmin does, that Christ takes them, and gives them to his Successor? But
he must be sure to wait till the Cardinals agree, To whom he must give them.
Nothing then could be further from S. Austin's meaning, than that S. Peter
received the Keys, as Head of the Church, and so, that he represented the
Church only finally; whereas his expressions carry it, that he means the formal
right of them was conveyed to the Church, and that S. Peter was only a public
person, to receive them in the name of the Church. But, whatever S. Austin's
meaning was, the strength of his Lordships assertion does not stand or fall
with that; for there are arguments sufficient besides to prove, that the
Authority for governing the Church, was not committed formally to S. Peter,
much less to any pretended successor, but that it primarily and formally
resides in the whole body of the Church. And, were that the thing to be here
disputed, you must not think to take it for granted, that if the Keys were
given personally to S. Peter, by them was meant the Supreme Authority of
governing the Church, exclusively of the other Apostles.

To the third Consideration, you answer, That in case a General Council err,.
7.
P. 267.
there can be no redress for error in Faith; for if one Council may err, so
may another, and a third, and a fourth, etc. This indeed is very suitable to
your Doctrine from the beginning, that a man can be certain of nothing but what
it is impossible should be otherwise. I hope you are certain your self, you do
not err; but I suppose you do not think it impossible you should: So, although
we do not think it impossible, a Council should err, yet we may be certain it
does not: and, supposing it should, we do not say, It is impossible that a
Council should not err, so that another Council may correct the error of the
former. And doubtless men may be certain of it too; if, as his Lordship says,
plain Scripture, and evident demonstration be brought against the former
error. But these are strange Doctrines, that because a Council may err,
therefore a Council can never afford remedy against inconveniences. For, one
great inconvenience is, the breaking the Churches peace: that, is remedied by
the Councils Authority; another is, error in Faith, that may be remedied by
another Council: No, say you, for that may err too; but, Does it follow that
it must err? or, Is it probable that it should err? if the former error be
so discovered, and the Council so proceed as his Lordship supposes. For your
other difficulty about the calling another General Council, I have answered it
already, P. 268.
when I showed, what we meant by a General Council, and when it was lawfully
called. When you after add, That the Church never represented her self in
another Council but where the former Council was unlawful; and instance in the
Councils of Ariminum and Ephesus: you say the same which his Lordship does, for
these Councils were therefore accounted unlawful because erroneous and
factious, and he never asserts the necessity of calling a new Council, but in
those two cases. But if you would have us account none such, but whom you do,
you must excuse us till we see greater reason for it then we do yet: and so
likewise for what follows, that the Councils which rectified the errors of
those were called by the Popes authority, as that of Trent and others were,
which to speak mildly is a gross untruth.

You urge from his Lordships granting, That the Church has a Praetorian power
to control and censure too, where errors or crimes are against points
Fundamental or of great consequence; that therefore he and all Protestants are
justly censured by the Roman Church for opposing those Doctrines which are with
her Fundamental and of great consequence. But still there is no difference with
you between the Roman Church and the Catholic; between Papal Councils, and
Free and General; between what she judges Fundamental, and what all are bound
to judge so. If you prove then, that we are bound to rely only on the judgment
of your Church, your consequence is good; but otherwise it is tied with a rope
of sand, and therefore we do not fear the lashes of it. And the same fault runs
through your subsequent discourse, P. 269.
in which you suppose the Church Infallible in all she propounds, which you
know is constantly denied, and has been at large disproved in our first Part.
For, the ground of your resolution of Faith being removed, I see the Fabric of
your Church falls down with it. For take but away your pretense of
Infallibility, and your confounding the Catholic and Roman Church; all the
rest moulders, as not being able to stand without them. But that is still your
way, if any thing be said of the Catholic Church, we must presently understand
it of yours; so that it cannot be said in any sense that the Church is without
spot or wrinkle, but by you it must be understood presently of the Doctrine of
the Roman Catholic Church universally received as a matter of Faith: Ibid.
but till you prove not only your two former assertions, but that St. Austin
understood those words ever in that sense, your vindication of that place in
him concerning it, will appear utterly impertinent to your purpose. And his
Lordships assertion may still stand good, That the Church on earth is not any
freer from wrinkles in Doctrine and Discipline, then she is from spots in life
and Conversation.

Having thus vindicated his Lordships way from the objections you raised
against it,. 8.
we must now consider how well you vindicate your own from the unreasonableness
he charges it with, in several particulars. 1. That if we suppose a General
Council Infallible, and it prove not so, P. 258.
but that an error in Faith be concluded; the same erring opinion, which makes
it think it self Infallible, makes the error of it irrevocable, and so leaves
the Church without remedy. To this you Answer, P. 269.
Grant false antecedents and false premises enough, and what absurdities will not
be consequent, and fill up the conclusion? But you clearly mistake the present
business; which is not, Whether Councils be Infallible or no? but, Whether
opinion be liable to greater Inconveniences, that which asserts that they may,
or that they cannot, err? Will you have your supposition of the Infallibility
of Councils taken for a first principle, or a thing as true as the Scriptures?
So you would seem indeed, by the supposing the Scriptures not to be Gods Word,
which you subjoyn as the parallel, P. 270.
to the supposing General Councils fallible. But will you say the one is as
evident and built on as good reason, and as much agreed on among Christians, as
the other is? I suppose, you will not: and therefore it was very absurd and
unreasonable to say, Supposing the Word of God were not so, errors would be
irrevocable, as if General Councils were supposed Infallible and proved not so.
But this is a Question you grant to be disputable among Christians, and will
you not give us leave to make a supposition that it may prove not so? You must
consider, we are now enquiring into the conveniences of these two opinions,
and in that case it is necessary to make such suppositions: And let any
reasonable man judge what opinion can be more pernicious to the Church then
yours is, supposing it not to be true: for then it will be necessary for men to
assent to the grossest errors, as the most Divine and Infallible truths: and
there can be no remedy imagined for the redress of them. If then the
Inconvenience of admitting it be so great, men had need look well to the
grounds on which it is built. And I cannot see any reason men can have to admit
any Infallible proponent in matters of Faith to the Church, but on as great and
as clear evidence, as the Prophets and Apostles had, that they were sent from
God. For the danger may be as great to believe that to be Infallible which is
not, as not to believe that to be Infallible which is: for the believing an
error to be a Divine truth, may be as dangerous to the souls of men, as the
not believing something which is really revealed by God. But to be sure, those
who see no reason to believe a General Council to be Infallible, cannot be
obliged to assent to errors propounded by it; but such who believe it
Infallible must what ever the errors be, swallow them down, without
questioning the truth of them. And it argues how conscious you are of the
falseness of your principles, that you are so loath to have them examined, or
so much as a supposition made that they should not prove true: Whereas truth
always invites men to the most accurate search into it. We see the Apostles
bid men search, whether the things they spoke were true or no; and those are
most commended who did it most, and I hope men were as much bound to believe
them Infallible as General Councils. But we see how unreasonable you are, you
would obtrude such things upon men's Faith, which must lead them into
unavoidable errors if false, and yet not allow men the liberty of examination,
whether they be true or no. But such proceedings are so far from advancing your
cause, that nothing can more prejudice it among rational and inquisitive men.

His Lordship for the clearing this, proceeds to an Instance of an error
defined by one of your General Councils, P. 259.
viz. Communion in one kind; but that we shall reserve the discussion of, to
the ensuing Chapter; which is purposely allotted for the discovery of those
errors which have been defined by such as you call General Councils. Therefore
I proceed.

2. His Lordship says, Your opinion is yet more unreasonable, because no
Body-collective,. 9.
whenever it assembled it self, did ever give more power to the representing
body of it, then a binding power upon it self and all particulars; nor ever did
it give this power otherwise, P. 260.
then with this reservation in nature, that it would call again, and reform,
and, if need were, abrogate any Law, or ordinance upon just cause made evident
that the representing Body had failed in trust, or truth. And this power no
Body-collective, ecclesiastical or civil, can put out of it self, or give away
to a Parliament, or Council, or call it what you will that represents it. To
this again you Answer, P. 272.
This is only to suppose and take for granted, that a General Council has no
Authority, but what is merely delegate from the Church Universal which it
represents. I grant, this is supposed in it, and this is all which the nature
of a representative body does imply; if you say, there is more then that, you
are bound to prove it. Yes, say you, We maintain its Authority to be of Divine
Institution, and when lawfully assembled to act by Divine right, and not merely
by deputation and consent of the Church. But if all the proof you have for it,
be only that which you refer us to in the precedent Chapter, the palpable
weakness of it for any such purpose has been there fully laid open. His
Lordship says, That the power which a Council has to order, P. 261.
settle and define differences arising concerning Faith, it has not by any
Immediate Institution from Christ, but it was prudently taken up by the Church
from the Apostles example. So that to hold Councils to this end, is apparent
Apostolical Tradition written: but the power which Councils have, is from the
whole Catholic Church, whose members they are, and the Churches power from
God. You say, True it is, the calling such assemblies was taken up, and has
for its pattern the example of the Apostles, Act. 15. yet surely there is
little doubt to be made, but the Apostles had both direction and precept too,
for doing it so often as just occasion required, from Christ himself. The whole
force of which Answer lies in those well placed words, Surely there is little
doubt to be made; for as to any thing of reason, you never offer at it. Just
such another of Bellarmins Sine dubio's comes after; Though a General Council
be the Church representative, and do not meet, or assemble together hic and
nunc, but by order and deputation from man; yet it follows not, but the power
and authority by which they act when they are met may be from God, as doubtless
it is. Can any man have the face to question, Whether the Authority of General
Councils be of Divine Institution or no, when you say, Yes surely, there is no
doubt to be made of it, doubtless it is? We do not question, as you would seem
to imply afterward, Whether the people or the Pastors have right to send to
General Councils, but what ground you have to assert, that General Councils are
an immediate Divine Institution. But I must needs say, I never saw any thing
affirmed oftener, and offered to be proved less, then that is here: and yet as
though you had done it invincibly you triumphantly proceed; General Councils
then, are a principal and necessary part of that Ecclesiastical Hierarchy which
Christ instituted for the Government of his Church, and not an humane Expedient
only, P. 273.
taken up by the Church her self merely upon prudential considerations, as the
Bishop will needs conceive. It strangely puzzles me to find out any thing that
Particle then relates to; and after all my search can find nothing, but surely,
without doubt, and doubtless. I pray Sir, think not so meanly of us, that we
should take these for Arguments or Demonstrations: Deal fairly with us, and if
we fall by the force of reason, we yield our selves up to you. But you are very
much deceived, if you think these things are taken for proofs with us: we can
easily discern the weakness of your cause through the most confident
affirmations. If you had brought any Law of Christ, appointing that General
Councils should be in the Church, any Apostolical precept, prescribing or
giving directions concerning them, you had done something; but, not so much as
to offer at a proof, and yet conclude it as confidently as if it were
impossible to resist the force of your Demonstrations, is an evidence, that
either you know your cause to be weak, or suppose us to be so. Much such
another discourse is that which follows, wherein you pretend to give a reason,
Why what is defined by one Council in point of Doctrine cannot be reversed by
another. P. 273.
Which is, because the true Christian Faith is ex natura rei unchangeable, that
it admits not of yea and nay, but only yea; that it is always the same, that
it must stand without alteration for ever, nay that it is to be invariable and
admit no change. All these expressions we have in one Paragraph, and, for all
that I see, are the greatest strength of it. But what is it you mean by all
this? Do you think we could not understand what you meant by the
unchangeableness of Christian Faith, without so many diversified expressions of
it? And what follows now from all this? That one Council cannot repeal the
Decrees of another? How so? was not the Faith of Christ as unchangeable in the
time of the Arrian Councils, as it is now? and yet then one Council repealed
the Decrees of others, in point of Doctrine; and yet by that nothing was
derogated from the Institution or honor of Christ, by such a reversing those
Decrees. Though the Faith, i. e. The Doctrine of Christ, be always the same,
Does it thence follow; then men shall always believe all this unalterable
Doctrine? If so, how came Arrianism to overspread the Church? How came six
hundred Bishops at the Council of Ariminum to be deceived in a Doctrine of
Faith, by your own confession? It is therefore a profound mistake, to infer
from the fallibility of General Councils the alteration of the Faith of Christ.
The Faith of Christ is founded on a surer bottom then the Decrees of Councils,
though all men are liars God is true, and Christ the same yesterday, to day,
and for ever. But of this more afterward.

You would seem to argue more pertinently in the following pages against his
Lordships opinion:. 10.
for you say, He says and unsayes the same; and what he seems to attribute to
General Councils in one proposition, P. 274, 275.
he takes away in another. That which his Lordship says, is, That the
definitions of a General Council are binding to all particulars, P. 261.
and it self; but yet so, that they cannot bind the whole Church from calling
again, and in the after-calls upon just cause to order, and, if need be, to
abrogate former acts. And after adds, And because the whole Church can meet no
other way, the Council shall remain the Supreme, external, living, temporary,
Ecclesiastical Judge of all Controversies. Only the whole Church, and she
alone, has power when Scripture or Demonstration is found, and peaceably
tendered to her, to represent her self again in a new Council, and in it to
order what was amiss. Now we must consider what we find contradictious and
repugnant to themselves in these words: Three things, if I mistake not, the
main of this charge may be reduced to, 1. That men should be bound to that
which Scripture and Demonstration be against; But this is very easily answered,
for his Lordship does not say, Men are bound to believe it, but not so to
oppose it as to break the peace of the Church by it. 2. That another Council
cannot be called without opposition to the other: this his Lordship prevented,
by supposing that the just reasons against the decrees of the former Council
ought to be peaceably tendered to the Church; but no boisterous opposition to be
made against it. 3. To what purpose should another Council be called, if the
whole Church be satisfied that there is Scripture and Demonstration against the
decrees of the former? But, 1. His Lordship supposes there may Scripture and
Demonstration be, where the whole Church is not satisfied; and therefore there
may be necessity of calling another Council. 2. That the Council may free all
those who may suppose themselves still bound not to oppose the former error.
3. That no erroneous Decree of a Council, may remain unrepealed in the Church:
that so no erroneous person may challenge such a Decree of a Council, as a
ground for his opposition to the Doctrine of the Church. And where now lies any
such appearance of contradiction in his Lordships words?

3. The last thing his Lordship charge your way with unreasonableness in, is,
That you do not only make the definition of a General Council,. 11.
but the sentence of the Pope Infallible; nay, more Infallible than it. For, P.
262.
any General Council may err with you, if the Pope confirm it not. So belike
this Infallibility rests not in the representative body, the Council, nor in
the whole body the Church, but in your Head of the Church, the Pope of Rome.
And if this be so, To what end such a trouble for a General Council? or, Where
in are we nearer to unity, if the Pope confirm it not? To this you answer, 1.
That a General Council is not held by you to be Infallible at all, unless it
involve the Pope, P. 276.
or his Confirmation; and so there is but one Infallibility, viz. of the Pope
presiding in, and confirming of the votes of a General Council. 2. You confess
there are two different Opinions among you; the first and more common is, that
the Pope, even without a General Council, is Infallible in his definitions of
Faith, when he teaches the whole Church; the second is, that he is not
Infallible in his definitions, save only where he defines in, and with, a
General Council. Now the Bishop (you say) takes no notice of the second
Opinion, but only of the first, as though that were the Opinion of all
Catholic Doctors. But, for your part, you will not meddle much with any
matters of private Opinion or dispute, and therefore you will briefly pass over
what his Lordship says further, and only correct some mistakes of his. But
whereas you pretend it only necessary to believe, that Pope and Council
together are Infallible, for this all Catholics are agreed in; but, whether
the Pope be Infallible without a Council or no, you leave it as matter of
dispute. I shall manifest, how great a cheat you put upon the world by this
Assertion, in these two things, 1. That there is no such agreement among your
selves in this common principle, as you pretend. 2. That from the making the
Popes Confirmation necessary to the Infallibility of the Council, you must make
the Pope Infallible without a Council. 1. Whereas you pretend such a consent
among all Catholics in this common principle, That Pope and Council are
Infallible together, it is evident that there is no such thing. For, 1. Some
among you have asserted, that the representative body of the Church is not at
all the subject of Infallibility, but the diffusive. For Occham contends at
large, That the privilege of Infallibility, Occham Dialog. p. 1. l. 5. cap.
25, 29, 31.

Cameracensis quaest. Vesp. art. 3. ad liter. O. and P.

Cusan. Concord. Cathol. l. 2. c. 3.

Antonin. Sum. Summarum. p. 3. Tit. 23. c. 2. sect. 6.

Panormitan. decret. p. 1. l. 1. Tit: de elect. cap. significasti.

Clemangis disput. de Council. Gener. Mirandula. de fide and ordine credend.
Theorem. 4. etc.


belongs only to the whole Militant Church; and neither to the Pope, nor
General Council, nor body of the Clergy. And so likewise does Petrus de
Alliaco, Cusanus, Antoninus of Florence, Panormitan, Nicolaus de Clemangis,
Franciscus Mirandula, and others, whose words you may find at large in some of
your Writers, and therefore I forbear repeating them. 2. Some assert, that
Councils are no further Infallible, than they adhere to Universal Tradition;
and you cannot be ignorant, who they are at this day among you, who assert this
doctrine. 3. Some further say, That Councils are in themselves Infallible, and
therefore must be so, whether the Pope confirm them or no. And this opinion,
however now you say, it be not so common as the other, yet it is certain, that
before the Council of Lateran under Leo 10. it was much the more common
opinion, as appears by the Councils of Constance and Basil. And, that there is
an irreconcilable difference between the Authors of this Opinion, and those
who make the Popes Confirmation necessary to the Infallibility of a General
Council, I shall prove out of Bellarmin himself, from the state of the
Question, and the Arguments he urges against it. Bellarmin. de Council. l. 2. c.
13.
Bellarmin tells us, The first occasion of this Controversy, was about the
deposition of Popes, viz. whether the Pope might against his consent be judged,
condemned, and deposed by the Council: and therefore, says he, They are
mistaken, who think the Question is, Whether the Council with the Pope be
greater than the Pope without a Council? for, it cannot be conceived he should
give consent to his own deposition. And this he proves from the Council at
Basil, who defined their Council to be above the Pope, at that time, when
neither the Pope, nor his Legates were present. And this Council of Basil in
their Synodal Epistle, declare a General Council, as representing the Universal
Church, to be Infallible, when at the same time they assert, That Popes have
fallen into Heresy. Now, Can any one possibly imagine, these men should
believe the Popes Confirmation to be necessary to the Councils Infallibility,
who suppose the Pope may be an Heretic at the same time, in which a Council
may be Infallible? And when they assert it to belong to the Council only to
pronounce, Whether the Pope be guilty of Heresy or no? Those therefore who
contend for the Councils Authority above the Pope, do not at all look at the
Popes Confirmation, as necessary to make the Decrees Infallible; though some of
them may, to make them Canonical. For there lies one of your fallacies; because
they look on the Pope as Ministerial Head of the Church, therefore to make
Canons to be valid, they may judge it in most cases necessary that the Pope
confirm the Decrees; but yet, they do not suppose this Confirmation does at all
make them Infallible; but, whether the Pope had confirmed them or no, they had
been Infallible however. So that you cannot say, That it is a principle of
Faith among you, that Pope and Council together are Infallible; for those of
this opinion make it a principle of Faith, that the Council in it self is
Infallible, and consequently, De Council. l. 2. c. 14.
whether it be confirmed by the Pope or no. And therefore Bellarmin says,
Their opinion is, That in case the Pope be dead, deposed, or refuses to come
to the Council, the Council is not at all the less perfect, but that it has
full power to make definitions in matters of Faith. And when he comes to urge
against this Opinion, C. 16.
one of his arguments is, that from hence it follows, That the Council would
not at all need the Popes Confirmation; and another, That Councils without the
Pope may err in Decrees of Faith; for which he instanceth in the Councils of
Sirmium, Milan, Ariminum, Ephesus, etc. Neither, says he, can it be answered,
that these Councils erred, because they were unlawful Councils; for the most of
them wanted nothing but the Popes consent, and the second Ephesine Council was
just such another as that of Basil. From which disputation of Bellarmin, it is
both clear, that those who make Councils above the Pope, do not judge the Popes
Confirmation necessary; and those who judge it necessary, do not suppose the
Council Infallible without it. So that you are either deceived your self, or
would deceive others, when you would make them believe that there is but one
Infallibility asserted by you, whereas nothing can be more evident, than that
two distinct subjects of Infallibility are asserted in your Church, some
placing it in the Council without the Pope, and others in the Pope, and not in
the Council, and neither of them absolutely and formally in the Pope and
Council together.

2. I shall therefore more fully show, That those who make the Popes
Confirmation necessary,. 12.
do really place the Infallibility in the Pope, and not in the Council; and
that from these things, 1. Because they in terms assert, That though nothing be
wanting to a Council, but the Popes Confirmation, it may err, if the Pope
confirm it not. And this we produced Bellarmins assertion for already, giving
that as the only reason, why those Councils did err, which wanted nothing but
that. Nay, he elsewhere asserts, Not only that General Councils may err,
though the Pope confirm them not, L 2. de Council. c. 11.
but although the Popes Legates be present, and consent with the Council, yet if
they do not follow the certain instruction of the Pope, the Council may err.
And, Can any one then possibly conceive, that the Infallibility lies any where
but in the Pope? 2. You assert, That all the Power and Infallibility which is
in the Church, is formally in the Pope, and only finally in the Church, because
it is for the good of the Church; this I suppose you have not forgot, since you
told us, that S. Peter sustained the person of the Church historice, P. 266.
and not parabolice, and that the fullness of all Ecclesiastical Power was in
him as Head of the Church: If this be true, as there you assert it confidently,
whatever you pretend here, you are bound to defend, that all the Infallibility
in the Council comes wholly from the Pope; for I know you will not place
Infallibility in one, and the fullness of Ecclesiastical Power in another. 3.
Because the main ground of the reprobating Councils lies in the Popes dissent.
So that Councils which in all other particulars are accounted lawful and
general, yet if any thing passed displeasing in them to the Pope, so far they
are reprobated; as the proceedings of the Council of Chalcedon, Constance, and
Basil, in reference to the Popes, do sufficiently testify. For, although they
were the same persons, acting with equal freedom in those, as in other things,
yet when they came to touch any thing of the Popes Interess, then, because the
Pope does not consent, so far they were not Infallible. By which it is plain,
that, though the Council stands for a show and blind to the world, all the
Infallibility lies wholly in the Pope. And by this means, to be sure, the Pope
shall never receive any hurt by General Councils; for if he pleases, the
Council shall either be approved or rejected, or partly approved, and partly
rejected; or neither approved, nor rejected; for of all these sorts Bellarmin
tells us Councils are: which in short is, The Councils which make for the Popes
turn, are Infallible, but none other. And therefore Bellarmin, very consonantly
to his principles, says expressly, De Pontif. Rom l. 4. c. 3.
Totam firmitatem Conciliorum legitimorum esse a Pontifice, non partim a
Pontifice, partim a Concilio; The whole strength of lawful Councils depends
wholly on the Pope, and not partly on the Pope, and partly on the Council. And
if their firmness does, their Infallibility must do so too. This is not a mere
private opinion of his, but that which does necessarily follow, from the making
the Popes Confirmation necessary to the Infallibility of General Councils.
Although therefore you would fain put off this as a matter of dispute among
your selves; yet it can be no matter of dispute any more, than, Whether the
Decrees of Councils, as confirmed by the Pope, be Infallible or no? And
therefore all that his Lordship objects, falls upon all such who assert this:
Whereof the first which you mention is, Ibid.
That then the Council is called but only in effect, to hear the Pope give his
Sentence in more state. To which you answer, That the Objection has the same
force against the Council called in the Apostles time, viz. that it was done;
only to hear S. Peter pronounce his Sentence in more state. Neither had it been
any more, if the Infallibility of the Council had only depended on S. Peter's
Sentence: but I hope you will not deny the rest of the Apostles to have been as
Infallible as S. Peter was. But you answer, 2. That the Pope being to use all
means morally requisite to find out the truth; the Council is called really to
help and assist the Pope; and the advice of the Council is a necessary Medium
to his Holiness, whereby to make a full inspection into the matters he is to
define. But all this only confirms what his Lordship says, That it is for his
giving Sentence in more state; for the Council is only a subservient means, and
contributes nothing at all to the Infallibility of the Sentence. But, you say,
They are a necessary Medium. 1. Then the Pope cannot define any matter of Faith
without a General Council. Which, all who assert that Opinion, utterly deny;
for, they say, The Pope may define matters of Faith without a General Council;
and Bellarmin says, De Rom Pont. l. 4. c. 3.
That the state of the Church, without General Councils (which was for three
hundred years) might have continued so to the worlds end; and therefore it was
necessary there should be a living Judge, whose Infallibility should not depend
upon any Council: And elsewhere he says, That if seven Heresies have been
condemned by seven General Councils; more than a hundred have been condemned
without, De Council. l. 1. c. 10.
by the Pope and Provincial Councils. 2. Though the Pope must use all moral
means, yet, Why must a General Council be that necessary Medium? Why may not a
Provincial, or lesser Council serve turn? And so Bellarmin tells you, it would;
he says, indeed some kind of Council is necessary, Ibid c. 11.
magnum aut parvum, unum vel plura, prou^t ipse judicaverit, great or little,
more or less, as the Pope shall judge fitting; so that still a General Council
is but a piece of state, for all moral means might be used without one. 3. What
use are these moral means for? to enable him to pass a right judgment, or no?
If they be, then the Pope is bound to pronounce according to the Decree of the
Council, and so it will not be in his power, not to confirm it; if not, What do
these moral means signify? No more, then the Crucifix Pope Innocent showed to
Monsieur de Saint-Amour; Before which, he told him, he kneeled down to take at
the feet thereof his resolution, Journal of Mr de Saint Amor. part 3. chap. 4
p 78.
according to the inspiration given to him by the Holy Spirt, whose assistance
was promised to him, and could not fail him. We see, the Pope understood his
Infallibility better, than to make use of such moral means as Councils are; he
knew his Infallibility came not that way, and therefore he took the more likely
course to receive his Inspiration from Heaven, by taking his resolution at the
feet of a Crucifix. And this he called, his Council in matters of Faith: And
yet, if we believe him, he did as much want all moral means for finding out the
truth, as another; since he so ingenuously confessed at another audience, That
he was old, and had never studied Divinity. Journal. part 3. chapter 12 p 120
But, What need he to do it, that could so easily be inspired, by kneeling at
the feet of a Crucifix? Your Doctrine then would not be very well taken at
Rome, that General Councils are a necessary Medium to his Holiness, in order to
the definition of matters of Faith. No more would your following Distinction in
vindication of Stapleton, P. 277.
That though the Pope acquires no new power, or certainty of judgment by the
presence of a General Council, and there is something thereby, which conduces
to the due exercise of that power: So that it must be an usurpation or undue
exercise of power, for the Pope to offer to define without a General Council. I
know not what liberty you have to write these things among us; but if you were
at Rome, you durst not venture to do it. Your saying, that Bellarmin only
says, That the firmness of a Council in regard of us, depends wholly on the
Popes Confirmation, argues, you had very little to say: For, What firmness has
a Council at all in this dispute, but in regard of us; since you look on men as
obliged to believe the Decrees of it Infallible? And, if the Decrees had any
Infallibility from the Council, that might make them firm in regard of us, as
well as the Pope. But you object to your self, That if the Pope be Infallible
without the Council, and the Council subject to error without the Pope, it
must needs follow, that all the Infallibility of General Councils proceeds from
the Pope only; not partly from the Pope, and partly from the Council. To which
you answer, Ibid.
That the assertors of that Opinion (of whom you must be one, if you know what
you say) may say, that Christ has made two promises to his Church, the one to
assist her Sovereign Head and Pastor to make him Infallible, another to assist
General Councils to make them so. But, What need this latter, if the former be
well proved? For if the Head be Infallible by virtue of a promise from Christ,
he must be Infallible, whether in Council, or out of it. And therefore it is a
ridiculous shift to say, The Pope has one promise to make him Infallible in a
General Council; ano-to make him so out of it. But I commend you, that since
you thought one would not hold, you would have two strings for the Popes
Infallibility. And it is but adding a third promise to the Church in general,
and then your threefold cord may be surely Infallible.

You give many Reasons (but none so convincing as Experience) Why the Popes
should not be Impeccable; and, if you search Scripture, Antiquity,. 13.
P. 278.
and Reason, you may find as much, why he should not be Infallible. For that of
the necessity of one, and not the other for the Church, is of your own
devising, it having been sufficiently proved, that the certainty of Faith does
not at all depend upon the Popes, or your Churches, or Councils Infallibility.
And it seems still very strange to all who know the doctrine and promises of
Christianity, and that the promotion of Holiness is the great design of it, and
that Faith signifies nothing without Obedience, and that the Spirit of God is a
Spirit of Holiness, as well as Truth, that you dare challenge such an
assistance of the Divine Spirit, as may make your Popes Infallible, who have
led lives quite contrary to the Gospel of Christ. Nay, such lives, as his
Lordship says, as no Epicurean Monster, P. 263.
storied out to the world, has out-gone them in sensuality, or other gross
impiety, if their own historians be true.

Your vindication of Pope Liberius his submitting his judgment to Athanasius,
because the Pope had passed no definition ex Cathedra in the business, Ibid.
has no strength at all, unless you first prove, that the Popes definitions ex
Cathedra, were held Infallible, then which none would ever believe that read
the passage, which his Lordship cites out of Liberius his Epistle to
Athanasius. For, as he says, The Pope complemented exceeding low, that would
submit his unerring judgment, to be commanded by Athanasius, who he well knew
could err. P. 264.
Whether S. Ambrose in his Epistle meddles with any doctrinal definitions, or
only with some difficulties which that year happened about the observation of
Easter, (the fourteenth of the first month falling on the Lords day) is not
very material to our purpose. But that it was something else besides
Astronomical definitions (which I know what S. Ambrose's excellency was in)
might easily appear, if you had read the Epistle. Ambros. l. 10. ep. 83.
So that you might have spared your large account of the Paschal Letters sent
by the Bishops of Alexandria about the keeping of Easter (which are no great
novelties to such, who are at all acquainted with Antiquity) and given us a
fuller account, why in such a matter of dispute about the right of the day to
be kept that year, the Roman Bishops should not rather have stood to the Popes
definition, than write to S. Ambrose, if it had been then taken for granted,
that the Pope was Infallible. But I might as well have passed by this testimony
of S. Ambrose, as you do that of Lyra, which is so express for the Erring and
Apostatizing of several Popes, that you thought the best Answer to it, were to
let it alone. However you come off with the story of Peter Lombard (which is
not of that consequence to require any further examination of the truth of it)
I am sure you are hard put to it, P. 280.
in the case of Honorius; when you deny, that Honorius did really maintain the
Monothelites Heresy, and excuse the Councils, Sentence, by saying, it was only
in case of misinformation. Since it manifestly appears by the sixth Synod,
action. 13. that they condemned his Epistle written to Sergius, as containing
heretical and pernicious Doctrine in it. And in the seventh Synod he is
reckoned up with Arrius, Macedonius, Eutyches, Dioscorus, and the rest of
condemned Heretics, among whom he is likewise reckoned by Leo 2. in his
Epistle to Constantine. Action. 8. Synod. 6. Canus. l. 6. cap. ult.
Which evidence is so great, that Canus wonders at those who would offer to
vindicate him. And, in the mean time, you provide excellent moral means for the
Pope to judge of matters of Faith by, in General Councils, if they may be
guilty of so gross misinformation, as you suppose here in the case of
Honorius; and not one barely, but three successively, the sixth, seventh, and
eighth, and the whole Church from their time, till Albertus Pighius, who first
began to defend him. For conclusion of this point, his Lordship would fain know
(since this had been so plain, P. 267.
so easy a way, either to prevent all divisions about the Faith, or to end all
Controversies, did they arise) why this brief, but most necessary proposition,
The Bishop of Rome cannot err in his judicial determinations concerning Faith,
is not to be found either in letter or sense, in any Scripture, in any Council,
or in any Father of the Church, for the full space of a thousand years and more
after Christ? To this you answer, 1. That in the sense wherein Catholics
maintain the Popes Infallibility to be a matter of necessary belief to all
Christians it is found (for sense) both in Scripture, Ibid.
Councils, and Fathers, as you say you have proved, in proving the
Infallibility of General Councils, of which he is the most principal and
necessary member. So then, when we enquire for the Infallibility of General
Councils, we are sent to the Pope for his Confirmation to make them so; but
when we enquire for the Popes Infallibility, we are sent back again to the
Councils, for the proof of it. And they are hugely to blame, if they give not
an ample testimony to the Pope, since he can do them as good a turn. But,
between them both, we see the greatest reason to believe neither the one, nor
the other to be Infallible. But, 2. You would offer at something too for his
personal Infallibility; in which I highly commend your prudence, that you say,
You will omit Scripture; and you might as well have omitted all that follows,
since you say only, That the testimonies you have produced, seem to do it in
effect; and at last say, That it is an Assertion you have wholly declined the
maintaining of, and judge it expedient to do so still. And you may very well do
so, if there be no better proofs for it than those you have produced, but
however, we must examine them. Does not the Council of Chalcedon seem to say,
in effect, Ibid.
that the Pope is Infallible, when, upon the reading of his Epistle to them, in
condemnation of the Eutychian Heresy, the whole Assembly of Prelates cry out
with acclamation, and profess that S. Peter (who was Infallible) spoke by the
mouth of Leo, and that the Pope was interpreter of the Apostles voice? You do
well to use those cautious expressions of seeming to say in effect, for it
would be a very hard matter to imagine any such thing as the Popes
Infallibility in the highest expressions used by the Council of Chalcedon.
Conci^ Chalced. part. 2. Act. 2. p. 2^8.
For, after the reading of Leo's Epistle against Eutyches, and many testimonies
of the Fathers to the same purpose, the Council begins their acclamations, with
these words, This is the Faith of the Fathers, this is the Faith of the
Apostles; all who are orthodox hold thus. And after it follows, Peter by Leo
has thus spoken, the Apostles have taught thus. Which are all the words there
extant to that purpose. And, Is not this a stout argument, for the Popes
personal Infallibility? For, What else do they mean, but only that Leo, who
succeeded in the Apostolical See of S. Peter at Rome, did concur in Faith with
S. Peter, and the rest of the Apostles? But, Do they say, that it was
impossible that Leo should err, or that his judgment was Infallible? or only
that he owned that Doctrine which was Divine and Apostolical? And the Council
of Ephesus (your next testimony) has much less than this, even nothing at all.
For the Council speaks not concerning S. Peter, or the Pope in the place by you
cited; only one of the Popes officious Legates, Philip, Council. Ephesians. p. 2.
Act. 3. page 330.
begins very formally, with S. Peter's being Prince and Head of the Apostles,
etc. and that he to this day (...); lives in his successors, and passes
judgment. Is it not a very good Inference from hence, that the Council
acknowledged the Popes personal Infallibility? because one of the Popes Legates
did assert in the Council, that S. Peter lived and judged by the Pope. And yet,
Might not this be done without his personal Infallibility, in regard of his
succession in that See which was founded by S. Peter? But you are very hard
driven, when you are fain to take up with the Sentence of a Roman Priest,
instead of a General Council, and any judgment in matters of Faith, instead of
Infallibility. Your other testimonies of S. Hierom, S. Augustine, and S.
Cyprian, have been largely examined already; and for the remaining testimonies
of four Popes, you justly fear it would be answered, that they were Popes, and
spoke partially in their own cause. P. 281.
And you give us no antidote against these fears; but conclude very warily,
That you had hitherto declined the defense of that Assertion, and professed
that it would be sufficient for Protestants to acknowledge the Pope Infallible
in, and with General Councils only. But, as we see no reason to believe General
Councils at all Infallible, whether with, or without the Pope; so neither can
we see, but if the Infallibility of the Council depends on the Popes
Confirmation, you are bound to defend the Popes personal Infallibility, as the
main Bulwark of your Church.

CHAP. III. Of the errors of pretended General Councils.
The erroneous Doctrine of the Church of Rome in making the Priests intention
necessary to the essence of Sacraments. That principle destructive to all
certainty of Faith upon our Authors grounds. The absurdity of asserting that
Councils define themselves to be Infallible. Sacramental actions sufficiently
distinguished from others without the Priests Intention. Of the moral assurance
of the Priests Intention, and the insufficiency of a mere virtual Intention.
The Popes confirmation of Councils supposes personal Infallibility.
Transubstantiation an error decreed by Pope and Council. The repugnancy of it
to the grounds of Faith. The Testimonies brought for it out of Antiquity
examined at large, and showed to be far from proving Transubstantiation.
Communion in one kind a violation of Christ's Institution. The Decree of the
Council of Constance implies a non obstante to it. The unalterable nature of
Christ's Institution cleared. The several evasions considered and answered. No
public Communion in one kind for a thousand years after Christ. The
indispensableness of Christ's Institution owned by the Primitive Church. Of
Invocation of Saints, and the Rhetorical expressions of the Fathers which gave
occ^sion to it. No footsteps of the Invocation of Saints in the three first
Centuries; nor precept or example in Scripture as our Adversaries confess.
Evidences against Invocation of Saints from the Christians Answers to the
Heathens. The worship of Spirits and Heroes among the Heathens justifiable on
the same grounds that Invocation of Saints is in the Church of Rome.
Commemoration of the Saints without Invocation, in S. Augustins time.
Invocation of Saints as practiced in the Church of Rome a derogation to the
merits of Christ. Of the worship of Images and the near approach to Pagan
Idolatry therein. No Use or Veneration of Images in the Primitive Church. The
Church of Rome justly chargeable with the abuses committed in the worship of
Images.

ALthough nothing can be more unreasonable then to pretend that Church,. 1.
Person, or Council to be Infallible, which we can prove to have actually
erred; yet we have yielded so much to you, as to disprove what you have in
general brought for the one, before we come to meddle with the other. But that
being dispatched, we come to a more short and compendious way of overthrowing
your Infallibility, by showing the palpable falsity of such principles which
must be owned by you as Infallible truths, because defined by General Councils
confirmed by the Pope. Whereof, The first in the Endictment, as you say, is
that of the Priests Intention defined by the Councils of Florence and Trent
(both of them confirmed by the Pope) to be essentially necessary to the
validity of a Sacrament. P. 281.
Concerning this, there are two things to be enquired into, 1. Whether this
does not render all pretense of Infallibility with you a vain and useless
thing? 2. Whether it be not in it self an error?

We must begin with the first of these, for that was the occasion of his
Lordships entering upon it; for he was showing, That your claim of
Infallibility is of no use at all, P. 271.
for the settling of Truth and Peace in the Church; because no man can either
know or believe this Infallibility. It cannot be believed with Divine Faith;
having no foundation either in the written Word of God, or Tradition of the
Catholic Church; and no humane Faith can be sufficient in order to it. But
neither can it be believed or known, upon that decree of the Councils of
Florence and Trent, that the intention of the Priest is necessary to the
validity of a Sacrament. And, lest you should think I represent his Lordships
words too much with advantage, I will take his Argument in the words you have
summed it up in, which are these: Before the Church or any particular man can
make use of the Popes Infallibility (that is, be settled, and confirmed in the
Truth by means thereof), P. 282.
he must either know, or upon sure grounds believe, that he is Infallible. But
(says the Bishop) this can only be believed of him, as he is S. Peter's
Successor and Bishop of Rome; of which it is impossible, in the relatours
opinion, for the Church or any particular man, to have such certainty as is
sufficient to ground an Infallible belief. Why? because the knowledge and
belief of this, depends upon his being truly in Orders, truly a Bishop, truly a
Priest, truly Baptized; none of all which, according to our principles, can be
certainly known and believed; because (forsooth) the intention of him that
administered these Sacraments to the Pope, or made him Bishop, Priest, etc. can
never be certainly known; and yet by the Doctrine of the Councils of Florence
and Trent, it is of absolute necessity to the validity of every one of these
Sacraments, so as without it, the Pope were neither Bishop nor Priest. Thus I
grant you have faithfully sum'd up his Lordships Argument; we must now see with
what courage and success you encounter it. Your first Answer is, That though it
be levelled against the Popes Infallibility, yet it has the same force against
the Infallibility of the whole Church in points fundamental; for we cannot be
Infallibly sure, there is such a number of Baptized persons to make a Church.
By this, we see how likely you are to assoil this difficulty, who bring it more
strongly upon your self, without the least inconvenience to your adversary. For
I grant, it necessarily follows against the pretense of any Infallibility,
whether in Church, Councils, or Pope, as being a certain ground for Faith; for
all these must suppose such a certainty of the due administration of
Sacraments, which your Doctrine of Intention does utterly destroy. For these
two things are your principles of Faith, that there can be no certainty of
Faith, without present Infallibility of the Church; and that, in order to the
believing this testimony Infallible, there must be such a certainty as is
ground sufficient for an Infallible belief. Now, How is it possible there can
be such, when there can be no certainty of the Being of a Church, Council, or
Pope, from your own principles? For when the only way of knowing this, is a
thing not possible to be evidenced to any one in any way of Infallible
certainty, viz. the intention of the Priest, you must unavoidably destroy all
your pretense of Infallibility. For, To what purpose do you tell me, that Pope
or Councils are Infallible, unless I may be Infallibly sure that such decrees
were passed by Pope and Council? I cannot be assured of that, unless I be first
assured that they were Baptized persons, and Bishops of the Church; and for
this you dare not offer at Infallible certainty, and therefore all the rest is
useless and vain. So that while by this Doctrine of the intention of the Priest
for the validity of the Sacraments, you thought to advance higher the
reputation of the Priesthood, and to take away the assurance of Protestants, as
to the benefits which come by the use of the Sacraments of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, you could not have asserted any thing more really pernicious to
your selves, than this Doctrine is. So strange an incogitancy was it in those
Councils to define it, and as great in those who defend it, and yet at the same
time, maintain the necessity of a present Infallibility in the Church and
General Councils. For can any thing be more rational, then to desire the
highest assurance as to that, whose decrees I am to believe Infallible? And yet
at the last, you confess we can have but a moral certainty of it, and that of
the lowest degree; the utmost ground of it, being either the testimony of the
Priest himself, or, that we have no ground to suspect the contrary. Now what
unreasonable men are you, who so much to the dishonor of Christian Religion
cry out upon the rational evidence of the truth of it, as an uncertain
principle, and that Protestants though they assert the highest degree of actual
certainty, cannot have any Divine Faith, because they want the Churches
Infallible testimony? and yet when we enquire into this Infallible Testimony,
you are fain to resolve it, into one of the most uncertain and conjectural
things imaginable. For what can I have less ground to build my Faith upon, than
that the Priest had at least a virtual intention to do as the Church does? Whom
must I believe in this case? and whereon must that Faith be grounded? On the
Priests Testimony? But how can I be assured, but that he, who may wander in his
intention, may do so in his expression too? Or must I do it because I have no
reason to suspect the contrary? how can you assure me of that, that I have no
reason to suspect the contrary? no otherwise then by telling me, that the
Priest is a man of that honesty and integrity, that he cannot be supposed to do
such a thing without intention? So that, though I were in Italy or Spain,
where, some have told us, it is no hard matter to meet with Jews in Priests
habits, and professing themselves such, and acting accordingly; yet I am bound
to believe (though they heartily believe nothing of Christianity) yet in all
Sacraments they must have an intention to do as the Church does. Without which,
we are told by you, No Sacrament can be valid, because the matter and form
cannot be determined or united without the Priests intention. And therefore I
do not only object, that this takes away the comfort of all Sacraments as to
the receivers, but that it destroys all certain Foundations of Faith. Because
the promises of Infallibility supposing that, which I can have no assurance of;
that Infallibility can be no foundation of Faith at all to me. As for instance,
suppose the title to an estate depends upon the Kings free donation, and this
donation to be confirmed by his Great Seal; but yet so, that if the Lord
Chancellor in the sealing it, does not intend it should pass on that account,
the whole gift becomes null in Law. I pray tell me now, What other assurance
you can have of your title to this estate, then you have of the Lord
Chancellours intention in passing the Seal? and what Infallible certainty you
can have of such intention of his? Just such, is your case, you tell us, The
only ground of Infallible certainty in Faith is the Churches Infallibility,
this Infallibility comes by a free promise of Christ, this promise must suppose
a Church in being; that there is a Church, we can have no more assurance then
that there are Baptized-persons, but the validity of their Baptism requires the
Priests intention in administering it; and therefore we can have no more
assurance of the Churches Infallibility, then we have of the Priests intention.
And, Is this it at last, which your loud clamours of Infallibility come to? Is
this the effect of all your exclamations against Protestants, for making Faith
uncertain by taking away the Churches Infallibility? Must our Faith at last be
resolved into that, which it is impossible we should have any undoubted
assurance at all of? And will not the highest reason, the clearest evidence,
the most pregnant demonstrations which things are capable of, be accounted with
you sufficient ground to build our Faith of the Scriptures upon? and yet, must
a thing so impossible to be certainly known, so generally uncertain and
conjectural, be accounted by you sufficient ground to believe your Churches
Infallibility? Are not the miracles wrought by Christ and his Apostles, joined
with the Universal Tradition of the Christian Church, a ground firm enough, for
us to believe the Doctrine of Christ divine? and yet must the intention of the
Priest with you be a much surer ground then these are? By all which it appears,
that if I had not already largely discovered your grand Imposture in your
pretense to Infallibility, this very Doctrine would invincibly prove it; since,
notwithstanding that pretense, you must resolve all into something which falls
short of those grounds of certainty which we have to build our Faith upon. But
we must now consider, how you offer to retort this upon his Lordship; for you
say, The same Argument will hold against the Infallibility of the whole Church
in Fundamentals; since men cannot be Infallibly sure, there is such a company
of men who are truly Baptized. But how manifestly ridiculous this is, will
appear, 1. That it will hold indeed against all such who assert this Doctrine
of the necessity of the Priests intention, but not others. Therefore if his
Lordship had said, This Doctrine had been true, the retortion had been good;
but you saw well enough he disproves it as an error, and urges this as an
absurdity consequent upon it. Your Argument then as it is, runs in this form:
If they who hold the Priests intention necessary cannot be sure who are
Baptized, then they who do not hold it necessary, cannot. Where is your
consequence? for he was showing, the uncertainty of it depended upon that
principle, and therefore I suppose the denying of the principle does not stand
guilty of the same absurdity, which the holding it does. But it may be, the
force lies in being Infallibly sure, and so that none can know the
Infallibility of the Church in Fundamentals, but such as are Infallibly sure
that men are Baptized. I Answer therefore, 2. That there is no such necessity
of being Infallibly sure, upon our principles as there is upon yours. For you
build your Faith upon the Churches Infallibility in Pope and Councils, but we
do not pretend to build our Faith upon the Churches Infallibility in
Fundamentals. All that we assert, is, that the Church is Infallible in
Fundamentals, but we do not say, the ground of our Faith is, because she is so,
for that were to make the Church the formal object of our Faith: since
therefore we do not rely on the Church as our Infallible Guide in Fundamentals,
there is no such necessity of that Infallible certainty as to this principle as
there is with you, who must wholly establish your Faith upon the Churches
Infallibility, The most then that we assert, is, that there is and shall
always be a Church, for that (as I have told you) is all that is meant by a
Church being Infallible in Fundamentals; now for this we have the greatest
assurance possible, that there shall be from the promises of Christ, and that
there is, from the certainty we have of the Faith and Baptism of Christians,
since no more is required by us to assure men of it, then all men in the world
are competent Judges of; which surely they cannot be of the Priests intention.
So much for your weak attempt of retorting this Argument upon his Lordship.

But the main thing to be considered, is, your solid Answer you give to it;
which indeed is of that weight,. ^.
that it must not be slightly passed over. You Answer therefore, That both a
General Council and the Pope, Ibid;
when they define any matters of Faith, do also implicitly define that
themselves are Infallible; and by consequence that both the Pope in such case,
and also the Bishops that sit in Council are persons Baptized, in holy Orders,
and have all things essentially necessary for that Function, which they then
execute. Neither is there any more difficulty in the case of the Pope now, then
there was in the time of the Prophets and Apostles of old; whom all must grant
that with the same breath they defined, or Infallibly declared the several
Articles and points of Doctrine proposed by them to the Faithful, and their own
Infallibility in proposing them. So indeed Vega answered in the case of General
Councils; for when it was demanded, How it should be known that the Council was
a lawful Council, he says, Because the Council defined it self to be so; but
for this he is sufficiently chastised by Bellarmin, De Council. l. 2. c. 9.
who gives this unanswerable Argument against it. Either it does appear from
some other Argument, that while the Council defines it self to be a lawful
Council, it was a lawful Council; or it does not: if it does, To what purpose
does it define it self to be a lawful Council? if it does not, then we shall
doubt of that Decree whereby it defines it self to be so: for if I doubt,
whether the Council were lawful before that Decree; I doubt likewise, whether
it might not err in passing that Decree. And therefore he grants, that no more
than moral certainty or historical Faith is requisite in order to it. Now this
Argument of Bellarmins holds with equal strength (if not more) against you; for
you derive the lawfulness of the Council from its Infallibility, and that
Infallibility from the Councils definition. Thus therefore I argue: Either it
does appear, that the Council was Infallible before that definition, or it does
not. If it appears to be Infallible before, then its Infallibility is not known
by that definition: If it does not, How can I know it to be Infallible by it?
For as I doubt, whether it was Infallible before it, so I must doubt, whether
it was Infallible in it: and consequently it is impossible I should believe it
Infallible because it defines it self to be so. Neither do you at all salve
this, by calling it only an implicit definition, for whether it be implicit
or explicit, it is all one, since that definition is made the ground, why we
must believe the Council to be Infallible. And of all men in the world you seem
the strangest in this, that you declaim with so much vehemence against those
who believe the Scriptures to be Infallible for themselves; and yet assert that
Pope and General Councils are to be believed Infallible, because they define
themselves to be so. Than which no greater absurdity can be well imagined. For
they who assert that the Scriptures are to be believed for themselves, do not
thereby mean that they are to be believed Infallible merely because they say
they are Infallible, but that out of the Scriptures such Arguments may be
brought, as may sufficiently prove that they come from God. But when you say,
that Pope and General Councils are to be believed Infallible, because of their
implicit definition that they are so, you can mean nothing else, but that they
are Infallible, because they take upon them to be Infallible, for that is all I
can understand by your implicit definition; for if they should decree they
were Infallible, that were an explicit definition. But yet how should this
implicit definition be known? for it must be some way certainly known, or else
we can never believe that they are Infallible upon that account. Which way then
must we understand that they implicitly define it? Is it by their meeting,
debating, decreeing matters of Faith? that cannot be, for Councils have done
all these which are acknowledged to have erred. Is it by Pope and Council
joining together? but how can that be, unless I know before, that, when Pope
and Council join, they are Infallible? If this then be all the way to prove
that Pope and Council are true Bishops because Infallible, and they are
Infallible because they define themselves to be so; I see, there is an absolute
necessity of a man's putting out the eye of his reason, if ever he hopes to see
Pope and Councils Infallible. But further yet, there is more absurdity still
(if more can be imagined) in this excellent Answer; for here is a new Labyrinth
for our Author to sport himself in. For, we are to believe a Council to
consist of lawful Bishops because they are Infallible, and yet his only way to
prove them Infallible, is by supposing that they consist of lawful Bishops. For
I ask, Whether all persons meeting together in Council are Infallible? No. Are
all Bishops of Protestant, and the Greek, and other Churches besides the Roman,
assembled in Council Infallible? No. Must it not then be supposed, that the
Bishops are lawful Bishops, before they can implicitly define themselves
Infallible? And if their lawfulness must be supposed before their
Infallibility, they cannot first be proved to be Infallible, before we can
know, Whether they were lawful Bishops or no. And we cannot know them to be
lawful Bishops, unless we knew the intention of the Priest; and therefore it
remains proved with evidence equal to a demonstration, that your certainty of
your Churches Infallibility, can be no greater than that you have of the
Priests intention in the administration of Sacraments.

And by this it appears, how absurdly you go about to compare the case of Pope
and Council, with that of the Prophets and Apostles of old. For you challenge
not an Infallibility by immediate inspiration, but such as is constantly
resident in the Church by virtue of some particular promises, which must
suppose the persons in whom it lodges to be actually members of the Church. And
therefore all the proof of their Infallibility depends upon the certainty of
that, which you can never satisfy any rational men in; but, I hope, you will
not say, it was so in the Prophets and Apostles. Besides, God never sent any
persons with a message from himself to the world, but he gave the world
sufficient evidence in point of reason that He sent them; either by Miracles,
the Testimony of other Prophets who wrought them, or some other satisfactory
way to humane reason, as I have elsewhere proved at large. But there is no such
thing in your case, no rational evidence at all is offered, but we must believe
the Council lawful because Infallible, and we must believe it Infallible
because it defines itself to be so. Neither is it possible to conceive that any
man should believe whatever the Prophet or Apostle said, to be Infallibly true;
unless he were before convinced, that they were Infallible who spoke it. But
for this you have a further Answer, That it is not necessary to believe the
Infallibility of the proposer, viz. prioritate temporis, in respect of time,
and afterward the Infallibility of the Doctrine he proposes: but it suffices
to believe it first prioritate naturae, so as the Infallibility of the teacher
be presupposed to the Infallibility of his Doctrine. But what this makes to
your purpose, I understand not. For it is not the time, but the evidence we
enquire for, or the ground on which we are to believe the proposer Infallible.
Whether it must not be something else besides the implicit defining himself to
be Infallible? You assert that to be a sufficient ground in the case of Pope
and Councils? and I pray, Will it not be as sufficient in the case of a Quaker,
or Enthusiast? May not they as well pretend this, that they are Infallible? and
if you ask them what evidence they have for it, they may tell you, just the
same that Pope and Council have to be so: for, as they implicitly define
themselves to be Infallible, so do they. So that, talk what you will of private
Spirits and Enthusiasms, I know none lay so great a foundation for them as you
do upon this pretense; That we are to believe the Pope and Council Infallible,
because implicitly they define themselves to be so. Than which, one could
hardly meet with a more absurd Answer from the highest Enthusiast: for, he can
tell you as boldly, that he has the Spirit of God, because he has it; and
just so much you say, and no more, Pope and Council are Infallible, because
they are Infallible. But I must pity you: I know you would not willingly have
run into these absurdities, but it was your hard fortune to maintain a bad
cause, and you could not possibly help it; for the straights you were in, were
so great, that you must venture through some great absurdity to get out of them.
But all the pity I have for you is gone, when I read your next words. Thus we
conceive the Relator's Achilles is fallen. How fallen? If he be, it is only
with Antaeus, to rise the stronger. But I assure you, so far was he from
falling by any force of your Answer, that he stands more impregnably than ever,
having not so much as a heel left, that you can wound him in. And if you have
nothing more to say, than what you here give us in answer to this argument,
which you tell us, is the common Answer of Divines; I am so far from wondering
that his Lordship took no notice of it, that I shall only wonder at the
weakness of your judgment, or largeness of your Faith, that can so contentedly
swallow such grand absurdities.

. 3.
If this be but, as you say, the Prologue to the Play, I doubt you will find
but a sad Catastrophe in it: P. 283.
The main business, you tell us, is about the Priests intention, concerning
which he positively lays down, that it is not of absolute necessity to the
essence of a Sacrament, so as to make it void, though the Priests thoughts
should wander from his work, at the instant of using the essentials of a
Sacrament; yea, or have in him an actual intention to scorn the Church. What
now have you to show to the contrary? If the Priests intention be not
absolutely necessary to the essence or validity of a Sacrament, you desire a
reason of your adversaries, Why we should not think a Priest consecrates the
body of Christ, as much at a Table where there is Wheaten Bread before him, and
that eieither by way of disputation, or reading the 26. Chapter of St. Matthew,
he pronounces the words, Hoc est corpus meum, as he does at the Altar; since
here is the true form, Hoc est corpus meum, the true matter Wheaten Bread, and
he that pronounces the form, is a true Priest, and yet in all men's judgment
here is no true Sacrament made. Something else therefore is requisite to the
essence of a Sacrament, and, What can that possibly be, if it be not the
intention which the Church requires? Since your request is reasonable, I shall
endeavor your satisfaction, and the rather because it tends to the full
clearing the business in hand. To your Enquiry then, I answer, That the
Institution of Christ requiring such a solemnity for the administration of it,
and such a disposition in the Church for the receiving it, and the performance
of such acts, in order to the administration, by the dispenser of it; these do
sufficiently distinguish the Lords Supper from all other actions, what matter,
form, or person soever be there. Were not in the Apostles times the assembling
of the people together for this end, and the solemn performance of the acts of
administration, sufficient to discriminate the Lords Supper, from reading the
26. of Matthew, by an Apostle at the Table, when there was Bread and Wine upon
it? And I must confess, I cannot but wonder that you should be so much to seek,
as not to know the one from the other, unless you knew the Priests intention?
But I consider, your Question was not made for Apostolical times, but for
private Masses, wherein the Priest may mumble over the words of Consecration to
himself, and none else be the wiser or better for what he says, or does. Here
it was indeed very requisite you should make the Priests intention necessary to
discriminate this action, from that you mentioned; but, wherever the Lords
Supper is duly administered according to the Primitive Institution, the
solemnity of the action and circumstances do so far individuate it, as
sufficiently to difference it from any other formalities whatsoever. And so it
is in conferring Orders; Is there not enough, do you think, in the solemnity of
the action, with the preceding circumstances, and the Bishops laying on of his
hands, with the using the words proper to that occasion, to difference it from
the Bishops casual laying his hands on the head of a man, and in the mean time
reading perchance the words of ordination? We assert then, that no further
intention is at all necessary to the essence of a Sacrament, but what is
discoverable by the outward action. Which being of that nature, which may
difference it self by reason of peculiar circumstances from others, there is no
imaginable necessity to have recourse to the private intention of the Priest
for satisfaction. But see how unreasonable you are herein; for you would make
that to be necessary to distinguish a Sacramental action from any other, which
it is impossible any man should be acquainted with. For, if I had no other way
to distinguish in the case you mention, but the Priests intention, I must be as
much to seek as ever, unless I cerrainly knew what the Priests intention was;
which if you have an art of being acquainted with, I pretend not to it. Is it
then necessary to distinguish the one from the other, or not? If not, To what
end is your Question? If it be, To what purpose is the Priests intention, when
I cannot know it? But you would seem to object against the circumstances
discriminating a Sacramental action. 1. If the circumstances do show to the
standers by, that the Priest really intends to make a Sacrament, and this
signification be necessary; then the Priests intention is necessary, or else,
Why is it necessary it should be signified? I answer, The circumstances are not
intended to signify the Priests intention any further, than that intention is
discoverable by the actions themselves, so that it is not any inward intention
which is thereby signified, but only such an intention as the outward action
imports, which is the celebration of the blessed Sacrament. So it is not the
Priests intending to make a Sacrament, as you phrasify it, but his intending to
celebrate it, i. e. not such an intention as is unitive of matter and form, as
your Schools speak in this case, but such as relates to the external action.
But against this you urge, 2. That such external signification is not at all
necessary; for, say you, Might not a Catholic Priest, to save the soul of some
dying Infant, baptize it, if he could, without any such signification by
circumstances? Yes, and a very charitable man he would be in it too, if without
any signification by circumstances, he could save the soul of a dying Infant.
But I should think his mere intention were sufficient and well, as the chief
Priest would supply the rest, as the Schools determine in a like case. For they
put a very hard Question to themselves, If the intention of a Priest be
necessary to the validity of a Sacrament, then, What becomes of the soul of an
Infant, which dies, being baptized without the Priest's intention? To which
they answer, It may very piously be believed, Alexand. Alensis. part 4. quaest.
8. memb. 3. art. 1. sect. 1. Reo. sine praejudicio, etc. Bonaventur. l. 4. did
6. art. 2. quaest. 1. ad fin
that in that case, summus Sacerdos supplebit, the High Priest will supply that
defect; and what they say of intention, is much more true of Baptism it self;
for in case it be not done out of contempt, I say that summus Sacerdos
supplebit: it is not the mere want of Baptism will damn the soul of the Infant,
(as you suppose) when you make it so necessary, to use such shifts as you speak
of, to save the soul of a dying Infant. But, Do you think seriously, that is
the way to do it; for a Priest, under a Physical pretense to sprinkle water on
the Child's face often, and once among the rest, to say softly, or by way of
discourse, Ego te baptizo, etc. with intention to conferr the Sacrament? But
you ask however, Whether the Child be not really baptized by this, although
none took notice of what the Priest did? I answer, though we should grant it,
yet it proves not that the Priests inward intention was it which made it a
Sacrament; but the observation of the institution of Christ in the external
actions; and so far, as that is observed in this odd kind of baptizing, so far
it is Baptism, and no more. There are two things therefore to be observed in
Sacramental actions. 1. The differencing of them from other common or ordinary
actions, and this we say is done by the circumstances attending them. 2. The
validity of them as Sacraments, and this depends wholly and only on the
observation of Christ's Institution. For, as it is Institution which makes a
Sacrament, so it is the observation of it, which makes this a Sacramental
action, and not another. But in neither case is the Priests intention necessary
to the essence of a Sacrament; for it may have its full force in all respects
it was appointed for, whatever the Priests inward intention be. So that neither
of your Instances, as to the Sacraments of Baptism, or the Eucharist, do at all
imply the necessity of the Priests intention, in order to the essence of a
Sacrament, in either of them.

As for the inconvenience which, you say, the Bishop pretends would follow out
of this Doctrine,. 4.
viz. that no man can rest secure that he has been really made partaker of any
Sacrament, P. 284.
no not of Baptism it self. You answer, 1. That as to the far greater part of
Christians, the inconvenience follows as much out of the Bishops principles as
yours, that they cannot be absolutely certain that they are baptized; because
the Priest may vitiate something pertaining to the essentials of Baptism. 2.
You answer, That moral Assurance is sufficient in such cases, i. e. such as is
liable to no just cause of doubting and suspecting the contrary. We accept of
this latter Answer in reference to your retortion of the inconvenience upon us,
as to which we say, That where is no sufficient cause of doubting, a man ought
to rest satisfied. But I shall now show you, that this moral Assurance cannot
be sufficient in your case, and that for these Reasons, 1. Because you build a
main principle of Faith upon it, and you say, That moral Assurance cannot be a
sufficient foundation for Faith; for then all your discourse of the resolution
of Faith, comes to nothing, which runs upon this principle, That nothing short
of Infallibility can be a sufficient foundation for Faith. Now that you build a
principle of Faith upon it, is evident, as I have proved already, even all that
Infallibility, you pretend to in Church, Pope, and Council; for all depends
upon this, that you certainly know, that such persons in your Church have had
the Sacrament of Baptism truly administered, which cannot be without knowing the
Priests intention. 2. Because you acknowledged before, that there must be such
a certainty as is sufficient to ground an Infallible belief; for this you
placed in his Lordships Objection, and this you pretended to satisfy, by
saying, That the Pope and Council implicitly define themselves to be
Infallible; and therefore you fall much beneath your self now, when you say,
Moral Assurance is sufficient. 3. Because we have far greater ground for moral
Assurance than you: for we make no more requisite to the essence of a
Sacrament, than what all men are competent judges of; and our Church allows no
such Baptisms, wherein none but the Priest is present; therefore if he vitiates
any thing essential to Baptism, it may easily be discovered; but in your case
you have no positive Assurance at all of the Priests intention, the utmost you
can pretend to, is, your having no ground to suspect it, which in many cases
there may be. So that you cannot have properly a moral Certainty, which has
some evidence to build it self upon; but in your case there can be no evidence
at all of the Priests intention, and therefore the knowledge of it is uncertain
and conjectural. So that there is a vast difference between that moral
Assurance, which we may have from the external action, and that which you can
possibly have from the Priests intention. 4. The danger is far greater, in not
having this Assurance upon your principles, than upon ours, and yet we have far
greater Assurance than you can possibly pretend to. Your danger is manifestly
greater, as appears by this evident demonstration of it, viz. that in case the
Priests intention be wanting, you must, by your own confession, be guilty of
gross Idolatry; and yet you cannot certainly know, what the Priests intention
was. This is plain in the case of the Eucharist, whose adoration you profess to
be lawful, because you suppose Christ to be present there. Now this depends
upon a thing impossible for you certainly to know, and that is the Priests
intention in the Consecration. For if the Priest wanted that inward intention
which you make necessary to the essence of a Sacrament, then, for all his
pronouncing the words of Consecration, Hoc est corpus meum, Christ's body may
not be there; and in case it be not there, you are by your own confession
guilty of Idolatry, for you do not then worship Christ, but merely the Bread.
Therefore, supposing adoration of the Eucharist upon your principle of
Transubstantiation were not Idolatry, yet since that depends upon a thing
impossible to be known, Who can with a good conscience do that, which he cannot
be certain, but in the doing it, he may commit the greatest Idolatry?
Wherefore, all the ill consequences of this Doctrine of the intention of the
Priest considered, besides the palpable errors of it, never was any Doctrine
more imprudently contrived, or more weakly managed, than when this was decreed
at the Councils of Florence and Trent.

You spend many words to explain that virtual intention which the Schools have
taken up from Scotus upon this subject; but, all that you say,. 5.
P. 284, etc.
adds nothing of satisfaction: upon these grounds, 1. Because this virtual
intention must suppose some actual intention, so it is in all those cases you
mention of a servant on his journey, a labourer at his work; though these may
not have always an express intention of the design of their journey or labor,
yet there is sufficient evidence from both of them, to know they had an actual
intention, and there is no necessity of knowing any more of it, than what their
actions discover: but in your case it is necessary to know that there was once
an actual intention, because upon that depends the essence of the Sacrament:
and that is it which we object against you, that you cannot have any assurance
that the Priest ever had an express intention. We do not therefore say, that
any wandering thoughts after, do destroy the essence of a Sacrament; but the
want of an actual intention at all upon your principles does it, and this you
cannot be certain of upon your grounds. And therefore your virtual intention
does you no service at all; for you say, This virtual intention is, when the
Priest does really operate, or celebrate the Sacrament in virtue of an express
intention which he had to do it; therefore it necessarily follows, that the
essence and validity of the Sacrament must depend upon the first express
intention, and not the after virtual one. So that if you cannot be certain of
the first actual intention, the Sacrament may want its essence, for all that
you know. 2. Though a virtual intention may be consistent with some wandering
thoughts from the first intention, yet not with an express intention to the
contrary. As in your own instance, A servant sent upon business, has at first
an express intention, to do what his Master commands him; after, falling into
company upon his way, he loses for the time his actual intention; but, as long
as he goes on upon his first business, he retains, I grant, a virtual intention
of it: but, supposing that company dissuade him from it, or his own mind turn,
so that he has an actual intention to the contrary, Will you say, this man
retains his virtual intention still? Now our argument does not lie merely in
this, that the Priest, at the instant of Consecration, may have his mind
distracted from the matter, in which case you say, The virtual intention
remains still, and is sufficient; but, that you cannot have any certainty, but
he may have an actual and express intention to the contrary, at the instant of
Consecration, and this destroys his virtual intention, and consequently the
essence of the Sacrament. For, as long as you require an inward intention,
besides the external action, you must be assured, that he had no actual
contrary intention at that time, or else your virtual intention signifies
nothing to your purpose or satisfaction. That which remains, is concerning
Catharinus, P. 273.
of whom his Lordship says, That being present at Trent, he disputed this case
very learnedly, and made it most evident, that this Opinion cannot be defended,
but that it must open a way for any unworthy Priest, to make infinite nullities
in the administration of Sacraments; and that his arguments were of such
strength, as amazed the other Divines which were present. And concluded, that
no internal intention was required in the Minister of a Sacrament, but that
intention which did appear, opere externo, in the work it self performed by
him; and that if he had unworthily any wandering thoughts; nay more, any
contrary intention within him, yet it neither did, nor could hinder the blessed
effect of any Sacrament. To this you answer, That the Cardinal Palavicino is
clear of opinion, P. 285.
that the Council decreed nothing against him; because he denied not an
intention to be necessary in the Sacrament, but only explicated the thing
differently from the common way of the Schoolmen. But whosoever will read the
arguments which Catharinus used in the Council of Trent against the Priests
intention, will easily find that he disputes against all manner of inward
intention, but such as may be discovered by the external action. But we must
consider that Palavicino had a particular kindness for Catharinus, as being of
Siena (the present Popes Country) insomuch that Caesar Aquilinius says, If
Luther had been of Siena, the Cardinal Palavicino would have defended him: and
thence he endeavors to vindicate him in the point of certitude of Grace, as
well as in this of the Priests intention, though in both, he goes contrary to
the general sense of your Divines, both then at Trent, and ever since; who
looked on both Opinions of Catharinus, as condemned there, as is manifest by
Bellarmin, Suares, Vasquez, Valentia, and others. But however, we may observe
this from hence, What an excellent Rule of Faith, and Judge of Controversies
the Decrees of your Council of Trent are, when there have been, and are still,
such different Opinions, and eager contests about the sense of them; that in
one point Dominicus a Soto says, the Council decreed of his side, Catharinus
says just the contrary, and yet both great Divines and present in the Council.
And in this Doctrine of the intention of the Priest, the general apprehension
then was, and has been since, that Catharinus his Opinion was condemned there,
but Cardinal Palavicino undertakes to prove the contrary. So that in the mean
time here is like to be a fair end of Controversies, by your pretended
Infallible Decrees of Councils, when you are so far from being agreed, what the
sense of them is: and yet You, You are the men who say, Controversies cannot be
ended by the Scripture, because there are such differences in the sense and
interpretation of it. Thus (we hope) we have sufficiently vindicated his
Lordships first charge of error against your pretended General Councils
confirmed by the Pope.

Before we come to the second, you say,. 6.
His Lordship presents such a quaint subtilty against the Popes right to
confirm them, P. 258.
and the necessity of his Confirmation, that you cannot well avoid the taking
notice of it. Thus then, you say, he argues, No Council is confirmed till it be
finished: and when it is finished, even before the Popes Confirmation be put to
it, either it has erred, or it has not erred: If it has erred, the Pope
ought not to confirm it; and if he do, it is a void act: for no power can make
falsehood truth: If it has not erred, then it was true before the Pope
confirmed it; so his Confirmation adds nothing but his own assent. As quaint a
subtilty as you call this, I am sure you are hard put to it, to return any
satisfactory Answer to it. For you distinguish of the Popes joynt-consent, and
of his actual Confirmation; in case, say you, the Pope either in person, or by
his Legates concur with the Council, then the definition is unquestionably
Infallible; but in case he does not, then the actual Confirmation is necessary;
but in case the Council err, the Pope ought not, and it is impossible he
should confirm it; but if he does not err, you grant it is true, before the
Pope confirms it, but his Confirmation makes us infallibly certain that it is
true. This is the full force of your Answer, which by no means takes off the
difficulty, as will appear, 1. That by reason of the Pope's rare appearance in
General Councils (never in any that are unquestioned by the Greek and Latin
Churches) that of his joynt-consent cannot serve you: neither does the presence
of his Legates suffice; for it is determined by Bellarmin, and proved by many
reasons, that though the Pope's Legates consent, De Council. l. 2. c. 11.
yet if they have not the express sentence of the Pope, the Council may err
notwithstanding. So that still the Popes actual Confirmation is supposed
necessary, and that after the definitions of the Council are passed. And this
is the case which his Lordship speaks to: and for your answer to that, I say,
2. That in plain terms you assert the Popes personal Infallibility, which you
disowned the defense of before: for you say, In case the Council err, not only
the Pope ought not to confirm it, but that it is impossible he should. Which,
What is it other than to assert, that the Pope shall never err, though the
Council may? Neither is it sufficient to say, That he shall never err in
confirming the Decrees of a Council: for in this case the Council is supposed
actually to err already, so that nothing of Infallibility can be at all
supposed in the Council; and if the Pope be not considered in his personal
capacity, he might err as well as the Council. From whence it follows, since
you suppose that a Council may err, but not the Pope, that you really judge
the Council not to be Infallible, but the Pope only. 3. When you say, That if
the Council erred not, the Popes Confirmation does not make the definition
true, but makes us infallibly certain that it is true. I enquire further,
Whereon this Infallible Certainty depends? on a promise made to the Council, or
to the Pope? not to the Council, for that you grant may err; but it is
impossible the Pope should confirm it, therefore still it is some promise of
the Popes Infallibility which makes men Infallibly certain of the truth of what
the Council decrees. 4. To what purpose then are all those promises and proofs
of Scripture which you produced concerning the Councils Infallibility, if,
notwithstanding them, a General Council may err? Only the Pope shall never
confirm it, and although it do not err, yet we cannot be Infallibly certain of
it, but by the Popes confirmation. And let any reasonable man judge, whether a
promise of the Popes Infallibility, though there be none at all concerning
Councils, be not sufficient for all this? So that upon these principles you
take away the least degree of necessity of any Infallibility in Councils, and
resolve all into the Popes Infallibility. For to what purpose are they
Infallible, if we cannot be certain that any thing which they decree is true,
but by the Popes confirmation?

But that the Popes confirmation cannot make the Decrees of those you account
General Councils Infallible,. 7.
nor us Infallibly Certain of the truth of them, his Lordship proves by another
evidence in matter of fact, viz. That the Pope has erred by teaching in and by
the Council of Lateran ( confirmed by Innocent 3.) that Christ is present in
the Sacrament by way of Transubstantiation. P. 257.
Which (his Lordship says) was never heard of in the Primitive Church, nor
till the Council of Lateran; nor can it be proved out of Scripture; and taken
properly cannot stand with the grounds of Christian Religion. P. 287.
This you call a strange kind of proceeding to assert a point of so great
importance, without solving or so much as taking notice of the pregnant proofs
your Authors bring both out of Scripture and Fathers to the contrary of what
he mainly affirms. How pregnant those proofs are, we must examine afterward;
but his Lordship might justly leave it to those who assert so strange a
Doctrine to produce their evidence for it. Especially, since it is confessed by
so many among your selves, That it could not be sufficiently proved, either
from Scripture or Fathers to bind men to the belief of it, Scotus in 4. sent.
did. 11. q 3.

Gabr. Biel in Canon. Missae. lect. 40.

Fisher contr. captivit. Babyl. c. 9. p. 99.

Cajetan. in 3. Qu. 75. A. 1.

Petrus de Alliaco in 4. sent q 6.

Tonstall de verit. corp. Christi. etc. p. 46.

Erasmus in 1 Cor. 7.

Ferus in Matthew. 26.

Apud Episcop. Elicus. resp. ad Apol.

Cardinal. Bollarm cap. 1 p. 7.

Suarez in 3. disp. 50. sect. 3.


till the Church had defined it in the Council of Lateran: Since, the more
moderate and learned men among your selves (Bishop Tonstall for one) have
looked on that definition as a rash and inconsiderate action. Since, the
English Jesuits confessed, that the Fathers did not meddle with the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. Since, Suarez confesses that the names used by the
Fathers, are more accommodated to an accidental change. Since, Father Barns
acknowledges that Transubstantiation is not the Faith of the Church, Barns
Catholico Romanus Pacificus M S. s. 7. liter. C.
and that Scripture and Fathers may be sufficiently expounded of a Supernatural
presence of the body of Christ without any change in the substance of the
Elements. For which he produces a large Catalogue of Fathers and others. Since
therefore we have such confessions of your own side, What need his Lordship (in
a Controversy so thoroughly sifted as this has been) bring all the Testimonies
of both sides which had been so often and so punctually examined by others. At
least (you say) he should have cleared how Transubstantiation may be taken
improperly, whereas of all the words which the Church uses, there is none
methinks less apt to a Metaphorical and figurative sense, then this of
Transubstantiation. By which I see you are a man who would really seem to
believe Transubstantiation, and are afraid of nothing, but that it should not
be impossible enough for you to believe it. For his Lordship was only afraid,
that though the word it self were gross enough, yet some of the more refined
and subtle wits might transubstantiate the word it self and leave only the
accidents of it behind, by taking it in a spiritual sense; as Bellarmin
confesses those words of St. Bernard, In Sacramento exhiberi nobis veram carnis
substantiam sed spiritualiter non carnaliter, have a true sense; but adds, that
the word spiritualiter must not be too often used; and the Council of Trent
would seem to provide an evasion by Sacramentaliter: and his Lordship not well
knowing what they would have by such expressions, therefore he says, properly
taken it cannot stand with the grounds of Christian Religion. And for all those
expressions, Bellarmin as well as the Council take it in as gross a manner as
you can desire; and I think the Physician who wanted impossibilities enough to
exercise his Faith, needed nothing else to try it, but your Doctrine of
Transubstantiation. But you say, P. 288.
The term indeed was first authorized by the Council of Lateran, as (...) by
that of Nice; but for the thing it self signified by this term, which is a real
conversion of the substance of bread into the body of Christ and of wine into
his blood, it is clear enough, that it was ever held for a Divine truth. If you
prove but that, I will never quarrel with you about the term, call it
Transubstantiation or what you will; but we do not think it so clear, as not to
want proofs stronger for the belief of it, then all the repugnancies of sense
and reason are against it. For it is a vain thing for you to attempt to prove
so unreasonable a Doctrine as this is, by some few lame citations of Fathers,
unless you can first prove that the Authority of them is so great, as to make
me believe any thing they say, though never so contrary to sense and reason. If
you could bring some places of the Fathers to prove that we must renounce
absolutely the judgment of sense, believe things most contradictions to
reason, yet you must first show that the evidence they bring is greater then
that of sense or reason. Or that I am more bound to believe them, then I am to
believe the greatest evidence of sense or reason. When you say, In these cases
we must submit reason to Faith; we acknowledge it, when it is no manifest
contradiction, in things so obvious to sense or reason, that the asserting it,
will destroy the use of our faculties and make us turn absolute Scepticks; for
then Faith, must be destroyed too. For may not a man question, as well, whether
his hearing may not deceive him as his sight, and by that means he may question
all the Tradition of the Church, and what becomes of his Faith then? and if
his sight might deceive him in a proper object of it, Why might not the
Apostles sight deceive them in the body of Christ being risen from the grave?
And if a man may be bound to believe that to be false which his sense judges to
be true, what assurance can be had of any miracles which were wrought to
confirm the Christian Doctrine? and therefore his Lordship might well say, Part
1 chapter 5. sect. 7.
That Transubstantiation is not consistent with the grounds of Christian
Religion. But of this I have spoken already. That which I am now upon, is not
how far reason is to be submitted to Divine Authority, in case of certainty
that there is a Divine Revelation for what I am to believe; but how far it is
to be renounced, when all the evidence which is brought is from the Authority
of the Fathers? So that the Question in short is, Whether there be greater
evidence that I am bound to believe the Fathers in a matter contrary to sense
and reason, or else to adhere to the judgment of them though in opposition to
the Fathers Authority? And since, you do not grant their Authority immediately
Divine; since you pretend not to places as clear out of them as the judgment
of sense and reason is in this case; since you dare not say, that all the
Fathers are as much agreed about it, as the senses of all mankind are about the
matter in dispute; I think with men who have not already renounced all that
looks like reason, this will be no matter of Controversy at all. From whence
it follows, that supposing the Fathers were as clear for you (as they are
against you) in this subject, yet that would not be enough to persuade us to
believe so many contradictions as Transubstantiation involves in it merely
because the Fathers delivered it to us. I speak not this, as though I did at
all fear the clearness of any Testimony you can produce out of them, but to
show you that you take not a competent way to prove such a Doctrine as
Transubstantiation is. For nothing but a stronger evidence than that of sense
and reason, can be judged sufficient to oversway the clear dictates of both.

. 8.
This being premised, I come to consider the clear evidence you produce out of
Antiquity for this Doctrine, and since you pretend to so much choice in
referring us to Bellarmin and Gualtierus for more, I must either much distrust
your judgment, or suppose these the clearest to be had in them, and therefore
the examination of these will save the labor of searching for the rest. And
yet it is the great unhappiness of your cause, that there is scarce one of all
the Testimonies you make use of, but either its Authority is slighted by some
of your own writers, or sufficient reasons given against it by many of ours.
Sermon de Coen^ Domini.
Your first is of St. Cyprian (or at least an Author of those first ages of
the Church) who speaking of the Sacrament of the Eucharist, says. This common
bread changed into flesh and blood gives life. And again, The bread which our
Lord gave to his Disciples being changed not in its outward form or semblance,
but in its inward nature or substance, by the omnipotency of the word is made
flesh. As to this Testimony there are two things to be considered, the
authority, and the meaning of it. For its Authority, you seem doubtful your
self, whether S. Cyprian's or no (since Bellarmin and others of your own deny
it) but at least you say, an Author of those first ages of the Church, but you
bring no evidence at all for it. Bellarmin grants that he is younger then St.
Augustine; and others say that none mention him for 800 years after St.
Cyprians time. De amiss. great. l 6. c. 2.
And the abundance of barbarisms which that book is so full fraught with,
manifest, that it is of a much later extraction then the time it pretends to.
But the matter seems to be now out of question; since the Book is extant in the
King of France's Library with an Inscription to Pope Adrian, and a MSS. of it
is in the Library of All Souls in Oxford with the same Inscription and the name
of Arnaldus Bonavillacensis; James of the Fathers. p. 12.
who was St. Bernards co-temporary, and lived in the twelfth Century. And those
who have taken the pains to compare this Book with what is extant of the same
Author in the Bibliotheca Patrum, not only observe the very same barbarisms,
but the same conceptions and expressions about the Sacrament which the other
has. Albertinus de Eucharist. Sacramento l. 2. p. 381.
Although therefore I might justly reject this testimony as in all respects
incompetent, yet I shall not take that advantage of you; but, supposing him an
Author as ancient as you would have him, I say he proves not the thing you
bring him for. For which, two things must be enquired into. 1. What kind of
presence of Christ he asserts in the Sacrament. 2. What change he supposes to
be made in the Elements. For your Doctrine asserts, That there is a conversion
of the whole substance of bread and wine into the substance of the natural body
and blood of Christ, and that this conveniently, properly, and most aptly is
called Transubstantiation. Now if this Author speaks wholly of a real but
spiritual presence of Christ, and if he asserts that the substance of bread and
wine do remain still, you can have no pretense at all left, that this Author
asserts your Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For the first, he expressly says,
That these things must not be understood after a carnal sense: Sed in
cogitation bus huj^smodi, caro and sanguis no^ prodest quidquam; quia sicut
ipse m^gister exposuit, verba haec spiritus and vita sunt: nec carnalis sensus
ad intellectum ^antae profunditatis p^netrat, nisi fides accedat. Auctor de
Coena Domini. sect. 4.
viz. unless ye eat the flesh and drink the blood of the Son of man, ye shall
have no life in you; for Christ himself has said, His words are spirit and
life. And nothing can be more evident, then that this Author speaks not of any
corporeal, but spiritual presence of Christ, by the effects which he attributes
to it, calling it inconsumptibilem cibum, that food which cannot be consumed:
and the reason he gives of it, is, because it feeds to eternal life, and
therefore he says it is immortalitatis alimonia, that which nourishes to
immortality; which cannot possibly be conceived of the corporal presence of
Christ, since you confess the body of Christ remains no longer in the body then
the accidents of the bread and wine do. And after he tells us, What the feeding
upon the flesh of Christ is, Esus igitur carnis hujus q^aedam aviditas est, and
quoddam desiderium manendi in ipso per quod sic imprimimus, and eliquamus in
nobis dulcedinem charitatis, ut haereat palato and visceribus sapor dilectionis
infusus, penetrans and imbuens omnes animae corporisque recessus. Id. sect. 9.
viz. our hunger and desire of remaining in Christ, by which the sweetness of
his Love, is so imprinted and melted as it were within us, that the savor of
it may remain in our palate and bowels, penetrating and diffusing it self
through all the recesses of soul and body. And so just before he says, Christ
did, Spiritualinos instruere documento, instruct us by a spiritual lesson, that
we might know, that our abiding in him is our eating of him, and our drinking a
kind of incorporation, by the humility of our obedience, Vt sciremus quod
mansio nostra in ipso sit manducatio, and potus quasi quaedam incorporatio,
subjectis obsequiis, voluntatibus junctis, affectibus unitis. Id. ib.

Et non tam corporali quam spirituali transitione Christo nos uniri. Sect 4.

Haec quoties agimus, non dentes ad mordendum acuimus, sed fide sincera panem
sanctum frangimus and partimur. Id. sect. 18.


the conjunction of our wills, the union of our affections. And in another
place denies, That there is any corporal union between Christ and us, but a
spiritual; and therefore adds afterward, As often as we do these things, we do
not sharpen our teeth to bite, but break and divide the holy bread by a sincere
Faith, All which and many other places in that Author make it plain, that he
does not speak of such a corporal presence as you imagine, but of a real but
spiritual presence of Christ, whereby the souls of Believers have an intimate
union and conjunction with Christ, which he calls Societatem germanissimam, in
which respect they have communion with the body of Christ. But I need mention
but one place more to explain his meaning, in which he fully asserts the
spiritual presence of Christ, and withal that the substance of the elements
does remain. That immortal nourishment is given us, which differs from common
food, Sed immortalitatis alimonia, datur, a communibus cibis differens,
corporalis substantiae retinens speciem, sed virtutis divinae invisibili
efficientia probans adesse praesentiam. Id. f. 2.
that it retains the nature of a corporeal substance, but proving the presence
of a Divine power, by its invisible efficiency. So that what presence of Divine
power there is, is showed in regard of the effects of it, not in regard of any
substantial change of the bread into the body of Christ; for in reference to
that efficiency he calls it, immortal nourishment, and afterward, That as
common bread is the life of the body, so this supersubstantial bread is the
life of the soul, and health of the mind. Id. sect. 6.
But I know you will quarrel with me for rendering, corporalis substantiae
retinens speciem, by, retaining the nature of a corporal substance; for you
would fain have species to signify only the accidents of a corporeal substance
to remain. This being therefore the main thing in dispute, if I can evince that
species signifies not the bare external accidents, but the nature of a
corporeal substance, then this Author will be so far from asserting that he
will appear pointblank against your Doctrine of Transubstantiation. Now, I
shall prove that species was not taken then, for the mere external shape and
figure, but for the solid body it self especially of such things as were
designed for nourishment. Thence in the Civil Law we read of the species
annonariae, and of the species publicae, largitionales, and fiscales; and those
who had the care of corn are said to be curatores specierum; and thence very
often in the Codes of Justinian and Theodosius, Cod. Theod. de eursu publ. and
leg. 67.

Arcad l. ult. De munerib. and honor.

Cassiod. l. 12. Vegetius de remilit. l. 3. c. 3.


there is mention of the species vini, species olei, species tritici. But lest
you should think, it is only used in this sense in the Civil Law, not only
Cassiodore and Vegetius use it in the same sense for the species tritici, and
species annonariae; but, that which comes home to our purpose, St. Ambrose uses
it where it is impossible to be taken for the mere external accidents, but must
be understood of the substance it self: speaking of Christ's being desired to
change the water into wine, he thus expresses it, Ambros. sermon. 21. de die
sancto Epiphan.
Vt rogatus ad nuptias aquae substantiam in vini speciem commutaret, that he
would change the substance of water into the species of wine; Will you say,
that Christ turned it only into the external accidents and not the nature of
it? So when St. Austin says, that Christ was the same food to the Jews and us,
significatione nonspecie, he opposes species to a mere type, Augustine. in Psalm
82.
and therefore it imports the substance and reality of the thing. And so the
translator of Origin opposes the regeneratio in specie to the baptismus in
aenigmate, and the manna in aenigmate to the manna in specie: Origin. hom. 7.
in Number.
in both which, being opposed to the figure it denotes the reality. And one of
those Authors whom you cite in the very same Book and Chapter which you cite,
Ambros de Sacram. l 4 c. 4.
uses species sanguinis for the substance of blood, for he opposes it to the
similitudo sanguinis; for when the person objects, and says, That after the
cup is consecrated speciem sanguinis non video, I do not see the nature or
substance of blood; he answers him, Sed similitudinem habet, But it has the
resemblance of it; for as (says he) there is the similitude of his death, so
there is the similitude of his blood. These may be sufficient to show that
species corporalis substantiae, does not relate to the external shape and
figure, but to the nature and reality of it: So that his meaning is, although
it remains still the same substance of bread and wine; yet there is such an
invisible efficiency of Divine power going along with the use of it, as makes
it to nourish the souls of men to eternal life.

And now it will be no matter of difficulty at all to Answer the places you
bring out of this Author.. 9.
The first is, This common bread changed into flesh and blood gives life. But
how little this place makes to your purpose is easy to discern, because we do
not deny a Sacramental change of the bread into the flesh and blood of Christ,
but only that substantial change which you assert, but that Author
sufficiently disproves, even in that very sentence from whence those words are
cited, if you had given them us at large. For, says he, that common bread
being changed into flesh and blood, Panis iste communis in carnem and sanguinem
m^^atus pro^^rat vitam and increment^m corpo^^bus; ideoque ex consueto rerum
effectu, fidei nostrae adjuta infirmitas, sensibili argumento edocta ^st,
visibilibus sacramentis inesse vitae aeternae effectum, and non tam corporali
quam spirituali transitione Christo nos ua^ri. Id. sect. 5.
procures life and increase to our bodies; and therefore from the usual effect
of things, the weakness of our Faith is helped, being taught by a sensible
argument, that the effect of eternal life is in the visible Sacraments, and
that we are not united to Christ so much by a Corporal as Spiritual union. In
which words he compares the sign and the thing signified together: that as the
bread being Sacramentally changed into the flesh and blood of Christ, does yet
really give life and nourishment to our bodies, (which certainly is far enough
from that substantial change into the body of Christ, which you assert) so by
that effect of the sign it self upon our bodies, our Faith is helped the better
to understand the efficacy of the thing signified upon our souls, in order to
eternal life; there being as real, though spiritual, union between Christ and
Believers, as there is between the bread and our bodies. And that this is the
plain and unsophisticated meaning of this Author in these words, I dare appeal
to the impartial judgment of any intelligent Reader. By which we see, Those
first words of the change of the bread into the flesh and blood of Christ, must
be understood of a sacramental, and not a substantial change. But your other is
the great and (as Bellarmin thinks) unanswerable place; which you thus render,
The bread which our Lord gave to his Disciples, Panis iste quem Dominus
discipulis porrigebat, non effigy, sed natura mutatus, omnipotentia verbi
factus est caro. Id. sect. 6.
being changed not in its outward form and semblance, but in its inward nature
and substance, by the omnipotency of the word is made flesh. As to which place,
I must tell you first, that there are very shrewd suspicions of some unhandsome
dealings with it; for some great Critics have assured us, that the place is
corrupted, and that the ancient MSS. read it quite otherwise, non effigy, nec
natura mutatus, which is so far from your purpose, that it is directly against
it; and this seems far more consonant to the following words; For, says he, as
in the person of Christ, the humanity was seen, but the divinity lay hid; so in
the visible Sacrament, Et sicut in persona Christi humanitas videbatur, and
latebat divinitas; ita Sacramento visibili, ineffabiliter divina se infudit
essentia. Ib.
the divine essence does infuse it self after an unexpressible manner. In which
it is considerable, how he does parallel these two together; for as the humane
nature of Christ did substantially remain, notwithstanding the presence of the
divine nature, so to make good the parallel, the substance of Bread and Wine
must remain too, and that because he does not say, That the body of Christ is
present, which might exclude the substance of the elements, but the divine
essence, which only imports a spiritual and real presence. And when he says,
That the Bread is neither changed in its form or nature, when by the
Omnipotency of God it is made flesh (i. e. as to the real communion which
believers have of the body of Christ; which is an act of divine power as well
as goodness) he says no more, than Theodoret, Ephraim, and Gelasius do
expressly speak. For, says Theodoret, The mystical symbols after Consecration,
go not out of their own nature, (...). Theodoret. Dialog. 2. Tom. 1. p. 85.
but remain in their former substance, figure, and shape, and are visible and
tangible as they were before: Which words, considering the occasion and
importance of them, are so express, as nothing can be more. And in his former
Dialogue, he gives an account, Why the external symbols are called by the names
of the body and blood of Christ, (...). Id. Dialog. 1.
not by changing their natures, but by superadding Grace to nature; which is
the same with that our Author says here, Though neither figure nor nature be
changed, yet by Gods Omnipotency it is made flesh; that (...), in Theodoret and
this omnipotentia Dei, here importing the same thing. To the same purpose
Ephraim the famous Patriarch of Antioch speaks in Photius. For, says he, the
body of Christ, which is received by believers does not lose its sensible
substance; (...). Ap^d Photium in Biblioth. Cod. 229. p. 794.
and yet is inseparable from spiritual Grace. And so Gelasius, as plainly as
either of the foregoing, asserts, That the Sacraments of the body and blood of
Christ, which we receive, Certe Sacramenta quae sumimus, corporis and sanguinis
Christi, divina res est, propter quod, and per eadem divinae efficimur
consortes naturae and tamen esse non desinit substantia vel natura pani^ and
vini. Gelas. tract advers. Eutych. and Nestor.
are a divine thing, through and by which we are made partakers of the divine
nature (which answers to the Omnipotency of God, by which it is made flesh, in
our Author) and yet it does not cease to be the substance, or nature of Bread
and Wine (which is the same with the former clause, That the Bread is not
changed in figure or nature.) So that the ancient reading of this place is not
only consonant to the other parts of his discourse, but asserts no more than is
in express terms said by genuine and unquestionable Authors; who plainly
overthrew your Doctrine of Transubstantiation. For these testimonies being so
express for the remaining of the substance of Bread and Wine after
Consecration, are of far greater force against it, than the highest expressions
concerning the change of the elements can make for it. For in these they speak
their judgments, clearly and punctually against Heretics, and speak that
which is absolutely inconsistent with Transubstantiation; but in their other
they speak mystically and sacramentally; and their most lofty expressions, must
be understood by the nature and design of their discourse, which is to
represent symbolical things in the most lively and affecting manner. But when
our Adversaries are urged with the former testimonies, they then tell us, That
substance and nature are not always taken properly, but sometimes at large for
the accidents or use of things: but although this can never be applied to the
places of the foregoing Authors, in their disputations with the Eutychian
Heretics; yet from thence we are furnished by themselves with a further answer
to this place. So that although we admit of the present reading, non effigy,
sed natura mutatus, yet since by their own confession nature does not always
import the substance of a thing, they cannot in any justice or reason from
hence infer a substantial change. Let them then take their choice, Whether are
the words of substance and nature in the Fathers always to be taken properly,
or no? If they must be taken so, we have three unquestionable testimonies of
ancient Fathers directly against Transubstantiation, and we only lose the
testimony of an uncertain Author, built upon an uncertain reading, and
contrary to other expressions in the same book: If they be not, then from the
change of nature here expressed, no such thing as a substantial change can be
inferred, but only accidental, upon consecration, in regard of the sacramental
use and effect of it. Which that it is nothing strange in Antiquity, might be
easily proved, but that our Adversaries confession saves me the labor of it.

. 10.
The second Testimony, is of Gregory Nyssen, out of whose Catechetical Oration
you produce these words, With good reason do we believe, that the Bread being
sanctified by God's Word, is changed into the body of the Word of God: and a
little after, The nature of the things we see being trans-elemented into him. I
might here tell you, What Exceptions are taken against this book, Not. in Greg.
Nyss. p. 45.
as not being genuine, not only by Protestants (as Fronto Ducaeus would have
it, because of these expressions) but by others too. But I will not insist on
this, because I see no sufficient reason to question the Authority of it; yet I
know not how you can excuse it from some interpolations, since he therein
mentions Severus, an heretical Acephalist, who lived not till after Gregory's
time; yet for the main of the book, I say as Casaubon does, I^ Casaub. Not.
(...) Greg. Ep^st. ad Eustath, etc. p 99.
that it is, Opus plane eximium si paucos navos excipias, An excellent piece in
the general, and becoming its Author, some few escapes excepted. And the
design of it being to show, that Christian Religion has nothing absurd or
unreasonable in it, it would be very strange that he should assert so absurd
and unreasonable a Doctrine, as Transubstantiation is. But there is nothing
tending to that in the places cited, but only the use of those two words, (...)
and (...); for the main force of all, you say, depends upon them. (...).
Gregor. Nyssen. orat. Catachet. cap. 37. Tom 3.
So that if we can give a good account of them, without any Transubstantiation,
there remains no difficulty at all in these words of Gregory Nyssen. For, we
deny not that there is a change in the elements after Consecration, but we say,
It is a sacramental, and you, That it is a substantial change, and this you
offer to prove from these two words here used in reference to the Eucharist.
The argument commonly formed by your Authors from the first words, is,
Whatsoever is changed, is not what it was before: which we readily grant, so
far as the change is; but still it remains to be proved, that the substance is
changed in it self. But it were easy to show, that the word (...), in
multitudes of places of the Fathers is used for an accidental and relative
change, and Gregory Nyssen himself very frequently uses the word, where it is
capable of no other sense, as when he says, Of the shining of Moses his face,
that it was (...), De vit^ Mosi^* Hom. 1. in Cant.

Orat. Catech. c. 37. c. 40.


a change to that which was more glorious; and when he affirms, the souls of
men by the Doctrine of Christ, (...), to be changed into that which is more
divine. And in this same Catechetical Oration he uses it several times to the
same purpose, about the change which shall be in glorified bodies, and the
change of men's souls by Regeneration: But I need not insist more on this, since
I produced before the confession of Suarez, that such expressions are more
accommodated to an accidental mutation. Neither is there any more strength in
the other word, (...), though Suarez thinks this comes nearer the matter, and
you confidently say, What can here be signified by trans-elementation of the
nature of the outward element, but that which the Church now styles
Transubstantiation? I will therefore show you, what else is signified by that
word which Gregory used, which cannot be properly rendered trans-elementation;
for (...), does not come from the Noune (...), but from the Verb (...), and the
Greeks expound (...) by (...): and so (...); as you may see in Suidas, and
others. So that it imports not a substantial, but an accidental change too: and
in that sense Gregory Nyssen uses it to express Regeneration by, (...), those
who are trans-elemented by Regeneration; Would you say, Epist. Canon.
those who are transubstantiated by it? So that* neither of these Testimonies
import any more than that there is a sacramental change in the elements after
Consecration, by which believers are made partakers of the body and blood of
Christ; which is no more than we assert, and falls far short of your Doctrine
of Transubstantiation.

Your third Testimony is, of S. Cyril of Jerusalem, which you would make us
believe, is so full and clear, that no Catholic could express his own,. 11.
or the Churches belief of this mystery, in more full, plain, and effectual
terms: Neither shall I here stand to dispute the reasons on which those
Mystagogical discourses under his name are questioned, but proceed to the
consideration of the Testimony it self. Which lies in these words, He that
changed water into wine by his sole will (at Cana in Galilee) does he not
deserve our belief, that he has also changed wine into blood? Cyril. Catech.
Mystagog 4.
Wherefore let us receive with all assurance of Faith, the body and blood of
Jesus Christ. Seeing under the species of bread the body is given, and under
the species of wine his blood is given, etc. knowing and holding for certain,
that the bread which we see, is not bread (though it seem to the taste to be
bread) but the body of Jesus Christ; likewise that the wine which we see
(though to the sense it seem to be wine) is not wine for all that, but the
blood of Jesus Christ. This testimony you have patched together out of several
places in that Oration, very warily leaving out that, which would sufficiently
clear the meaning of S. Cyril in the words you cite out of him. For it is
evident, that his design is to persuade the Catechumens (from whom the
mysterious presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament was wont to be concealed)
that the bread and wine were not mere common elements, but that they were
designed for a greater and higher use to exhibit the body and blood of Christ
to believers. And therefore he says expressly, Do not consider them as mere
bread and wine, (...). Id. ib.
for they are the body and blood of Christ, according to his own words. By
which it is plain he speaks of the body and blood of Christ, as sacramentally,
and not corporeally present; for he does not oppose the body and blood of
Christ, to the substance of bread and wine, but to mere bread and wine, i. e.
that they should not look on the bread and wine as naked signs, but as signa
efficacia, and that there is a real presence of Christ in and with them to the
souls of believers. And this is it which he says, That they ought not to make
a question of, since Christ said, This is my body, and this is my blood. For if
he could by his will turn the water into wine, Shall we not believe him, that
he can change his wine into his blood? And after adds, That under the symbols
of bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ is given, that thou may be a
partaker both of his body and blood. You render this under the species or form
of bread and wine in Cyril it is (...), in that which is the figure or
representation of the body and blood of Christ; for (...) is not taken in your
sense for the external accidents, which you call the species, but for that
which does figure or represent; Catech. Mist. 5. Theophil. in Mirc. 14.
for in his next Catechetical discourse he calls the bread and wine, (...), the
figure of the body and blood of Christ, and this Theophylact, and those who
assert Transubstantiation, deny that the bread and wine are (...). For, where
there are (...), there must be (...), which must answer to them; if Cyril
therefore makes the bread and wine to be (...), he must make the body and blood
of Christ to be the (...), and consequently they cannot be the very body and
blood of Christ in your sense. This (...) and (...) here have the same
signification, and are the same with (...), and so when he says, (...), his
meaning cannot be, under the accidents of bread and wine the body and blood of
Christ is present in your sense, for he speaks of such a presence as has
relation to the receiver, and not to the elements; for he says, Under the type
of bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ is given to thee. For otherwise
it had been far more to his purpose to have said absolutely, that under the
species of bread and wine, the body and blood of Christ is substantially
present; but, when he says, only that it is given to the receiver, it does not
belong to such a corporeal presence as you dream of, but to such a real and
spiritual presence, whereby believers are make partakers of the body and blood
of Christ. And therefore Cyril is in this well explained by that of Tertullian,
Hoc est corpus meum, id est, figura corpus mei, This is my body, i. e. the
figure of my body, (...)
which is the same with (...); and by that of S. Austin, Non dubitavit Dominus
dicere, Hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis sui, Christ did not
scruple to say, This is my body, when he gave the figure of his body: Comment.
in Psalm. 3.
And elsewhere speaking of Judas his being present ad convivium in quo corporis
and sanguinis sui figuram discipulis commendavit and tradidit, at that Supper
in which Christ commended and delivered to his Disciples the figure of his body
and blood. So that hitherto there is nothing in the testimony of Cyril,
importing Transubstantiation. But it may be you think, there is more force in
it, where he says, That we must not believe our senses, that that which we see
is not bread, though it seem to the taste to be so, etc. As to which I answer,
That this place of Cyril must be explained by that which went before it,
wherein he said, That we must not judge it to be mere bread, and mere wine.
For, although sense be a sufficient judge of that which it sees and tastes, yet
it cannot be a judge of that which is exhibited by that which is seen and
tasted; therefore, though to the taste, it seems to be nothing but common bread
and wine, yet they ought to believe that it is the communion of the body and
blood of Christ. So that this is not to be understood of the elements
themselves, but of the mystical and sacramental nature of them. And, as
Cardinal Perron has observed, It is an usual thing, for the greater Emphasis
sake, to deny that to be, which is meant only respectively; or to express the
affirmation and denial of some qualities, by the affirmation or denial of the
substances themselves: as in that of Tully, Memmius semper est Memmius, for
one; that in S. Ambrose, Ego non sum ego, for the other: and in many other
instances to the same purposes, in which he says, Though the substance seem to
be denied, yet only some quality is understood by it. So when Cyril here says,
That bread is not bread, etc. he means not by it any alteration of the
substance of it, but that it is not that common bread which it was before, and
as our sight and taste judge it still to be. And what he says here of the bread
in the Eucharist, he said the same before of the Chrism, where he compares them
both together. For (says he) do not think that to be mere ointment; for as the
bread of the Eucharist after the invocation of the Holy Spirit, (...). Cyril.
Mystag. 3. p. 235.
is no longer bread, but the body of Christ; so this holy ointment, is no
longer mere, or common ointment, after it is consecrated, but a gift of Christ,
and the Holy Spirit; being effectual through the presence of his divine nature.
May not you then as well prove a Transubstantiation here as in the Eucharist,
since he parallels these two so exactly together? And so elsewhere he speaks
concerning Baptism, C^tech. Illum. 3.
That they ought not to look on it as mere water, but as spiritual grace; so
that he means not a substantial change in the Eucharist, any more than in the
other, but only relative and sacramental.

Neither can any thing more be inferred from your testimonies out of your last
Author S. Ambrose,. 12.
Ambros. de^is q^i i^itian^ur. c. 9.
there being nothing at all in the words you produce, which implies any
substantial change in the elements; for, although it be only sacramental, yet
it may be truly said, It is no longer that which nature has framed it (viz.
mere bread and wine) but that which the benediction of consecration has made
it to be: which I grant to be the body and blood of Christ, but not in your
gross and corporeal sense. Ch^y^ost in Act. hom. 23.
So S. Chrysostom says of Baptism, That its virtue is so great, it does not
suffer men to be men; Will you therefore say, it transubstantiates them? But
you add further out of him, that he says, The force of benediction is greater
than that of nature, seeing by that nature it self is often changed? And so we
assert too, that the force of benediction far exceeds that of nature, which can
so alter common elements, as by the use of them, to make us partakers of the
body and blood of Christ. Your last words are out of the counterfeit S.
Ambrose, which are only general, De Sacrament. l. 4. c. 4.
viz. this bread, is bread before the words of the Sacrament, but when
consecration comes, of bread, it is made the flesh of Christ. This we deny not,
but the dispute is about the sense in which it is made so, whether by a
substantial change of the bread into the body of Christ: and that this cannot
be this Author's meaning, appears by those known words which are used by him,
speaking of the efficacy of Christ's power in the Sacrament, whereby he can
make, ut sint quae erant and in aliud commutentur, that they might be what they
were, and yet be changed into something else. And, although a great
Controversy has been raised about the reading of these words, yet this
reading is not only justified by many Authors of competent Antiquity, but by
two MSS. in the K. of France's Library, besides many others elsewhere, and all
editions, but that at Rome, and others which follow it. So that this Author
plainly asserts, that the substance of the elements does remain still, and
therefore can only be understood of a sacramental change.

Thus I have, to satisfy you, examined your testimonies in behalf of
Transubstantiation; but whereas you referr me for more to Bellarmin and other
Catholic Authors, I shall referr you for Answer to those no less Catholic
Authors, though no believers of Transubstantiation, who have taken large and
excellent pains in answering what they have brought; either from Scripture or
Antiquity. But you, having done your best in the latter, come at last to the
former; but so pitifully manage your business as to Scripture, that it had been
more for the interest of your cause, you had never meddled with it. For you only
say, That the words of Scripture, taken in their proper and litteral sense, do
evidently show, that the only substance which is delivered in this Sacrament,
is the body of Christ, and that the substance of bread is no more there. And
all this comes only from hence, because Christ says, This is my body, which
you parallel with one, pointing to a hogshead of wine, saying, This is wine;
and with one holding up a purse full of money, saying, This is gold: who if they
intend to speak truth, must signify, that the only liquor contained sub
propria forma, in the hogshead is wine; and all the money in the purse, gold.
But how weak this is, will easily appear, 1. That you take it for granted, that
the expression of Christ is not at all figurative, but of the same nature with
those Propositions you mention, whereas it is largely proved, from the nature
of a Sacrament, from many parallel expressions in Scripture, from evidence of
Antiquity, Sense, and Reason, that these words of Christ cannot be otherwise
than figuratively understood. 2. You suppose that Christ must speak of the
individual bread, when he said, This is my body, as our parallel instances are
of such individuals as are pointed to. But Bellarmin will tell you, That if
Christ had spoken of the bread, when he said, This is my body, absurdissima
esset locutio, it had been a most absurd speech. And Vasquez says, If the
Pronoune Hoc, This, should relate to the bread, Vasquez. disp. 180 c. 9 n. 91.
he confesses, that by virtue of those words, there could be no substantial
change made in it; for the bread must remain still. So that by the confession
of your own Authors, your parallel is absurd, and destructive to the Doctrine
of Transubstantiation.

The third error of a General Council confirmed by the Pope, which his
Lordship insists on,. 13.
is, That of administering the B. Sacrament to the Laiety under one kind only.
Of this he had spoken. before; and thither you referr us for your Answer; but I
purposely omitted the handling it there, because it comes in more properly in
this place. There his Lordship has these words: To break Christ's Institution
is a damnable error, P. 259.
and so confessed by Stapleton. The Council of Constance is bold, and defines
peremptorily, that to communicate in both kinds is not necessary, with a non
obstante to the Institution of Christ; and although Bellarmin answers, that the
non obstante only belongs to the time of receiving it after supper, yet his
Lordship shows from the words of the Council, that the non obstante must relate
to both clauses foregoing, and has as much force against receiving under both
kinds, as against receiving after supper. Yea, and the after words of the
Council couple both together, in this reference; for it follows, and similiter,
And so likewise, though in the Primitive Church, etc. And a man by the
definition of this Council may be an Heretic for standing to Christ's
Institution, in the very matter of the Sacrament: And the Churches Law for one
kind may not be refused, but Christ's Institution under both kinds may. And yet
this Council did not err; no, take heed of it. But all this cannot persuade
you, That the non obstante relates to any thing but to the receiving after
supper: which I much wonder at, P. 250.
since the design of the Decree of the Council was not to determine so much
concerning the time of receiving, as the kinds in which it was to be received.
Now to have said point blank, that, notwithstanding the Institution of Christ
to the contrary, they decreed that the Sacrament should be received in one kind
only, would have been too plain and gross: and therefore they fetch it about
with a compass, and put in something not so much controverted then, the better
to disguise the opposition between their Decree and Christ's Institution. But
yet by the adding the administration in both kinds to the time of receiving,
and the non obstante following both, Licet Christus post coenam instituerit,
and suis discipulis administraverit sub utraque specie panis and vini, hoc
venerabile Sacramentum; tamen, hoc non obstante, non confici debet post coenam,
nec ^ecipi nisi a jejunis; similiter, quod licet in Primit^v^ Eccl^sia
Sacramenta reciperentur sub utraque specie a fidelibus, tamen haec consuetudo,
ut Laicis sub specie panis tantum suscipiatur, habenda est pro lege, quam non
licet repro^are: and asserere hanc esse illicitam, est erroneum, and
p^rtinaci^e^ ass^rentes sunt arcendi tanquam haereti^i. Council. Constant. Sess.
13.
and the decree being against that which is acknowledged to have been done by
Christ, nothing can be more evident, then that the sense of the Decree implies
a non obstante to Christ's Institution. For otherwise, To what purpose do they
say, Although Christ administered the Sacrament in both kinds, and although the
Primitive Church so received it, if they did not intend to decree something
contrary to that administration and the practice of the Primitive Church?
Therefore, whether by the mere form of words the non obstante does relate to
Christ's Institution or no, is not material, since the Decree it self is
directly opposite to it. Although therefore they did not put receiving in one
kind immediately after the non obstante (which is that you object) as they do,
not consecrating after supper, and receiving fasting, yet the force of it
reaches to what follows after: as not only appears by the connection And
likewise, but chiefly by the scope of the Decree it self. For the Proctors of
the Council, Henricus de Piro, and Johannes de Scribanis, in their ^uthentick
Instrument, never exhibited any Controversy at all concerning the time of
receiving, but only concerning the Communion in both kinds, because, they said,
there was an ill custom (so the observing Christ's Institution was called) for
some Priests to give the Cup to the Laity, therefore they desired the Council,
etc. So that it appears, this bringing in the time of receiving, was only the
artifice of the contrivers of the Decree, that they might with less noise and
clamor thwart the plain Institution of Christ. And accordingly it appears by
the title of the Decree, that the intent of it was to forbid the giving the
Sacrament to the people in both kinds, and so Carranza delivers the Canon it
self. Carranz Sum. Con. p. 415.
Praecipimus sub poena excommunicationis, quod nullus presbyter communicet
populum sub utraque specie panis and vini. Indeed, in the late editions of the
Councils by Binius, a complaint is supposed to be made concerning the
celebrating the Sacrament after Supper by some which he seems to take out of
Cochlaeus, Council. Tom. 7. p. 2 p. 1042.
as appears by his notes; but in the Instrument it self nothing appears of that
nature, and since the Decree contains nothing against that custom as well as
the other; it seems probable, that this was made use of the better to bring on
the other. But, whether it were so or no, is not very much material; for
however the Council confessing that Christ did so administer it, and that it
was the custom of the Primitive Church, their prohibiting of it does in its own
nature imply a non obstante to the Institution of Christ.

. 14.
But this is that you stiffly deny, in saying, That neither the Decree of the
Council, P. 271.
nor the practice of the Church in administering under one kind is contrary to
the Institution and ordination of Christ. For, say you, to show this, the
Bishop should have made it appear that Christ did so institute this Sacrament
of his last supper, that he would not have one part to be administered without
the other, or that he would not have one part to be taken without the other.
And it cannot be proved that Laymen are bound to receive in both kinds, from
those words, Drink ye all of this; For if this were a command and not a
Counsel, it was given to the Apostles who all drunk of the Chalice. So that the
state of the Question is this, Whether the Primitive Institution be universally
obligatory to all Christians or no? For you suppose, that either it was only a
Counsel, or else it had particular reference to the Apostles. For the clearing
therefore of this Question, there are but two ways whereby we can judge of the
obligatory nature of such Institutions; either by an express declaration of the
will of the first Institutor, or by the Universal sense of the Church
concerning the nature of that Institution. And if these two appear evident in
this present case, you will have no cause to question, but the communion in one
kind is a violation of the Institution of Christ. There are two ways whereby
we may judge what the will of the Legislator is: First, by an express positive
command. Secondly, by an unalterable reason on which the Institution is
founded. Now that both these are clear in the case of Communion in both kinds I
now come to manifest. First, by a positive command. For although we grant a
difference between an Institution and a command, in this respect, that the
Institution properly respects the thing, and a command the person; and that an
Institution, barely considered as such, does not bind all persons to the
observance of it; as we say, Matrimony is Instituted by God, but do not thence
assert that all persons are bound to it, but yet take an Institution as it
referrs to persons, and so it is aequipollent with a command. And so Christ's
Instituting that all who believe should be baptized, is of the nature of a
command to that purpose. But here is a great difference to be made between such
things as were done at the Institution, and such things as were Instituted to
be done afterward. Thus Christ washed his Disciples feet, administered after
Supper, and only to twelve; but it does not follow that these circumstances
must be still observed, because though they were done then at that celebration,
yet Christ does not Institute or appoint the doing of them, when ever that
Sacrament should be administered afterward. For we are to consider, that though
there were some things peculiar to the first Institution, yet the main of it
was intended for the Church in all following times. Or else we must make the
celebration of the Eucharist it self to be a mere arbitrary thing. Which if it
be not, there must lie an obligation on men for the participation of it; now
this obligation must suppose a Law, and therefore we have gained this, that the
Institution of the Eucharist does imply a command for its observation in the
Church. So that this action of Christ was not merely a matter of Counsel, but
there is something in it perpetually obligatory: Because it was not a peculiar
rite appropriated to the present time, but intended for the future ages of the
Church. This being proved in the General, that there is a perpetually
obligatory command, employed in the Institution; we are now to enquire, How far
this command extends? Whether it extended only to the Apostles, or else to all
believers? That it was administered then to the Apostles only is granted, but
the Question is, In what capacity it was administered to them, Whether only as
Apostles, or as Believers? and that must be judged by the intention of the
Institution, Whether it were of that nature as to respect their Apostolical
office, or else some thing which would be common with them to all other
Believers to the worlds end? If it were only and wholly proper to the Apostles,
there can be no reason given, why the Institution of the Sacrament should
continue after their times: neither could any other but the Apostles have any
right, either to administer or to receive it. It follows then, that this
Sacrament was not instituted merely for the Apostles; if not for them merely,
then what was contained in the Institution does concern others as well as them.
Now there are four things commanded in the Institution, Take, eat, drink ye all
of this, and, This do in remembrance of me. If the Institution does not merely
respect the Apostles as such but others also, then some of these things at
least must extend to others too considered as Believers. And if some, why not
all of them? Were the Apostles considered as Believers, when they were bid to
take and eat? and as Apostles, when Christ said, drink ye all of this? What
reasonable pretext can be imagined for such a groundless fancy? If they were
not considered as Believers, when Christ said take, eat; by what right can any
Believers take and eat? if they were then, so were they likewise afterward,
when Christ said to them, Drink ye all of this. As far therefore as I can
possibly see, you must either admit the people to drinking all of this, or else
deprive them of their right of taking and eating. And if you did speak
consistently, you must say, that the peoples being admitted at all to the
Eucharist is an act of favor and indulgence in the Church, but not necessary
by any command of Christ, the Eucharist being administered to the Apostles and
not the people; and therefore it being indulgence to admit them at all, it is
in the Churches power to admit as far and to what she pleases. This is the only
rational way I can imagine, whereby you may defend the excluding the people
from the Cup: But this you dare not say; and therefore are put to the weakest
shifts imaginable to reconcile it with the Institution of Christ.

Some therefore say,. 15.
That all these are words only of invitation and not of command, and that they
only give a right, and not oblige men to do it. But if these be only words of
invitation, what precept is there any where extant for the celebration of the
Eucharist? That they are an invitation we deny not; but we say they are such an
invitation as imply a duty to come, too. When a Father bids his Children come
and sit down at Table, take and eat their meat: this is an invitation, but such
as by reason of the authority of the person carry a command with them. So it is
here, Christ invites to come, to take, eat, and drink; but so that it implies a
command that men should come; or else it must be wholly left at men's liberty,
so that it is no sin for men to neglect or refuse to come. And if the
Institution of Christ only gives men a liberty to take, eat, and drink, without
any obligation to these things as a duty, How comes the administration of the
Eucharist at all to become a duty, since there are no other words of command
then what are contained in the Institution? Which others being sensible of,
they most unreasonably distinguish between Taking and eating, which they make
an absolute command, and, Drinking all of this, which they say is only a
conditional precept: and the reason they give, is, because St. Paul says, 1
Cor. 11.25.
This do ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me; and so, say they, Do
this, does not imply a command for the doing it, but only the relation which
that action has to the death of Christ when they do it; for those words, as
often as you do it, do suppose it not to be simply necessary, but only show, when
they do it, to what purpose it should be done. But if there be any weight in
this, it will as well hold still concerning the participation of the bread, as
well as the cup; for, as the Apostle says This do ye as often as ye drink it in
remembrance of me, so he adds in the words immediately following, For as often
as ye eat this bread and drink this cup, Ver. 26.
ye do show forth the Lords death till he come. If therefore it notes only the
relation of the action to its end without a command for performance in the one,
it must do so in the other also. And so all the Sacrament will be a mere matter
of liberty in the Church, whether men will observe it or no. But Bellarmin with
wonderful subtilty has found a command for the one and not the other; De
Eucharist. l. 4. c. 25.
which is, That in Luke after the bread, Christ says, This do in remembrance
of me, but omits it wholly after the cup; Luke 22.19.
by which, says he, we are to understand, that Christ commanded that the
Sacrament should be administered to all under the species of bread, but not
under that of wine. And this he is so transported with, That in a rapture he
admires the wonderful providence of God in the Scripture, who by this means
has taken away all possibility of evasion from the Heretics. So it should
seem indeed, when even his Brethren the Jesuits can scarce hold laughing at
this subtilty. Since, St. Paul puts that expression, This do in remembrance of
me, not after the bread, but after the cup. And therefore may we not more
justly admire at the Providence of God in thus suffering men who will not see
the truth under a pretense of subtilty, to infatuate themselves. And although
it be added here, As often as ye do it, yet both Vasquez and Suarez ingenuously
confess, that contains under it a command for the doing it. Vasquez. in 3.
Thom. c. 2. dispat. ^13.
For says Vasquez, Qui praecipit ut opere aliquo commemoratio fiat alicujus
beneficii accepti, ex modo ipso praecipiendi praecipit etiam ut fiat opus
ipsum. Quis hoc non videat? He that commands that by something to be done a
commemoration should be made of a benefit received; from the manner of
commanding it, he does command that very action to be done. Suarez in 3. Tom. 3
disp. 71. sect. 2.
Who does not see this? And Suarez says, those words, Do this, or with that
addition, In remembrance of me, or with that condition, As often as ye do it, ad
eundem sensum referuntur, come all to the same purpose. So that still it
follows, if there be a command for one, there is for the other also. But yet
there is a subtilty beyond any of these; which is, That Christ in those words
in Luke after the distribution of the bread, Hoc facite, Do this, did make the
Apostles Priests; and therefore, although they did receive the bread as
believers, yet they received the cup as Priests, and so that belongs only to
the Priests and not to the people. What will not these men prove which they
have a mind to! But it is their unhappiness, that their own subtilties do them
the most mischief, as appears by these things consequent from hence; which are
repugnant to their own principles. 1. That Priests not consecrating, ought to
receive the Cup, as well as those that do. For it is plain, that the Apostles
did not consecrate now, but only receive; and therefore this belongs to them as
receiving, and not as consecrating. And by the same reasons that Priests
not-consecrating may receive, others may receive too. 2. That if they were made
Priests by those words, after the distribution of the bread, then they have no
power to consecrate, but only the bread. For the words are, Hoc facite, Do
this, i. e. that which Christ had then done. Otherwise, if those words be taken
with reference to the Cup, then if the Apostles received the bread as
believers, they received the Cup so too: for these words, Do this, must not
relate to their receiving, but to their power of consecration. 3. If this be
taken generally, Do this, and so giving them a power to do all that Christ did,
then it will amount to a precept for all who administer to follow Christ's
example in the Institution. And therefore, as he did administer, the Cup, as
well as the Bread, to all that were present, then all others will be bound to
do so, if their power of administration be derived from these words, Do this,
and they referr to the whole action of Christ. But I know what Answer will be
here given, That these words relate to the Sacrifice, and not to the Sacrament,
Hoc facite, implying their power of sacrificing, as to which they say, both
elements are necessary, but not to the Sacrament. But 1. Not to enter on the
Dispute about the Sacrifice; if both elements be necessary to it, then it was
great reason that the words making them Priests, should come after both
elements, and therefore it cannot in reason be deduced from those words which
are spoken only after the bread. 2. If these words relate to the Sacrifice, and
not to the Sacrament, By what authority do they administer the Sacrament? What
other words are there to give them a power to do the one distinct from them,
whereby they pretend a right for the other. 3. There is no evidence at all from
Antiquity, that Hoc facite has any respect to the Eucharist as a Sacrifice, or
to the making the Apostles Priests. And so much is confessed by Estius, viz.
that neither is this exposition found in any ancient Writer, nor is it suitable
to our Saviors purpose. For, he says, it is not absolutely said, Estius in l.
4. sentent did. 12. sect. 11.
Facite, but, Hoc facite, i. e. that which ye see me do, do ye likewise. So
that still, by virtue of these words, those who do receive authority to
administer, are bound to follow Christ's example, and that as he did administer
in both kinds to all who were present, so ought they to do likewise. But there
is one Exception yet more left, which is the last Reserve, viz. that although
it be granted to be a command, that the Cup should be administered to all, yet
it is only a positive command, binding in the general; but yet it is of the
nature of all affirmative precepts, that though it always binds, yet not at
all times, but only in case of necessity, of which necessity the Church is the
most competent Judge; and therefore if the Church do not think it necessary,
then the obligation ceases. To which I answer, 1. That upon this ground it will
be in the Churches power to repeal or suspend all divine positive precepts as
well as this. For the reason of this will hold for all others, which is, that
they do not oblige, as they speak, ad semper, but only semper, i. e. not at all
times, though they never cease to oblige. And therefore on this ground, for all
that I can see, the Church may as well repeal the use of Baptism, or the
Eucharist it self, as the communion in both kinds; all being of of an equal
nature, as affirmative precepts. But, Is it possible to imagine that Christ
appointing positive Institutions in his Church, and giving precepts and plain
directions about them, should yet leave it in the power of any men to reverse,
alter, suspend the obligation to the performance of those commands? Did not he
foresee all cases of necessity, when he first appointed these things, and, if
notwithstanding that, he makes a plain command, for the observance of them;
What can such a pretended power in the Church signify, but an authority to
alter or repeal what she pleases in the Laws of Christ? 2. There is a great
deal of difference between the nature of the obligation of affirmative
precepts, and the prohibiting the use of something positively commanded. For,
although positive precepts do not bind at all times, yet that reaches only to
the thing it self, and not to the mode of performance. Thus we say, That the
Eucharist being a positive Institution, does not oblige men at all times to be
partakers of it; but if on that account any Church should undertake to forbid
the celebration of it, this were a direct violation of the Law it self, and not
an Interpretation of it in regard of circumstances. And what ever obligation of
this nature there is, it respects the whole duty; But it does by no means
follow, that therefore in the celebration the Church may declare what may be
used, and what not. For the manner of performance in case it be performed at
all, is absolutely commanded; it is only the performance in general, which is
of the nature of a positive precept. Thus we say, Men are not bound to pray at
all times, though they be always bound to pray; but in case men do pray, they
are indispensably bound to pray as God has required them to do it. So we say
here, That men are not bound at all times to administer, or receive the
Eucharist; but, in case they do, they are indispensably bound to receive it
according to Christ's Institution. So that this of communion in both kinds,
relates to the manner of a positive precept, and is not a distinct positive
precept by it self; and therefore is indispensably by any authority of the
Church. Besides, your Church does not merely suspend the exercise of this in
case of necessity, but forbids men the doing it, which is a direct and wilful
violation of the Institution of Christ. And therefore the Question is not as it
is strangely perverted by some of you, Whether it be necessary at all times to
receive the Cup (although even that be true in case of receiving at all) but,
whether it be in the Churches power at all to prohibit the receiving it; and
this we say, and are ready to make good to be a presumptuous violation of the
Laws of Christ, and an usurping an Authority which may as well extend to all
positive Institutions. And thus I hope I have made that appear, which you say
his Lordship should have done, viz. that Christ did so institute the Sacrament
of his last Supper, that he would, not have one part to be administered without
the other, nor one part to be taken without the other.

The same I might also at large show, from the Reasons of this Institution,
that they do equally belong to the people, 16.
as well as the Priests, and that those reasons are of a nature as unalterable
as the Institution it self; whereby I should have showed the vanity of your
distinction of the Eucharist into a Sacrament, and a Sacrifice, and the
absurdity of your Doctrine of Concomitancy; but that would be too large for our
present design; and that which you give me not sufficient ground to enter upon,
since the obligation is sufficiently cleared from the Institution it self. I
therefore proceed to show, that the Primitive Church did always understand the
Communion in both kinds to be an indispensible part of the Institution of
Christ. Which one would think were evident enough from S. Paul, in his bringing
the Corinthians back to the Primitive Institution, as that unalterable Rule
which they were to observe. For if, because of some ill customs which had
obtained amongst them, he tells them, This is not to eat the Lords Supper; How
much more would he have said so, 2 Cor. 11.20.
if there had been an mutilation of the parts of it? And all along in his
discourse he supposes Christ's Institution to be the indispensable Rule which
they ought to observe; That which I have received of the Lord, I delivered unto
you: not, certainly, to leave it in their power, Whether they would observe it
or no, but to show them, what their duty was, and what they ought unalterably
to observe. Else he would never have told them so much of the danger of
unworthy receiving, in eating the Bread, and drinking the Cup of the Lord
unworthily; For, Can we possibly think, that the rudeness of their access to
the Lords Table was so great a sin, and the violation of his Institution to be
none at all? The Apostles were such strangers to the Doctrine of Concomitancy,
that still both eating and drinking were supposed then, even by the most
unworthy receivers. There were then no such fears of the effusion of the blood
of Christ, or the irreverence in receiving it, and much less of the long beards
of the Laity; which are the worshipful reasons given by Gerson and others, why
the people should not be admitted to the use of the Chalice. I do verily think
the Apostles had as much care to preserve the due reverence of the Sacrament,
as ever the Councils of Constance or Trent had; but they thought it no way to
preserve the reverence of the Sacrament, by showing so little to Christ, as not
to observe his Institution. But you very kindly grant that which you knew was
impossible to be denied, viz. That in ancient times, when, you say, the number
of Christians was small, P. ^90.
it was the ordinary custom for all that would (the Laity as well as others) to
receive the Eucharist in both kinds; but, say you, we averr, this custom
proceeded merely out of free devotion, and not out of any belief, that it was
absolutely necessary so to do, by virtue of Christ's precept. It is no great
matter what you averr, since you averr so monstrous a Doctrine of
Transubstantiation, as confidently as you do this, and with much alike reason.
For I have showed already, that the Institution of Christ in reference to this,
is perpetually obligatory, and that the Apostles look upon that as an
unalterable Rule, and therefore your averring signifies nothing, when you never
offer to prove what you averr. But, I pray tell me, By what means would you
understand what precepts are perpetually obligatory, which are not clear to our
present purpose? If positive command, immutable reason, universal practice of
the Church may prove any thing so, we have all these plain and clear for
Communion in both kinds. And not the least suspicion or intimation given, that
they looked on it as a matter of free devotion, but of indispensable necessity.
But, What mean you in saying, When the number of Christians was small, they
received it in both kinds? Do Christ's Institutions vary according to the
numbers of Communicants? Has not Christ the same power to oblige many as a
few? or, Do you think the numbers of breakers of his Institution make the fault
the less? But, When was it the number of Christians was so small? Only in the
Apostles times, or as long as the custom lasted of communicating in both kinds?
Do you think the number of Christians was so small in the Primitive times? If
you do, you lamentably discover your ignorance in the History of those times:
Read the Christians Apologies over, and you will believe the contrary. But, Did
this small number continue in the time of the Christian Emperors, even till
after a thousand years after Christ? For so long the Communion in both kinds
continued so inviolably, that neither you, nor any before you, are able to
produce one Instance of a public and solemn celebration of the Eucharist in
the Church wherein the People did not communicate in both kinds. And, Could a
matter so indifferent as you suppose this to be, meet with no persons all this
time, who out of reverence to the blood of Christ, should deny giving it to the
People? Nothing then but an unmeasurable confidence, and a resolution to say
any thing, though never so false or absurd (if it tend to the interest of your
Church) could make you say, That communion in one kind was always, even in the
first five or six hundred years, allowed publicly as well in the Church, as
out of it. Than which, if you had studied it, you could scarce have uttered a
greater untruth; and in which there are such multitudes of your own party
bearing witness against you. And Bellarmin is so far from helping you out in
it, that he is extremely at a loss to offer at any thing which has any
tendency that way. But before we come to consider the Instances and Exceptions
you make, we must somewhat further see, what the practice and sense of the
Church was, that we may the better judge, Whether communion in both kinds were
looked on as a matter only of free devotion, or as something necessary by
virtue of Christ's Institution. And for this I shall not insist on those
multitudes of Testimonies, which manifest the practice it self, but briefly
touch at some few, which more directly prove, that what they did, was, Because
in doing otherwise, they should have violated the Institution of Christ. To
pass by therefore the Testimonies of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Tertullian, all clear for the practice; the first I insist on, is
that of S. Cyprian against those who gave water in the Chalice, instead of
wine; for, whosoever does but read the very entrance of that Epistle, will soon
find that he looked on Christ's Institution in all the parts of it as
unalterable. For (says he) although I know, that most Bishops do keep to that
which agrees with the truth of the Gospel, Quanquam sciam Episcopos plurimos,
Evangelicae veritatis ac Dominicae traditionis tenere rationem, nec ab eo quod
Christus Magister and praecepit and gessit, bumana and novella institutione
dec^dere; tamen quoniam quidam vel ignorant^r vel simpliciter in calice
Dominico sanctificando, and plebi ministrando, non hoc faciant quod Jesus
Christus, Dominus and Deus noster, sacrificii hujus Auctor and Doctor, fecit
and docuit; religiosum pariter ac necessarium duxi, has ad vos literas facere,
ut si quis in ist^ errore adhuc teneatur, veritatis luce perspecta ad radicem
atque originem traditionis Dominicae revertatur. Cyprian. Epist. 63.
and what our Lord has delivered; and do not depart from that which Christ our
Master has commanded and practiced: yet because some, either through
ignorance, or simplicity, in sanctifying the Cup of our Lord, and delivering it
to the people, do not that which Jesus Christ our Lord and God, the Author and
Teacher of this Sacrifice, did and taught; I have thought it a necessary part
of my duty to write to you, that if any one continue in that error, he may, by
discovering the light of truth, return to the root and fountain of our Lords
Tradition. I insist on this Testimony, not only for the clearness of it, as to
the custom of giving the Cup to the people; but especially for the evidence
contained in it, of the unalterable nature of the Institution of Christ. For
that he looks on as the great fault of them who ministered water instead of
wine, that they therein departed from the example and precept of Christ. Now
there cannot be produced any greater evidence of any obligation as to this,
than there is as to the giving the Cup it self. For here is Christ's example and
institution equally as to both of them, and that in the same words, Drink ye
all of it. If that were such a departing from the Institution to alter the
Liquor, Would it not have been accounted as great, to take away the Cup wholly?
For afterward he adds, If men ought not to break the least of Christ's
commands, How much less those great ones which pertain to the Sacrament of our
Lords Passion, and our Redemption? or to change it into any thing, but that
which was appointed by him? And if not to change the matter, certainly neither
can it be lawful to order the administration otherwise than Christ appointed. I
know Bellarmin says, The parity of reason will not hold, De Euchar. l. 4. c.
26.
because this is to corrupt the matter of the Sacrament: but S. Cyprian does
not insist on that as his reason, but the departing from the Institution of
Christ, and this is done by one as well as the other. But he adds, That there
was a precept for that, Do this. And so, say we, was there as plain for the
other, Drink ye all of this. So that the parity of reason is evident for the
one as well as the other. Upon the same ground does Pope Julius afterward
condemn the using milk instead of wine, because contrary to Christ's
Institution; and so he does the dipping the bread in the Chalice: From whence
we infer, that they looked on Christ's Example and Institution in the
administration to be unalterable. But most express is the Testimony of Pope
Gelasius, who finding some, from the remainders of Manichaism, did abstain from
the Cup, gives express order, That they who were infected with this odd
superstition, either should receive the whole Sacrament, Comperimus quod
quidam, sump^a tantummodo corporis sacri portione, a cal^ce sacri cruoris
abstineant. Qui proculdubio (quoniam nescio-qua superstitione docentur
obstring^) aut Sacramenta integra percipia^^, aut ab integris arceantur; quia
divisio unius and ejusdem mysterii sine grandi sacrilegio non potest provenire.
Apud Gratian c. Comper. de Consecr. did. 2.
or abstain wholly from it; because the dividing one and the same mystery,
cannot be done without great sacrilege. To this, Bellarmin tells us, two
Answers are commonly given; one, That these words are meant of Priests;
another, That they relate only to those superstitious persons; but both of them
are sufficiently taken off by the reason assigned, which is not fetched either
from their Priesthood, or Superstition, but only from the Institution of
Christ, that it would be sacrilege to part those things, which Christ by his
Institution had joined together. Thus we see, the sense of the Church is clear,
not only for the practice, but the command too; and the sinfulness of the
violation of it. Although to you one would think it were wholly needless to
prove any more than the Universal Practice, since the Tradition of the Church
is equal with you, with an unwritten word; but that is, when it makes for your
purpose, and not otherwise. For in this case, though the Institution be
express, the universal practice of the Church for at least a thousand years
unquestionable; yet because it contradicts the present sense and practice of
your Church, all this signifies nothing at all with you. So true is it, that it
is neither Scripture nor Antiquity, which you really regard, Cusan. ep. 27.
but Interest and the Present Church. And what Cusanus, like a downright man,
spoke out in this case, is that you must all at last take sanctuary in, That
the Scriptures must be interpreted according to the current practice of the
Church; and therefore it is no wonder if they be interpreted at one time one
way, and another time another way. And though this seem a very great absurdity,
yet it is no more than is necessary to be said by such who maintain things so
contrary to Scripture, and the practice of former ages of the Church.

But you are so far from thinking this contrary to the practice of the Church
in former ages, that you say, Not only in S. Thomas his time,. 17.
P. 289.
but in all times of the Church, it was both publicly allowed, and commonly by
some practiced even in Churches, to receive under one kind only. Cassander de
Comm^n. sub utra^ p 1025, 1027.1039. op. Paris.

Barns Catholico-Rom. Pacif. sect. 7. lit. 8.


A bold Assertion, and which is confidently denied by very many of your own
Communion. For not only Cassander often confesses, that for above a thousand
years after Christ, no instance can be produced of public Communion in one
kind: But Father Barns acknowledges not only that Communion in both kinds, is
much more agreeable to Scripture, Fathers, and the Universal Church, but that
per se loquendo jure divino praescribitur, taking it in it self, it is
commanded by a Divine Law. But I know these men are too honest for you to own
them, but as to the universal practice of the Church it is confessed by, Rua^d.
Tapp^r. Tom. 2. p 328. Alphons. a Castro. haeres. 38. Lindan. Panopl. l. 4. c.
56.
Ruardus, Alphonsus a Castro, Lindanus, and many others. But we need no more
than your S. Thomas himself, even in that very place, where you say, He rather
makes for you, than against you; for, when he says, that Provide in quibusdam
Ecclesiis observatur ut populo sanguis non detur, It was a custom providently
observed in some Churches, not to give the Sacrament in the form of wine to the
Laity; He thereby shows indeed, that in his time about A. D. 1260. this custom
did in some places obtain, but yet so, that the universal practice had been to
the contrary; Aquinas. p. 3. qu 80* Art. 12.
for so much is confessed by him in his Commentaries on S. John, where his
words are, secundum antiquam in Ecclesia consuetudinem omnes sicut
communicabant corpori, ita communicabant and sanguini, quod etiam adhuc in
quibusdam Ecclesiis servatur. According to the anceint custom of the Church,
all did communicate in both kinds, which as yet is observed in some Churches.
Now, Whether the universal practice of the Church in former times, or the
practice of some Churches in his time, were more agreeable to the Divine
Institution, we may appeal to Aquinas himself, who elsewhere gives this
account, Why the elements of bread and wine, were made use of, and delivered
severally, Aquinas. c. Gentes. l. 4. cap. 61. Bonavent. l 4. did. 8. Art. 2.
q. 2. Alensis. p. 4 q. 6. memb. 3. Art. 2.


That they might denote a complete refection, and fully represent the death and
passion of our Savior. On the same accounts, Bonaventure and Alensis make both
kinds necessary to the Integrity of the Sacrament. And the latter (who was
Master to the two former) says expressly, That whole Christ is not contained
sacramentally under either kinds; but his flesh under that of bread, and his
blood under that of wine. Than which nothing can be more destructive to the
Doctrine of Concomitancy. And it is learnedly proved by Pet. Picherellus, P.
Picherel. de Missa* c. 4.
that the bread was appointed to represent not the body in its complete
substance, but the mere flesh, when the blood is out of it, according to the
division of the Sacrifices into flesh and blood; from whence it appears, that
the Sacrifice of Christ's death cannot be represented merely by one kind, and
that whole Christ is not contained under one, in the administration of it. And
therefore Alensis rightly determines, that the res Sacramenti cannot be
perfectly represented by one kind; Alens. p. 4. q 31. memb. 1.
and thence says, He that receives but in one kind, does not receive the
Sacrament perfectly. No wonder therefore that he tells us, That some religious
persons in his time (when the contrary custom, Alens, p. 4. q. 53. memb. 1.
through the superstition of people, had somewhat prevailed) did earnestly
desire that the Sacrament might again be received in both kinds. Thus we see,
when this custom did begin, reason and argument was still against it, and
nothing pleaded for it, but only some superstitious fears of some accidental
effusions of the blood of Christ. But you are the man, who would still persuade
us, That Communion in one kind was not only publicly allowed, but by some
practiced even in Churches in all times of the Church. And therefore in reason
we must give attendance to your impregnable demonstrations of it. For
otherwise, say you, How is it possible that the Manichees should find liberty
and opportunity to communicate amongst Catholics in Catholic Churches,
without being perceived, since they never drank wine, nor communicated under
the form of wine? as it is certain they frequently did in S. Leo 's time, and
after. But you have very unhappily light of this for your first proof, which is
so evident against you. For Leo, who mentions the Manichees communicating in
Catholic Churches, tells the Catholics, What way they might discern them from
themselves, viz. that though they received the bread, yet they refused the
wine; by which, says he, you may discover their sacrilegious hypocrisy, Quum
ad tegend^m infidelitatem suam nostris audeant interesse mysteriu, tam
sacramentorum communione se temperant, ut interdum tutius lateant, ore indigno
Christi corpus accipiunt, sanguinem autem redemp^ionis nostrae haurire omnino
declinant Quod ideo vestram volumus scire sanctitatem, ut vobis hujusmodi
homines and hisce manifeslentur indiciis, and quo^um deprehensa fuerit
sacrilega simulatio, notati and prod^ti a sanctorum soc^etate, sacerdotum
autoritate pellantur. Leo. Sermon. quadrages. 4.
and by that means they may be expelled out of the society of Catholics. You
were therefore very ill advised, to make choice of this for your argument,
which makes it plain, that all Catholics did receive in both kinds, and that
the Manichees might be thereby known that they did not. And if it were the
custom for the Catholics sometimes to receive in both kinds, and sometimes
not, (which is all the shift Bellarmin has) and the Manichees not at all, this
could be no note of distinction between them; for, although the Manichees might
not receive at one time, they could not tell but they might at another. Now
Leo's intention being, to give such a note of distinction, that they might not
receive at all among them, it evidently follows, that all the Catholics did
constantly receive in both kinds, and that they were only Manichees who did
abstain from the Cup. For that Story which Bellarmin insists on, and you referr
to, of the woman, who being a Macedonian Heretic, yet pretending to
communicate with the Catholics, had the bread which her Maid brought with her,
and which she took instead of the Eucharist, turned into a stone in her mouth,
upon which she runs presently to the Bishop, and with tears confessed her
fault, as we take it wholly upon the Faith of Sozomen, from whom Nicephorus
transcribes it, Sozom. hist. l. 8. c. 5. Niceph. l. 13. c. 7.
so I cannot imagine what it proves for your purpose, unless it be, that they
in whose mouths the bread turns into a stone too, will hardly have patience
till the Cup be administered to them. For so both Sozomen and Nicephorus relate
it, that immediately upon her feeling it to be a stone, she ran to the Bishop,
and showed him the stone, acknowledging with tears her miscarriage. But besides
this, you bring several Instances from the Communion of Hermites in the
wilderness, of travelers on their journeys, of sick persons in their beds, and
private Communions in houses, and lastly, little Children in the Church, and at
home in their Cradles, which communicated in form of wine only. And, Are not
all these invincible proofs, that there was a public, solemn administration of
the Communion in one kind publicly allowed in Churches in all times? When you
can prove that the Communion of Hermites was in the Church, or that they did
not receive as well the wine as the bread in the wilderness, or that such
Communion was approved by the Church: That the Communion of Travelers was not
mere Communion in Prayers, as Baronius and Albaspinaeus assert, without any
participation of the Eucharist at all; Baron. An. 400. n. 67.

Albaspinae. observat. l. 1 c. 3


or if it were, that it was only a participation in one kind (against which
Albaspinaeus gives many reasons:) That the Communion of the sick was without
wine, when Justin Martyr says, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2.

Eusebius. hist. l. 6. c. 36.

Hieron. ep. 4. Nazianz. Or. 11.

Albaspinae. obs. cap. 4. l. 1. Durant. de r^tib. Eccles. l. ^ c. 55.


That both bread and wine were sent to the absent: when Eusebius tells us, That
the bread given to Serapion, was dipped; when S. Hierom says of Exuperius, That
he preserved the blood in a glass for the use of the sick: That Private
Communions were without wine, since Gregory Nazianzen says; his Sister
Gorgonia, preserved both the symbols of the body and blood of Christ; and
Albaspinaeus confesses, that one might be carried home as well as the other; or
that these were approved by the Church, since Durantus says, That the use of
Private Communions coming up by persecutions, were abrogated afterward; and
are expressly condemned by the Council of Caesar-Augusta about the year 381. and
the first Council of Toledo, about A. D. 400. Lastly, that the Communion of
Infants was only in one kind either in the Church or at home, or that this
Communion of Infants which the Council of Trent condemns, was a due
administration of the Eucharist: When I say you have proved all these things,
the utmost you can hence infer, is, only that in some rare cases, and
accidental occasions, Communion in one kind was allowed of. But what is all
this to the proving that the stated, solemn administration of the Eucharist in
one kind was ever practiced, much less allowed, within a thousand years after
Christ. And yet if you could prove that, you fall short of vindicating your
Church, unless you add this, which you never so much as touch at, viz. That it
was ever in all that time thought lawful to forbid the celebration of the
Eucharist in both kinds. Prove but this, which is your only proper task, and I
say as his Lordship does in another case, You shall be my Apollo for ever.

We proceed to a fourth error, which is the Invocation of Saints defined by
the Council of Trent.. 18.
As to which, that which his Lordship says may be reduced to three things, P.
276.
1. That those expressions of the Fathers which seem most to countenance it are
but Rhetorical flourishes. 2. That the Church then did not admit of the
Invocation of Saints, but only of the commemoration of Martyrs. 3. That the
Doctrine of the Roman Church makes the Saints more then Mediators of
Intercession. To these three I shall confine my discourse on this subject, and
therefore shall follow you close in your Answers to them. For the first, When
you are proving that the Fathers expressions were not Rhetorical flourishes,
you would fain have your own accounted so. For, say you, How can it seem to any
that duly considers it, P. 290.
but most extremely partial and strange to term so many exhortations, so many
plain and positive assertions, so many Instances, Examples, Histories, Reports
and the like, which the Fathers frequently use, and afford in this kind (and
that upon occasions wherein dogmatical and plain delivery of Christian Doctrine
and truth is expected) nothing but flourishes of wit and Rhetoric? And after,
you call these mere put-off's, as before you had said, That when any thing in
the Fathers is against us, then it is Rhetoric only; when against you, then it
is dogmatical and the real sense of the Fathers. But these are only General
words, fit only to deceive such who believe bold affirmations sooner then solid
proofs. This is a thing must be tried by particulars, because it is on both
sides acknowledged, that the Fathers did many times use their Rhetoric, and
that such things are uttered by them, in their Panegyrical Orations especially,
which will not abide a severe trial. De Missa. l. ^. c. 10.

Sixtus Sen. bibl. Annot. 152. l. 6. Basil. ep. 64. Theodoret. dialog. 3.


Does not Bellarmin confess that St. Chrysostom does often hyperbolize, and
Sixtus Senensis say as much of others, that in the heat of their discourses
they are carried beyond what they would have said in a strict debate? But who
are better Judges of these things then the Fathers themselves? Are they not the
men, who have bid us distinguish what comes from them in a heat, from that
which they deliver as the Doctrine of the Church? Have not they told us, that
the popular Orations uttered in Churches are no rules of opinion? Have not some
of them, when they have seemed extreme vehement and earnest, at last come off
with this, That they have been declaiming all that while? Witness St. Hierome
against Helvidius; and if you make not use of the same rule to put a favorable
construction on his Books against Jovinian, Vigilantius, Ruffinus and others,
you will as little be able to excuse him from strange Doctrines, as from
intemperate heats. What put-off then is it for us to say, that St. Basil in his
Oration on Mammas, and the forty eight Martyrs; that S. Gregory Nazianzen in
his Panegyrical Orations on St. Basil, St. Athanasius, St. Cyprian, his sister
Gorgonia, St. Gregory Nyssen in his commendation of Theodorus, do make use of
their Rhetoric in Apostrophe's to the persons whom they praise, without any
solemn Invocation of them? What is there herein unsuitable to their present
purpose? Is it any more then Orators have commonly done? What strange thing is
it then, that those great Masters of Rhetoric should make use of their art to
raise the people, not only to a high esteem of their persons, but of those
virtues which rendered them so illustrious. Might not such expressions by way of
Apostrophe be still used by such who are furthest from the Invocation of
Saints? although by their example we are taught how dangerous it is to indulge
Rhetoric too much in such cases. But as though they foresaw the ill use would
be made of them, they add such expressions as sufficiently tell us, they made
no solemn Invocation of them; (...), and the like. Had these persons a mind to
deliver a Doctrine of Invocation of Saints, who speak with such hesitation and
doubt as to their sense of what was spoken? (For it is a groundless shift, to
say, that those expressions imply an affirmation and not doubt.) That which we
say then, is this, That the Doctrine of the Church is not to be judged by such
Encomiastick Orations, wherein such Rhetorical flourishes are usual; and when
you bring us their plain and positive assertions, we will by no means give you
that Answer, That those are flourishes of wit and Rhetoric. But his Lordship
very well knew, how far you were from any such dogmatical assertions of the
Fathers in this point, and that the most plausible testimonies which you had
were taken out of those three great Orators in their Panegyricks in praise of
their Friends, or of the Martyrs; and therefore it was he said, Though some of
the ancient Fathers have some Rhetorical flourishes about it, for the stirring
up devotion (as they thought) yet the Church then admitted not of the
Invocation of Saints. That is it we stand on, that no such thing was admitted
by the Church, if we should yield that any particular (though great) persons
were too lavish in their expressions this way; must these be the standard which
we must judge of the Doctrine of the Church by? We must consider the Church was
now out of persecution, and ease and honor attended that profession of
Christianity, for which such multitudes had endured the flames; and the people
began to grow more loose and vain then when they still expected Martyrdoms:
This made these great men so highly commend the Martyrs in their popular
Orations, not to propound them as objects of Invocation, but as examples for
their imitation. Thence they encouraged them to frequent the Memoriae martyrum,
that by their assemblies in those places they might revive something of that
pristine heat of devotion, which was now so much abated among them. But the
event was so far from answering their expectation, that by this means they grew
by degrees to place much of their Religion, rather in honoring the former
Martyrs and Saints then in striving to imitate them in their virtues and
graces. And from the frequenting the places where the Martyrs were enshrined
through the pretense of some extatical dreams and visions, or some rare
occurrences which they say happened at those places, they began to turn their
real honor into superstitious devotion, which at last ended in solemn
Invocation. To which no small encouragement was given when such persons as S.
Hierom and others, were so far from putting a stop to the growing evil, that
though they confessed many miscarriages committed, yet they rather sought to
palliate them and make the best construction of them, still hoping that this
zeal in the people to the honor of the Martyrs would promote devotion among
them; whereas it sunk gradually into greater superstitions. This I take to be
the truest and most faithful account of those first beginnings and tendencies
to Invocation of Saints, which appeared in the latter end of the fourth Century.

. 19.
For before that time we meet with nothing that can bear the face of any
positive and plain assertions, instances, examples, histories, or reports
tending that way. Which is so clear, that Cardinal Perron after the best use of
his wit and diligence to find out something to this purpose within the three
first Centuries, at last confesses, that in the Authors who lived nearer the
Apostles times no footsteps can be found of the Invocation of Saints. But when
he gives this account of it, That most of the writings of that time are lost,
it makes us see what poor excuses bad causes will drive the greatest wits to.
For are not the writings of Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, Arnobius, Lactantius and others still extant, who
were pious and learned men? And is it possible that such men should all of them
conceal such a Doctrine as this, which would so easily appear in the face of
the Church? But it is well we have the confession of so great a man for the
best ages of the Church; and not only so, but he acknowledges withal, That
there is neither precept nor example for it in the Scripture. Eckius in
Enchirid. cap. 5. Salmeron ^n 1 Timothy 2 disp. S. Peers. de Tradit. p. 3.
Which others not only assert, but offer to give reasons for it, for the Old
Testament: Because the Fathers were not then admitted to the beatifical vision:
and for the New Testament, Because the Apostles were men of such piety and
humility, that they would not admit of it themselves, and therefore made no
mention of it in their writings; and withal, Because in the beginning of
Christianity there would have been a suspicion, that they had only changed the
names of Heathen Deities, and retained the same kinds of worship. These for the
new Testament we admit of, not as Rhetorical flourishes, but as plain and
positive assertions which contain a great deal of truth and reason in them. So
that here is a confessed silence as to this Doctrine throughout all the story
of Scripture, and for three hundred years and more after Christ; and in all
this time we meet with no such assertions, instances, examples, reports, and
the like, which tend to establish this new Doctrine. But in stead of this, we
meet with very plain assertions to the contrary, backed with strong and
invincible reasons; and herein not to insist on those places in Scripture which
appropriate Invocation to God only, and that in regard of his incommunicable
attributes of omnisciency, and infinite goodness and power, which are the only
foundations given in Scripture for Invocation; nor to mention those places,
where all tendencies to such kind of worship of any created Being, are severely
checked; and wherein an Inferior and relative worship is condemned on this
account, Because all worship is due to God only; and wherein that very pretense
of humility, in not coming to God, but through some Mediator is expressly
spoken against; nor to enlarge how much this Doctrine of Invocation of Saints
is injurious to God, by giving that worship to creatures which belongs only to
himself, and how repugnant it is to Divine wisdom, that prayers should be made
to Saints for them to intercede with God, when they cannot know what those
prayers are till God reveals them; nor how dishonorable it is to Christ, both
in regard of his merits and intercession; nor how great a check it is to true
piety to put men to pray to them, whom they can have no ground to believe do
hear or regard their prayers, and in the mean time to take them off from their
serious and solemn addresses to God. Not to insist, I say, on these things,
because I design no set discourse on this subject, which has been so amply
handled by so many already; I shall only discover the sense of the Primitive
Church in this particular by two things, the one of which takes in the first
three Centuries, and the other extends a great deal farther: From which I doubt
not, but to make it evident how far the Invocation of Saints was from being
received then. The first is, from the Answers given to the Heathens, when it
was objected against the Christians that they did worship dead men and Angels.
I confess, some have been so subtle as from hence to infer that they did it;
or else, say they, the Heathens would never have charged them with it. Bellarm.
de Sanctor. Beatit. l. 1. c. 13.
But they who read the Christians Apologies will find far more unreasonable
things than this laid to their charge, and I hope they will not say, there must
be an equal ground for all the other imputations also. But it seems they more
believe the Heathens Objections then the Christians Answers, who utterly
disavow any such thing. The first mention we find of any such imputation, is in
that excellent Epistle of the Church of Smyrna to the Church of Philomylium
concerning the Martyrdom of Polycarpe, wherein they tell us; how some
suggested to Nicetas, that he should desire the Proconsul that Polycarp's body
might not be granted to the Christians; Lest, say they, they should leave to
worship Him that was Crucified, and worship him; to which they return this
excellent Answer. They are ignorant that we can never be induced to forsake
Christ, who suffered for the salvation of all who shall be saved of the whole
world, (...). Apud Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 15. ed. Vales.
or to worship any other for him being the Son of God we adore. But the Martyrs
as the Disciples and followers of the Lord, we love worthily for their
exceeding great affection toward their own King and Master, of whom we wish
that we may be partners and disciples. Can any thing be more express then this
is, to show what difference they put between Christ and the Martyrs? Not that
they worshipped one as God with an absolute direct worship, and the other as
subordinate intercessours, with a relative and indirect worship, as you would
have told them; but they worshipped Christ and none but him, because he was the
Son of God; but for the Martyrs they loved them indeed, but they worshipped them
not at all, for so much is employed in the Antithesis between that and their
worship of Christ. So that these words are exclusive of any kind of worship
which they gave to the Martyrs; for they were so far from giving them that
worship which belonged to the Son of God, that they only expressed their love
to them, without giving them any worship. And in the old Latin translation of
this Epistle, of which there are two MSS. extant in England; when they say,
They can worship none else but Christ, it is there rendered, Neque alteri
cuiquam precem orationis impendere, Nor impart the supplication of prayer to
any other. As the late learned Lord Primat Usher has observed; Answer to the
Jesuits Chall. p; 426.
which utterly destroys the Doctrine of Invocation.

We proceed further to see what account Origin gives of the Christian Doctrine
touching Invocation in his Answer to Celsus,. 20.
wherein he had sufficient occasion given him to declare the sense of the
Church at that time. And if he had known or approved any relative worship given
to Angels or Saints, it is not conceivable that he should express himself in
such a manner as he does. For when Celsus enquires what kind of Beings they
thought Angels to be, Origin answers, that although the Scripture sometimes
calls them Gods, it is not with that intention that we ought to worship them.
For, says he, all prayers, and supplications, (...) ((...) leg. Usser.) (...).
Orig. c. Celsum l. 5. p. 233. ed. Cantab.
and intercessions, and thanksgivings are to be sent up to God the Lord of all,
by the High Priest who is above all Angels, being the living Word and God. For
to call upon Angels (we not comprehending the knowledge of them, which is above
the reach of man) is unreasonable. And supposing it were granted that the
knowledge of them, which is wonderful and secret, might be comprehended: this
very knowledge declaring their nature to us, and the charge over which every
one of them is set, would not permit us to presume to pray unto any other but
God the Lord of all, who is abundantly sufficient for all, by our Savior the
Son of God. In which Testimony, we clearly see what the judgment of the Church
then was concerning Invocation; For in a matter of Divine worship equally
concerning the whole Church, we have no reason to imagine that Origin should
deliver any private opinion of his own. And herein we are plainly told, That
all prayers and supplications are to be made to God only through Christ, that
in such cases where we are Ignorant of the nature of Beings, it is unreasonable
for us to pray to them (as we certainly are concerning separated souls as well
as Angels); that in case we did know them, yet it would not be reasonable to
pray to them, both because they are inferior and ministering Spirits, and that
God himself is abundantly sufficient for all through Christ. Now let any
reasonable man judge, whether these Arguments do not hold as well against a
relative and subordinate Invocation, as absolute and Sovereign. But no such
distinctions were thought of then. For they judged all Prayer and Invocation,
by the very nature of it, to import Divinity in that it was made to, and
therefore that no created Beings how excellent soever were capable of it. From
whence Origin afterward supposing the Sun, Moon, and Stars to be Intellectual
Beings, gives this account, Why, notwithstanding that, they made no prayers to
them. For, says he, since they offer up prayers themselves to God through his
only Son, L. 5. p. 238.
(...), we judge that we ought not to pray to them that pray. Since they would
rather send us to God whom they pray to, then bring us down to themselves, or
to divide our praying virtue from God, to themselves. Can we then suppose that
the Church at that time did allow of prayers to be made to Saints in Heaven,
supposing their praying there in behalf of the Church on earth? For we see
Origin goes on this ground, that all Intellectual Spirits which pray
themselves, are not to be prayed too; And that if they knew of our praying to
them, they would send us to God and not accept of those supplications to
themselves which are due only to God. In the beginning of the eighth Book,
Celsus disputes against the Christians because they worship only the Supreme
God, L 8. p. 381.
without giving any to the Inferior Demons; and that upon this ground,
because, says he, They who worship the Inferior Gods, acknowledging them
Inferior, is so far from dishonouring the Supreme, that he does that which is
acceptable to him. (...). For he that honors and worships those who are
subject to him, does not displease God whose they are all. These are Celsus his
words; from whence we are to take notice, that Celsus does not plead for
absolute and Sovereign worship to be given to these Inferior Deities or
Spirits, but only a relative and subordinate worship. So that if the
Controversy had been between Celsus and a modern Romanist, all that Celsus
here says must have been confessed on both sides, and the whole dispute only
have been concerning those Demons or Spirits which were to have this relative
and inferior kind of worship, viz. Whether those which Celsus called Demons,
or only the Blessed Spirits and glorified Saints. But Origin who went upon
other grounds returns a far different Answer; For, says he, it is not lest we
should hurt God that we abstain from the worship of any but God according to
this word ((...), P. 383.
to render the inferior worship of (...) to any but God) but lest we should
thereby hurt our selves, by separating our selves from our portion in God. P.
384.
And the reason he gives why Christ is to be worshipped is, P. 385.
from that divinity which manifested it self in him, and because of the unity
of nature between God and him. And although Origin says, That in some sense we
may be said (...) to give some kind of worship to Angels and Archangels; yet he
says, the sense of the word must be purged, and the actions of the worshippers
distinguished. Yet in the following words he attributes that worship which is
by supplication only to God and his only Son. So that still he reserves the
offering up our prayers as the appropriate worship to God himself, through his
only Son. For to him, says he, (...). Orig. l. 8. p. 386.
we first offer them, entreating him who is the propitiation for our sins, that
he would vouchsafe as our high Priest to offer our Prayers, Sacrifices, and
Intercessions to God over all. Id. Ibid.
Therefore our Faith is only in God through his Son, who has confirmed it to
us. And afterward, Away (says he) with Celsus his Counsel, that we should
worship Demons (or inferior spirits not taking them in the worst sense)
(...), for we must only pray to God over all, Id. p. 395.
and to the Word of God, his only begotten, and first born of all Creatures;
and we must entreat him, that he as High Priest, would present our Prayer, when
it is come to him, unto his God, and our God, and unto his Father, and the
Father of them that frame their life according to the Word of God. To the same
purpose again in another place; To whom we offer our first fruits, Id. p. 400.
to him we direct our prayers, having a High Priest, who is entered into Heaven,
Jesus the Son of God; and we hold fast this confession while we live, through
the favor of God, and his Son, who is manifested to us: And after says, That
the Angels help forward their salvation, who call upon God, and pray sincerely,
to whom they themselves also pray. But not one word of any praying to them, but
only to God through Christ. For, as he says elsewhere, We must endeavor to
please God only, who is over all, (...). Orig. l. 8. p. 420.
and pray that he may be propitious to us, procuring his good will with piety,
and all kind of virtue. But if he will yet have us to procure the good will of
any others, after him that is God over all; let him consider, that as when the
body is moved, the motion of the shadow does follow it: so in like manner,
having God favorable to us, who is over all, it follows that we shall have
all his friends, both Angels, and Souls, and Spirits, favorable to us. For
they have a sympathy with them, that are thought worthy to find favor with
God. Neither are they only favorable unto such as be worthy; but they
cooperate with them also that are willing to serve God over all, and are
friendly to them, and pray with them, and entreat with them. So as we may be
bold to say, that when men, who with a resolution, propose to themselves the
best things, do pray unto God, many thousands of the Sacred Powers pray
together with them uncalled upon. Here indeed we find that Saints and Angels do
intercede in Heaven in behalf of the Saints on Earth, but that is not the thing
in dispute between us: but here we find no such thing at all as an Invocation
of them; but he says, They pray together with us, when we pray to God himself,
not when we pray first to them to pray with us. For this Origin makes to be
wholly needless; for if God be propitious to us, so will all the Sacred Powers
be too. So that still we find in Origin, that Invocation was only to be made to
God over all, although he says, That with those who do sincerely call upon
God, the Holy Spirits do join with them. To the same purpose Arnobius speaks,
Arnob. l. 3.
when the Heathens asked, Why they did not worship any Inferior Gods, satis
est nobis, says he, Deus primus, the Supreme God is sufficient for us. In hoc
omne quod colendum est colimus; quod adorari convenit adoramus, quod obsequium
venerationis poscit, venerationibus promeremur. In worshipping him, we worship
all that is to be worshipped; we adore all, that is fit to be adored; we
procure favor by showing reverence to all that require it. Where we are still
to take notice, that the Heathens did not blame them for not giving the highest
kind of Worship to these Inferior Deities, but for not worshipping them with
the subordinate and relative Worship, which they said belonged to them. Now
when in the Answer he says, That in worshipping God, they worshipped all that
was to be worshipped; he utterly destroies any such Relative Worship, which may
be given to Inferior Spirits.

. 21.
For we are to consider, that the Heathens themselves did not give the same kind
of Adoration to their Heroes, and Inferior Deities, which they did to him whom
they accounted Supreme. And, setting aside the difference of the object, I can
find no possible difference between the Invocation of Saints in the Church of
Rome, and that of Demons among the Heathens. And althoug^ Bellarmin has taken
the greatest pains to clear the nature of that Worship, Bellarm. de Sanct.
beatitud. l. 1. c. 12.
which is given to Saints; yet, upon a through examination of it, we shall find
that all his pleas would have held as well for the Worship of Demons in the
Platonists sense of them, as they do for the worship of Saints among
Christians. Three things he tells us Adoration consists in, An Act of
Understanding apprehending some excellency; An Act of the Will, whereby we are
inwardly inclined to do something by an internal, or external act, by which we
declare our sense of that excellency, and our subjection to it; and lastly, An
external Act, in which we bow or kneel, or show some outward sign of
subjection. Now of these three he says, the second is most proper and
essential, because the first may be without Adoration, and the last with
Irrision of that we pretend to worship. Further he observes that there are so
many sorts of Adoration or Worship, as there are degrees of excellency, of
which he reckons three kinds, Divine, Humane, and between both, as the Grace
and Glory of the Saints: and that these several sorts of Worship, according to
these several excellencies, are not univocal, but analogical: and that they may
be very well distinguished by the Internal Acts, for the inclination of the
will is greater or less, according to the degree of excellency apprehended in
the object. But as to the External Acts, it is not easy to distinguish them;
for, almost all External Acts, (sacrifice only, and the things referring to it
excepted) are common to all kinds of Adoration. This is the substance of what
he has, for explaining the nature of Divine Worship: And by which I cannot
possibly see, but that kind of Worship which was given by the Heathens to their
Demons, was defensible upon the same grounds that the Invocations of Saints is
now. For as these apprehend a greater excellency in God, than in the Saints; so
did they in the Supreme God, than in those Inferior Deities; which they did
not acknowledge to have an Infinite Nature in themselves, but only that they
had the honor of being solemnly worshipped bestowed upon them. But this will
be much clearer in the case of the Heroes, or the Apotheosis of the Roman
Emperors, as Augustus for instance. The Roman Senate decrees, that Divine
Honors shall be given to Augustus: we cannot think, that by virtue of this
decree he assumed a Divine Nature, or became absolutely God, so that the Act of
the Understanding was of the same nature, which it would have been, supposing
some Roman Catholic should believe Augustus to have been a Saint: on which
supposition, we will suppose a Heathen and him to be at their prayers together
to him. I pray now tell me, Wherein lies the difference, that one is Idolatry,
and the other is not: for neither of them suppose him to be the Supreme God,
both look on him as having a middle kind of excellency between God and man, the
external actions are the same in both, and their apprehensions of excellency
being equal, the inclinations of their Wills to testify their devotion must be
equal too. If you answer me, that one looks on him as a Saint, and the other
does not; I may soon tell you, that is nothing to the purpose; for, the
Question is not, Whether he was a Saint or no, but, Whether the apprehension of
a middle excellency between Divine and Humane, with a correspondent inclination
of the Will, testified by external acts of Adoration be Idolatry or no? If it
be Idolatry in the one, it must be in the other; for the ratio formalis is the
same in both, viz. the apprehension of an excellency between Divine and Humane:
for we are not enquiring, Whether the apprehension be true or false, but, What
the nature of that act of Religion is, which is cons^quent upon such an
apprehension. Now if it were not Idolatry in him* that believed Augustus to be
a Saint, and worshipped him; How can it be made appear to be so in him, that
believed him deified, or that Divine Honors did belong to him? And if this be
granted; for my part, I cannot tell how you can excuse the Primitive
Christians, that would rather suffer Martyrdom, than worship the Heathen
Emperors; for, although they all thought it Idolatry, yet upon these
principles it could not be so; but the worst that could be made of it, was
this, That the Senate took that upon it, which it had nothing to do with,
because it belonged to the Pope to Canonize men, and not to the Roman Senate.
For, let me put it seriously to you, Whether you do not attribute the very same
kind of authority to the Pope now, which the Roman Senate challenged in the
(...), of the Roman Emperors? For, whosoever will compare the rites of
Canonization in Bellarmin with the ancient rites of the (...), De Sanct. beat.
l. 1. c. 7.
will find them exactly answering to each other. For, 1. They are put in a
Catalogue of Saints, and must be owned by all for such. 2. Invocantur in
publicis Ecclesiae precibus, They are prayed to in the public prayers of the
Church. 3. Temples and Altars for their sake, are dedicated to God. 4. The
sacrifices of the Eucharist, of prayers, and praises, are publicly offered to
God for their honor; and then follow their Festivals, Images, Relics, etc.
What was there more done then, that public Divine Honors were made to the
Deified Emperors; not that these Honors were wholly terminated upon them, but
they thought the giving of this relative Honor to them, did redound to the
greater Honor of the Supreme Deity? So that we see, a new object of Divine
Worship is solemnly appointed, upon the Popes Canonizing a Saint; and no
pretense can be made to excuse this from Idolatry, which would not have excused
all those Heathens from it, who believed there was one Supreme Deity, and yet
allowed Divine Honors to be given to such Spirits which were employed by him,
or attended on him. So that if the notion of Idolatry must only lie in such an
act of the Will, which results from an apprehension of infinite excellency,
which is only in the Supreme Being; very few, if any, of the more intelligent
Heathens were ever guilty of it. But if the formal reason of their Idolatry lay
in offering up those devotions to that which was not God, which only belong to
an Infinite Being; I see not, but the same charge will hold on the same
grounds, against those who Invocate Saints with those external acts of
devotion, which are confessed to be the same with those wherewith we call on
God. But nothing can be more unreasonable, than that Bellarmin should except
Sacrifices, and things belonging thereto, from being common to the first and
second sort of Adoration, and not except Invocation. For, Is it possible to
conceive any act which does more express our sense of an Infinite Excellency,
and the profession of our subjection to it, than Invocation does? which does it
far more than Sacrifice does; for that being a mere external act, is consistent
with the greatest mockery of God; but solemn Invocation implies in its own
nature our dependence upon God, and an acknowledgement of his Infinite
Knowledge and Power. For Invocation lies chiefly in the internal acts, and
denotes primarily the inward desire of obtaining something from a Being above
our own: So that, though I should grant the mere external acts of bowing and
kneeling to be common to Adoration given to infinite and finite perfections;
yet I utterly deny that these acts are common to both, when the circumstances
do determine the end and design of them. As no man by the mere bowing of
Abraham to the Children of Heth could tell, whether it were civil or divine
Adoration which he meant; but none who understood all the circumstances of it,
would have any reason to question it. But, suppose it had been declared before,
that these men expected a more than civil Adoration, and that all the rites of
solemn Invocation which Abraham at any time used to God, must be used to them
too; then the same external acts must have received a new denomination. So that
though the mere external acts be common to civil and religious Worship, yet as
those acts are considered with their several circumstances, they are
appropriated to one or the other of them. Thus, though a man may use the same
form of words to an Emperor on his Throne, and the same external posture,
which he does use after his death in a Temple consecrated to him; yet in the
one they are merely signs of Civil Worship, but in the other they become
Testimonies of Religious Adoration. So, although in the Invocation of Saints,
no other words were used, but such as denote them to be Creatures still, yet if
they be used with all the rites of solemn Invocation; in places appropriate to
Divine Worship, and in Sacred Offices, they thereby declare the Adoration
intended to be greater than any mere creature is capable of. For we must
consider, that as God is owned to be Infinite in himself, and to have
incommunicable perfections, so by reason of them there ought to be some
appropriated acts or signs of Worship, to declare our subjection to him; which
being determined for this end, either by the Law of God, or the consent of
people, the attributing of them to any else but him, is a public violation of
his honor. Although in so doing, men profess that they intend them only as
expressions of a lower kind of Worship than is due to the Supreme Being. But in
such cases the protestation avails not, where the fact is evident to the
contrary. For when men in the most solemn manner, in public places of
devotion, and in sacred offices, do invocate Saints, and yet think they
dishonor not God by it, because they say, they do not worship them as God; it
is just as if a man should upon all occasions, in the Presence Chamber, address
himself to one of the King's subjects as to the King himself; and being
questioned for it, should only say, he did not dishonor the King by it,
because he meant it not to him as a King, but as a Subject. But by so much is
the dishonor greater because the Soveraignity of the King does require that
the rights of Majesty should not be given to any Subject whatsoever. So that it
is but a vain pretense, when men use all the expressions whereby we declare our
sense of the Infinite Perfections which are in God, to any Creatures, to say,
They give them not that Worship which belongs to God, merely because they do
believe they are Creatures still. But, Is it possible for men to give the
honor which is due to God, to the Creatures, or no, acknowledging them to be
Creatures still? or, Is it not? If not, then none of the Heathens could be
guilty of Idolatry, in worshipping Demons, Heroes, and Deified Emperors; if
it be possible, then the acknowledging the Saints not to be God, cannot excuse
men from the same kind of Idolatry, in the Invocation of them. And it is as
frivolous a plea which is made for those forms of Invocation which are made to
the Saints in plain terms, not to intercede with God for them, but to bestow
upon them both temporal and spiritual Blessings (of which multitudes have been
produced by our Writers) viz. That though the form of words be the same that is
used to God, yet the sense is wholly that they would pray to God to bestow
them. For, How should any other sense be understood, when these forms are
allowed in Invocation? For, although the Scripture may sometimes attribute the
effect to the subordinate Instrument, as when S. Paul is said to save some, yet
certainly the Scripture is far from allowing such a liberty in solemn
Invocation: For upon this ground it might have been lawful for men to have
fallen down upon their knees to St. Paul, and have entreated him to save them.
Do you think, St. Paul would have approved such phrases in Invocation? So that
it is not the mere phrase, but as it is joined with all rites of Invocation,
which makes it look so like the most gross Idolatry. When you pray to the
Virgin Mary, to protect you from your enemies, and receive you in the hour of
death; and to the Apostles, to heal your spiritual maladies, which forms are
acknowledged by Bellarmin; Can any reasonable man think, Bell. de San^^. beat.
l. 1. c. 17.
that the meaning of them only is, that they would pray to God to do these
things for them. If one should bring his Petition to a Courtier for his Pardon,
and in plain terms beg that of him which the King only can grant; What man that
had his wits about him, would ever imagine that he only meant by it, that he
would entreat the King to do it for him. But God is more jealous of his honor,
than to be put off by such Mockeries as these are: Nay, when your great men at
the end of their most elaborate works conclude with a Laus Deo and beatissimae
Virgini, What can be meant by it, but the attributing an honor of the same
kind to the one as the other? And when prayers are made to Saints, that through
their merits they would do such things for them, it is hard conceiving the
meaning should only be, that they would pray to God for them. Nay, some have
expressly said, That God has communicated that which of right belonged to him
because of his divinity and omnipotency,to the blessed Virgin, and the Saints;
and, that which is more wonderful to their Images too. So Gulielmus Fabricius
in his appropriation of Lipsius his Diva Virgo Hallensis, which it is thought
by some that Lipsius only writ in imitation of some Heathen Goddess; which may
be a very probable account of that otherwise very unhappy undertaking of that
learned Man. And as one said of the Pen he offered to the Virgin, Nothing could
be lighter, unless it were the Book he wrote with it. Post Tacitum exactum,
consummatosque labores
Pennam Lipsiades hanc tibi, Diva, dicat.
Nil potuit penn^ levius tibi Diva dicare,
Ni f^^erit levius quod tibi scribit opus.

But that professed Critic understood well enough the exactness of the
parallel of the Worship of the Virgin Mary, with that of the Heathen Goddesses;
and therefore very suitably calls her Tutelaris Diva, by which his meaning
might be guessed at, as Plato's was, by his using the name of God, or Gods. But
however that be, we are sure the parallel is so great between the worship of
Saints in the Church of Rome, and that of Heroes and Demons amongst the
Heathens, that if one be justified, the other cannot be condemned, and if one
be condemned, the other cannot be justified. So that from hence it follows,
that the arguments used by the Primitive Christians against that Worship, will
hold against Invocation of Saints; because the Heathens pleaded not for an
absolute and sovereign Worship of them, but only such a kind of relative and
subordinate Worship, as you profess to be due to Saints. Thus much may suffice
to clear the notion of Worship in the Primitive Church, and to show, how far
that was from approving your Doctrine of the Invocation of Saints.

. 22.
The next Argument I intended to have insisted on, should have been the proving
the Divinity of Christ from the Invocation of him, Athanas. Orat: 4. Cont.
Arrian. Greg. Nyssen. Orat. 4. Cont. Eunom. Novatian. de Trin. c. 14.
as Athanasius and several others do; which could signify nothing, if
Invocation were then allowed to Saints. But this has been so amply managed by
others, and the sense of the Church having been sufficiently discovered by our
precedent discourse; I shall not need to insist any more on those foregoing
times, but now come to that age of the Church, wherein the honor of the
Martyrs seems to be advanced higher upon the ceasing of persecution. But still
his Lordship says, That the Church then admitted not of the Invocation of
Saints, but only of the Commemoration of the Martyrs, as appears clearly in S.
Augustine, Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 22. c. 10.
who says, Although they be at the Sacrifice named in their order, non tamen a
Sacerdote qui sacrificat invocantur: they are not invoked by the Priest who
sacrifices. P. 291.
Now to this you answer, The Father's meaning is, that the Saints departed are
not invocated, or called upon by way of Sacrifice, i. e. as persons to whom the
Sacrifice is offered; which, you say, is a work of Religion due to God only:
and this you prove was all that S. Austin meant, because in other places of his
works, where he teaches, that not only Commemoration is made of the Saints
departed in time of Sacrifice, but that it is done to this particular intent
and purpose, viz. that they would pray for us; which doubtless amounts to a
virtual Invocation of them. And for this you produce several passages out of
his works. Two things therefore must be enquired into. 1. What the meaning of
S. Austin is, when he says, That the Saints are not invocated at the
sacrifice. 2. What his meaning is, in those places wherein he allows of that
you call Virtual Invocation, viz. that the Saints would pray for us. 1. We are
to enquire, What S. Austin's meaning is, when he says, That the Saints are not
invocated at the Sacrifice; meaning no other, (say you) but the Sacrifice of
the Mass, which you hope the Reader will mark for S. Austin's sake; wherein you
betray most egregious ignorance or fraud, if you either suppose the Christians
called nothing else a Sacrifice at that time, but what you now call the Mass,
or that they did it in the same respect that you do now. A Sacrifice of Prayer
and Praise indeed they had, and a Commemoration of Christ's Sacrifice in the
Lords Supper, but no such thing as a propitiatory Sacrifice for the living and
the dead; and I pray mark this for your own sake. But for our better
understanding S. Austin's meaning, we must consider that he is there comparing
the honors which the Heathens gave to their Heroes, with those which the
Christians give to the Martyrs. They, says he, to those Gods of theirs, build
Temples, erect Altars, appoint Priests, and offer Sacrifices; but we do not
build any Temples to the Martyrs as to gods, but raise Sepulchers as to dead
men, whose spirits live with God; neither do we build Altars, at which we may
sacrifice to the Martyrs, but we offer up a Sacrifice only to the God of the
Martyrs, and of us; at which Sacrifice, says he, as holy men of God, who
through their confession of him have overcome the world, they are named in
their place and order, but are not invocated by the Priest, who offers up the
Sacrifice. Two things may here be understood by the Sacrifice, either the
anniversary Sacrifice of praise to God, on the day of their Natalitia or
Martyrdoms; or else the celebration of the Eucharist, which was wont to be done
at the memoriae Martyrum chiefly upon that anniversary day. Now there are many
reasons to incline me to think that S. Austin does not speak of any ordinary
celebration of the Eucharist, but of that anniversary solemnity, which was wont
to be kept at the tombs of the Martyrs on the day of their sufferings. Chiefly
because S. Austin is here paralleling the honors of the Martyrs, with those of
the Heathen Heroes; and therefore it was reason he should speak of the greatest
solemnities which were used for them. Now it is certain that there were such
anniversary days then kept (by many passages of those times, and somewhat
before them) especially in the African Churches; and at these they offered up
solemn prayers and praises to God. Both which are clear from this passage of S.
Cyprian, Sacrificia pro iis semper ut meministis offerimus, Cyprian. ep. 34. p.
53.
quoties Martyrum passiones and dies anniversaria Commemoratione celebramus:
Where we find an anniversary Commemoration and Sacrifices offered at them. What
these Sacrifices were, Rigaltius in his Observations on that place tells us;
Christiani, says he, sacris anniversariis, lauds Deo dicunt, commemoratis
eorum nominibus qui pro fide Christo dicta Martyrium fortiter obierunt. Rigalt.
obs. ad Cyprian. p. 50.
So that the Sacrifice was a Sacrifice of praise to God in behalf of the
Martyrs. At which they had their Orationum Sacrificia too, as Tertullian calls
them, who says, Under the Gospel the pure Sacrifice is Prayer to God; and that
the sinner being cleansed, ought to offer to God, munus apud Templum, Tertull.
c. Marcion. l. 3. p. 497. l. 4. p. 502.
orationem sci. and gratiarum actionem apud Ecclesiam per Jesum Christum
Catholicum Patris Sacerdotem, a Sacrifice in his Temple, viz. prayer and praise
in his Church through Jesus Christ the Catholic High Priest of his Father.
Hence S. Cyprian, Quando in Sacrificiis precem cum pluribus facimus, P. 512.
Ed. Rigalt.
which Rigaltius explains by the public prayers, which the Priest made for the
people, and understands it wholly of the Sacrifices of prayers. Cypr. ep. 15.
So that these solemn thanksgivings to God in behalf of the Martyrs, and the
prayers which were made for others, are those Sacrifices which did belong to
these anniversary solemnities, Oblationes pro defunctis, Tertull. de Coron.
M^lit. c. 3.
pro natalitiis annua die facimus. Those oblationes pro natalitiis, were
nothing else but these solemn Eucharistical Sacrifices in behalf of the Martyrs
sufferings, which were called their Natalitia. Now to apply this to S. Austin:
among the honors belonging to the Martyrs, he mentions the Sacrifice which was
offered to God in Commemoration of them, and, What can this be other than on
that anniversary solemnity which Tertullian and Cyprian mention, that was duly
kept on that account. Now at this Sacrifice, says he, they are named in their
order, but not invocated. Which being understood of the anniversary day, and of
the Sacrifices of prayers and praises, nothing can be more express against
Invocation of Saints, than this place is. For, if ever they were solemnly
invocated, it certainly would be on the day of the great solemnity for them;
and if then all prayers and praises were looked on as due only to God, as
Sacrifices belonging to him, then it cannot but be a robbing God of his honor,
to offer up either prayers or praises to any but himself. But, because it was
the custom at those solemnities, to have the Eucharist administered, and that S.
Austin afterward mentions this, I shall not exclude the Eucharist here, yet
that Sacrifice may still comprehend all the supplications which were then used;
and if the Saints were not invocated then, we have reason to conclude they were
not at all. For the Commemoration of the Martyrs was made after the Ite, missa
est, and the Catechumens were departed; so that there was no such occasion for
their Invocation at any other time, as then. So that if there were no
Invocation of them at the Sacrifice, much less was there out of it; since all
the solemnities concerning the Martyrs were used in the time of Celebration.
Thus we see, this place of S. Austin is full and clear against Invocation of
Saints, and we must now enquire into what he says elsewhere. Only we take
notice here, that S. Austin not only appropriates Sacrifices as a thing
peculiar to God, but Temples and Altars too. And that Sacrifice which was then
appropriated to God, was not a propitiatory Sacrifice, but Eucharistical and
supplicatory; and by consequence, if Sacrifice only belongs to God, then all
Thanksgiving and Invocation does too. For both those, we see, were comprehended
by the African Fathers under the notion of Sacrifice.

. 23.
We proceed now to enquire, what S. Austin says elsewhere; Whether he does any
where else allow Invocation as due to Saints? For which we must consider, that
St. Austin every where appropriates all acts of Religion only to God; for he
expressly says, That we must only ask of God that good which we hope to do, S.
Augustine Enchirid. c. 114. De quantitate animae. c. 34. De ve^a Relig. c. 55.
De Civit. Dei. l. 10. c. 1. c. 4. l. 5. c. 15. l. 7. c. 32. Epist. 49. quaest.
3. Epist. 63. Confess. l. 10. c. 42.
that God alone must be served by the soul, because he alone is the Creator of
it: and that every glorified rational creature, is only to be loved and
imitated; that we ought not to apply our Religion to yield service to the dead;
that they must be honored for imitation, not worshipped for Religion. That
Religion is nothing else but the Worship of God, and therefore we ought not to
consecrate our selves to any thing else, by any Religious rites. That those who
have gone to Angels, instead of God, have fallen into many illusions, and
deceitful fancies. Now is it conceivable, that a person constant to himself,
should so often, and on such good grounds assert, that all Acts of Religion
belong only to God, and yet withal ascribe religious Invocation as due either
to Saints or Angels? But we must further consider, that the ground of S.
Austin's distinguishing between (...) and (...), was not to assert different
degrees of religious worship, but to make different kinds of worship of those
two; the one being properly religious worship, the other only cultus
dilectionis and societatis, as he calls it, a worship only of love and respect.
So that we quarrel not with the distinction it self, but with your misapplying
it. For St. Austin plainly makes the honor given to Saints departed, Colimus
ergo Martyrs eo cultu dilectionis and societatis, quo and in hac vita coluntur
Sancti homines Dei. Cont. Faustum. l. 20 c. 21.
to be of the same nature with that which is given them, while they live: all
the difference is, says he, we may render that honor to them with the more
confidence, after they have over come. But still adds, That all religious
worship is proper only to God. The only difficulty then is, What is to be
understood by those other passages you produce out of him. And this we have
gained already, that they cannot be understood of any religious worship,
without an apparent contradiction. Your first Citation is, That the
commemoration of Martyrs at the Holy Table, Tract. 84. in Johan. De verbis Ap.
sermon. 17. ( not) 34.
is not that we should pray for them, but rather that they should pray for us.
To the same purpose the second is, That it is an injury to pray for a Martyr,
to whose prayers we our selves ought to be recommended. The only things which
can be drawn from hence are, that the Martyrs do pray for the Church on earth,
and that we ought to recommend our selves to their prayers: But what is this to
an Invocation of them, when it does not so much as imply a direct desire of
them to pray for us? When this recommending our selves to the prayers of the
Martyrs, is probably understood of nothing else, but a desire that God would
hear the prayers which the Saints in Heaven do make on our behalf, without any
address to the Martyrs themselves, that they would pray for us. Which seems
very unreasonable, without good assurance that they did hear or understand
those requests of that nature which are made to them. It is not therefore the
saying that the Saints do pray for us, which makes it either lawful or
profitable for us to pray to them. For since they ascribe that honor as alone
due to God, so ought we to do too; and I can hardly see how the very praying to
Saints to pray for us, being performed with all the rites of solemn and
Religious Invocation, can be excused from attributing that honor to the
creature which is due only to the Creator. And therefore I cannot but wonder
at those who would make this only of the same nature, with our desiring
Fellow Christians to pray for us. For is there no difference between a man's
entreating a Courtier to present his Petition to the King, and his falling down
on his Knees to him with all the ceremony due to the King himself; and then put
it off, with saying, that in all that, he only desired him to sue to his
Majesty in his behalf? Although therefore we condemn not the solemn praying to
God, not only to hear the prayers of the Church Militant, but of that part of
it which is triumphant in behalf of the other in General; yet this falls far
short of solemn addresses in places of Divine worship, and in Sacred offices to
the Saints, that they would pray for us. This is it, which as to that you call
virtual Invocation, you should have proved out of St. Austin; and yet even that
falls much short of that direct and formal Invocation which is both used and
allowed in the Church of Rome. But you offer at a further proof of a direct Ora
pro nobis in St. Austin. For (say you) St. Austin does profess it to be the
General custom of Christians in their recommending themselves to the Saints, to
say, De Civit. Dei. l. 21. c. 27*
Memor esto nostri; which surely no man will contend to signify less than ora
pro nobis. I grant, it signifies as much where St. Austin uses it; but if you
had consulted the place you might easily have seen how wholly impertinent it is
to your purpose. For St. Austin speaks not at all there of Saints departed, but
of them living; and that it was a common thing among Christians to say to any
one of them Memor esto mei, Remember me in your prayers; which appears by the
whole scope of that Chapter, where he speaks of giving alms, and the effect of
them on those who received them in making them mindful of them. It cannot be
denied, but some of them did use such expressions to those who were near their
Martyrdom; but still this only shows the requesting it of them, when they were
sure they heard them; but it proves not any solemn Invocations of them when
they were dead. But if we should grant, that there are expressions intimating a
desire that Saints in Heaven should pray for them, which is the utmost you can
make of the citation out of the Sermon on St. Stephen (which with the rest de
Sanctis is vehemently suspected, and the other on Job is counterfeit) yet there
is a great deal of difference to be put between such a calling upon Martyrs (of
whom only St. Austin speaks) out of a desire of their prayers; and a solemn and
direct praying to them in the most Sacred offices and public devotions: which
is used and approved in your Church. For whatever there might be of private
devotion (not to call it superstition) this way in St. Austins time, in
desiring the prayers of departed Saints whom they could have no ground at all
to believe they heard them; yet you can bring no evidence of any use of this in
the public offices of the Church, much less of that direct Invocation, which
we most of all charge your Church with. That then which began in mere
hypothetical addresses, went somewhat further, when they began to grow more
confident that in some extraordinary way or other the Saints heard them; but
still this kept it self within the bounds of the cultus dilectionis and
societatis, that respect which arose from Love and Communion; but it was a good
while after before it obtained a place in the public Offices, and yet longer,
before it came to that height of Religious Invocation, which is more practiced
then pleaded for in the Church of Rome. For although great endeavors be used
to smooth over these gross abuses with fair distinctions, of relative and
absolute, direct and indirect worship; yet the general practice is incapable of
being palliated by these narrow coverings, there being the most formal and
direct Invocations used to Saints for spiritual and temporal blessings. Which
being allowed of in common practice and the most sacred Offices, can never be
excused from as great Idolatry as the Heathens were guilty of, in the worship
of their Inferior Deities. I conclude this therefore with that of Spalatensis,
Sp^lat. oste^. err.

Suarez. c. 2. sect. 20. Wicel. via regia. de I^vocat. Sanct.


Religious Invocation of Saints is Heathenism; and mere civil Invocation of
them, though not so bad is yet dangerous. And therefore Wicelius justly says,
That the Invocation of Saints, is to be cast out of the Church, because it
ascribes Gods honor and attributes to his creatures, and derogates from the
office and glory of Christ by making Saints, Mediators and Intercessours.

. 24.
Which is that we now come to consider. For, as his Lordship says, When the
Church prayed to God for any thing, Page 276.
she desired to be heard for the mercies and the merits of Christ, not for the
merits of any Saints whatsoever. For I much doubt, this were to make the Saints
more then Mediators of Intercession, which is all that you will acknowledge
you allow to the Saints. For I pray, is not by the Merits more then by the
Intercession? Did not Christ redeem us by his merits? And if God must hear our
prayers for the merits of the Saints, how much fall they short of sharers in
the mediation of Redemption? Such prayers as these the Church of Rome makes at
this day, and they stand (not without great scandal to Christ and Christianity)
used and authorized to be used in the Missal. To this you Answer in two things.
1. That such prayers as these, are used in Scripture. P. 292.
2. That they are no derogation to the merits of Christ. For the first, you
say, Solomon, Psalm. 132. pray's to God to hear him, in effect for the merits of
his Father David deceased, when he says, Memento, Domine, David and omnis
mansuetudinis ejus, Lord remember David and all his meekness, etc. This (you
say) cannot be understood of Gods Covenant and promise made to David ( as
Protestants vainly pretend) but of David's piety and virtue by which he was
acceptable to God. For which reason he adds again, For thy servant David's sake
turn not away the face of thine Anointed. The like was done by Daniel, Moses,
Hieremias and other Prophets praying unto God, and desiring their petitions
might be heard for Abraham, for Isaac, for Isreal's sake, and for the sakes of
other Holy men, who had lived before, and been in their times persons
acceptable to God. And for this you quote St. Austin and Chrysostom. So far
you have very fairly rendered Bellarmin exactly in English. But we are yet to
seek, De Sanct. beatitud. l. 1 c. 19.
Why all those expressions in Scripture are not to be understood of the
Covenant and Promise God made with those persons who are mentioned by you. For
it is considerable, that you instance in none but such whom God had made an
express Covenant with, as with the Patriarchs, and with David. But since you
say, That this Answer has not the least ground from the Text, therein you
outdo Bellarmin, and speak that which the Text evidently contradicts you in.
For Psalm. 132.11. next after those very words, For thy servant David 's sake;
it follows, The Lord has sworn in truth unto David; and, in the following
verse, The Covenant God made with David is mentioned. If thy Children will keep
my Covenant and my Testimony that I shall teach them, their Children also shall
sit upon thy throne for evermore. You had then much consulted the Text when you
say, This exposition had not the least ground from it; for that speaks expressly
of the Promise and Covenant which God made with David. And what you add to the
text, of David's piety and virtue, we may more justly say, has not the least
ground from it. For the word does not signify meekness but affliction, and
therefore Aquila renders it (...), Symmachus (...), and some old Copies (...),
all referring not to David's merits, but to his sufferings. And it is not
improbably conceived by some, that this Psalm is not of Solomon's penning, but
of David's; and that at the time when the Ark was to be brought back from the
House of Obed Edom to Jerusalem. And in all those other places of Scripture
mentioned, referring to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; the Scripture is very plain,
that they are to be understood of the Covenant God made with them: As appears
by the very words of Moses, Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel thy servants,
Exodus 32.13. Exodus 6.5.8. Levit 26.42, 45.
to whom thou swarest by thine own self, etc. And God himself speaks often of
his remembering his Covenant which he made with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and
that is the ground why the Prophets afterward plead the remembrance of those
persons, because the Covenant made with them was the foundation of all those
blessings which the Children of Israel expected afterward. The utmost that can
be made of St. Augustins testimony is, Aug. in Exodus quaest. 49.
That God may sometimes show favor to a people that has deserved ill at his
hands for the sake of such as pray for them; as he did to the people of Israel
for the sake of Moses. And all that St. Chrysostom says, is, That God may show
mercy to wicked men for the sake of their righteous Ancestors who are dead.
Chrysostom. hom. 42. in Genesis hom. 27. in Matthew.
But this is no more then he has promised, That he will show mercy to them
that love him to the third and fourth Generation. But there is a great deal of
difference to be made between the expressions of Gods bounty and the Foundation
of our prayers; which ought to be only a promise of God. And in this case we
deny it not to be lawful, to pray that God would remember his promise: but that
is a quite different thing from praying that we may receive blessings through
the merits of the Saints in Heaven. So that it cannot be hence concluded, that
it is no unwarrantable thing to pray that God would hear us for the merits of
the Saints.

But this will be further explained now we come to see, how you vindicate this
from being any derogation to the merits of Christ.. 25.
We believe, say you, P. 293.
and confess that Christ alone is our Redeemer; and that he, and none but he,
by the just price of his most precious blood, has paid our ransom, and fully
satisfied the justice of God for our sins: all that we desire of the Saints,
either when we mention their merits to God, or simply beg their Intercession
with God for us, is only, that they would join with us in prayer to God, and
that God would be pleased for their sakes, whose works were so grateful to him,
to bestow on us the favors we ask. When things are so odious in the practice
of them, that they cause all persons of any ingenuity among your selves to cry
out upon them, then your Arts are, To let the same practices continue still,
but to find out some plausible pretext to color them over with. As it is here
in the business of praying to Saints, and making them thereby to be Mediators
between God and us; which implying so great dishonor to the all sufficiency of
the Merits and Intercession of Christ, you are fain to find out the fairest
excuses you can make for it, although the practices still continue which
overthrow all the distinctions you use. Thus it is plain, that direct and
formal prayers in your Church are made to Saints; but, you say, these are only
to entreat them to pray for us: You pray expressly (as his Lordship tells you)
That God by the merits and prayers of Saints would deliver you from the fire of
Hell; P. 277.
that you may obtain the glory of eternity by their merits; and that God would
absolve you from your sins by their Interceding merits: and yet for all this,
you would have us believe, that you offer no derogation at all to the Merits
and Intercession of Christ. But is it not the great honor of Christ that his
Merits and Intercession alone are all-sufficient to procure all spiritual
blessings for us? And can any spiritual blessings be greater than deliverance
from hell, eternal glory, and the forgiveness of sins? And when you pray for
all these through the Merits of the Saints, how can you possibly more disparage
the all sufficiency of the Merits of Christ? For, if those be sufficient what
need any more? Will God grant that for the Merits of the Saints, which he would
not do for the Intercession of Christ? Or, do we want the Merits of the Saints
to apply the Merits of Christ? but still something of weakness and defect must
be employed in them, if some further additional Merits be wanting for the
application of the former. If a Prince should declare to some of his Fathers
Subjects, that he would satisfy his Fathers displeasure, and intercede for
them that they should have an absolute pardon; Would it not argue a distrust of
the Princes Interest to solicit some Inferior Attendants to entreat the King
to pardon them for their sakes? And it is here a plain case, whatever you
pretend, that you do not only pray that the Saints would join in prayer to God
with you, but you run to them for help and assistance, in order to the
obtaining the greatest spiritual blessings from God. For so the Council of
Trent expressly defines, That it is not only good and profitable to Invocate the
Saints, but ob beneficia impetranda a Deo per Christum ad eorum orationes,
Council. T^^^nt. sess. ult.
opem auxiliumque confugere; for the obtaining of blessings from God through
Christ, we ought to fly to their prayers, help and assistance. If nothing else
were meant, but only that the Saints should pray for us, What means help and
assistance mentioned as distinct from their prayers? Catech. Romans p. 3 p. 504.
And the Roman Catechism more fully delivers it (which was published by order
of the Council of Trent) viz. That Saints are not only to be invocated, because
of their prayers to God, but because God bestows many blessings on us, eorum
merito and gratia, by their merits and favor; and after adds, Roga^i and
peccatorum veniam impetrabunt, and conciliabunt nobis Dei gratiam; Being asked,
they will obtain the pardon of sin, and procure for us the savor of God. And,
What can be more said concerning Christ himself? Although therefore you say
never so much, That your prayers are made to the Saints through the merits of
Christ, and that you conclude all your prayers, per Christum Dominum nostrum;
yet all this cannot clear you from offering the greatest dishonor to the
merits and intercession of Christ, since it is plain you rely on the Saints
merits, in order to the obtaining the Blessings you pray for. But, say you, If
the Saints being rewarded in Heaven for their merits, Ibid.
be not injurious to the fullness of Christ^ merits, Why should their being
heard by virtue of those merits, when they pray to God for us through Christ,
or our desire that they may be heard for them, be thought injurious to Christ's
merits? To which I answer, Those merits which you suppose in Saints, when they
are rewarded in Heaven, have either an equal proportion with the reward they
receive, or not? If not, then they cease to be merits, and the giving the
reward, (though an act of Justice, the Promise supposed) yet in it self is
wholly an act of Grace and Favor; if they have, then the full recompense is
received by that reward, and nothing further can be obtained for others on
their account. But in the sense it is to be suspected you take merits in, we as
well assert, that the proportioning the reward in Heaven to the merits of
Saints, is injurious to the fullness of Christ's merits, as their obtaining
mercies for others by reason of them. Only this latter adds to the dishonor,
in that there is not only supposed a proportion between Heaven and them; but,
as though that were not enough, a further efficacy is attributed to them, for
obtaining mercies for others too. His Lordship therefore does not go about to
pervert the sense of the prayers used in your Missal; but the plain words and
sense of them evidently show, how contrary they are to Christian Doctrine and
Piety. Bellarmin's saying, that the Saints may in some sense be called our
Redeemers, cannot be vindicated by that saying of S. Paul, That he became all
things to all men, that he might save some; 1 Cor. 9.23.
because salvation respects the effect of Christ's death, the promotion of which
may in some sense be attributed to the Instruments of it, such as S. Paul was
here on Earth; but Redemption respects the merits by which that effect was
obtained, and so belongs wholly to Christ, and cannot be attributed to any
Saints, either in Earth or Heaven. When you can prove that any subordinate
Instruments of Gods Power are called Numina, you may then excuse Bellarmin for
calling the Saints so; but that is so incongruous a sense of the word, that it
needs no confutation.

We are now come to the last Error, which his Lordship here charges your
pretended General Councils with, which is,. 26.
concerning Adoration of Images. Of which, his Lordship says, That the Ancient
Church knew it not. And the Modern Church of Rome is too like to Paganism, in
the practice of it; P. 277.
and driven to scarce intelligible subtilties in her servants writings that
defend it. And this, without any care had of millions of souls, unable to
understand her subtilties, or shun her practice. Here you say, The Bishop is
very bitter; but no more than the nature of the thing required. All the Answer
you return to this, lies in these things. 1. That the Church of Rome teaches
nothing concerning the Worship of Images, P. 294.
but what the second Council of Nice did nine hundred years ago; which is, that
they must be had in Veneration, and due Reverence, but not have Divine Worship
given to them. 2. That Images were in common Use and Veneration too, amongst
Christians in the Ancient Church. 3. That what abuses are crept in, are not to
be imputed to the Church, but to particular persons. This is the substance of
what you say to the end of the Chapter; as to which a brief Answer will
suffice, because I design not a full handling the Question of the worship of
Images. If that which you say in the first place, be true, it does the more
prove that which his Lordship intends, viz. that not one barely, but two of
those you own to be General Councils, have erred in this particular. If either
those Councils, or you, had intended to have dealt fairly and honestly with the
world, they and you should have declared, what that Veneration and Reverence
is, which is due to Images; What difference you put between that, and the
Worship due to God; and, Whether the same pretenses and excuses would not as
well have justified the Pagan Idolatries? For this was it which his Lordship
charged you with, that you came too near Paganism in your practice. But as to
this you answer nothing, but that if you do, so did the Council of Nice too:
But, Is that a sufficient excuse for you? It is well enough known, What kind of
Council that was; How much it was opposed by the Synod of Frankford; How many
persons both in the Eastern and Western Churches, declared themselves against
the Doctrine of it? But, What a pitiful plea is it for you to say, That the
Council of Trent had silenced all calumnies, by saying, That you attribute no
Divinity to the Images, but only worship them with such honor and reverence as
is due to them? Would not any considerate Heathens have said as much as this
is? But, the Question is, Whether that Veneration of them which is used by you
toward Images, be due to them, or no? This you should have undertaken, and set
the distinct limits between the worship due to God, and that which is given to
these. You should have proved, that this is no prohibited way of worship; for,
if it be, it can in no sense be due to them. For, since God may determine the
modes of his own worship, what he has forbidden in his service, becomes
unlawful; and, so long as that command continues in force, all acts of worship
contrary to it, are a positive kind of Idolatry. For, as there is a kind of
Natural Idolatry lying in the worship of false Gods instead of the true; so
there is that which may be called Positive Idolatry, which is a worshipping God
in a way or manner which he has forbidden. From whence the Israelites in the
Golden Calf, and the Ten Tribes in the worship of the Calves at Dan and Bethel,
are charged with Idolatry, although they acknowledged the true God, and
designed that for a Relative worship to him. If it were so then, you should
have showed us, How it comes to be otherwise now? Where it was, God repealed
the second Commandment? or, What there was in it typical and ceremonial, that
it must cease to oblige at Christ's coming? or, What Reasons it was built on,
which were only proper to the Jews, and cannot extend to the Christians too?
and, Why Relative Worship, and the helps for memory and devotion would not as
well have justified the use and worship of Images, before Christ as after? And
why the same reasons from the danger of Idolatry, low conceptions of God (and
what other reasons you will give of that prohibition then) may not hold as well
still? These, and many other things, if you would have vindicated the practice
of your Church you ought to have insisted on. But since you omit them wholly,
and think to put us off with repeating the decree of the Council of Trent, you
only show the weakness of your cause, and of those unintelligible subtilties
which are used to defend it.

To what his Lordship says, That, in Optatus his time,. 27.
the Christians were much troubled upon but a false report, Optal. l. 3.
that an Image was to be placed upon the Altar; What would they have done, if
Adoration had been commanded? You answer, That it was either some Idol, or
common Image of a Man, or of the Emperor, or the Governor of the Province, or
something or other, but you cannot tell what. But if it had been any of all
these, How easy had it been for them to have vindicated themselves by saying,
That if it had been the Image of Christ, or some Saints, they would then have
worshipped it, but they could not otherwise. But we see, it was not because it
was such or such an Image, that the displeasure was taken, but that it was any
at all; and this was then justly looked on as a strange thing, being so
contrary to the practice of the Christian Church, from Christ's time till that.
This you deny, and say, That the Images of Christ and the Saints were in common
use and veneration too, amongst Christians in the Ancient Church. How is it
possible to deal with you, that dare with so much confidence obtrude such
notorious falsities upon the world? There being scarce any thing imaginable, in
which there are more express testimonies for so many ages together then against
the use or veneration of Images in the Ancient Church. With what scorn and
contempt do the Primitive Christians reject the use of Images, and that not in
regard of an absolute, but a relative Worship? If you had read the discourses
of the Christians in the Primitive times, such as Clemens Alexandrinus, Origin
against Celsus, Tertullian, Minutius Felix, Arnobius, Lactantius, Athanasius,
Eusebius, S. Augustine where they dispute against the Heathens, not merely for
worshipping Idols, but for any worship of Images, though merely as they are
signs or symbols of the proper objects of worship, you could not possibly have
uttered so gross a falsehood as that foregoing, unless you were resolved to
offer violence to your conscience in it. If you think the Council of Trent
brings off all this by saying, Men must not believe there is any Divinity in
Images, and that it was the worship which arose from such an apprehension which
the Fathers disputed against; I assure you, you are greatly deceived. For there
is no such difference between the Heathens apprehensions, and yours, as to the
worship of Images, as you imagine. Who is such a fool, says Celsus, to think
that these are gods, and not the bare Images of them. Orig c. Cells. l. 7.

Arnob. l. 6.


You are greatly mistaken (says the Heathen in Arnobius) if you think that we
worship the Images for gods; no, we worship the gods by and through them: and
therefore says, That the Ancients were not ignorant that the Images had
neither sense nor divinity in them, but only that the rude and ignorant people
wanted such things to put them in mind of the gods. What is there more than
this, that you have to plead for the Use of them? Non ipsa timemus simulachra
(say the Heathens in Lactantius) sed eos ad quorum imaginem ficta, Lact. l. 2.
c. 2.
and quorum nominibus consecrata sunt; We worship not the Images, but them to
whom they are consecrated; which in your language is, Aug. in Ps. 113. c. 2.
They give them not an absolute, but a relative Worship. Nec simulachrum nec
Daemonium colo, sed per effigi^m corporalem ejus rei signum intu^or, quam
colere debeo, says the Heathen in S. Augustine; I neither worship the Image,
nor the Demon in it, but only by that visible representation, I am put in mind
of that which I ought to worship. If you say, This was not the common sense of
them, but only some more subtle men asserted this, because they could not
defend their gross Idolatries otherwise; the very same is most true of your
selves; your distinctions are such which the people are not capable of in the
worship they give; and they only serve to answer those, who dislike so palpable
an imitation of Heathenism, as is in the worship of Images. And it will be hard
to find that any Heathens had any higher thoughts of their Images, or used
greater acts of worship toward them, than the people of your Church do. For,
Are not miraculous operations among you ascribed to Images of Saints? And what
greater testimony of Divinity can be supposed in them? Do not they fall down in
the most devout manner to them, and make the most formal addresses before them?
and that not merely with a respect to what is represented, but with a worship
belonging to the Images themselves? And* What more than this did ever the
Heathens do? So that those Fathers who so much condemned that use and
veneration of Images which was among the Heathens, must needs be understood to
condemn as much that in your Church too. And thence Eusebius ascribes the
setting up the Statue at Paneas to a Heathen custom, Eusebius. h^st l. 7. c. 18.

Epiph. ep ad Job. Hieros. Council. Eliber. can. 36.

Aug. de morib. Eccles. Cath. c 34. Clem. Alex. Protrept. Tertull. ad Hermog.
(...).


thence Epiphanius rent the vail at Anablatha, wherein the Image of Christ, or
some Saint, was drawn: thence the Council of Elvira in Spain, forbids the
placing of pictures in Churches, lest that which is worshipped or adored,
should be painted on walls; thence S. Augustine condemns the worshippers of
pictures; thence the very Art of Painting was condemned in the Ancient Church,
as appears by Clemens Alexandrinus, and Tertullian; and after all this, Is it
possible to believe what you say, viz. That Images were in common use and
veneration too in the Ancient Church? But surely we shall have some evident
proof for so bold an assertion: It were well if there were any thing looked
like it. P. 296.
For all that you produce, is only that in Tertullian 's time, the Christians
were abused with the nickname of Crucis Religiosi; and that in Chrysostom 's
time, the Cross made a glorious show upon the Altar. And, Are not these
invincible proofs for the veneration of Images in the Ancient Church? But, Why
do you not as well say. The Christians worshipped an Asses Head, Tertul.
Apolog. c. 16.
the Sun, and Ononychites; for all these are in the same Chapter, and equally
reckoned among the false accusations of the Christians. But it seems you had
rather believe the Heathens objection* than the Christians denial, whose Answer
we find express to the contrary in Minutius Felix, Cruces nec colimus, Minut.
Fell. p. 33.
nec optamus, we neither wish for, nor worship Crosses; and Tertullian, in
answer to the former cavil, says, Quod colimus nos, Deus unus est; That which
we worship, is only God. They were then strangers to any such distinctions of
worship as you have invented to answer such places with, viz. that they did not
worship them absolutely, but relatively. And for all that I can perceive, by
the same distinctions you may prove that the Christians did worship Demons and
Heroes; for, although they deny it never so much, I may as well say, they meant
only by it, that they did not worship them with the Worship proper only to God,
but with an inferior and relative Worship, as you say as much concerning
Images; by which Art you may evade all denyals whatsoever. (...)
For your place of S. Chrysostom, the most that Bellarmin makes of it is, That
in his time the Cross was wont to be painted in all places, in Cities, Houses,
Chambers, Vessels, not a word in him of Altars, which he would not have left
out, had he found any such thing in him, but you intended to take care we
should not search too far, by not referring us to the Edition of S.
Chrysostom, which you, or your Author made use of. But, What is all this to
the veneration of the Cross, if we grant that it did make a glorious show on
the Altar? Could it not make a glorious show, unless they all fell down and
worshipped it? And, Can you think now, that these testimonies are sufficient
against the whole strain of Antiquity, to persuade men that the veneration of
Images was used in the Ancient Church? But you are men who can believe what you
have a mind to; any word, clause, or impertinent allegation, which does but
seem afar off, to cast an eye toward you, is presently the consent of all
Antiquity, when the most pregnant testimonies of the best Writers of the Church
against you, are pish'd at, and scorned, or else eluded with most frivolous
interpretations, or lastly suspected without any shadow of reason. As the
Epistle of Epiphanius, and the Canon of the Eliberine Council have been in this
present Controversy. When you shall produce your other testimonies, an Answer
shall attend them; but you must not think the story of the Statue at Paneas,
which Eusebius attributes to a Heathenish Custom (besides the many
improbabilities in it) will ever persuade us, that the Christians did then
worship Images. But it would now take up too much time to examine that
particularly, with others of a like nature. What I have said already, being
sufficient to give an account of the sense of the Primitive Church, as to this
subject, which is our present business.

We pass by the resemblance between the Feasts at the Oratories of Martyrs, and
the Heathen Parentalia, because you say now it seems wholly extirpated.. 28.
And I would not charge you with more faults than you are guilty of, since you
have enough without it. An evidence of which, is your discarding all persons
from your communion, who are not such Bigots, as to approve all the abuses and
corruptions among you: Which sufficiently appears by your censure of Cassander;
P. 298.
Who (you say) seemed to many to halt between God and Baal; and, although he
was not actually excommunicate, yet you would have us believe he was
meritoriously so, because he favored Heresy so much. By which we see, that we
must not judge all of the Roman Communion, who profess themselves to be of it;
for so Cassander did to his death. But, whoever offer to find the least fault
with the practices or Doctrine of your Church, let them pretend never so much
to be of it, yet they may be excommunicate, sententia juris; and so not only
Cassander, but Erasmus, Fspencaeus, Ferus, Barns, Picherellus, and all other
persons of reason and ingenuity among you, ought not to be looked on as persons
of your Communion, whatever their pretenses be. It seems your Church bears none
but Hectors, and in a short time none shall be accounted Papists, but Jesuits:
but it is hard to determine, Whether this discovers more the corruption, or
tyranny of your Church; which loves her degeneracy so much, that she proscribes
all who dare in the least to tell her of her faults. But, How can she be found
fault with, that takes such excellent care to prevent all abuses, as appears by
the caution of the Council of Trent, in the present case of your worship of
Images? For, say you, As to any matter of abuse in this kind, crept in amongst
the ignorant, we have already shown, P. 297.
how careful the Council of Trent was to prevent and provide against all
inconveniences that could reasonably be foreseen or feared. So it seems, by
the admirable Caution used by the Council, to prevent giving undue Worship to
Images, by telling men, They must only give that which was due; when all the
Question was, What was due? and, What not? So it seems, by the care used to
instruct the people concerning the nature of Divine Worship, and the danger of
Idolatry. So it seems, by the leaving out the second Commandment in the offices
of frequent use, lest the peoples consciences should check them, for doing that
which God had severely prohibited. So it seems, by the unintelligible
subtilties concerning the kind of that Worship which is to be given to the
Image; when yet a mistake there, makes the person who gives it, guilty of
Idolatry. So it seems, by the continuance of the most gross abuses in this
nature still in your Church, in this matter of Images. Of which such things are
related by eyewitnesses, that the most gross Heathen Idolatries were not more
unreasonable, absurd, and ridiculous, than they are. And if people continue
ignorant, and sottish enough, all is well; but if with Cassander, they charge
you with any corruptions, then they stand meritoriously excommunicate: and it
is well if they escape so; for, although Cassander did, Father Barns did not.
But, plead as long as you will for the care your Church has taken to prevent
all abuses in the worship of Images; as long as the worship of Images
continues, it is impossible to prevent the abuses in it; since that is a great
abuse it self, and gives occasion to all others. For, the vindication of your
Doctrine depends on such Metaphysical Niceties, which the minds of people are
incapable of; and, however they may serve you in disputation, are impossible to
be reconciled with the practice of your Church, and the apprehensions of those
who yield the worship you allow to Images. And therefore it is no wonder at all
what Llamas relates of the Spanish people, P. 298.
that they were so besotted on their old worm-eaten Images, that when they were
to have new ones in their rooms, they begged with tears to have their old ones
still. But, although you grant these people guilty of indiscretion, yet by no
means of Idolatry, because they did not call them their gods. If you think none
were Idolaters, but such as did believe their Images to be gods; I doubt you
may find the number of Atheists as great as that of Idolaters in the world. But
if we may guess at peoples apprehensions by their actions, these seemed as much
to believe them to be gods, as any Heathens you can instance in. Your
vindication of Llamas from saying, That the Images of Christ, and the Saints,
as they represent their exemplars, have Deity or Divinity in them; as it is
undertaken somewhat fearfully, because (you say) you hope to clear his meaning,
whatever his words seem to import; P. 299.
so at last it stands on the sandy foundation of relative and absolute Worship,
which being taken away, that and your Images fall together. I conclude this
subject with his Lordships wish; That men of learning would not strain their
wits to spoil the truth, P. 279.
and rent the Peace of the Church of Christ, by such dangerous, such
superstitious vanities. For better they are not, but they may be worse: And I
fear are so.

CHAP. IV. Of the possibility of Salvation in the Roman Church.
Protestants Concessions ought not to be any ground to prefer the Communion of
the Church of Rome. How far those Concessions extend. The uncharitableness of
Romanists, if they yield not the same to us. The weakness of the Arguments to
prove the Roman Church the safer way to salvation on Protestant Principles. The
dangerous Doctrines of Romanists about the easiness of salvation, by the
Sacrament of Penance. The case parall'eld bebetween the Donatists and
Romanists, in denying salvation to all but themselves; and the advantages equal
from their adversaries Concessions. The advantage of the Protestants, if that
be the safest way which both parties are agreed in, manifested and vindicated
in several particulars. The Principle it self at large showed to be a mere
contingent Proposition, and such as may lead to Heresy and Infidelity. The
case of the Leaders in the Roman Church, and others, distinguished. The Errors
and Superstitions of the Roman Church, make its communion very dangerous in
order to Salvation.

THe main thing which now remains to be discussed, is, Whether the Communion of
your Church, or ours, be rather to be chosen,. 1.
in order to salvation. For that being the great end of our Faith, the tendency
to the promotion of that, ought to be the Rule, by which we should embrace or
continue in the society of any Church. And, since the regard men ought to have
of their eternal welfare, does oblige them to make choice of the best means in
order to it, the bare remote possibility of salvation in any Church, ought to
have no force or consideration at all in the determining their choice in a
matter of so great importance. As, supposing a Pilot at Sea, whose only desire
is to bring his ship safe into his desired Port, should be told, that there are
two passages homewards; the one free and open, in which there is no danger; the
other amidst many Rocks and Shelves in which yet there is a possibility of
escaping: Would not he be accounted a very weak man, that should choose this
latter way, merely because it is possible he may escape; and neglect the other,
in which there is no danger of miscarrying? So it is here in our present case,
the Protestants confess there is a possibility for some to escape in the
Communion of the Roman Church; but it is as men may escape with their lives in
a shipwreck; but they undertake to make it evident, there can be no danger, if
they observe the principles of Protestant Religion; Would it not be madness in
any then to neglect this, and make choice of the other, merely because
Protestants agree with you, that there is a possibility of salvation for some
in the Roman Church? Yet this is the great Argument you make use of, whereby to
Proselyte such persons, who want judgment enough to discern the weakness and
sophistry of it. That therefore we are now to enquire into, is, Whether your
Communion, or ours, be more eligible upon principles of reason and prudence, in
order to Salvation? And two things are insisted on in behalf of your Church;
first, That Protestants grant the possibility of salvation in your Church, but
you deny it in ours, and therefore yours is the safer way. Secondly, That the
Faith of Protestants does not stand upon those sure grounds which your Faith
does.

. 2.
As to the first, there are two things to be considered. 1. How far we grant a
possibility of salvation to those in your Church. 2. What can be inferred from
that Concession in the choice of Religion. The occasion of entering upon this
debate was the Lady's Query, Whether she might be saved in the Roman Faith; P.
280.
to which his Lordship answers in General, that the ignorant that could not
discern the errors of that Church, so they held the Foundation and conformed
themselves to a religious life, might be saved; and more particularly to the
Lady, that it must needs go harder with her even in point of salvation, because
she had been brought to understand very much for one of her condition, in these
Controverted causes of Religion. And a person that comes to know much had need
carefully bethink himself, that he oppose not known truth against the Church
that made him a Christian; for salvation may be in the Church of Rome, P. 282.
and they not find it that make surest of it. And after, he explains himself
more fully, That [might be saved] grants but a possibility, no sure or safe way
to salvation; the possibility, I think says he, cannot be denied to the
ignorants, especially because they hold the Foundation and cannot survey the
Building. And the Foundation can deceive no man that rests upon it. But a
secure way they cannot go, that hold with such corruptions when they know them.
Now, whether it be wisdom, in such a point as salvation is, to forsake a Church
in the which the ground of salvation is firm, to follow a Church in which it is
but possible one may be saved, but very probable he may do worse, if he look
not well to the Foundation; judge ye. So that still his Lordship asserts the
Protestants way to be the only safe way to salvation; and that in the Church of
Rome there is only a limited possibility of it, which is such, that he says,
A. C. or his fellows can take little comfort in. For as he after declares
himself, P. 285.
Many Protestants indeed confess, there is salvation possible to be attained in
the Roman Church; but yet they say withal, that the errors of that Church are
so many, (and some so great, as weaken the Foundation) that it is very hard to
go that way to Heaven, especially to them that have had the truth manifested;
and a little after, But we have not so learned Christ, as either to return evil
for evil in this heady course, or to deny salvation to some ignorant silly
souls, whose humble peaceable obedience makes them safe among any part of men
that profess the Foundation Christ. And in another place, I do indeed for my
part (leaving other men free to their own judgment) acknowledge a possibility
of salvation in the Roman Church. P. 299.
But so, as that which I grant to Romanists, is not as they are Romanists, but
as they are Christians, that is, as they believe the Creed and hold the
Foundation Christ himself, not as they associate themselves wittingly and
knowingly to the gross Superstitions of the Roman Church. And I am willing to
hope there are many among them, which keep within that Church, and yet wish the
superstitions abolished which they know, and which pray to God to forgive their
errors in what they know not, and which hold the Foundation firm, and live
accordingly, and which would have all things amended that are amiss, were it in
their power. And to such I dare not deny a possibility of salvation, for that
which is Christ's in them, though they hazard themselves extremely by keeping
so close to that which is superstition, and in the case of Images comes too
near Idolatry. The substance then of what his Lordship says, is, that the
Protestant way is a safe and secure way to salvation; that in the Roman Church
there is extreme hazard made of it, which all who love their souls ought to
avoid; but yet for such, who by reason of ignorance see not the danger, and by
reason of honesty keep close to Christ the Foundation, and repent of all
miscarriages known or unknown, he dares not deny a possibility of salvation for
them. But he is far from asserting it of those, who either know the corruptions
of that Church and yet continue in them, or such who wilfully neglect the means
whereby they may be convinced of them. So that you strangely either mistake or
pervert his Lordships meaning when you would infer from these passages, That
he asserts a possibility of being saved to those who join with the Roman
Church, P. 301.
though their ignorance be not invincible, and though all or the chief motives
which the Protestants bring against you be never so sufficiently proposed to
them. For he still speaks either of such, whose mere ignorance does excuse them
where the Fundamentals are held and a life lead according to them, or else of
such who condemn your superstitions as far as they are discovered to them, and
sincerely desire to find impartially the way that leads to Heaven; Of such as
these he dares not deny a possibility of salvation.

And you are the most uncharitable persons in the world, if you dare assert the
contrary of Protestants.. 3.
You expressly grant a possibility of salvation to those who join with the
Protestant Church, in case of invincible ignorance; and dare you deny it where
there is a preparation of mind to find out and embrace the most certain way to
Heaven, where all endeavors are used to that end, and where there is a
conscientious obedience to the Will of God, so far as it is discovered? If you
dare peremptorily deny a possibility of salvation to such persons, merely
because not of the Roman Church, this prodigious uncharitableness would make us
question the possibility of your salvation more, while you persist in it. For,
What is there more contrary to the design and spirit of the Gospel then this
is? From whence must we gather the terms of salvation, but only from thence?
But it seems by you, although men give never so hearty an assent to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, and live in the most universal obedience to it, and
abound in the fruits of the spirit of God, of which Charity is none of the
least; yet if they be not in the Communion of your Church, there is no hopes of
salvation for them. But, Who is it the mean while that has the disposal of
this salvation? Is it in your hands or Christ's? If it be in His, we dare rely
on His promise, although you pretend to know His mind better than He did
himself. For, notwithstanding a sincere endeavor to know and obey the will of
God, be the great Fundamental in order to salvation, which is delivered us by
the Doctrine of Christ; yet it seems by you, there may be this, where there may
be not so much as possibility of salvation. By which assertion of yours, you
are so far from working upon any, but very weak persons, to bring them over to
your Church, that nothing can more effectually prejudice it among all such who
dare believe Christ to be more Infallible then the Church of Rome. For what is
this else, but to make heaven and eternal salvation stalk to the interess of
your Church, and to lay more weight upon being in your communion then upon the
most indispensable precepts of Christianity? But when we consider how many
among you dispute for the possibility of the salvation of Heathens, and yet
deny it to those who own all the Fundamentals of Christianity; when we see how
much you lay the weight of salvation upon being in your Church, and what ways
you have for those who are in it to reconcile the hopes of salvation with the
practice of sin, What can we otherwise imagine, but it is the Interess of your
Church that you more aim at than the salvation of mens-souls. For you have so
many ways to give indulgence in sin to those who desire it, and yet such ready
ways of pardon, and such an easy task of repentance, and so little
troublesome means of obtaining grace by the Sacraments, ex opere operato, that
it is hard conceiving what way a man should sooner take, who would live in his
sins and come to heaven at last, then to be of your Church. And yet you who are
so soft and gentle, so kind and indulgent to the sons of your Church, are not
more ready to send those who are out of it to the fire in this world than to
eternal flames in another. But we have not so learned Christ, we dare not deal
so inhumanely with them in this world, much less judge so uncharitably as to
another, of those who profess to fear God and work righteousness, though they
be not of the same opinion or communion with us. Yet, we tell men of the danger
of hazzarding their salvation by erroneous doctrines and superstitious
practices, and suppose that sufficient to persuade such who sincerely regard
their future happiness to avoid all such things as tend so much to their
eternal ruin. And such who will continue in such things, merely because there
is a possibility some persons may be saved in them by reason of Ignorance or
Repentance, are no wiser men then such, who should split their ship upon a
rock, because some have escaped upon a plank notwithstanding. So that
considering on what terms we grant this possibility of salvation, this
Concession of ours can be no Argument at all to judge yours to be the safer
way; and if upon the same terms you deny it to us, it shows how much more
unsafe your way is, where there is so much of Interess and so little Charity.

But you attempt to prove against all Protestants whatsoever, that yours is the
safer way to salvation:. 4.
P. 301.
Your first Argument in short is, Because we grant that you may be saved upon
our own principles, but you deny that we may be saved upon yours. And what is
there more in this Argument (but a multitude of words to little purpose) then
there is in that which his Lordship examines? For the main force of it lies in
this, That is the safest way which both parties are agreed in; and therefore
although you would have your Major proposition put out of all doubt, yet that
wants more proof then I doubt you are able to give it. For although we grant,
Men may be saved who have true Faith, Repentance, and a holy Conversation
without any such Sacrament of Penance, which you make necessary for conveying
the grace of Justification; yet, What security can thence come to a man in the
choice of his Religion, since we withal say, That where there is a continuance
in the corruptions and errors of your Church, it is hard to conceive there
should be that Faith and Repentance which we make necessary to Salvation. You
go therefore on a very false supposition, when you take it for granted that we
acknowledge, that all those whom you admit to your Sacrament of Penance have
all things upon our own principles which are necessary to Salvation. And so
your Minor is as false as your Major uncertain, viz. That many are saved in the
Roman Church according to the principles which are granted on both sides. But
you would seem to prove, That all admitted by you at death to the Sacrament of
Penance (as you call it) have all things necessary to Salvation upon
Protestant principles, P. 302.
because, you say, That Faith, Hope, true Repentance, and a purpose of
Amendment are necessary to the due receiving the Sacrament of Penance, and
these, are all which Protestants make necessary to Salvation. But supposing
that, Is it necessary that all those things must be in them, which make the
necessary requisites to this Sacrament of yours? Do none receive this
unworthily as many do a far greater Sacrament than this, granting it to be any
at all. It seems Salvation is very easy to be had in your Church then, for
this Sacrament is supposed by you, to be given to men upon their deathbeds,
when, you say, It cannot be supposed that men will omit any thing necessary for
the attaining Salvation; and by virtue of this Sacrament they receive the grace
of Justification, whereby of sinners they are made the Sons of God and heirs
of eternal life. But I assure you, we who believe, Men must be saved only by
the terms of the Gospel, make no such easy matter of it as you do; we profess
the necessity of a through-renovation of heart and life to be indispensable in
order to happiness, for without holiness no man shall see the Lord: and
although we take not upon us to judge the final estate of men whose hearts we
know not; yet the Gospel gives us very little ground to think, that such who
defer the work of their Salvation to their deathbeds shall ever attain to it;
The main design of Christian Religion being, The turning men's souls from sin to
God in order to the serving him in this world, that they may be happy in
another. For if Salvation depended on no more then you require, the greatest
part of the Gospel might have been spared, whose great end is to persuade men
to holiness of heart and life. It is not a mere purpose of amendment, when men
can sin no longer, that we make only necessary to Salvation: But so hearty a
repentance of sin past, as to carry with it an effectual reformation; without
this, men may flatter themselves into their own ruin by your Sacraments of
Penance and such contrivances of men, but there can be no grounded hopes of
any freedom from eternal misery. And their Faith too, must be as weak as their
Repentance shallow, who dare venture their souls into another world, upon no
better security than that By receiving the Sacrament of Penance they are made
the Sons of God and heirs of eternal life. But you betray men into stupid
ignorance and carelessness as to their eternal Salvation, and then deal most
unfaithfully with them, by telling them that a deathbed Repentance will
suffice them, and the Sacrament of Penance will presently make them heirs of
eternal life. So that although your Doctrine be very unreasonable, and your
Superstitions very gross, yet this unfaithfulness to the souls of men makes all
true lovers of Christian Religion, and of the Salvation of men's souls, more
averse from your Doctrine and Practices, then any thing else whatsoever. For
what can really be more pernicious to the world, then to flatter them into the
hopes of Salvation without the performance of those things, which, if the
Gospel be true, are absolutely necessary in order to it? How quietly do you
permit the most stupid ignorance in such who are the zealous practisers of your
fopperies and superstitions? What excellent arts have you to allure debauches
upon their deathbeds to you, by promising them that in another world, which
our principles will not allow us to do? How many ways have you to get the
pardon of sin, or at least to delude people with the hopes of it, without any
serious turning from sin to God? What do your Doctrines of the sufficiency of
bare contrition, and the Sacraments working grace ex opere operato, of
Indulgences, Satisfactions, regulating the intention, and the like, tend to,
but to supersede the necessity of a holy life? And at last you exchange the
inward hatred and mortification of sin, for some external severities upon men's
bodies; which is, only beating the servant for the Masters fault. So that it is
hard to imagine any Doctrine or way of Religion which owns Christianity, which
does with more apparent danger to the souls of men undermine the foundations of
Faith and Obedience than yours does. And as I have at large showed the former,
How destructive your principles are to the grounds of Faith; so it has been
fully and lately manifested by a learned Bishop of our Church, What Doctrines
and practices are allowed in your Church, (...) Tailors Dissuasive from Popery.
Chap. 2.
which in themselves or their immediate consequences are direct impieties, and
give warranty to a wicked life.

Which being so of your own side, we must see what reasons you give for your
most uncharitable Censure,. 5.
That there are very few or none among Protestants that escape damnation: P.
302.
And this you call, The Doctrine of Catholics. The Doctrine rather of a proud,
tyrannical, and uncharitable faction of men; who that they might gain
Proselytes to themselves, show how little they are themselves the Proselytes of
Christ. But you offer us a reason for it: Because all Catholics hold, that
neither Faith, nor Hope, nor any Repentance can save us, P. 303.
but that only which is joined with a perfect Love of God; without the
Sacrament of Penance actually and duly received: and because Protestants
reject this, they cannot be saved. But you are not at all the less excusable,
because you assert such Doctrines from whence such uncharitableness follows,
but the dreadful consequence of such Doctrines ought rather to make you
question the truth of them. For, can any one who knows and understands
Christianity ever believe, that although he had a most hearty repentance for
sin, and a most sincere love to God, he should eternally perish because he did
not confess his sins to a Priest and receive absolution from him? I can hardly
persuade my self, that you can believe such things, but that only such
Doctrines are necessary to be taught, to maintain the Priests authority, and to
fright men into that picklock of conscience, the useful practice of Auricular
Confession. To what purpose, are all the promises of grace and mercy through
Christ upon the sincerity of our turning to him, if, after all this, the effect
depends upon that Sacrament of Penance, of which no precept is given us by
Christ, much less any necessity of it asserted in order to eternal Salvation?
If this then be all your ground of condemning Protestants, they may rejoice in
this, That your reasons are as weak as your malice strong. But it would be more
fit for you to enquire, Whether such who live and dye in such a height of
uncharitableness (whether with or without the Sacrament of Penance) can be in
any capacity of eternal Salvation? For that is a plain violation of the Laws of
Christ, this other even among your selves a disputable Institution of Christ;
and by many said, not to be at all of that necessity, Medina de Confess. tr. 2.
qu. 4.

Maldon. de Sacram. T. 2. c. 3.


which you suppose it to be. For neither Medina, nor Maldonate even since the
Council of Trent dare affirm, the denial of your Sacrament of Penance to be
Heresy; and must then the souls of all Protestants be sent to hell, for want
of that, which it is questionable, whether it were Instituted by Christ or no.
But if this Sacrament of Penance be so necessary to Salvation, that they
cannot be saved who want it, What becomes then of all the Primitive Church
which was utterly a stranger to your Sacrament of Penance (as shall be
manifested when you desire it)? what becomes of the Greek Church which as
peremptorily denies the necessity of it as Protestants do? Both which you may
find confessed and proved by Father Barns, and many testimonies of your own
Authors are brought by him against the Divine Institution and necessity of it.
Who very ingenuously confesses, ^ staado in lege Christi praecise pronunciar^
sit, ex plurimo^um Ca^holicorum se^te (...) coram Deo, -- qui m^nisestis iniis
probat se ve^am b^be^e fidem and chari^^m; e^si ne verb^m propale^ de ^ mero, ^
gravitate p^ccator^m s^^rum. Ba^s ^ct 8. de paenit. confess. and satisfactione.
That, by the Law of Christ, such a one by the sentence of very many
Catholics, may be pronounced absolved before God, who manifests the truth of
his Faith and Charity, although he discovers not a word of the number or weight
of his sins. What unreasonable, as well as uncharitable, men are you then, to
assert, That no Protestants can escape damnation for want of that, which so
many among your selves make unnecessary for the pardon of sin? But it is just
with God, that those who are so ready to condemn others, should be condemned by
themselves: and if your Consciences do not condemn you here, your Sentence may
be the greater in another world.

Your second Argument against Protestants is,. 6.
Because they want certainty of Faith by denying the Infallibility of Church
and Councils; P. 304.
but this has been so thoroughly sifted already, that I suppose none who have
read the preceding discourses will have the least cause to stick at this: and
therefore we proceed to the Vindication of your censures from being guilty of
the want of Charity. For you are the men, who would have us thank God, when you
condemn us to hell, that we escape so; and are angry with us, that we do not
believe that you most entirely love us, when you judge us to eternal flames.
For, you say, that your denial of Salvation to us is grounded even upon
Charity. If it be so, P. 305.
you are the most charitable people in the world, for you deny Salvation to all
but your selves and some Heathens. But, say you, If Salvation may be had in
your Church as Protestants confess, and there be no true Church or Faith but
one, it follows that out of your Church there is no Salvation to be had. To
which his Lordship had fully answered, by saying, It Is true, there is but one
true Faith, P. 284.
and but one true Church; but that one both Faith and Church is the Catholic
Christian, not the particular Roman. So that this passage is a mere begging the
question, and then threatening upon it, without all reason or charity. And all
your declamations about the way of knowing the Doctrine of the Catholic
Church, P. 306.
have been spoiled by what has been said already upon that subject. We come
therefore to that which is the proper business of this Chapter, which is to
examine the strength of that Inference which is drawn from the Protestants
concession of the possibility of Salvation in your Church, viz. That thence it
follows, that the Roman Church and Religion is the safer way to Salvation. Two
things his Lordship observes the force of this Argument lies in, the one
directly expressed, P. 285.
viz. The consent of both parties of the possibility of Salvation in the Roman
Church; the other upon the By, viz. That we cannot be saved because we are out
of the Church. And of these two he speaks in order. First he begins with the
confession: as to which his Answer lies in three things, 1. That this was the
way of the Donatists of old, and would hold as well for them as the Church of
Rome. 2. That if the principle on which this Argument proceeds be true, it will
be more for the advantage of Protestants then of your Church. 3. That the
principle it self is a contingent Proposition, and may justify the greatest
Heresies in the world. By this methodizing his Lordships discourse, we shall
the better discern the strength of your Answers to the several particulars of
it. In the first place he shows How parallel this is with the proceedings of
the Donatists; for both parts granted that baptism was true among the
Donatists, P. 286.
but the Donatists denied it to be true baptism among the Catholic Christians,
and therefore on this principle the Donatists side is the surer side, if that
principle be true, That it is the safest taking that way which the differing
parties agree on. To this you Answer nothing, but what will still return upon
your selves and discover the weakness of your Argument. P. 307.
For the crimes of Schism, and unsoundness of Faith, are still as chargeable
upon you though we may grant a possibility of Salvation to some in your Church.
And I cannot possibly discern any difference between the judgment of the
Catholics concerning the Donatists, and ours concerning you; for, if they
judged the Donatists way very dangerous because of their uncharitableness to
all others, so do we of yours; but if they, notwithstanding that, hoped that
the misled people among them might be saved; that is as much as we dare say
concerning you. And you very much mistake, if you think the contrary, For his
Lordship no where says, as you would seem to impose upon him, That a man may
live and dye in the Roman Church, and that none of his errors shall hinder
salvation, whatsoever motives he may know to the contrary. But on the other
side, P. 296.
he plainly says, That he that lives in the Roman Church, with a resolution to
live and dye in it, is presumed to believe as that Church believes. And he that
does so, I will not say, is as guilty, but guilty he is more or less, of the
Schism which that Church first caused by her corruptions, and now continues by
them and her power together. And of all her damnable opinions too, and all
other sins also, which the Doctrine and mis-belief of that Church leads him
into. Judge you now, I pray, Whether we think otherwise of those in your
Church, than the Orthodox did of the Donatists? So that if the Argument does
hold for you, it would as well have held for them too. And therefore his
Lordship well inferrs, That this Principle, That where two parties are
dissenting, it is safest believing that in which both parties agree, or which
the adversary confesses, may lead men, by your own confession, into known and
damnable Schism and Heresy; for such, you say, the Donatists were guilty of.
And such his Lordship says, there is great danger of, P. 298.
in your Church too; for, says he, in this present case there is peril, great
peril of damnable, both Schism and Heresy, and other sins, by living and dying
in the Roman Faith, tainted with so many superstitions, as at this day it is,
and their tyranny to boot. I pray now bethink your self, What difference is
there, between the Orthodox judgment of the Donatists, and ours, concerning
your Church? And therefore the comparison between Petilian the Donatist, and
his Lordships adversary holds good still; for, all your Answer depends upon a
mistake of Protestants granting a possibility of Salvation, P. 315.
as I have already showed you. And, in what way soever you limit this
agreement, you cannot possibly avoid, but that it would equally hold as to the
Donatists too; for the concession was then as great, in order to Salvation, as
it is now.

. 7.
But, you say, Whether he asserts it or no, it must needs follow from the
Bishops Principles, that there can be no peril of damnation by living and dying
in the Roman Church, because he professedly exempts the Ignorant, and grants as
much of those who do wittingly and knowingly associate themselves to the gross
superstitions of the Roman Church, if they hold the Foundation Christ, and live
accordingly; From whence you argue, That if neither voluntary nor involuntary
superstition can hinder from Salvation, then there is confessedly no peril of
damnation in your Church. And yet his Lordship says, All Protestants
unanimously agree in this, P. 302.
That there is great peril of damnation for any man to live and dye in the
Roman Persuasion. And therefore (says he) that is a most notorious slander,
where you say, that they which affirm this peril of damnation, are contradicted
by their own more learned Brethren. By which we see the unjustice of your
proceeding, in offering to wrest his Lordships words contrary to his express
meaning: and since all your Argument depends upon your adversaries confession,
you ought to take that confession in the most clear and perspicuous terms, and
to understand all obscure expressions suitably to their often declared sense.
Which if you had attended to, you would never have undertaken to prove that
this Lordship grants, that there is no peril of damnation in your Church, which
he so often disavows, and calls it, a most notorious slander; and, a most loud
untruth, which no ingenuous man would ever have said. P. 301.
And even of those persons whom he speaks most favorably of, he says, That
although they wish for the abolishing the superstitions in use, yet all he
grants them is, a possibility of Salvation, but with extreme hazard to
themselves, by keeping close to that which is superstition, and comes so near
Idolatry. Are these then such expressions which import no peril of damnation in
the Roman Church? And therefore when he speaks of the possibility of the
Salvation of such who associate themselves wittingly and knowingly to the gross
superstitions of the Romish Church; he declares sufficiently, that he means it
not of those who do in heart approve of them, but only of such, who though they
are convinced they are gross superstitions, yet think, they may communicate
with those who use them, as long as they do not approve of them. Which error
of theirs, though he looks on it as dangerous, yet not as wholly destructive of
Salvation. But since, your Answer to this, is, P. 316.
That he mistakes very much, in supposing such persons to belong to your Church
and Communion: you are not aware, How much thereby you take off from the
Protestants Confession, since those whom we contend for a possibility of
Salvation for, are such only whom you deny to be of your Churches Communion,
and so the Argument signifies much less by your confession, than it did before.
Thus we see, how this Argument upon the same terms you manage it against us,
would have held as well in the behalf of the Donatists against the Communion of
the Catholic Church. For what other impertinencies you mix here and there, it
is time now to pass them over, since the main grounds of them have been so
fully handled before.

We therefore proceed to the second Answer his Lordship gives to this Argument,
viz. That if the Principle on which it stands, does hold,. 8.
it makes more for the advantage of Protestants, than against them. For if that
be safest which both parties are agreed in, then 1. You are bound to believe
with us in the point of the Eucharist. P. 286.
For all sides agree in the Faith of the Church of England, that in the most
blessed Sacrament, the worthy Receiver is by his Faith made spiritually
partaker of the true and real body and blood of Christ, truly and really, and
of all the benefits of his passion. Your Roman Catholics add a manner of this
presence, Transubstantiation which many deny; and the Lutherans
Consubstantiation, which more deny. If this Argument be good then, even for
this consent it is safer communicating with the Church of England, than with
the Roman or Lutheran; because all agree in this Truth, not in any other
Opinion. You say, This can hold no further than communicating in the belief of
this Opinion; let that be granted, and, Does it not then follow, P. 308.
that the Church of England's Opinion is the safest upon your own ground? No,
say you, for it is not such a common consent as does exclude the manner of
presence, by trans-, or consubstantiation. But, How senseless an Answer is this!
for the Argument proceeds so far as all are agreed: and the Church of England
asserting that real presence, which all acknowledge as simply necessary, in
order to the effects of it; her Communion is more desirable on this account,
than of either of those Churches which offer to define the manner of Christ's
presence, since even the greatest men of your persuasion, as Suarez and
Bellarmin assert the belief of Transubstantiation not to be simply necessary to
Salvation, and that the manner of it is secret and ineffable. P. 309.
It is therefore quite beside the purpose, when you offer to prove, that Suarez
believed Transubstantiation: for, although he did so, yet since he grants it
not simply necessary to do it; his Lordships Argument in behalf of the Church
of England holds firm still, unless you can prove, that Suarez held the belief
of that to be as necessary, as the belief of the real and spiritual presence of
Christ. But you, after, attempt at large to prove, that the real participation
of Christ in the Sacrament in your sense, is quite different from that of
Protestants: If you mean a corporal participation, indeed it is so; but that is
not it, which is now enquired after; but, Whether you do not allow any real and
spiritual presence of Christ, besides the corporal manducation of that you call
his body by Transubstantiation. If you do not, you would do well to show, what
effects that has upon the souls of men; if you do, then still the Church of
England is of the safer side, which holds that in which all are agreed. Which
is as much as we are here concerned to take notice of, as to this subject, the
Controversy it self having been so lately handled. P. 303.
2. His Lordship instances, in the Article of our Savior Christ's descent into
Hell; both are agreed as to the Article of descent, but the Church of Rome
differs in the explication; therefore it is safer holding with the Church of
England, which owns the Article without defining the manner. But, P. 317.
you say, He proceeds on a false supposition, for both are not agreed, what is
meant by Hell, whether it be the place of the damned or no: But this does
belong to the manner of Explication, and not to the Article it self, which both
equally own, and therefore the Church of England has the advantage there. 3.
He instances, in the Institution of the Sacrament in both kinds; in which it is
agreed by both Churches, that Christ did institute it so, and the Primitive
Church received it so. Therefore according to the former Rule, Ibid.
it is safest for a man to receive the Sacrament in both kinds. This (you say)
is as little to the purpose as the former, because you do not agree that he did
it with an intention, or gave any command that it should be always so
received; but still you are quite besides the business; for that is not our
Question, but, Whether it be more safe to adhere to that which Christ
instituted, and the Primitive Church practiced, as you confess your selves; Or
to your Church, which prohibits the doing that which you confess Christ, and
the Primitive Church did? And we see, how great your Charity is, when you deny
a possibility of Salvation to those who assert that Christ's Institution is
unalterable, P. 318.
or that all who communicate are bound to receive in both kinds. For all other
things concerning this subject, I must referr the Reader to the precedent
Chapter, P. 306.
in which they are fully discussed. 4. The dissenting Churches agree, that in
the Eucharist there is a sacrifice of duty, and a sacrifice of praise, and a
sacrifice of commemoration. Therefore it is safest to hold to the Church of
England in this, and leave the Church of Rome to her superstitions that I say
no more. P. 319.
Here you still pretend, you differ in sense; but all this is only to say, you
assert more than we do; which we grant, but assert upon your Principle, that we
are on the safer side. And so in the intention of the Priest you agree with us
as to the necessity of matter and form, and therefore it is safer holding to
that, P. 307.
than believing the necessity of the Priest's intention, which many deny. And
if the Rule does hold, as you assert, That that which both are agreed in, is
safer than the contrary; it will hold in matter of Opinion too, that it is
safer to believe no more is necessary to the Sacrament, than both parties are
agreed in. The last Instance is, That we say, there are diverse errors, and
some gross ones, in the Roman Missal; but you confess there is no positive
error in the Liturgy of the Church of England; and therefore it is safest to
worship God by that, and not by the Roman Mass. This you answer as all the
rest, by running off from the business; P. 320.
for, you say, It cannot be safer to use that, because you Catholics say, That
to use it in contempt of the Roman Missal is certainly damnable sin, and
destructive of Salvation. But, as it is not material what you say in this case,
so it is not at all to the purpose; for, if your Rule holds good, it must be
safer; and, if it be not, you must confess the Principle is false, That what
both parties agree in, is the safest to be chosen in Religion. The same might
be at large proved concerning the main things in difference between us, that,
if this Principle be true, we have very much the advantage of you: as, You and
we are agreed, that the Scripture is God's Word, but we deny that Tradition is
so, therefore it is safer adhering to the Scripture, and let Tradition shift
for it self. You and we are agreed that there are sufficient Motives of
Credibility, to believe the Scripture; but we deny that there are any such
Motives to believe the present Churches Infallibility; therefore it is safer to
believe the Scripture, than the present Church. So that this Principle, if
improved by these, and other Instances, will redound more to our advantage,
than yours, considering that in the case we grant it as to you, it is joined
with a Protestation of the extreme hazard which those run, who venture on your
Communion, on the account of it; but there is no such danger upon the agreement
with us in those Principles which are agreed upon between us.

3. His Lordship answers truly, that this Proposition,. 9.
That in point of Faith and Salvation, P. 288.
it is safest for a man to take that way which the adversary confesses, or
differing parties agree in, is no Metaphysical Principle, but a bare contingent
Proposition, and may be true or false as the matter is to which it is applied,
and so of no necessary truth in it self, nor able to lead in the Conclusion.
Because consent of disagreeing parties, is neither Rule, nor Proof of Truth.
For Herod and Pilate, disagreeing parties enough, yet agreed against Truth it
self. But Truth rather is, or should be, the Rule to frame, if not to force
agreement. And to prove this further, his Lordship shows, P. 308.
That if this Principle hold good, that it is safest to believe as the
dissenting parties agree, or as the adverse party confesses, a man must be an
Heretic in the highest degree, if not an Infidel. For, 1. In the Question
between the Orthodox and Arrian concerning the Consubstantiality of the Son of
God with the Father; The Orthodox confessed that which the Arrians asserted,
viz. that Christ was of a like nature with his Father; but they added more,
viz. that he was of the same nature. Therefore upon this Principle it would be
safest holding with the Arrians. 2. In the Question about the Resurrection; the
dissenting parties agree, that there ought to be a Resurrection from sin, to
the state of grace, and that this Resurrection only is meant in diverse passages
of Scripture, together with the life of the soul, which they are content to say
is Immortal; but they deny any Resurrection of the body after death. And
therefore if this Principle be true, it will be safest to deny the Article of
the Resurrection. 3. In the great Dispute about the Unity of the Godhead; all
dissenting parties, Jew, Turk, and Christian, and all sects of Christians,
agree in this, that there is but one God; and so by virtue of this Principle,
men will be bound to deny the Trinity. 4. In the Article of the Divinity of
Christ, The dissenting parties agree fully and clearly, that Christ is man; but
the Heretics deny him to be God: if it be therefore safest to go by the
consent of dissenting parties, or the confession of adversaries, it will be
safest believing that Christ is a mere man, and not God. From whence his
Lordship most evidently proves, That this Rule, P. 311.
To resolve a man's Faith into that, in which the dissenting parties agree, or
which the adverse party confesses, is a mere contingent Proposition, and is as
often false as true. And false in as great, if not greater matters than those,
in which it is true. And where it is true, you dare not govern your selves by
it; the Church of Rome condemning those things which that Rule proves. And his
Lordship justly admires, that while you talk of Certainty, nay, of
Infallibility, you are driven to make use of such poor shifts as these, which
have no Certainty at all of Truth in them, but infer Falsehood and Truth alike.
And yet for this also, men will be so weak, or so wilful, as to be seduced by
you. But now it is time to take notice, what Answer you return to these
pregnant Instances which his Lordship uses; and you think to take off all this
by one General Answer, viz. That the Rule speaks this precisely, P. 321.
and no more, viz. that when two parties differ in point of Religion, it is in
prudence safest to take that way wherein both parties grant Salvation to be
obtainable; but in the former Instances, Salvation was not allowed by the
Orthodox to the dissenters. But, how poor an Evasion this is, will be very
easily discovered. For, 1. If that Principle be true, it must be built on that
which his Lordship disproves, viz. That when two parties disagree, it is safest
believing that which both consent in. For, let any reasonable man judge, on
what account I ought to make choice of your Religion; you say, Because both
parties are agreed that men may be saved in your Church; well then, I ask, Why
I ought to believe that which both parties are agreed in? Does it not
necessarily resolve it self into this Principle, That it is safest believing
that which both parties consent in? For if this be not safest, Why should I be
more inclined by their consent, than otherwise? So that if you let go this, you
let go the only foundation on which that Principle stands. For if the
consenting parties may agree in a falsehood, What evidence can I have, but that
this is one of those falsehoods they may agree in? And therefore it is far from
being the safest way to venture upon that which the dissenting parties agree
in. And because Salvation is a matter of the highest moment, if the Principle
will not hold as to matter of particular Opinion, much less certainly in the
most weighty affair of men's eternal Salvation. And it ought to be a safe
Principle indeed, which men should venture their souls upon, and not so
uncertain Topical an Argument as this is. So that it is so far from being a
matter of prudence to make choice of Religion on such a Principle, that no man
can be guilty of greater weakness or imprudence, than by doing so. 2. If this
Principle should be limited only to a possibility of Salvation, yet, as to
that, it is easy to discover, how false and uncertain a principle it is,
because it it generally the nature of Sects, to be uncharitable, and to deny
Salvation to all but themselves: Whereas the Orthodox Christians in all ages
have hoped the best of those who were misled among them; and on this ground it
would still be safer to be on the Sectaries, than the Churches side. You have
therefore gained an excellent Principle for the advantage of your Church;
which, if it hold for you, will hold as well for the most uncharitable
Sectaries that are in the world. Nay, we may go somewhat further; and, What
think you if Heathenism it self will be proved the safest way to Salvation? For
many of you agree with them, That many of them might be saved, without any
explicit knowledge of Christ; but they deny, you can be saved by it: If then
this Principle be found, farewell the Church of Rome, and welcome Philosophy. If
you say, They are only some among you who assert the possibility of the
Salvation of Heathens; you know, the very same Answer will hold as to us; P.
301.
for, you confess, That many Protestants grant no more to you, than you do to
them, in order to Salvation. If you say, That Heathens may be saved only on
supposition of a general Repentance; that is all that any of us say as to you.
So that if the Argument will hold one way, it must the other too; and it
argues, you are very much to seek for proofs, when you make use of this to
persuade men to be of your Church. And you have no cause to triumph in the
Conversion of such, who suffer themselves to be imposed on by so palpable a
piece of Sophistry as this is. But your way is to deal with the weakest, and
such as are capable of such easy impressions as these are.

His Lordship, from that which was expressed, comes to that which was employed
in this Argument, viz. That we cannot be saved, because we are out of the
Church. As to which, he says, We are not out of the Catholic Church, because
not within the Roman. For the Roman Church, P. 313.
and the Church of England, are but two distinct members of that Catholic
Church, which is spread over the face of the earth. If you can prove, that Rome
is properly the Catholic Church it self, speak out, and prove it. This, you
say, P. 321.
you have done already; but, how poorly, let the Reader judge. But, when you
add, That in the day of account, the Roman Church will be found not an elder
Sister, but a Mother; it will be well for her, if it prove not, only in the
sense wherein Babylon the Great is called so, Rev. 17.5.
viz. the Mother of Harlots and abominations of the Earth.

The Controversy, you tell us,. 10.
goes on touching Roman- Catholics Salvation, and we must follow it; P. 222.
though without breaking it into several Chapters, as you do, that so we may
lay together all that belongs to the same subject. And here his Lordship
distinguishes the case of such, whose calling and sufficiency gives them a
greater capacity for understanding the Truth; and such, whom, as S. Augustine
speaks, P. 214.
the simplicity of believing makes safe. So that there is no Question, says he,
but many were saved in corrupted times of the Church, when their leaders,
unless they repented before death, were lost. Which he understands, of such
Leaders, as refuse to hear the Churches instruction, or to use all the means
they can to come to the knowledge of the Truth. For if they do this, err they
may, but Heretics they are not; as is most manifest in S. Cyprian 's case of
Re-baptization. But when Leaders add Schism to Heresy, and Obstinacy to both,
they are lost without Repentance, while many that succeed them in the error
only without obstinacy may be saved. That is, in case they hold these errors
not supinely, not pertinaciously, not uncharitably, not factiously, i. e. in
case all endeavors be used after Truth and Peace, and all expressions of
Charity showed to all who retain an internal Communion with the whole visible
Church of Christ in the fundamental points of Faith. Such as these he confesses
to be in a state of Salvation, though their mis-leaders perish. This is the
sum of his Lordships discourse. Which you call, P. 323,
a heavy doom against all the Roman Doctors in general (for what you say
before, is a mere declamation and repetition of what has been often examined.)
But you ask, How could they be all lost, who by the Bishops own Principles,
were members of the true visible Church of Christ, by reason of their being
baptized, and holding the Foundation? But, Does his Lordship say, that all such
as are within the Church, are undoubtedly saved? For he only faith, That no man
can be said simply to be out of the visible Church, that is baptized, and holds
the Foundation. The most then that can be inferred merely from being within the
Church, is only, the possibility of Salvation, notwithstanding which, I suppose
you will not deny, but many who have a possibility of Salvation, may yet
certainly perish. For many may hold the Foundation it self doctrinally, who may
not hold it savingly; and therefore it is a pitiful inference, because he
grants they are members of the Church, therefore it follows from his
Principles, they cannot be lost. But you are in a very sad condition, if you
have no other ground for your Salvation, but being members of that which you
account the Catholic Church. Joh. 15.2.
When Christ himself says, Every branch in me, that bears not fruit, he
takes away; How much more such, who have nothing else to plead for their
Salvation, but that they are in the Church? It is not therefore the bare
doctrinal holding that Faith which makes them members of the Church, which can
give them a title to Salvation; unless all sincere endeavors be used to find
out, what the will of God is, and to practice it when it is known. P. 324.
But, you say, Your leaders did not refuse the Churches instructions, for they
taught as the Church taught for many hundred years together; and, What other
means could they be bound to use than they did, to come to the knowledge of the
Truth? Yes, there were other means which they most supinely neglected
themselves, and most dangerously withheld from others, viz. the plain and
undoubted word of God, which is the only Infallible Rule of Faith. And let any
Church whatsoever teach against this, it must incurr the same Anathema which S.
Paul pronounces against an Angel from Heaven, if he teaches any other Doctrine.
Did those then take care of their own, and others souls, whose greatest care
was to lock the Scripture up from the view of the people, and minded it so
little themselves; which yet alone is able to make men wise to Salvation But
you take the greatest advantage of his vindication of S. Cyprian and his
followers, P. 324.
for therein you say, He vindicates more the Roman- Catholic Doctors, who had
always the universal practice of the Church on their side which they opposed;
and condemns Protestants, because, if S. Cyprian 's followers were in such
danger for opposing the whole Church, so must they be too, who, you say, have
opposed the Churches Instruction given them by the voice of a General Council.
But, Who is so blind as not to discern that all this proceeds upon a palpable
begging the Question, viz. that the whole Church is of your side, and against
us? which I have so often discovered to be a notorious falsehood, that there is
no necessity at all here to repeat it. But, if we grant you that liberty to
suppose your selves to be the whole and only Church, you will not more easily
acquit all your Doctors, than condemn Protestants, both teachers and people.
However, by this we see, that you have no other way to do the one, or the
other; but by supposing what you can never prove, and which none in their wits
will ever grant you.

The greatest part of the thirty seventh Paragraph in his Lordships Book, is
(you say) taken up with personal matters, and matters of fact, in which you
will not interpose; P. 325.
and you might as well have spared your pains in that which you touch at, since
they are spent only upon a bare asserting the Greek Church to be guilty of
fundamental errors (which we have at large disproved at the very beginning;
but, as his Lordship says, you labor indeed but like a horse in a Mill; P.
324.
no farther at night than at noon; the same thing over and over again; and so
we find it almost to the end of your Book) and as vain an attempt to clear your
Church from any error endangering Salvation. For, Whether the errors of your
Church be fundamental in themselves, or only by reduction and consequence;
Whether you hold all fundamental points literally, or no; yet if we prove you
guilty of any gross, dangerous, and damnable errors (as his Lordship asserts
you are) that will be abundantly sufficient to our purpose, P. 320.
that, Yours cannot possibly be any safe way to Salvation. And, although we
should grant your Church right in the exposition of the three Creeds, yet if
you assert any other errors of a dangerous nature, your right exposition of
them cannot secure the souls of men from the danger they run themselves upon,
by embracing the other. So much for the Argument drawn from the possibility of
Salvation in the Roman Church.

CHAP. V. The Safety of the Protestant Faith.
The sufficiency of the Protestant Faith to Salvation, manifested by disproving
the Cavils against it. T. C's tedious Repetitions passed over. The Argument
from Possession at large considered. No Prescription allowable, where the Law
has antecedently determined the right. Of the Infallibility of Oral Tradition.
That, contrary to the received Doctrine of the Roman Church; and in it self
unreasonable. The Grounds of it examined. The ridiculousness of the Plea of
bare Possession, discovered. General Answers returned to the remaining
Chapters, consisting wholly of things already discussed. The place of S.
Cyprian to Cornelius particularly vindicated. The proof of Succession of
Doctrine lies on the Romanists by their own Principles.

ALthough this Subject has been sufficiently cleared in the Controversy,
concerning the resolution of Faith;. 1.
yet the nature of our task requires that we so far resume the debate of it, as
any thing undiscussed already offers it self to consideration. For I cannot
think it a civil way of treating the Reader, to cloy him with Tautologies, or
Repetitions; nor can I think it a way to satisfy him, rather by some
incidental passages, than by a full and free debate. In all those things then,
which we have had occasion to handle already, I shall remit the Reader to the
precedent discourses; but whatever has the face of being new and pertinent, I
shall readily examine the force of it. The occasion of this fresh Debate was a
new Question of the Lady; Whether she might be saved in the Protestant Faith?
In answering whereof, you say, The parties conferring are put into new heats;
Upon my soul (said the Bishop) you may. Upon my soul (said Mr. Fisher) there is
but one saving Faith, and that is the Roman. Since the confidence seems equal on
both sides, we must examine, Which is built on the stronger reason. And his
Lordship's comes first to be examined; which he offers very freely to
examination. For, says he, to believe the Scripture and the Creeds; to believe
these in the sense of the Ancient Primitive Church; to receive the four great
General Councils so much magnified by Antiquity; to believe all points of
Doctrine generally received as fundamental in the Church of Christ, is a Faith,
in which to live and dye, cannot but give Salvation. And therefore, says he, I
went upon sure ground in the adventure of my soul upon that Faith. Besides, in
all the points controverted between us, I would fain see any one point
maintained by the Church of England, that can be proved to depart from the
foundation. You have many dangerous errors about the very foundation, in that
which you call the Roman Faith; but there I leave you to look to your own soul,
and theirs whom you seduce. Thus far his Lordship. Two things you seem to
answer to this. 1. That such a Faith may not be sufficient. 2. That ours is not
such a Faith. 1. That such a Faith may not be sufficient, because you suppose
it necessary to believe the Infallibility of the present Church, and General
Councils: But that we are now excused from a fresh enquiry into; but you would
seem to infer it from his own principles of submission to General Councils. P.
328.
But by what peculiar Arts you can thence draw, that some thing else is
necessary to be believed in order to Salvation besides what has been owned as
Fundamentals in all ages, I am yet to learn. And sure you were much to seek for
Arguments, when you could not distinguish between the necessity of external
submission and internal assent.

But the second is the main thing you quarrel with, viz. That the
English-Protestant Faith is really and indeed such a Faith:. 2.
and this you undertake at large to disprove. P. 329.
You ask first, Whether we believe all Scripture, or only a part of it? we
answer, All without exception that is Scripture, i. e. has any evidence that
ever it was of Divine Revelation. In this, you say, we profess more then we can
make good, seeing we refuse many books owned for Canonical by the Primitive
Church, and embrace some which were not. But in both you assert that, which we
are sure you are never able to defend; since we are content to put it upon as
fair a trial as you can desire, viz. That the Church of England does fully
agree with the Primitive Church, as to the Canon of Scripture. Which has been
already made good by the successful diligence of a learned Bishop of our
Church, Bishop Cosens Scholastical history of the Canon of Scripture.
to whom I refer you either for satisfaction or confusion. But you are the men
whose bare words and bold affirmations must weigh more then the greatest
evidence of reason or Antiquity. You love to pronounce, where you are loath to
prove; and think to bear men down with confidence, where you are afraid to
enter the lists. But our Faith stands not on so sandy a Foundation to be blown
down with your biggest words; which have that property of wind in them to be
leight and loud. When you will attempt to prove that the Books called Apocrypha
have had an equal testimony of Divine Authority with those we receive into the
Canon of Scripture, you may meet with a further Answer upon that Subject. Just
as much you say to disprove our believing Scripture, and the Creeds in the
Primitive Church; For, you say, The Fathers oppose us, we deny it: you say, The
Councils condemn us, we say and prove the contrary. You offer again at some
broken evidences of the Popes Supremacy from Councils and Fathers; P. 330.
but those have been discussed already: and the sense of the Church at large
manifested to be contrary to it. But I fear your matters lie very ill concocted
upon your stomach, you bring them us so often up; but I am not bound to dance
in a circle because you do so. And therefore I proceed; but when I hope to do
so, you pull me back again to the Infallibility of Councils and the Church, the
question of Fundamentals and the Greek Church; P. 331. P. 332.
and scarce a page between, but in comes again the Popes Supremacy as fresh, as
if it had been never handled before. But I assure you after this rate, P. 334:
P. 335.
I wonder you ever came to an end, for you might have writ all your life time
after that manner. For the decretal Epistles (those impregnable testimonies)
St. Cyprian, Optatus, Hierom, Austin, the Council of Sardica, Ephesus,
Chalcedon, and all the baffled and impertinent proofs you could think on, must
be pressed to do new service, though they had run out of the Field before. And
this you call a General Consent of the Fathers of the Primitive Church; but I
must beg the Reader not to be scared with these vizards, for if he touches them
they fall off, and then you will see them blush that they are so often abused
to so ill an end. But this is not the only subject ( viz. the Popes Supremacy)
which you give us so often over, but, within a page or two following, enter
again worship of Images with as much ceremony as if it had never appeared; but
till you have Answered what I have said already, P. 337.
all that you have here is vain and impertinent: in the next page enter
Transubstantiation: in the following, enter again Infallibility of Councils, P.
338.
Resolution of Faith, Apocrypha books, Fundamentals, Communion in one kind, P.
339.
etc. to the end of the Chapter. In all which I find but two things new, the
one about Purgatory, which we shall meet with again; and the other you call a
Note only by the way, but it is so rare a one, it ought to be considered.

Which is, P. 333.
That Protestants ought to prove their Faith agreeable to that of the Primitive
Church by special undeniable evidence;. 3.
but they have not the like reason to require it of you Catholics (good reason
for it) but, you say, not that you are unable to do it, (no, who would ever
suspect that, who reads your book?) but because you are in full and quiet
possession of your Faith, Religion, Church, etc. by immemorial tradition and
succession from your Ancestors, that you do, upon that sole ground of quiet
possession, justly prescribe against your Adversaries. And your plea, you say,
must in all Law and equity be admitted for good, till they do by more pregnant
and convincing arguments disprove it, and show that your possession is not
bonae fidei, but gained by force or fraud, or some other wrongful and unallowed
means. To this, because I have not yet considered it, I shall now return the
suller Answer. And it appears that the proof lies upon you: For they who
challenge full and quiet possession by virtue of immemorial tradition and
succession from their Ancestors, ought to produce the conveyance of that
tradition from him who alone could invest them in that possession. For although
this title of possession be of late so much insisted on by those who see the
weakness of other Arguments and are ashamed to use them, yet whosoever
thoroughly searches it, will find it as weak and ridiculous as any other. For it
is plain in this case the full right depends not upon mere occupancy, but a
title must be pleaded, to show that the possession is bonae fidei; so that the
Question comes from the bare possession to the goodness of the title and the
validity of it in justice and equity. Your title then is immemorial tradition
from your Ancestors: but here several things are to be contested, before your
prescription be allowed, 1. That no antecedent Law has determined contrary to
what you challenge by virtue of possession. For if it has, no prescription is
allowable in it. For, prescription can only take place where the Law allows a
liberty for prescription; but if the Law has antecedently determined against
it, possession signifies nothing, but the liberty to make good the Title. Would
any man be so mad, as to think that prescription of threescore years would have
been sufficient in the Judaical Law, when all possessions were to return to
their first owners by Law at every year of Jubilee? So then the matter to be
enquired here, is, What liberty of prescription is allowed by virtue of the Law
of Christ; for since he has made Laws to Govern his Church by, it is most
senseless pleading prescription, till you have particularly examined, how far
such prescription is allowed by him. Let us then suppose, that any of the
matters in difference between us, are one way or other determined by him, viz.
Whether the Bishop of Rome be Head of the Church or no, Whether the present
Church be Infallible or no. What do you say? Has he determined these things,
or has he not? If he has determined them one way or other, it is to no
purpose in the world to plead possession or prescription; for these signify
nothing against Law. So that the question must be wholly removed from the plea
of possession, and it must be tried upon this issue, Whether Christ by his Law
has determined on your side or ours? It may be you will tell me, That in this
case prescription interprets Law, and that the Churches possession argues it
was the will of Christ. But still the proof lies upon your side, since you run
your self into new briars; for you must prove that there is no way to interpret
this Law, but by the practice of the Church, and which is the (...) of all,
That the Church cannot come into the possession of any thing, but what was
originally given her by the Legislator. Which is a task necessarily incumbent
on you to prove, and I suppose you will find so much difficulty in it, that you
had as good run back to Super hanc Petram, and Pasce oves, as undertake to
manage it. He that undertakes to prove it impossible that the Church should
claim possession by an undue title; must prove it impossible, that the Church
should ever be deceived. And herein we see the excellent way of this proof. For
suppose the matter in dispute be the Roman Churches Infallibility, this, you
say, you are in possession of (though that be the thing in question), well, we
will suppose it, that we may discern your proofs. I demand then, On what
account do you challenge this? you say, By prescription. I further ask, How you
prove this prescription sufficient? you say, Because the Church cannot
challenge any thing but what belongs to her. I demand a proof of that: your
Answer must be, Because the Church cannot be deceived; so that the proof at
last comes to this, The Church is Infallible because she is Infallible.

Well, but suppose this Infallibility challenged, be only an Infallibility of
Tradition,. 4.
and not a Doctrinal Infallibility in either Pope or Councils. Yet still I am
as unsatisfied as ever. For I ask, Whether am I bound to believe what the
present Church delivers to be Infallible? Yes. On what account am I bound to
believe it? Because the present Church cannot be deceived in what the Church of
the former age believed, nor that in the preceding, and so up till the time of
Christ. But, 1. How can you assure me, the present Church obliges me to believe
nothing, but only what, and so far, as it received it from the former Church?
What evidence can you bring to convince me, both that the Church always
observed this rule and could never be deceived in it? For I see the Roman
Church asserts, that things may be de fide in one age, which were not in
another; at least Pope, and Councils challenge this, and this is the common
Doctrine maintained there, and others are looked on as no members of their
Church who assert the contrary; but as persons, at least meritoriously, if not
actually, excommunicate. Where then shall I satisfy my self what the sense of
your Church is, as to this particular? Must I believe a very few persons whom
the rest disown as Heretical and Seditious persons? or ought I not rather to
take the judgment of the greatest and most approved persons in that Church?
And these disown any such Doctrine; but assert that the Church may determine
things de fide which were not so before: in which case I ask, Whether, when a
thing is de novo determined to be de fide, that Church believed as the
precedent did, or no? If it did, How comes any thing to be de fide which was
not before? If it did not, What assurance can I have that every age of the
Church believes just as the precedent did, and no otherwise? when I see they
profess the contrary. And if a thing may be de fide in one age, which was not
in a foregoing, then a Church may deliver that as a matter of Faith at one
time, which was never accounted so before: by which means the present Church
may oblige me to believe that as a matter of Faith which never was so in Christ
or the Apostles times, and so the Infallibility on the account of Tradition is
destroyed. 2. What security is there, that in no age of the Church any
practices should come in, which were not used in the precedent? You may say,
Because they could not be deceived what their fore Fathers did; but that
satisfies not, unless you prove that all the Church in every age looked upon it
self as obliged to do nothing at all, but what their Forefathers did. For
although they might know never so much what was done by them, if they did not
judge themselves bound to observe unalterably what they did, this does not
hinder at all, but new customs and opinions might be introduced in the Church.
And therefore I cannot but justly wonder, that any men of parts who professedly
disown the vulgar ways of establishing the Roman Church should think to
satisfy themselves with Orall Tradition, and cry it up as so impregnable a
thing. Because no age of the Church can be deceived in what the foregoing did
and taught. Whereas a very little of that reason, which these men pretend to,
might acquaint them, that the force of it does not lie in their capacity to
know what was done by others, but in their obligation not to vary at all from
it. For the main weight of the Argument lies here, That nothing has been
changed in the Faith or Practice of the Church, which being the thing to be
proved, the bare knowledge of what was believed or practiced, is not sufficient
to prove it; for men may know very well what others believe and do, and yet may
believe and do quite contrary themselves. But the only thing to be proved in
this case is, That every age of the Church, and all persons in it looked upon
themselves as obliged, not to vary in any thing from the Doctrine or practice
of the precedent age. And I pray let me know by what demonstrative medium can
this be proved; for no less then demonstrations are spoken of by the magnifiers
of this way; although there be so little evidence in it, that it cannot work
but upon a very weak understanding. Must that obligation to observe all which
the precedent age believed or practiced be proved by reason, particular
testimony, or universal tradition? And let the extollers of this way take their
choice, so they will undertake to bring evidence equal to the weight which
depends upon it. It is hard to conceive what reason should enforce it, but such
as proves the impossibility of the contrary: And they have understandings of
another mould from others, who can conceive it impossible that men should not
think themselves obliged to believe and do all just as their Predecessors did.
If particular testimonies could be produced, they signify no more, then their
own judgments; but we are enquiring for the judgment of every age of the
Church, and the persons who live in it. And to prove an universal tradition of
this obligation is the most difficult task of all, for it depends upon the
truth of that which is to be proved by it. For if they did not think themselves
obliged to believe and do what their Predecessors did, they could not think
themselves bound to deliver such an obligation to their posterity to do it. And
therefore you must first prove the obligation it self, before you can prove the
universal tradition of it. For although one age may deliver it, yet you cannot
be assured that a former age did it to them; unless you can prove, the same
sense of this obligation ran through them all. But this is so far from being an
universal tradition, that the present age from which it begins was never agreed
in it, as I have showed already.

3. It is to no purpose to prove the impossibility of motion,. 5.
when I see men move: no more is it to prove that no age of the Church could
vary from the foregoing, when we can evidently prove that they have done it.
And therefore this Argument is intended only to catch easy minds that care not
for a search into the History of the several ages of the Church, but had rather
sit down with a superficial subtilty* than spend time in further enquiries. For
this Argument proceeds just as if men should prove the world eternal by this
medium; The present age sees no alteration in it, and they could not be
deceived in what their fore Fathers believed, nor they in theirs, and so on in
infinitum; for no men did ever see the world made: and therefore it was never
made, and so eternal. But if we go about to prove by reason the production of
the world, or by Scripture to show that it was once made, then this oral
tradition is spoiled. And so it is in the present case; These men attempt to
prove there could never be any alteration in the Faith or practice of the
Church since Christ's time; for the present age delivers what it had from the
precedent, and so up till the first institution of the Church: but in the mean
time, if we can evidently prove that there have been such alterations in the
Church, then it is to no purpose to prove that impossible which we see actually
done. And this appears, not only because the Scripture supposes a degeneracy in
the Christian Church, which could never be, if every age of the Church did
infallibly believe and practice as the precedent up to Christ's time did; but
because we can produce clear evidence, that some things are delivered by the
present Church which must be brought in by some age since the time of Christ.
For which I shall refer you to what I have said already concerning Communion in
one kind, Invocation of Saints, and Worship of Images. In all which I have
proved evidently, that they were not in use in some ages of the Christian
Church; and it is as evident that these are delivered by the present Church;
and therefore this principle must needs be false. For by these things it
appears, that one age of the Church may differ in practice or opinion from
another, and therefore this oral tradition cannot be infallible. And yet this
is the only way whereby a prescription may be allowed, for this offers to give
a sufficient title if it could be made good. But bare possession in matters of
Religion is a most senseless plea; and which would justify Heathenism and
Mahumetism as well as your Church.

2. It were worth knowing, What you mean by full and quiet possession of your
Faith,. 6.
Religion, and Church, which you say you were in. Either you mean, that you did
believe the Doctrines of your Church your selves, or that we were bound to
believe them too. If you mean only the former, you are in as full possession of
them as ever, for I suppose all in your Church do believe them; if you intend
by this possession, that we ought to believe them because you did, this is a
prescription indeed, but without any ground or reason. For even Tertullian whom
you cite for prescribing against Heretics, Tertui. de virg. veland. cap. 1.
says, That nothing can be prescribed against truth, Non spatium temporum, non
patrocinia personarum, non privilegium regionum. Neither length of time, nor
authority of persons, nor privilege of places. If you say, It was truth you
were in possession of, that is the thing to be proved; and if you can make that
appear we will not disturb your possession at all. But you must be sure to
prove it by something else besides your quiet and full possession; unless you
can prove it impossible that you should be possessed of falsehoods; But we have
evidently shown the contrary already. And if we examine a little further what
this possession is, we shall see what an excellent right it gives you to
prescribe by. You were possessed of your Faith, Religion, and Church, i. e. you
did believe the Roman Church Infallible, you believed the Popes Supremacy,
Transubstantiation, Purgatory, etc. And what then? Do you not believe them
still? Yes doubtless. But, What is your quarrel with us then? Do we hinder you
the Possession of them? No, but we ought to believe them too. But, Why so?
because you are in possession of them. What, Must we then believe whatever you
do, whether it be true or false? If this be the meaning of your Possession, you
ought well to prove it, or else we shall call it Usurpation. For it is a most
ridiculous thing for you to talk of Possession, when the Question is, Whether
there be any such things in the world or no, as those you say you are possessed
of? We deny your Churches Infallibility, the Popes Supremacy, Purgatory, etc.
You must first prove there are such things in rerum natura, as Purgatory,
Transubstantiation, etc. before you can say, you are possessed of them: You
must convince us, that your Church is Infallible, and that the Pope was made
Head of the Church by Christ, and then we will grant you are in full possession
of them, but not before. So that you see, the Question is not concerning the
manner of Possession, but of the things themselves, which you call your Faith,
Religion, and Church, in opposition to ours; and therefore it is impossible to
plead Prescription, where there never was any Possession at all. And therefore
you clearly mistake when you call us, The Aggressors, for you are plainly the
Imposers in this case, and quarrel with us for not believing what you would
have us; and therefore you are bound to prove, and not we. So that there is
nothing you could challenge any Possession of in the Church of England, but
some Authority which the Pope had, which you elsewhere confess he might he
deprived of, as he was in King Henry 's time; and which we offer to prove that
he was not Possessor bonae fidei of, but that he came to it by fraud and
violence, and was deprived of it by a legal Power. Thus I have fully examined
your Argument from Possession, because it presents us with something which had
not been discussed before.

But having taken a view of all that remains, I find that it consists of a bare
Repetition of the Controversies before discussed,. 7.
especially concerning the certainty and grounds of Faith, the Infallibility of
the Church, and General Councils, and the Authority of the Roman Church; So
that if you had not an excellent faculty of saying most, where there is least
occasion, I should wonder at your design in spending several Chapters in giving
the same things, under other words. Unless it were an ambition of answering
every clause in his Lordships Book, which carried you to it, though you only
gave over and over what you had said in many places before. Which is a piece of
vanity I neither envy you for, nor shall I strive to imitate you in; having
made it my endeavor to lay those grounds in the handling each Controversy,
that there should not need any such fruitless repetitions as you here give us.
His Lordship, though he complains much of it, was forced by his Adversaries
importunity to return the same Answers in effect, which had been given before
by him in the proper places; but, whosoever compares what his Lordship says,
with what you pretend to answer, will find no necessity at all of my undergoing
the same tedious and wearisome task. Instead therefore of a particular Answer,
I shall give only some general strictures on what remains of these subjects,
where there is any appearance of difficulty; and conclude all with the
examination of your Defense of Purgatory, that being a subject which has not
yet come under our enquiry. Your main business is to persuade us, that yours is
the only saving Faith; which you prove by this, The saving Faith is but one, P.
349.
yours is confessed by us to be a saving Faith still; therefore yours is the
only saving Faith. But if you had considered on what that confession depends,
you could have made no Argument at all of it; for, when we say, that your Faith
is saving, we mean no more but this, that you have so much of the common truths
of Christianity among you, that there is a possibility for men to be saved in
your Church; but, Does this imply, that yours is a saving Faith, in that sense
wherein it is said, There is but one saving Faith? for in that Proposition it
is understood of all those common fundamental Truths, which the Christian
Church of all ages has been agreed in And the saying, There is but one saving
Faith, is of the same sense with the saying, There is but one true Religion in
the world.

The substance of what you would infer from the saying of Athanasius his
Creed, P. 351.
Which if a man keeps whole and inviolate (as you would have it) is this, That
a man is equally bound to believe every Article of Faith. But you cannot mean,
that it is simply necessary to do it, for that you disclaim elsewhere, by your
distinction of things necessary from the matter and the formal reason of Faith;
and therefore it can only be meant of such to whom those objects of Faith are
sufficiently proposed, and so far we acknowledge it too, that it is necessary
to Salvation for every man to believe that which he is convinced to be an
object of Faith. For otherwise such persons must call in question God's
Veracity; but if you would hence make it necessary to believe all that your
Church proposes for matter of Faith, you must prove, that whatever your Church
delivers, is as infallibly true, as if God himself spoke; and when you can
persuade us of this, we shall believe whatever is propounded by her. When you
say, We cannot believe all Articles of Faith on the same formal reason, P. 352.
because we deny the Churches Infallibility, it is apparent, that you make the
Churches testimony the formal reason of Faith; and that you are bound to prove
the Church absolutely Infallible, before we can believe any thing on her
account. Neither does it follow, Because we deny that, therefore we pick and
choose our Faith; for we believe all without reservation, P. 353.
which you, or any man can convince us was ever revealed by God. As to what at
large occurrs here again, about the Infallibility of Councils; there is nothing
but what has been sufficiently answered on that subject; P. 355, etc.
and so reserving the Question of Purgatory, which is here brought in by his
Lordship, as a further Instance of the errors of General Councils; I pass on
to the two last Chapters: In which we meet again with the objected
inconveniences, P. 373. P. 376, etc.
from questioning the Infallibility of the Church and Councils, That then Faith
would be uncertain, and private persons might judge of Councils, and if they
may err in one, they may err in all; as fresh as if they had never been heard
of before. Only the Argument from Romans 10.15. P. 375.
That because none can preach except they be sent, therefore the present Church
is Infallible, is both new and excellent, on which account I let it pass. P.
386.
If your Church, with all her Infallibility, can do no more, as you confess, in
reference to Heresies, but only secure the faithful members of the Church, who
have due care of themselves, and perform their duty well toward their lawful
Pastors; you have little cause to boast of the great privilege of it, and as
little reason to contend for the necessity of it, since so much is done without
it, and on surer grounds by the Scriptures, and the use of other means which
fall short of Infallibility.

. 8.
In the beginning of your last Chapter, we have a large dispute concerning S.
Cyprian's meaning, in his 45. Epistle to Cornelius, where he speaks of the root
and matrix of the Catholic Church, viz. Whether by that, the Roman Church be
understood or no? His Lordship says, Not, and gives many reasons for it; you
maintain the contrary; but the business may be soon decided upon a true state
of the occasion of writing that Epistle. Which in short was this; It seems,
Letters had been sent in the name of Polycarp Bishop of the Colony of
Adrumyttium, directed to Cornelius at Rome; but Cyprian and Liberalis coming
thither, and acquainting the Clergy there with the resolution of the African
Bishops to suspend communion either with Cornelius, or Novatianus, till the
return of Caldonius and Fortunatus, who were sent on purpose to give an account
of the proceedings there, the Clergy of Adrumyttium upon this writing to Rome,
direct their Letters not to Cornelius, but to the Roman Clergy. Which Cornelius
(being it seems informed by some, as though it were done by S. Cyprian's
Counsel) takes offense at, and writes to Cyprian about it. Who gives him in
this Epistle the account of it, that it was only done, that there might be no
dissent among themselves upon this difference at Rome, and that they only
suspended their sentence till the return of Caldonius and Fortunatus, who might
either bring them word that all was composed at Rome, or else satisfy them,
Who was the lawfully ordained Bishop. And therefore, as soon as they understood
that Cornelius was the lawful Bishop, they unanimously declare for him, and
order all Letters to be sent to him, and that his communion should be embraced.
This is the substance of that Epistle. But, it seems Cornelius was moved at S.
Cyprian's suspending himself, as though it were done out of dis-favour to him;
which Cyprian to clear himself of, tells him, That his design was only to
preserve the Unity of the Catholic Church. For, says he, we gave this advice
to all those, who the mean time had occasion to sail to Rome, ut Ecclesiae
Catholicae radicem and matricem agnoscerent and tenerent; that they would
acknowledge and hold to the root and matrix of the Catholic Church, by which
his Lordship understands, the Unity of the Church Catholic, you, the
particular Church of Rome. But it is apparent, the meaning of this Counsel was,
to prevent their participation in the Schism. So that if, upon their coming to
Rome, the Schismatical party was evidently known from the other (which they
might, I grant, soon understand there, by the circumstances of affairs) they
should join themselves with that part which preserved the Unity of the
Catholic Church. Which I take to be the true meaning of S. Cyprian. But in
case the matter should prove disputable at Rome, and the matter be referred to
other Churches, then by virtue of this advice, they were bound to suspend their
communion with either party, till the Catholic Church had declared it self. By
this account of the business, all your Arguments come to nothing: for they only
prove that which I grant, viz. That in case it appeared at Rome, Which was the
Catholic party, they were to communicate with it: P. 391. P. 392.
but this was not, because the Catholic party at Rome was the root and matrix
of the Catholic Church (for on that account the party of Novatianus might have
been so too, if Novatianus had been lawful Bishop) but their holding to the
root of the Catholic Church, would oblige them to communicate only with that
part, which did preserve the Unity of it. For the Controversy now at Rome was
between two parties both challenging an equal right; and therefore if S.
Cyprian had only advised them to communicate with the Roman Church, because
that was the root and matrix of the Catholic Church, his advice had signified
nothing; for the Question was not between the Church of Rome, and other
Churches, in which case it might have been pertinent to have said, they should
adhere to the Church of Rome, because that was the root, etc. But when the
difference was at Rome it self between two Bishops there, this reason had been
wholly impertinent; for the only reason proper in this case, must be such as
must discriminate the one party from the other, which this could not do,
because it was equally challenged by them both. And had belonged to one as well
as the other, in case Novatianus had proved the lawful Bishop, and not
Cornelius. And therefore the sense of Cyprian's words must be such as might
give direction, which party to join with at Rome, on which account they cannot
import any privilege of the Church of Rome over other Churches, but only
contain this advice, that they should hold to the Unity of the Catholic
Church, and communicate only with that party which did it. This reason is so
clear and evident to me, that this place cannot be understood of any privilege
of the Church of Rome, above other Churches, that if there were nothing else to
induce me to believe it, this were so pregnant, that I could not resist the
force of it.

But besides this, his Lordship proves that elsewhere S. Cyprian speaks in his
own person with other Catholic Bishops,. 9.
nos qui Ecclesiae unius caput and radicem tenemus, P. 366.
we who hold the head and root of one Church, by which it appears, he could not
make the Church of Rome the root and matrix of the Catholic; this being
understood of the Unity and Society of the Catholic Church, Cypr. ep. 73.
without relation to the Church of Rome: and S. Cyprian writes to Cornelius,
that they had sent Caldonius and Fortunatus to reduce the Church of Rome to the
Unity and Communion of the Catholic Church; and because no particular Church
can be the root of the Catholic, and if any were, Jerusalem might more pretend
to it than Rome, and because S. Cyprian and his Brethren durst not have
suspended their communion at all, if they had looked on the Church of Rome as
the root and matrix of the Catholic, as Baronius confesses they did, all which
things are largely insisted on by his Lordship, and do all confirm, that hereby
was not meant any Authority or Privilege of the Church of Rome above other
Apostolical Churches, which in respect of the lesser Churches which came from
them, are called Matrices Ecclesiae, by Tertullian and others. But you are
still so very unreasonable, that though no more be said of the Church of Rome,
than might be said of any other Apostolical Church, yet because it is said of
the Church of Rome, it must import some huge Authority, which if it had been
said of any other, would have been interpreted by your selves into nothing: For
so do you deal with us here; for, because it is said, that they who joined with
Cornelius, did preserve the Unity of the Catholic Church, P. 394.
therefore it must needs be understood, that the Roman Church is the root of
the Catholic. But he must have a very mean understanding, that can be swayed
by such trifles as these are: For, Was there not a Catholic and Schismatical
party then at Rome? and if they who joined with Novatianus, did separate from
the Catholic Church, then they who were in communion with Cornelius, must
preserve the Unity of it. And, Would not this Argment as well prove the
Catholic party at Carthage to be the root and matrix of the Catholic Church,
as well as at Rome? But such kind of things must they deal with, who are
resolved to maintain a cause, and yet are destitute of better means to do it
with. So that I cannot find any thing in all your Answer, but what would
equally hold for any other Church at that time, which was so divided as Rome
was; considering the great care that then was used to preserve the Unity of the
Catholic Church. And what particularly S. Cyprian's apprehension was
concerning the Nature and Unity of the Catholic Church, Part 2. chapter 2. sect.
8, 9.
we have at large discoursed already, to which place we referr the Reader, if
he desires any further satisfaction.

Your whole N. 5. depends on personal matters concerning the satisfaction of
the Lady's conscience; but if you would thence infer,. 10.
P. 399, etc.
That she did well to desert the Protestant Communion; you must prove that it
can be no sin to follow the dictates of an erroneous conscience. For such, we
say, it was in her, and, you denying it, all this discourse signifies nothing,
but depends on the truth of the matters in controversy between us. But you
most notoriously impose on his Lordship, when, because he asserts the
possibility of Salvation of some in your Church, you would make him say, P. 401.
That it is no sin to join with your Church: You might as well say, Because he
hopes some who have committed Adultery may be saved, therefore it is no sin to
commit Adultery. So that while you are charging him falsely for allowing
dissimulation, you do that which is more, in saying that which you cannot but
know to be a great untruth.

If our Religion be not the same with yours, as you eagerly contend it is not,
P. 402.
let it suffice to tell you, that our Religion is Christianity, let yours be
what it will. And if it please you better, to have a name wholly distinct from
us, yours shall be called the Roman Religion, and ours the Christian. If you
judge us of another Religion from yours, because we do not believe all that you
do, we may judge you to have a different Religion from the Christian, because
you impose more by your own confession to be believed as necessary in order to
Salvation, than ever Christ or the Apostles did. And certainly the main of any
Religion consists in those things which are necessary to be believed in it, in
order to eternal happiness.

In your following discourse, you are so far from giving us any hopes of peace
with your Church, that you plainly give us the reason, P. 403*
why it is vain to expect or desire it; which is, that if your Church should
recede from any thing, it would appear she had erred, and if that appears,
farewell Infallibility; and then if that be once gone, you think all is gone.
And while you maintain it, we are so far from hoping any peace with you, that
the Peace of Christendom may still be joined in the Dutchmans Sign with the
quadrature of the circle, and the Philosophers Stone for the sign of the three
hopeless things.

How far we are bound to submit to General Councils, has been so fully cleared
already, that I need not go about here to vindicate his Lordships Opinion from
falsity or contradiction; both which you unreasonably charge it with, and that
still from no wiser a ground, than not being able to distinguish between the
submission of Obedience and Faith. P. 404, etc.
For his Lordship says, It may be our duty not to oppose General Councils in
case they err, and yet it may be no pride not to believe known and gross
errors of General Councils; and I pray, What shadow of a contradiction is
here? And if it be pride in us not to believe gross errors imposed on us, Is
it not much more intolerable in them who offer to impose them? What Authority
the Pope has either to order or confirm Councils; P. 406.
it is not here a place to enter upon again, since it has been so largely
discoursed of in so many places. But you force me, though not to the repetition
of matter, yet to the repeating my saying that I will not, oftener than I
should, but only to show, how little you deserve any further answer.

There is nothing now remaining to the end of your Book, which has not been
over and over, even in these last Chapters, but only a long discourse touching
Succession, which you show your self, of how little importance it is, when,
after you have endeavored at large to prove the necessity of personal
Succession, P. 409. P. 410.
you grant, That it is not sufficient without succession of Doctrine too: And
on that account you deny the Greek Church to have a true Succession. P. 411.
And in vindication of Stapleton, you say, All the Succession which he and you
contend for, is a Succession of Pastors, which hold entire both the Unity and
the Faith of the Church. So that it comes to this at last, that you are bound
to prove a continual Succession of all that which you call the Faith of your
Church in every age from the Apostles times; if you would have us believe that
Doctrine, or own your Church for the true Church of Christ. And therefore I
conclude these general Answers with his Lordships words; If A. C. T. C. or any
Jesuit can prove, P. 382.
that by a visible continued Succession from Christ or his Apostles to this
day, either Transubstantiation in the Eucharist, or the Eucharist in one kind,
or Purgatory, or Worship of Images, or the Intention of the Priest of necessity
in Baptism, or the Power of the Pope over a General Council, or his
Infallibility with or without it, or his Power to depose Princes, or the
public Prayers of the Church in an unknown tongue, with diverse other points,
have been so taught; I, for my part, will give the Cause.

CHAP. VI. The Sense of the Fathers concerning Purgatory.
The Advantage which comes to the Church of Rome, by the Doctrine of Purgatory,
thence the boldness of our Adversaries in contending for it. The Sense of the
Roman Church concerning Purgatory, explained. The Controversy between the
Greek and Latin Church concerning it. The Difference in the Church of Rome
about Purgatory. Some general Considerations about the Sense of the Fathers, as
to its being an Article of Faith. The Doubtfulness and Uncertainty of the
Fathers Judgments in this particular, manifested by S. Austin the first who
seemed to assert a Purgation before the day of Judgment. Prayer for the Dead
used in the Ancient Church, does not infer Purgatory. The Primate of Armagh
vindicated from our Adversaries Calumnies. The general Intention of the Church
distinguished from the private Opinions of particular persons. The Prayers of
the Church respected the day of Judgment. The Testimonies of the Fathers in
behalf of Purgatory, examined; particularly of the pretended Dionysius,
Tertullian, S. Cyprian, Origin, S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, S. Basil, Nazianzen,
Lactantius, Hilary, Gregory Nyssen, etc. And not one of them asserts the
Purgatory of the Church of Rome. S. Austin does not contradict himself about
it. The Doctrine of Purgatory no elder than Gregory 1. and built on Cred^lity
and Superstition. The Churches Infallibility made at last the Foundation of the
belief of Purgatory. The Falsity of that Principle: and the whole concluded.

THese general Answers being dispatched, there remains only now this Question
concerning Purgatory to be discussed.. 1.
Which being the great Diana of your Church, no wonder you are so much
displeased at his Lordship for speaking against it; for by that means your
craft is in danger to be set at naught. There being no Opinion in your Church
which brings in a more constant revenue, by Masses for the dead, and
Indulgencies, besides Casualties, and Deodands, by dying persons, or their
friends, in hopes of a speedier release out of the pains of Purgatory. So that
if this Opinion were once out of Countenance in the world, you would lose one
of the best Arts you have of upholding the Grandeur of your Church. For then
farewell Indulgences, and years of Jubilee; farewell all those rich Donations
which are given by those at their death, who hope by that means to get the
sooner out of the Suburbs of Hell, to a place of rest and happiness. For, What
Engine could possibly be better contrived to extort the largest gifts from
those whose riches were as great as their sins, than to persuade them, that by
that means they would be sooner delivered out of the Flames of Purgatory, and
need not doubt but they should come to Heaven at last? And, Would not they be
accounted great Fools, that would not live as they pleased in this world, as
long as they could buy themselves out of the pains of another? And by this
means your Church has not only eaten, but grown fat, by the sins of the
people; it being truly observed by Spalatensis, De Repub Eccles. l 5 c 8. sect.
73.
That the Doctrine of Purgatory has been that which has most enriched the
Church of Rome; which he gives as the reason of the most zealous contending for
that Doctrine among those of your party, who find so much advantage by it. And
we might easily believe there was something extraordinary in it, when you tell
us; It is therefore firmly to be believed by all Catholics, P. 371.
that there is a Purgatory; yea, we are as much bound to believe it, as we are
bound to believe (for Instance) the Trinity or Incarnation it self: because,
since it is defined by the Church, we cannot lawfully, or without sin and peril
of damnation deny or question this doctrine. We had need then look to our
selves, who look on this Doctrine as a mere figment, that has no foundation at
all either in Scripture, Reason, or Tradition of the Primitive Church; but much
more had you need to look to your selves, who dare with so much confidence
obtrude so destructive a Doctine to a Christian life, without any evidence of
the truth of it, to be believed as much as the Trinity or Incarnation it self;
which expressions take them in the mildest sense you can give them, carry a
most insufferable boldness with them. But these are not all the bold words
which you utter on this Subject; for you say elsewhere, P. 350.
That Bellarmin does not more boldly, than truly affirm, yea evidently prove,
that all the Fathers, both Greek and Latin, did constantly teach Purgatory from
the very Apostles times, and consequently that it must be held for an
Apostolical Tradition, or nothing can be. So then, if confidence would carry
it, we must not only tremble at the fears of Purgatory; but we must firmly
believe it as an Article of Faith, and as a most undoubted Apostolical
Tradition.

But before we can digest these things, we must see a little more ground for
them, than as yet we do;. 2.
and therefore you must be content to hear our reasons, Why we neither look on
it as a matter of Faith or Apostolical tradition; in order to which nothing is
more necessary, then to enquire what you mean by Purgatory. For as long as you
can shelter your selves under General words, you think you are safe enough; but
when we once bring you to a fuller explication of your meaning, Purgatory it
self is not half so evident as those impostures are whereby you would maintain
it. But for our clear understanding this Controversy, we must find out what
your Doctrine is concerning it; for, as confident as you are of it, there are
not a few among you who are afraid to declare what you mean by it, lest by that
means the world should see how far it is from having foundation either in
Scripture or Antiquity. We are therefore told by some either are ashamed of the
Doctrine it self, or loath to betray their cause (who by declaring themselves)
that your Church requires no more then to believe that there is a Purgatory,
for which they avouch the Council of Trent, which only defines That the sound
Doctrine concerning Purgatory should be taught. This was indeed necessary to be
said by such who do not at all believe the Roman Doctrine concerning it, what
ever they pretend; but rather agree with the Greek Church about the middle
state of souls. But although the Council of Trent did not expressly define what
they meant by Purgatory; yet the sense of the Council concerning it, is easy
to be gathered from the comparing of places together in it. For the Council of
Trent in the last Session when it passed the decree of Purgatory referrs us to
two things, by which we may fully understand the meaning of it; For in the
Preface to the Decree, it says, That the Catholic Church had, in this and
former Ecumenical Councils, taught that there was a Purgatory; by which we may
understand, What this Purgatory is, which was now decreed, and you say, we are
bound to believe it as an Article of Faith. Now in all the former Decrees and
Anathematisms of the Council, there is no place which seems to concern the
Doctrine of Purgatory, so much as the thirtieth Anathema of the sixth Session
in these words, Si quis ita reatum poenae aeternae deleri dixerit; ut nullus
remaneat reatus poenae temporalis exsolvendae vel in hoc seculo vel in futuro
in Purgatorio, antequam ad regna coelorum aditus patere possit; Anathema sit.
If any one shall affirm that the guilt of eternal punishment is so forgiven, as
that there remains no guilt of temporal punishment to be paid, either in this
life, or hereafter in Purgatory; before there can be any entrance into the
Kingdom of Heaven; let them be Anathema. From whence it evidently follows, that
the Doctrine of Purgatory as it is taught by the Council of Trent does depend
upon this principle, That there is a guilt of temporal punishment remaining
after the sin is pardoned, which temporal punishment is to be satisfied for,
either in this life, or in Purgatory. So that all those who are in Purgatory
are there on that account, that they might satisfy the justice of God for the
temporal punishment of sin. For the guilt of mortal sin being remitted by the
merits of Christ, the punishment is supposed still to remain, which being
exchanged from eternal to temporal by the keys of the Church, this punishment
remains to be satisfied for, in the pains of Purgatory. But this punishment
being temporal, the possibility of a release from them is necessarily supposed
before the day of judgment; for the Council of Trent in the Decree of
Purgatory, declares that the souls there detained are relieved by the prayers
of the Faithful, and especially by the sacrifice of the Altar. Which, in the 22
Session, it says, is offered pro defunctis in Christo nondum ad plenum
purgatis, for the departed in Christ not yet fully purged. So that the
satisfaction of the debt of temporal punishment which remains when the sin is
pardoned, and the translation of souls from thence to Heaven by the prayers of
the living and the sacrifice of the Mass, are the main Foundations of the
Doctrine of your Church concerning Purgatory.

. 3.
And this will further appear by the state of the Controversy between the
Greek and Latin Church upon this Subject. For the main thing which the Greeks
objected against the Latins, was this temporary punishment for sin, in a future
state: For they say, in their Apology delivered into the Council of Basil, We
own no Purgatory fire, nor any temporary punishment by fire which shall have an
end; for we received no such thing by tradition, nor does the Eastern Church
confess it. And afterward; We deny that any souls pass through this fire to
eternal fire; for in saying so, Apolog. Graecorum de Igne Purgat. p. 66. ed.
Salmas.
we should weaken the consent of the whole Church: and it is to be feared, if
we should assert such a temporary fire, that people would be apt to believe
that all the fire in the other life were only temporary; by which means they
would fall into such neglect and carelessness, that they would make the more
fuel for eternal fire. And therefore they conclude, That they neither have nor
shall assert any such Purgatory fire. But you would seem to persuade us, P. 358.
That the Contest between the Greeks and Latins was only, whether the fire of
Purgatory were material or no; For you say, The Greeks in the Council of
Florence never doubted in the least measure, nor denied Purgatory it self, but
only questioned, Whether the fire were material or metaphorical. But if you
speak of those Greeks, who held to what was generally received in the Greek
Church; you are very much deceived therein, for the sense of the Greek Church
was fully delivered by them in this Apology, penned, as is supposed, by Marcus
Ephesius but the year before at the Council of Basil; and herein they not only
dispute against the fire, but against any such state of purgation after this
life, by the undergoing any temporary punishment for sin. For thus that Apology
ends; For these causes the Doctrine proposed of a Purgatory fire is to be cast
out of the Church, (...). P. 93.
as that which tends to slacken the endeavors of the diligent, and which
hinders them from doing their utmost to purge themselves in this life, since
another purgation is expected after it. Is not this plain enough for their
denial of any state of purgation after this life, by which men might satisfy
for the temporary punishment of sin, and be translated out of that state to the
Kingdom of Heaven? And thence, although in the Bull of Union published by
Eugenius 4. at the concluding the Florentine Council, no more was concluded,
than that those penitents who departed this life, before they had satisfied for
their former sins by worthy fruits of penance, should have their souls purged
after death, poenis purgatoriis, with purgatory punishments, yet Marcus
Eugenicus utterly refused to subscribe it thus; which certainly he would never
have done if all the Controversy had been only, Whether the fire were real or
metaphorical. And the whole Greek Church utterly refused those terms of union,
Alphons. a Castro. l. 12. tit. purgat.
and therefore Alphonsus a Castro recounts the denying Purgatory among the
errors of the Greeks. The Greeks indeed do not believe that any souls enjoy
the beatifical Vision before the day of Judgment, and on that account they
allow of prayer for the dead, notwith any respect to a deliverance of souls out
of purgatory, but to the participation of their happiness at the great Day. But
there is a great deal of difference between this Opinion, and that of your
Church; for they believe all souls of believers to be in expectation of the
final Judgment but without any temporary punishment for sin, or any release
from that punishment by the prayers of the living, which your Church asserts;
and is the proper state of the Question concerning Purgatory. Which is not,
Whether there be any middle state wherein the souls of the Faithful may
continue in expectation of the final consummation of their happiness at the
great day; nor, Whether it be lawful in that sense for the Church on earth to
pray for departed souls in order to their final justification at the day of
Judgment, or in St. Paul's language, That God would have mercy on them in that
day; but, Whether there be such a state, wherein the souls of men undergo a
temporary punishment for sin, the guilt being pardoned, out of which they may
be released by the prayers of the living, and translated from Purgatory to the
Kingdom of Heaven, before the day of Resurrection. This is the true state of
the Question between us and the Church of Rome; and now we come to examine,
Whether your Doctrine concerning Purgatory be either an Article of Faith, or
Apostolical Tradition; which how confidently so ever you may assert, we shall
find your confidence built on very little reason.

Which we may the easier believe, since there are so many among your selves,. 4.
who do not think themselves obliged to own this Doctrine of your Church
concerning Purgatory. Nay, we have not only the confession of several of your
party, that your Doctrine of Purgatory was not known in the Primitive Church,
as Alphonsus a Castro, Roffensis, Polydore, etc. and of others, that it cannot
be sufficiently proved from Scripture, as Petrus a Soto, Perionius, Bulenger,
whose testimonies are produced by others; but there are some persons of note
among you, who have expressly denied the Doctrine it self, and confuted the
pretended reasons which are given for it. Petrus Picherellus, Picherellus de
Missa c. 2. p. 150.
says, There is no fuel to be found in Scripture, either to kindle or maintain
the fire of Purgatory; and which afterward he largely disproves in his
excellent Discourse de Missa. Father Barns acknowledges, Punitio ergo in
Purgatorio est res in opinione humana posita: quae nec ex Scripturis nec
Patribus, nec Conciliis deduci potest firmiter: Immo, (salvo meliori judicio)
opposita sententia eis conformior videtur. Barns Catholico. Romans Pacif. sect.
9. l. D. ad fin. Paralip.
That the punishment of souls in Purgatory, is a thing which lies merely in
humane opinion, which cannot be firmly deduced from Scriptures, Fathers, or
Councils. Yea, (says he, with submission to better judgments) the opposite
opinion seems more agreeable to them. But later then these, you cannot but
know, Who it is here at home, that has not only pulled down the
superstructure, but raced the very Foundations of your Doctrine of Purgatory in
his discourse de medio Animarum statu: wherein he professedly disproves the
Doctrine of your Church (though he is loath to own it to be so) in this
particular, and shows at large, that it has no foundation at all, either in
Scripture, Antiquity, or Reason. But if your Doctrine of Purgatory be to be
believed as an Article of Faith, and Apostolical Tradition if any be; How come
these differences among your selves about it? How comes that Author not to be
answered, and his reasons satisfied? But if you be not agreed among your
selves, What this Article of Faith is, you are most unreasonable men, to tell
us, We are as much bound to believe it as the Trinity, or Incarnation. We ask
you, What it is we are bound to believe? You tell us, according to the sense of
your Church, The punishment of souls in a future state, out of which they may
be delivered by the prayers of the Faithful, and translated into the Kingdom of
Heaven; Another he denies all this, and says, We are in effect only bound to
believe, That faithful souls do not enjoy their full happiness till the
resurrection, and that there is no deliverance at all out of any state in which
men's souls are after death, till the day of Judgment; and that the prayers of
the Church, only respect that Day; but that the former Doctrine is so far from
being an Article of Faith, that it is contrary to Scripture, Antiquity, and
Reason. If such a state of expectation wherein faithful souls are at rest (but
according to different degrees of grace which they had at their departure
hence, and look for the day of Resurrection, when they shall have a perfect
consummation of their bliss) were all the Purgatory which your Church asserted,
the breach might be far nearer closing as to this Article, than now it is. For
although we find some particular persons ready to give a fair and tolerable
sense of your Doctrine herein; yet we cannot be ignorant, that the General
apprehension and sense of your Church is directly contrary; and those persons
who have discovered the freedom of their judgments as to this and other
particulars, know how much it concerns them to keep a due distance from Rome,
if they would preserve the freedom of their persons. But you are not one of
those that has cause for any such fears: for what ever Bellarmin says, you
are ready to swear to it, and accordingly set your self to the defense of
Purgatory upon his principles; which are far more suitable to the Doctrine of
your Church, than to Scripture or Antiquity.

But because this Controversy is not managed between his Lordship and you
about the sense of the Scripture, but the Fathers concerning it;. 5.
I must therefore enquire, Whether your Doctrine of Purgatory were ever owned
by the Fathers as an Article of Faith or Apostolical Tradition. And that I may
the more fully clear it, before I come to examine your proofs for it, I shall
lay down some general considerations.

1. Nothing ought to be looked on as an Article of Faith among the Fathers, but
what they declare, that they believe on the account of Divine Revelation. As to
all other things which they assert, we may look on them as private opinions of
particular persons, but not as such things which were received as Articles of
Faith. For whatsoever is received as such, it must be wholly on the account of
Gods revealing it, who only can oblige us to believe with that assent which is
required to Faith. And if it be so as to all other things, much more certainly
as to the future state of souls, of which we can know nothing certainly without
Divine Revelation. For since the remission of sins, and the happiness of the
future life, depend upon the goodness and mercy of God, we can define nothing
as to these things any further then God has declared them. If God has
declared that remission of sins lies in the taking away the obligation to
punishment, it will be a contradiction to say, That he pardons those whom he
exacts the punishment of sin from, purely to satisfy his justice; if he has
declared, that the souls of the faithful are in joy and felicity as soon as they
are delivered out of this sinful world, it is impossible they should undergo
unsufferable pains, though not to eternity. I dispute not now, Whether he has
so revealed these things, but that it is impossible for any thing to be looked
on as an Article of Faith, but what has clear Divine Revelation for it. And
therefore, although many testimonies of the Fathers might be produced one way
or other, as to these things; when they speak only their own fancies and
imaginations, and not what God has revealed, they cannot, all put together,
make the opinion they assert to be an Article of Faith. Nothing is more
apparent, then that the itching curiosity of humane nature to know more then
God has revealed, concerning the future state of souls, did betimes discover
it self in the Church. But the strange diversity of these Imaginations were a
sufficient evidence, that they speak not by any certain rule, but according to
their different fancies; and therefore that they did not deliver any Doctrine
of Faith, but only their own private opinions. If you would therefore prove,
that the Fathers did own Purgatory as an Article of Faith, you must not think
it enough to prove, that one or two of the Fathers did speak something tending
to it, but that all who had occasion to mention it, did speak of it as the
Doctrine of the Church, and that which came from an immediate Divine Revelation.

2. There is no reason, That should be looked on as an Article of Faith, which,
they who seemed to assert it most, did build on such places, which they
acknowledged themselves to be very obscure. For since they deduced it from
Scripture, it is apparent that they did not believe it on the account of any
unwritten word, or Divine Revelation conveyed merely by Tradition; and since
they confess the places to be very difficult, it is unreasonable to judge, that
they looked on that as a matter of Faith, which they supposed was contained in
them. As for instance, St. Austin in several places asserts, that all things
necessary to be believed are clearly revealed in Scripture; and withal he
says, Aug. de fide and oper. c. 15, 16.
that the place 1 Cor. 3.15. is very difficult and obscure, and that it is one
of those places in St. Paul, which St. Peter says are hard to be understood;
and therefore it is not conceivable that S. Austin should make any thing a
matter of Faith, which he founds upon this place. And this is the great and
almost only considerable Place, which he or the rest of the Fathers did insist
on, as to the nature of that purgation which was to be in a future state.

3. That cannot be looked on as an Article of Faith to such persons, who
express their own doubts concerning the truth of it. For whatever is owned as
an Article of Faith by any person, is thereby acknowledged to be firmly
believed by him. Now upon our enquiry into the Fathers we shall find, the first
person who seemed to assert that any faithful souls passed through a fire of
purgation before the day of judgment, was St. Austin: but he delivers his
judgment with so much fear and hesitancy, that any one may easily see that he
was far from making it any Article of Faith. We must consider then, that in St.
Augustin's time, there were many, who though they denied Origen's opinion as to
the Salvation at last of all persons; yet were very willing to believe it, as
to all those who died in the Communion of the Church, that though they passed
through the flames of Hell for their sins, yet at last they should be saved;
and for this they mainly insisted on 1 Cor. 3.15. where it is said, That some
should be saved, but as by fire. Such, say they, build upon the foundation
gold, silver, precious stones, who to their Faith add good works: but they,
hay, wood, and stubble, whose life is contrary to their Faith; and yet these
latter, they asserted should come to Heaven at last, but they must undergo the
torments of Hell first. Against these St. Austin writes his book de fide and
operibus, wherein he proves that such as live in sin shall be finally excluded
the Kingdom of Heaven; And when he comes to the interpretation of that place,
he gives this account of it, That those who do so love Christ, as rather to
part with all things for him than to lose him, but yet have too great a love to
the things of the world, shall suffer grief and loss on that account. Sive ergo
in hac vita tantum homines ista patiuntur, Aug. de fide and oper. c. 16.
sive etiam post hanc vitam talia quaedam judicia subsequuntur; non abhorret,
quantum arbitror, a ratione veritatis iste intellectus hujus sententiae.
Whether, says he, men suffer these things in this life, or such judgments
follow after it; I suppose this sense of S. Paul 's meaning is not dissonant
from truth. So far was he from being certain of it, that he puts in, quantum
arbitror, as far as I suppose; and yet he would not define, whether that loss
which they were to suffer were only in this life or no. And, in his Enchiridion
to Laurentius, where he disputes the very same matter, Enchirid. c. 69.
he says, Tale aliquid post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est; and utrum
ita sit quaeri potest, and aut inveniri aut latere, Nonnullos fideles per ignem
quendam purgatorium, quanto magis minusve bona pereuntia dilexerunt, tanto
tardius citiusve salvari. It is not incredible that such a thing should be
after this life, and it may be enquired after whether it be found to be so or
no, that some faithful souls pass through a purging fire, and are saved sooner
or later according to the degree of their affection to worldly things. Will any
man in his wits think that St. Austin spoke this of any matter of Faith, or
that was generally received in the Church as an Apostolical Tradition? Did he
ever speak so concerning the Trinity or the Incarnation of Christ which you
parallel with Purgatory? What would men have thought of him, if he had said of
either of those Articles, It is not incredible they may be true, and it may be
enquired into whether they be or no? Whatever then St. Austins private opinion
was, we see he delivers it modestly and doubtfully, not obtruding it as an
Article of Faith, or Apostolical Tradition if any be. And the very same he
repeats in his Answer to the first Question of Dulcitius; so that this was all
that ever he asserted as to this Controversy. What you offer to the contrary
from other places of St. Austin shall be considered in its due place.

4. Where any of the Fathers build any Doctrine upon the sense of doubtful
places of Scripture, we have no further reason to believe that Doctrine, then
we have to believe that it is the meaning of those places. So that in this case
the enquiry is taken off from the judgment of the Fathers, and fixed upon the
sense of the Scriptures which they and we both rely upon. For since they
pretend themselves to no greater evidence of the truth of the Doctrine then
such places do afford: it is the greatest reason that the argument to persuade
us be not the testimony of the Father, but the evidence of the place it self.
Unless it be evident some other way, that there was an universal Tradition in
the Church from the Apostles times concerning it, and that the only design of
the Father was, to apply some particular place to it. But then such a Tradition
must be cleared from something else, besides the sense of some ambiguous places
of Scripture, and that Tradition manifested to be Universal both as to time and
place.

These things being premised,. 6.
I now come particularly to examine the evidence you bring, That all the
Fathers both Greek and Latin did constantly teach Purgatory from the Apostles
times, and consequently that it must be held for an Apostolical Tradition or
nothing can be. And as you follow Bellarmin in your way of proving it, so must
I follow you; and he divides his proofs you say into two ranks. First, Such who
affirm prayer for the dead. 2. Such who in the successive ages of the Church
did expressly affirm Purgatory. First, with those who affirm prayer for the
dead; P. 306.
Which (you say) does necessarily infer Purgatory, whatever the Bishop vainly
insinuates to the contrary. The Question then between us is, Whether that
prayer for the dead which was used in the ancient Church, does necessarily
infer that Purgatory was then acknowledged? This you affirm; for, say you, If
there were no other place, or condition of being for departed souls, but either
Heaven or Hell, surely it were a vain thing to pray for the dead; especially to
pray for the remission of their sins, or for their refreshment, ease, rest,
relaxation of their pains, as Ancients most frequently do. From whence, you
add, that Purgatory is so undenyably proved, that the Relator finding nothing
himself sufficient to Answer, was forced to put us off to the late Primate of
Armagh 's Answer to the Jesuits Challenge. Which, you say, You have perused,
and find only there, that the Author proves that which none of you deny, viz.
That the prayers and commemorations used for the dead had reference to more
souls than those in Purgatory. But, you attempt to prove, That the nature and
kind of those prayers do imply that they were intended for other ends, than
merely that the body might be glorified as well as the soul, and to praise God
for the final happy end of the deceased: Whereas that Answerer of the Jesuit
would, you say, by his allegations insinuate to the Reader a conceit, that it
was used only for those two reasons and no other; Which, you say, you must
needs avouch to be most loudly untrue, and so manifestly contrary to the
Doctrine and practice of the Fathers as nothing can be more. A high charge
against two most Reverend and learned Primates together: against the one, as
not being able to Answer, and therefore turning it off to the other; against
the other, for publishing most loud untruths, instead of giving a true account
of the grounds of the Churches practice. It seems, you thought it not honor
enough to overcome one, unless you led the other in triumph also; but you do
neither of them, but only in your own fancy and imagination. And never had you
less cause to give out such big words then here, unless it were to amuse the
spectatours that they might not see how you fall before them. For it was not
the least distrust of his sufficiency to Answer, which made his Lordship to put
it often to the Primate of Armagh, but because he was prevented in it by him,
Who, (as he truly says) had very learnedly and at large set down other reasons
which the Ancients gave for prayer for the dead without any intention to free
them from Purgatory. Which are not only different from, but inconsistent with,
the belief of Purgatory; for the clearing of which, and vindicating my Lord
Primate from your calumnies rather then answers, it will be necessary to give a
brief account of his Discourse on that subject. Answer to the Jesuits challenge
p. 195.
He tells us therefore at first, That we are here prudently to distinguish the
Original institution of the Church, from the private opinions of particular
Doctors, which waded further herein then the general intendment of the Church
did give them warrant. Now he evidently proves that the memorials, oblations,
and prayers made for the dead at the beginning had reference to such as rested
from their labors, and not unto any souls which were thought to be tormented
in that Vtopian Purgatory, whereof there was no news stirring in those days.
This he gathers first by the practice of the ancient Christians laid down by
the Author of the Commentaries on Job, who says, The memorials of the Saints
were observed as a memorial of rest to the souls departed, and that they
therein rejoiced for their refreshing. St. Cyprian says, they offered
Sacrifices for them, whom he acknowledges to have received of the Lord Palms
and Crowns; and in the Author of the Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, the party
deceased is described by him to have departed this life replenished with Divine
joy, as now not fearing any change to worse, being come unto the end of all his
labors, and publicly pronounced to be a happy man, and admitted into the
society of the Saints; and yet the Bishop prays, that God would forgive him
all his sins he had committed through humane infirmity, and bring him into the
light and band of the living, into the bosoms of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
into the place from whence pain, and sorrow, and sighing flies. And Saint
Chrysostom shows that the funeral Ordinances of the Church were appointed to
admonish the living, that the parties deceased were in a state of joy and not
of grief; and therefore they sung at the Burial, Return my soul to thy rest,
for the Lord has dealt bountifully with thee. And this he proves likewise from
the Ancient Liturgies, wherein prayers are made for all Saints, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and others. And S. Ambrose, after he had said,
That Valentinian and Gratian were both blessed, and enjoyed the pleasures of
everlasting life; and yet subjoyns his Orizons for them. Thus he prays for
Theodosius, of whom he had said, That he enjoyes everlasting light, and
continual tranquillity: And so for his Brother Satyrus, when he had pronounced
of him before, That he had entered into the Kingdom of Heaven. The same does
Gregory Nazianzen for his Brother Caesarius. Now, Is it possible you should
think that Prayer for the Dead, as used in the the Ancient Church, does
necessarily infer Purgatory; when they who made these Prayers, did suppose the
persons they made them for, to be at rest, and in joy, and in the Kingdom of
Heaven? And I hope that is a different state from that of Purgatory. Therefore
you see, it is not barely proved, that some different accounts are given of
Prayer for the Dead, but such as are exclusive of it, and those such as appear
from the eldest times of the Church, when such Prayers were used. Now, having
thus showed, for whom these Prayers were made, he proceeds to show, of what
kinds they were, whereof, he says, P. 204.
some were Eucharistical for the blessed estate of the party deceased; others
deprecatory, and petitory, that God would forgive him his sins, keep him from
Hell, and place him in the Kingdom of Heaven: which, though at first well
meant, were turned to an ill use afterward, when these intercessions began
once to be applied not only to the good, but evil livers also, unto whom by the
first Institution they were never intended. And he at large proves by very many
examples, P. 224.
that the primary Intention of the Church in her supplications for the Dead,
was, That the whole man (not the soul separated only) might receive public
remission of sins, and a solemn acquittal in the judgment of that great Day,
and so obtain both a full escape from all the consequences of sin, and a
perfect consummation of bliss and happiness. And of this nature he shows
afterward were the Prayers of the Church used in Epiphanius his time, which
Aerius was condemned for rejecting of; and he plainly proves, P 265.
that the Church of Rome comes nearer the Opinion of Aerius, than they would
seem to do. For they agree with Aerius, in rejecting that kind of praying and
offering for the Dead, which was used in the Church at that time; which was for
such as were believed to be in bliss. For, since the Romanists say, That
without the supposition of Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead would be
unprofitable, and at that time the souls they prayed for, are supposed to be
already in bliss; therefore they do as much condemn those Prayers for the Dead,
which were then used, as Aerius did. And it is very strange, if the releasing
of souls out of Purgatory, had been any ground then of praying for the Dead,
that Epiphanius, among all his far-fetcht Reasons, should never assign that,
which you think to be the only proper ground of such Prayers. Thus we see, what
was the general Intention of the Church in those Prayers which were made for
the Dead, and how far this was from inferring Purgatory.

But besides this,. 7.
there were several particular Opinions among the Ancient Fathers touching the
place and condition of souls separated from their bodies: P. 229*
and according to the several apprehensions which they had thereof, they made
different interpretations and applications of the Use of praying for the Dead;
whose particular intentions and devotions in that kind, must of necessity
therefore be distinguished from the general intention of the whole Church. Thus
there were two Opinions much in vogue among many of the Fathers, viz. of souls
being kept in secret receptacles till the day of resurrection, and the purging
of them in the fire of conflagration at the day of judgment; of which Opinion
were not only S. Augustine, but Origin, Lactantius, S. Hilary. S. Ambrose, and
others. Now according to these Opinions they interpreted the Use of praying for
the Dead. And thence S. Augustine says, P. 207.
That the oblations and alms usually offered in the Church for all the Dead
that received Baptism, were thanksgivings for such as were very good,
propitiations for such as were not very bad; but as for such as were very evil,
although they were no helps of the Dead, yet were they some kind of
consolations of the Living; but this was only a private exposition of the
Churches meaning in her Prayers, because it is not to be found in the writings
of the former Fathers; and, because it suiteth not well with the general
practice of the Church, which it intends to interpret. For it is somewhat too
harsh an interpretation, to imagine that one and the same act of praying,
should be a petition for some, and for others only a thanksgiving. Some other
private Opinions there were besides these, as that of Theophylact, That God did
not always cast grievous sinners into Hell, but that the Prayers of the Church
might keep them from being cast into Hell; P. 241.
another, That an augmentation of Glory might be procured for the Saints, and
either a total deliverance, or a diminution of torment at least, obtained for
the wicked; P. 243.
to which S. Chrysostom and others incline. Besides, there were different
Opinions concerning the benefit which the Dead received; by the Prayers of the
Living. For the Author of the Questions and Answers in Justin Martyrs work's,
Gregory Nazianzen, Theodoret, Diodorus Tarsensis, P. 270.
and S. Hierom, all conclude that there is no release to the expected for the
sins of those who were dead. But others supposed, the Dead might receive profit
by the Prayers of the Living, either for be remission of their sins, or the
ceasing of their punishment; but they were not agreed as to the nature of the
sins, which might be pardoned, or the manner of the benefit which they
received, whether their punishment were only lessened, or at last extinguished.
And Stephanus Gobarus in Photius, tells us, That though some held these things,
yet the true sentence of the Church was, That none at all was freed from
punishment. But, that still this was a Question in the Church, Whether the Dead
received profit by the Prayers of the Living, that learned Author more at
large proves; but my design is only to give a very brief extract of his
discourse, that you may from thence see, how far, by the Intention of the
Church in praying for the Dead, you are from gathering the necessary belief of
Purgatory.

And by this a full Answer is given to what you object concerning the practice
of the Fathers,. 8.
to pray for the soul, and not the body; and that when we pray for them, P. 361.
they receive ease, comfort, and refreshment by our Prayers, and that they
obtain pardon, and mercy, and deliverance from pain for them, and that by the
help of our Prayers they are brought to eternal rest and happiness. But all
this falls short of your purpose, unless you can prove that any of them either
believed or prayed that any such ease and refreshment were obtained by the
Prayers of the Living before the day of Resurrection. That they prayed, That
God would have mercy upon them in that day, we deny not, which implies ease,
comfort, refreshment, pardon, deliverance from pain, and eternal happiness; but
then all this referrs not to any purgatory-pains, which they had undergone
before, but those eternal pains which their sins deserved, if God should deal
in justice with them. We grant then, that supplications and intercessions were
used in the Church for the Dead, but we say, They did respect by the intention
of the Church the day of judgment, and Gods final justification of them by his
sentence at that day. For the Scriptures (as my Lord Primate truly says) every
where do point out, that great day to us, as the day wherein mercy and
forgiveness, rest and refreshing, joy and gladness, redemption and salvation,
Answ. p. 227.
rewards and Crowns, shall be bestowed upon all Gods Children, 2 Timothy 1.16.18.
1 Cor. 1.8. Act. 3.19. 2 These. 1.6, 7. Phil. 2.19. 1 These. 2.16. 1 Pet. 1.5. 1
Cor. 5.5. Ephesians. 4.30. Luke 21.28 2 Timothy 4.8. Luke 14.14. From whence it is no
improbable deduction, that even the souls of good men, do not enjoy their full
and complete felicity, till the great day: not that they either sleep or
undergo any Purgatory pains; but that they are at rest from their labors, and
in a blessed condition, but still waiting with a solicitous expectation for the
glorious Coming of Christ, that they may then receive the reward prepared for
them before the beginning of the world. But, Whether those souls be in Heaven
(as it notes a place, and not a state) whether the degrees of their happiness
be proportionable (till the great day) to the degrees of grace, which they had
when they left the world, are Questions of more curiosity, than necessity to be
resolved. But, as long as the Scripture does insist so much on the proceedings
of the great day, both as to rewards and punishments, we do not condemn the
practice of the Ancient Church in those prayers which did thus respect the day
of Resurrection. If any of the Fathers had any particular Opinions concerning
the state of the Dead, and of the benefit which came to them by the Prayers of
the Living; we are no more concerned to defend them, than you are to defend
those whom you acknowledge to hold, that no souls did enjoy the beatifical
vision before the day of judgment, against whom Bellarmin and others dispute
at large. Since you therefore confess your selves that some of the greatest of
the Fathers did for many ages hold erroneous Opinions crncerning the state of
the Dead, With what reason can you press us with the Testimonies of those whom
you refuse your selves? And since they had so many different Opinions
concerning the state of souls, it seems strange that none of them (at least
till S. Augustin's time) should hit upon such a state of Purgation, whereby
they might be freed from pains before the day of judgment. And yet we find not
one of them, which did so much as dream of that Purgatory which you call the
upper Region of Hell; or of any punishment, which they who dyed in favor with
God, should undergo between death and judgment, out of which they might be
delivered by the Prayers of the Living. Many of them indeed supposed that souls
were kept in secret receptacles; but they were far from asserting that they
underwent at all any pains equal to the damned, much less that any souls were
translated thence to glory upon the intercessions made for them; others
supposed that the souls of all good men were at last to pass through the fire of
conflagration at the day of judgment; others, that the souls of wicked men
might either escape, or have their torments mitigated; but all this while your
Purgatory was unthought of, and was not conceived till afterward, through the
ignorance and superstition of some, countenanced by pretended apparitions and
visions of souls departed, till at last it grew to be one of the
favourite-Opinions of the Roman Church. From whence it may easily appear, how
very much you were deceived, when you would infer, because Prayer for the
Dead, as it is now used in the Roman Church, does necessarily suppose
Purgatory; therefore it must do so in the Ancient Church: for, although we
should grant the same Prayers to be still used, yet since they are used for a
quite different intent, that may be supposed by you, which was not at all
supposed by them, nor could be inferred from what they did. And yet it is
plain, that in some cases, you have changed the Prayers for the Saints, into
Prayers to them: For, whereas in the old Gregorian Sacramentary, it was, Grant
unto us O Lord, that this oblation may profit the soul of thy servant Leo;
Answer to the Jesuit. p. 210.
in the latter Books it is turned into this, Grant unto us O Lord, that by the
intercession of thy servant Leo, this oblation may profit us. From whence you
may see, that your Prayers are changed from what they were: For the Ancient
Church prayed universally for all Saints and Martyrs; but you think it a
disparagement to them to pray for them; and therefore from your kind of Prayers
for the Dead, we may well say, that Purgatory is supposed; but we cannot
possibly infer it from those Prayers which were made for such, who, if any,
were supposed in a state of Bliss and happiness.

. 9.
And that the intention of your Church is quite different from the Ancient, we
now come more fully to make manifest; because none of them did believe that
Doctrine of Purgatory, which you assert. But herein we must follow your
footsteps, and consider the many authorities which you produce out of
Bellarmin, and undertake to vindicate in behalf of Purgatory; to which I give
this general Answer, That some Authors are counterfeit, and the places
supposititious; of those that are true, some speak only of Commemoration of the
Dead, and Oblations made for them; others respect the day of Resurrection, and
the fire of Conflagration, others the purging of the wicked, others only of a
purgation in this life; but none of them all speak of any Purgatory pains of
those who dye in favor with God, which they undergo as the temporal punishment
of sin, from whence they may be delivered by the Prayers of the Living; which
is the only thing you should prove from them. And this I come to make appear by
the examination of the particulars, as they occurr in order.

The first you begin with, is, Dionysius Areopagita; and, Is not he, say you,
P. 361.
an Author of the first three hundred years? As though this had never been
questioned by any? If you had asked, Whether he had been an Ancient and Learned
Author, living sometime within the first four hundred years; you should not
have met with any opposition from me. But if you will needs have him to be the
true Dionysius, you must prove it better than by mere referring us to what
Bellarmin, Baronius, and Del-Rio have said upon that subject; and you are very
strangely deceived when you say, That only Erasmus, and Valla, and some few
others, did doubt of it; but at present you suppose few learned men doubt of
the matter. For, even Bellarmin himself doubts of it; and, What think you of
Habertus, Sirmondus, De Confirm. l. 2. c. 7.
Launaeus, Petavius? Are not all these with you learned men, who have all
declared their doubts of it? and so will any one else do, that impartially
examines the Arguments brought on both sides. But we have no reason to insist
longer upon this, since you say, It is sufficient that he is acknowledged for a
Writer of great Antiquity; Well, But what is it then this Author says? only
that Prayers were made for the deceased party, that God would forgive his sins,
and place him in the Light and Country of the Living: But, say you, both the
Archbishop and Primate would have thought that man a Papist, who would have
made the like prayer for his deceased friend in their hearing. And very good
reason they might have to think so, when they know beforehand that your
intention of praying for the Dead, is, to deliver their souls from the pains of
purgatory; but, if they had heard one use such a Prayer in the Ancient Church,
they could not have imagined, it was for any such intention, since the same
person in Dionysius is said to be replenished with divine joy, and not fearing
any change to the worse, Dionys. Areop. de Eccles. Hier. cap. 7.
but knowing well that the good things possessed, shall be firmly and
everlastingly enjoyed; as he speaks at his entrance upon that discourse: And,
if this be in effect to teach Purgatory, as you would have it, you must set
your Purgatory a great deal higher than you do; for, you say, It is but an
upper Region of Hell a little after, when Dionysius speaks of those who were in
a Region of rest and happiness.

Your second Author is Tertullian; and three Citations you produce out of him.
In the first, he only mentions the oblations for the Dead, which we have
confessed to be used already, De Coron. Milit. c. 3. De Monog. c. 10.
but without any respect to Purgatory. In the second, a mention is made of
begging of God refrigerium, refreshment for the soul of one departed: this were
some thing to the purpose, if you had first proved, that Tertullian did suppose
that soul to be then in the pains of Purgatory; for then it were but reason to
think this refrigerium did relate to the easing of them. But he elsewhere tells
us, what he means by this refrigerium, Sinus Abrahae interim refrigerium
praebiturus est animabus justorum, by which he understands not any deliverance
from pains, but contentment in expectation of the future Resurrection. C. Marc.
l. 4. c. 34.
It was the ardency of the desire after that which made them pray for this
refrigerium, not out of any punishment they were supposed to be under for sin,
but their earnest expectation of future glory. And, since they supposed
different degrees of refreshment which the souls had in the bosom of Abraham,
this prayer only notes the desire of the continuance and increase of it, and
not being under present pains for the want of it.

In the last place of Tertullian, De anim^ c. 35.
you would fain have the Carcer infernus to be Purgatory, but he means no more
by it than Hades, or the common receptacle of souls till the day of
Resurrection, which Irenaeus calls locum invisibilem, which renders (...)
exactly, Iren. l. 5 cap. 25.
in which he makes souls to stay till the day of Resurrection; and Tertullian
explains himself afterward, when he says, Constituimus omnem animam apud
Inferos sequestrari in diem Domini; and therefore Bellarmin confesses
Tertullian to be one of those, De An. c. 55.
that held that no souls did enjoy the beatifical vision, till the day of
Resurrection; at which time he supposed the order of rising, to be according to
the degrees of holiness; and therefore he makes the punishment of souls not to
be any Purgatory pains, but the mora resurrectionis, that they should be longer
before they rise from the dead, viz. toward the latter end of the thousand
years; for so he makes the Resurrection to continue the thousand years of
Christ's Reign upon earth; and, as the highest rank of Christians should rise
in the beginning of it, so others in their order according to their degrees,
and the most slothful and negligent to be punished mora resurrectionis, by
their Resurrection being deferred to the conclusion of it. By which we fully
understand Tertullian's meaning, Judex in carcerem te mandet infernum, unde non
dimittaris, nisi modico quoque delicto mora resurrectionis expenso; by which
lower prison he intends neither Hell nor Purgatory, but the common receptacle
of souls, wherein they were held till they should rise sooner or later
according to the measure of their graces and sins.

The next place to be examined, is the noted one of S. Cyprian, to Antonianus:.
10.
where he gives an account of the difference between the lapsed persons who
become penitents, and the Martyrs. Aliud est ad veniam stare, aliud ad gloriam
pervenire; aliud missum in carcerem non exire inde, donec solvat novissimum
quadrantem; aliud statim fidei and virtutis mercedem accipere; aliud pro
peccatis longo dolor emendari, and purgari diu igne, aliud peccata omnia
passione purgasse. It is one thing to stay in hope and expectation of pardon,
another thing to come presently to glory: it is one thing to be cast into
prison, and not to come out thence, till you have paid the last farthing;
another to receive presently the reward of our Faith: it is one thing to be
amended for sins by long grief, and to be purged with fire a great while;
another to have purged away all his sins by suffering Martyrdom. Did not S.
Cyprian, say you, think of Purgatory, when he taught this? No, that did he not,
if we believe your own Writers. For Rigaltius tells us, that S. Cyprian here
speaks of the severities of penance, Rigalt. observe. ad Cypr. p. 68.
which the lapsed persons underwent in order to pardon; and compares them with
the present felicity which Martyrs were possessed of. And this was that purging
fire in order to their amendment, which he insists on, to show what great
disparity there was between the state of these penitents, and the Martyrs;
thereby to show, that though penitents were admitted by the Church, yet it was
with so much severity, that might give little encouragement for men to fall in
hopes of admission. For that was the main thing which S. Cyprian there
discourses of. Albaspin. observe. l. 2. c. 12.
And thus likewise Albaspinaeus understands it, of such who suffered penance
all their life time, and were absolved only at the point of death; these were
they who were held in prison till they paid the utmost farthing. Neither may it
seem strange that this should be called a purging fire; Hieron. ep. Fab. ad
Ocean.
since S. Hierom describing, the penance of Fabiola, says, Sedit super
carbones ignis, She sat upon coals of fire; and Pope Siricius in his Epistle
to Himmerius extant in the Councils, calls, perpetual penance, purificatorium
poenitudinis ignem, the purging fire of penance. And this seems a great deal
more probable to be S. Cyprian's meaning, because he speaks most clearly of any
of the Fathers of the immediate happiness of all Gods Children after death, in
his excellent Book of mortality; wherein he comforts the Christians of Carthage
against the fears of death, by reason of the raging plague, which was then
among them. It is for him, says he, to fear death, that would not go to
Christ; it is for him not to be willing to go to Christ, that does not believe
he shall begin to reign with him; with much more to the same purpose throughout
that Book, which, I pray read, and then tell me, Whether St. Cyprian did think
of Purgatory or no.

. 11.
I wonder with what face you produce Origen's Testimony in behalf of your
Doctrine of Purgatory, since Bellarmin confesses that he held all punishment to
be only Purgatory; and that this Opinion of his was condemned in the fifth
Ecumenical Council. But, you say, in the place produced by you, he says no
such thing, but that men are purged according to the mixture of Lead and Gold
in them, but that those who have all Lead, shall sink down to the bottomless
pit for ever. Than which (you say) nothing can be spoken more clearly for
Purgatory. P. 363.
To which a short Answer shall serve by this Dilemma; either you have
faithfully represented this place of Origin, or not: If you have, it is plain
that Origin has been infinitely abused, or else apparently contradicts
himself; for you make him here plainly to assert the eternity of punishment,
which the fifth General Council according to you infallibly condemned him for
denying; if you have unfaithfully represented him, then still Origin cannot be
understood of such a Purgatory as you speak of, but of such a one which all
must pass through, good and bad; and their continuance in it, is according to
the proportions of good or evil in them. And of such a Purgatory as this, De
Purgat. l. 2 c. 1.
Bellarmin confesses that Origin speaks: and which he places after the
Resurrection, and says, That even Peter and Paul must pass through it. And for
such a Purgatory as this is, many places are produced out of Origin, by Sixtus
Senensis, and many others. Biblioth. l. ^. Annot. 170.
But this is an universal Purgatory for good and bad, after the Resurrection,
and for the body as well as the soul; and judge you now, Whether this be the
Purgatory you contend for or no. The following Testimonies of St. Ambrose,
Hilary, Lactantius, St. Hierom, etc. are taken off by Bellarmin himself; since,
although in his first Book he produces them for the Roman Doctrine of
Purgatory, yet in the beginning of the second he confesses, that all these
were for such an Universal Purgatory at the day of judgment, through which all
must pass, not the Virgin Mary her self excepted. And St. Hierom, though he
denies Origen's Hypothesis as to the final Salvation of all, yet seems by the
places you cite out of him, very willing to admit of it, as to all such who dye
in the Churches Communion; against which Opinion St. Augustine at large
disputes, as I have showed already. I acknowledge then that these Authors do
speak of a purging fire, but such a one as your selves disown and dispute
against, and Bellarmin could no other ways bring any of them off, but by
saying, That they speak of the fire of the last judgment; by which we see the
apparent Sophistry, in bringing those as plain places for your Purgatory, which
you confess your selves, are understood of something else. It being confessed
that they speak of purging, consequent to the Resurrection, Sixtus Sen.
Biblioth. l. 5. Annot. 171.
which is quite another thing from what you plead for. And besides, it is plain
from St. Hierom's words, that he speaks of wicked men dying in the Communion of
the Church, that they shall at last be saved. And if you will needs have
arbitramur, when it is opposed to credimus, to signify a firm belief (which is
another proof of your skill in Lexicons) that which you can only infer thence,
is, that S. Hierom did, as firmly believe that wicked men (if Christians)
should at last be saved, as that Devils, and Atheists, and other wicked men
should be finally damned. For these are his words; Et sicut Diaboli and omnium
negatorum, Comment. in Isa. 66. ad sin.
atque impiorum qui dixerunt in cord suo, non est Deus, credimus aeterna
tormenta; sic peccatorum atque impiorum, and tamen Christianorum, quorum opera
in igne probanda sunt atque purganda, moderatam arbitramur, and mixtam
clementiae sententiam Judicis. And the same he rather more fully asserts in the
other place, and Christianos, si in peccato praeventi fuerint, Cont. Pelag. l.
1.
salvandos esse post poenas; but you who are never backward in helping the
Fathers to speak out, very commodiously render it, Such as dye before full and
perfect Penance for the sins, of which they had truly repented: Which is as
far as Purgatory as from St. Hieroms meaning, for he does not oppose penitent
sinners to impenitent, but opposes wicked men dying in the Churches Communion,
to the Devil and his Angels, and all other wicked persons, All which (he says)
shall perish eternally, but such as are Christians should be saved at last
after undergoing punishment. And it is to be observed, that at the end of the
Commentaries on Isaiah, he immediately before speaks of that which is supposed
to be the Origenical Hypothesis, viz. That the torments of the other life shall
after a long time be ended; and when he has produced the places of Scripture
which the favorers of it did produce, he only passes this censure of it, Quod
nos Dei solius scientiae debemus derelinquere; Which we ought to leave to the
knowledge of God alone; and then concludes with that moderation of his
sentence, That he did believe the eternity of torments of Devils, Atheists,
etc. but of such who were Christians he did suppose God would mingle Mercy with
his Justice, and that after they had been sufficiently purged by fire they
might escape at last. If he had intended only a mitigation of their torments
who were Christians, the opposition could not lie as it does, between the
eternity of some, and the clemency of God in others, but the eternity must have
been confessed in both, and the opposition made only in the weight of the
torments of such who were not Christians above such as were. If St. Hierome
does (as Bellarmin contends) elsewhere contradict this, by so much the less is
his testimony of any validity in this case, it being plain what his meaning is
here; but that seems the less probable, because he writ his Books against the
Pelagians in which he asserts the same, not long before his death. This purging
fire then, of St. Hierome makes little for your purpose, since it is only a
more refined branch of Origens Hypothesis, and is understood of a fire after
the Resurrection, and that of Hell, and not of Purgatory, and wherein wicked
men shall be purged if they dyed in the Churches Communion, and not such who
repented of their sins in this life. But if St. Hierom himself do not speak to
the purpose, you hope one under his name may do it (and we must needs say
Purgatory has been always beholding to forgeries) for you cite his
Commentaries on the Proverbs, which are rejected as counterfeit by Sixtus
Senensis, Canus, Marianus Victorius, and Bellarmin himself.

But from St. Hierome we proceed to St. Basil, who, you say, teaches the same
Doctrine with him;. 12.
P. 365.
if he does, it is very little for your comfort. But so far was St. Basil from
asserting your Doctrine, that although he speaks of a purging fire, he speaks
not at all concerning it in another life, but only of that which purges out
sins in the souls of men in this life. Comment. in Isa. 9.
For he calls the Spirit of God working upon men's souls, that (...), which
consumes sin within them; as may be seen by comparing his Commentaries on the
sixth and the ninth of Isaiah together. And where he afterward speaks not of
an utter rejection, but an expurgation as by fire; it is plain that he
understands it of the fire of affliction in this life, and not the fire of
Purgatory in another. But where ever you meet with fire and purging, you think
it impossible to be understood of any thing but your Purgatory; it seems you
are hugely possessed with the fears of it, that you think you meet with it,
where ever you go. But if you will needs have St. Basil to speak of a future
state, Sixtus Sen. l. 5. Annot. 171. Estius in 1 Cor. 3. Nazian. orat. 39.
then your own Sixtus Senensis, and Estius will tell you that he is to be
understood of the fire of Conflagration at the Day of Judgment; of which he
speaks in several other places. And so Nicetas understands the place of Gregory
Nazianzene which you produce about Baptism by fire, for says he, Per ignis
baptismum, examen censuramque divini judicii intelligit, and for that cites the
place of the Apostle, Every man's work shall be tried by fire. This he calls
elsewhere the last fire by which our works shall be judged and purged. And of
this Lactantius and Hilary, Orat. 26.
are to be understood: for Hilary expressly says, That even the Virgin Mary
shall pass through it, whom I hope you will not place in Purgatory. In Psalm.
118.
The testimony of Boethius shall then be taken, when you prove that he does not
speak in the person of a Philosopher, but of a Christian delivering matters of
Faith with an ut puto; but if you had considered the design of his Book, for
the sake of Philosophy, you might have spared his citation. And so you might
for your own sake that of Theodoret, which not only the Greeks in their Apology
cry out on as counterfeit; P. 367.
but no such place, as yet appears in any edition of Theodoret. And the same
Greeks tell you, if you consulted the honor of Gregory Nyssen you would spare
him too, because he was a favourer of the Origenical Hypothesis concerning the
redintegration of all things; and so many places are produced out of him
wherein he makes the nature of all pains to be Purgatory, that the Patriarch
Germanus (of whom Photius speaks) had no other way to vindicate him, Biblioth.
Cod. 233.
but by saying that the Origenists had foisted many places into his works. If
you will therefore say, That it is a groundless calumny, to say that any of the
Fathers did corrupt the Christian Doctrine by the opinions of Plato; you must
either deny that Origin and his followers ever asserted any Doctrine contrary
to Christianity, and therein contradict the fifth Ecumenical Council; or that
any of the Fathers had any touch of Origen's opinion: both which I suppose are
tasks you will be unwilling to undertake. But whether their opinions are true
or false (which we are not now enquiring after) to be sure they are far enough
from your Doctrine of Purgatory, which supposes the Sin pardoned in this life,
and yet the punishment undergone for it in another: which Doctrine if it were
granted at all reasonable, it would be much more, asserting it to be after the
Resurrection when the body might endure pains as well as the soul, than so
absurdly as you make the soul only to suffer, and that too in a way the most
unlikely of all other, viz. by a material fire.

But it is time we come to the succor of St. Austin,. 13.
who it seems has his share of Purgatory in this life; for, you say, P. 368.
He has the ill hap to be used the worst of all other. Because his Lordship
represents him as dubious and uncertain (as no doubt he was) in this point:
which argues indeed that he was a Novice in your Roman Faith, but thereby the
more a Father of the Church. But you are the man, that, let St. Augustine say
what he will himself, will prove to his face, that he could not possibly be
thought to deny or doubt of Purgatory. And it is a Combat worth seeing, to see
you dispute against St. Augustine; but you do it so pitifully, that St. Austin
remains as uncertain as ever he was. The only place which seems to the purpose,
Constat animas purgari post hanc vitam, etc. is so notorious a counterfeit,
that not only Vives confesses, no such words appeared in the ancient Copies;
but they are wholly left out, not only in the Basil Edition 1556. but in that
of Lions 1560. and in the later Lovain and Paris editions. The other places,
you confess your self, relate to the benefit which the dead receive by the
prayers of the living, of which a large account has been already given without
any supposition of Purgatory. Whether St. Austins doubts did referr only to the
circumstances of Purgatory, and not to the thing it self, I leave it to the
consideration of any reasonable man, who will read the places already cited,
wherein those doubts are expressed. By which one may see at what rate you use
your expressions, when you can have the face to say, That S. Austin no less
constantly teaches the Doctrine of Purgatory, than he does the Doctrine of
Heaven and Hell. Which after the language of the Sorbon-Censures, is a false,
rash, and scandalous assertion, and as ungrounded as Purgatory it self. The
remaining testimonies of St. Cyril and St. Chrysostom, only speak of prayer for
the dead, and the benefit of that, and so offers nothing new to our
consideration. But at last we are come to a man who did in good earnest believe
Purgatory, and was the first of any name in the Church who did so, and that is
Gregory 1. But whosoever reads in his Dialogues the excellent arguments he
builds it on, and confirms it with, will find as much reason to pity his
superstition and credulity, as to condemn his Doctrine. And after this time,
his Lordship says truly, Purgatory was found too warm a business to be
suffered to cool again; and in the after-ages more were frighted, then led by
proof into the belief of it. And although amidst the variety of judgments
among the Fathers concerning the state of the dead, not one of them affirmed
your Doctrine of Purgatory, before Gregory 1; yet by all means you will needs
have it to have been still owned as an Apostolical Tradition, and an Article of
Faith. But I commend you, that knowing the weakness of the arguments brought
from the Fathers and Scripture, you at last take Sanctuary in the Churches
Definition; P. 372.
on the account of which you say, We are as much bound to believe it as any
other Article of Faith, yea as the Trinity or Incarnation it self. But this
holds for none, but only those who so little understand the grounds of their
Religion as to believe it on the account of your Churches Infallibility; which
is so far from being any ground of Faith, that if we had nothing more certain
then that, to establish our Faith upon, you would be so far from making men
believe Purgatory on that account, that you would sooner make them question,
whether there were either Heaven or Hell. But though your Church be so far from
Infallibility that we have found her guilty of many Errors, yet the Word of
God abides for ever, which alone is the sure Foundation for our Faith to rest
upon. And so I conclude with your own Prayer: I beseech God to give all men
light to see this Truth, and Grace to assent unto it; to the end, that by
living in the militant Church in the Unity of Faith, we may come at last to
meet in Glory in the triumphant Church of Heaven, which we may hope for by the
merits of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: To whom with the Father, and the
Holy Ghost, be all honor and glory world without end.

FINIS.

