THREE SERMONS PREACHED By the Reverend, and Learned, Dr. Richard Stuart, Dean
of St. Paul's, afterward Dean of Westminster, and Clerk of the Closet to the
late King Charles. To which is added A fourth SERMON, Preached by the Right
Reverend Father in God SAMVEL HARSNETT, Lord Archbishop of York.

The second Edition Corrected and Amended.

(...). Isocrat. Orat. ad Nicoclem. LONDON, Printed for G. Bedel, and T.
Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop at Middle Temple Gate in
Fleet Street, 1658.

TO THE READERS.
WHat the Great Viscount S. Alban said of Time, we have but too just cause to
apply to ours: Like a River they conveigh unto us that which is Light and blown
up; but ^ink and drown that which is weighty and solid. Our Press^s (crowded
with pitiful Scriblers of all Sects and sizes) have their Diurnall and
Nocturnall sweates: yet after much travel and hard labor, they bring for^^
little else, but buzzing swarm^s of busy flies: and (as the best of Satyrists
complains) Tot pariter Pelues, and Tintinnabula di^as
Pulsari, --
Iuvenal. Sat. 6.

Amidst this confused noise of tinkling Cymbals, may it please your distempered
ears to entertain (...), one well-tuned, in whom is no jarring: nothing but
what invites to Harmony, Peace, and Concord? One, who being Dead, yet
preaches* and if men will not still be Adders, refusing to hear the voice of
the wise Charmer, he may, like David's Harp, contribute, in some measure at
least, to the allaying this Nations, (once Delight, but now) tormentor* the
Restless spirit of Contradiction. For let us but stand still a while (if we
yet (...)) and consider, what strange ^essons this Tempestuous Age has infused
into us. S* Paul bids us lift up holy hands without wrath: But we have turned
Proselyte^ to Peter^s ^word: an^ there have not been wanting Masters of
Offen^e, to Teach our hands to war, and our fingers to fight. As for our Harps,
we hanged them up (as now useless) upon the* Trees (and so not curslesse
neither) because they sounded no Discord, and so would not advance on toward
our great End, Confusion.

Thus have imprudent men either quite robbed themselves of those holy men and
means which God in mercy gave them; or else (which is but little better)
exchanged (...), Gold for Counters: the Cherubins of the Temple, for the Calves
in Bethel: and Aaron's golden Bells, for Alexanders sounding Brass*

That these Electors may (at length) see (...), the Absurdnesse of their
choice: and how, contrary to all shadow of (...), they have sentenced those
men, as unwo^thy of this World, of whom this World is not worthy* I here
present unto them three Drops from that pious Head, which the cloven ^oote of
our pampered Iesurun had kicked into an Helicon of Tears. If I tell you our
grave Authors name, (and it will not be convenient (yet) to tell you his
descent) I hope the Truths he here delivers* will not suffer, because of his
Invisum Nomen. Truth, as it does not fear, so neither begs, an Auditor. And
therefore, whether ye will hear, or whether ye will forbear ( Ezekiel, 2.7.) the
three Sermons next following were preached by Richard Stuart, Dr. of Civil
Law, Chaplain in Ordinary, and Clerk of the Closet to his sacred Majesty, King
Charles (now with God) Dean of S. Paul's in London: and now (after much experince
of both fortunes) advanced to an higher attendance in the Court of Heaven.

The latter part of his life was spun out in a kind of banishment: for what
cause let his first Sermon tell you. He had now learnt to be at home abroad;
and was able to say with patient (and therefore valiant Paul) (...). Phili.
4.11. And If we who still sit on the black lips of Euphrates* Psalm 137. do but
seriously contemplate our own faces in that troubled Glass, we may (though not
sing, yet) say: -- Poteras jam, Cadme, videri
Exilio faelix* --
Ovid. Met* 3*

As he lived so he died in Exile: and lies buried at Paris in France. And
though we could not afford him a place to rest his head on here, yet we may
bestow an Epitaph: and let it be without flattery: ( neque enim verendum est*
ne sit nimium, quod esse maximum debet* Plin. Lib. 8. Epist. ult.)

Hic Magna est veritas: Hic Invicta jacet Pietas: Hic Illaesa manet Patientia.
The Funer^ll being over, let us now see what the party decea^ed has left
behind him. These Orphan-Sermons were not (for ought I know) trusted to the
care of either Executor or Overseer. Now, 'twere pity three such elegant
children should either (by falling into the fierce hands of some hotheaded
professor) be cast into a fiery Furnace; or that (at long running) some more
wary person should (by an odd way of prescription) force them to ^all him Abba,
and he publish them as (...), his own Legitimate issue. For the preventing of
such either mischeife, or mistake, I have now published these three, hoping
that others may thereby also be incited, to make public such other pieces of
this rare workman, which yet remain secret in their private hands*

The first of these three, is concerning Scandal: I have now placed it first
(not for it is subject, or birthright only, but) because it is the best: and it
is the best, because it is the longest. In this Sermon, our hasty bre^hren
(Sons of the same Fathers with us) may (as in a plain-dealing Glass) see, how
causelessly and contrary to all that is either just, or sober, they have cast
those out of the holy places, as persons grossly superstitious, and whom much
washing had made unclean.

These (...) ((...)) may from this Sermon learn, that obedience to their holy
Mother is far better then sacrificing and grinding their brethren. Let such men
read the conclusion of Plutarchs Book, (...) and take he^d, least while there
is such gaping against Gnats, Camels do not slip down their th^oats.
Excellent is that saying of Mr. George Herbert, (the devout Bernard of our
Church) concerning the Injunction for kneeling at the holy Communion:
Contentiousness in a Feast of Charity, is more scandal then any posture: it is
in his Country-Parson page 92.

They o^ Rome too may here see what a great block their Imag^-Worship is to
the Jews conversion. Let then St. Chrysostom's Fatherly advice be done by us
all, (...) Let us shun offensive word^, and scandalous Works; let neither our
mouths preach (...), scandalous Homilies or Sermons; nor our lives exhort
others to sin. Let us Give no offense neither to the Jews nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

The second is an Easter Sermon Chrysologu^ (Sermon. 69*) bestows an Epitap^
upon our Savior. Cunctorum Resurrectio sepelitur:
Here lies the Resurrection buried.
Our Doctor shows the place where the Lord did lie; but with all tells you with
forcible Arguments, that the Resurrection is now Risen. In this Discourse,
you will find those strange opinions of Worshipping of Relics, and Christ's
corporal ubiquity, briefly, solidly, and charitably confuted.

The third is a Funeral Sermon: which you will not repent to have read: it
being upon a Text, which admits much variety of Interpretations.

To these three is added a fourth Sermon preached, long since, at S. Paul's
Cross, by Samuel Harsnett, Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge: afterward
advanced to the Archiepiscopall Chair of York* It is concerning Gods
Free Grace* and man's Free Will: I will not pass any Sentance upon this work; I
only say with S. Aug* (Epist* 46*) Si non sit Gratia Dei, quomodo mundum
salvabit Deus? Si non sit Liberum Arbitrium, quomodo Iudicabit mundum Deus?
Take away Gods Free Grace, and farewell Heaven: Take away Man's Free Will, what
can the day of Judgment say to us?

But I will not any longer keep you at the Door: pass on, and be ye followers
of these great Doctors, as they are of Christ* Forget not the Resolution of
that grave Roman: Nihil opinionis causa, omnia conscientiae faciam* Senec* de
Ira* 3*41*

T.H.

A Table of the Texts.
1 COR. 10.30. Give no offense neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor
to the Church of God, MATTHEW. 28.6. Come see the place where the Lord lay. 1
COR. 15.29. If the dead arise not at all* why are they then baptized for the
Dead? EZEKIEL. 33.11. As I live says the Lord, I do not delight in The death of
the Wicked.
A SERMON Preached on St. PETER'S Day* at S. Paul's cross in London.
The Text. 1 CORINTHIANS. 10.32. Give no offense, neither to the Jews* nor to the
Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.
GOod Carriage is as well ^ point of Religion, as of Civility, and must be
learned no less in the Temple, then in the Court: I mean no^ those Antic
gestures, whereby men st^i^^ to put off their Country, women their Sex, but a
conscientious care of outward actions, lea^t by their obliquity, we either
hazard the growth of them, whom the Church has already caught; or hinder their
entrance whom she yet longs for. Here then Virtue is the chief Behavior* and
(if my Text may judge of carriage) he cannot want complement, that wants not
innocence. Boast not now of a Courtly garb, or a smooth faining language:
Godliness is good manners, and Regeneration the noblest birth; yea, he is best
bred who giv^s no offense.

Here is a Direction to a great City from a greater Apostle, which may
challenge your attentions, because it was written by St. Paul. And this
circumstance may add to your patience, that it was sent to Corinth (a Map of
this place wherein you are) Achaiae Caput, Graeciae Decus (says Florus) The
Head of Achaia, the Glory of Greece. Inter maria quasi spectaculo exposita: It
was set upon Waters too, as for a spectacle. Pity it were, that this Church
should want instruction, whose ex^mple may be so doctrinall to her neighbor
Cities* especially in her greatest want, and in a state so dangerous. Do but
consider it.

Corinth was rich indeed, in Gold and Merchandise, in the wealth of Greece, and
in the Commodities of all other Nations: only here was her poverty, she was too
rich in Religions: For (as if they were to be sold too) she had choice of each
several sort, Judaism, Paganism, and Christianism. Want any Faith? Corinth
can furnish you. Here you may descry a Church there a Shrine, yonder a
Synagogue: In this place you may see Christ worshipped* go on, you may hear Him
questioned, and in the next street blasphemed. Nay, the Christian part was not
well settled: some were of ^trong Resolution, others weak, of an inconstant
frame: so that this baptized number scarce seemed one body, the members were so
unlike. Amidst this sea of distractions, the Church must needs hazard
Shipwreck, if an Apostle be not the Pilot. Hence therefore he draws his
directing Compass, and my Text is the Card which they must sail by, Give no
offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church of God.

To come nearer the Text.

You know, the best L^wes have commonly the meanest birth, they are begotten by
men's ill man^ers: the wickedness of all humane kind gave life to the Decalogue;
and this precept here was more immediately occasioned by some abuse in Corinth,
concerning things offered up to Idols. The D^linquents were c^iefly of two
sorts: some Christians (valiantly wicked) would adventure to eat meats at the
Pagans religious Feasts* ^n the midst of an Idol-Temple: and the fault once
past, it was easy (they thought) to dispute themselves ^nocent. For had not S.
Paul himself taught them, that An idol was nothing? as little able to unhallow
meat, as to sanctify it? what hurt then in these solemn meetings, where they
might maintain friendship, without loss to Religion? the apostle replies, v.
19. An idol indeed is nothing: but these things are sacrificed to Devils, and
therefore ^o partake in these religious meetings, is to communicate with
Devils; a fact in its own nature, and in it self unlawful. Nay (besides the
crime) it was most grossly scandalous, first to the Iewe^, who must ^eeds hence
imagine the Disciples were Idolators; and then, what h^pe of their conversion?
secondly, to the Gentiles, for if Christians will be their associates, their
religion sure was not then so blameable. Las^ly, to the Church, who must needs
grieve, that her first sons should be Apostates; but especially to those of the
weaker sort, whose mouths might (by such facts) be brought to ^at that which
their consciences abhorred.

Others there were that did offend more modestly, whose actions were in
themselves indifferent, only they were too careless, and therefore to be
accounted sinn^rs, because they made others sin. Such were they that forbear
the Temples, and yet did eat too, with the offense of others. ^or see, these
meats may lawfully be bought in the Market, v. 25* where they were often sold
for their Priests commodity (as H^rodotus intimates in his Eut^rpe, and S. Aug.
in his 78. Prop. upon the Romans) they might lawfully be eaten too at each
private meeting, v. 27. yet if a Christian chanced to light upon a Professor,
who in a Courteous unkindness will needs forewarn him, Take heed, these thing^s
were offered up to Idols: in this case, either to buy, or eat, were sinfully
uncharitable: not that the act in i^ self is unlawful, but that it is thu^ made
scandalous.

These things premised, my text straigh^ follows, and (with their help) admits
this Division:

Here is, 1. A Precept, ^ive no offense. 2. Its application. Neither to the
Jews, etc.


The precept must thus be doubled:

Give no offense.

1. By doing things in themselves unl^wfull, as by eating publicly in an
Idol-Temple.

Give no offense.

2. By an uncharitable carriage in things indifferent, as by eating carelessly
in private converse.

The application is likewise doubled*

1. It respects those that are without: Neither to the Jews, nor to the
Gentiles.

2. It concerns the Sons of the Church: Neither to the Church of God.

My discourse will insist upon these two particulars:

Give no offense, 1. In ^nlawfull things. 2. In things indifferent.


And to each of these several parts, I shall annex that twofold Application,
desiring, that in all things unlawful and indifferent, Jews and Gentiles
(strangers) may be free from scandal, and our own Church from offense.

We read, that Peter (this days Saint) was checked by our Apostle, about this
point we have in hand, I withstood him to the face (says he) for be was to be
blamed, Galat. 2* the reason was, because by his dissembling carriage he had
seduced Barnabas, and g^ven scandal to the new-won Gentiles, which were at
Antioch. How this can stand with Peter's commandi^g supremacy, let the Jesuits
see to it: I only observe from S. Aug. Est laus, etc. (it is in his 9. Epistle.)
'Twas Peter's honor, that he was thus rebuked, for it app^ared by his serious
amendment, how good he was, and how tractable, and his repentance gave this
unquestioned testimony, that his heart was as full of humility, as it was of
zeal.

Beloved, he best keeps this day, who imitates this Apostle, who does as well
follow, as remember him: and without all doubt, the only way to become a Saint,
is to be such an Auditor. Thus then do these Apostles both preach unto you, St.
Peter by his example, and S. Paul in the words which I have chosen, Give none
offense, neither to Jew nor Gentile. And first hear what I called my first
part, Give none offense, by doing things which in themselves are unlawful.

What an Offense is, may best be known by that Metaphor wherein my Text
decyphers it, For (...), (the word implied which we render Offense) properly
signifies some let, that hinders our sure footing; ^ stone perhaps, or the like
impediment, whereby our feet trip, an^ faulter. And you know that Christ is not
our life only, but our true way to life, by faith in him we all here walk
toward heaven. He therefore may be said to offend us, at whose bad actions we
either stumble, and so slack our p^ce* or else at whose vile example we fall
flat down, and grow lame by impenitency. T^rtulian will have it, Malae rei
exemplum aedificans ad d^lictum: An edifying sin, that helps to build up
^ransgressions. For, when upon the foundation of a bad example, we are brought
to lay our sin too, then the building ^s complete; the Schools that they may
make this Vice more conspicuous, oppose it to a Virtue, which they call
Correctio frat^um, Brotherly reproof, a chief, and main part of Charity. For,
we were not created for our selves alone, nor may we learn for this reason
only, to become lea^ned, bu^ that we may be Teachers too. We are so far bound
from offending, that we must ^o good to others. It Was the Quaere of Cain: Am I
my Brother^ Keeper.

The dispute is too subtle, whether all seducing crimes be offenses or no,
especially when they do harm beyond the Actors intention? as when Ammon counted
Thamar, was it Incest, or a Scandal? for his intent was not his sisters ruin,
but his own foul delight* The more wary Doctors conc^ude, it was both: but I
leave it, Athen^ is more fit for such Discourses, and I must remember we are
now at Corinth.

It may better deserve our thought^, to consider with what variety of dangerous
attempts Scandal besets our weakness, how it bids open war, and uses our own
Passions, as Engine^, to assaul^ us. In this man it deals by Love, in the next
by Fear, a third it assailes by Hatred: it (indeed) bribes our affection^* and
makes them all turn Traitors to the Soul. This appears in that grand sin of
David, that offensive and murtherous Adultery; this sin darted Scandals, and
gave wounds to all them that did bu^ hear it: 1. To his own people by Love and
Respect, for David was honorable* and because a Prophet, his life was thought
exemplary: if then he turn wanton, who will not follow him? probably there were
some among the people, who would sooner be brought to think Adultery no sin;
then to hold David vicious. Thus Cato's drunkenness gave scandal to strict
Seneca, whose Philosophy could not discern the Vice it self, because it was
clothed in a grave example. 2. Upon the Philistines it wrought by hatred: they
de^ested his Person, and from hence began to blaspheme his God too: what hope
now to make them Prosely^es? nay, what reproachful words would they not utter?
behold the fruits of this Jewish Faith, whose very Prophets are adulterous? 3.
Search Ioab's actions, and it is probable, his Masters sin made him sin for
fear. If D^vid decree Vriahs murder* he must not but act it; for the Letters
were his direction, and (alas) he dares not spare, if they be bloody. But Ioab
was herein most valiant, he durst neglect the com^and of God, that he might
please a Man. Of all Traitors this passion is the basest, which makes us sin
for company, and to please great ones, as if, where they are wick^d, it were
saucy to be good, or ill manners that our innocence should be thought to
reprove our betters. Sulpitius Severus observes this of Nero (in the 3. of his
History) that it was his own bad life, which made him hate Christians: for he
still thought they censured him, and could not but expect what they knew he
deserved. Would the Disciples but have turned bad to please him, they might (no
doubt) have kept their Faith, by forfeiting their Manners: but they had learned
rather to suffer for Truth, then to sin for Fear.

You see, by David's fact, how true it is of this infectious sin, what holy
Cyprian has of those who were present at the old Pagan-sports, Discit facere,
dum con^uescit videre (in his 6. de spectaculis.) At these sports each
Spectator becomes an Agent, and acts a part by seeing Actors play.

It appears then first, what this sin is* and then how many ways it assaults
us: in both (you see) it is dangerous, and what need we have of a strict
prohibition. If you will believe a Critic, my Text is most punctual, and must
needs forbid all kinds of this obliquity, because it forbids the least. For
it is not said here, Give no scandal only, but (...)* be free from offense, as
well from the Less, as from the Greater Evil. We read in the 9 to the Romans,
at the last verse (and S. Paul did borrow it from the Prophet Esaias) Behold, I
lay in Sion, (...), and in the Hebrew it is Lapis offensionis, but Petra
scandali, a stone of offense, but a Ro^k of scandal: So then from that we may
slip, but perhaps recover; from this a man falls headlong down, and ^he chance
is desperate. Our last Translators seem to approve it too in the 14. to ^he
Romans, and the 13. verse, That you put not in your Brothers way, (...), which
they render, A stumbling block* and an occasion to fall. Thus then we stumble
by an Offense, but we fall by a scandal. When mean men grow vicious, their
sins may be but stones: but when our Leaders err, what Rocks are their
transgres^ions? If this or that man sin, some few may ^tumble: but when Crimes
become practices, then some fall down wounded, and others lie stark dead.

Observe too, that as there may be ^eresie in our lives: So there may be ^rimes
in our Opinions. We may deny God in our works (says Saint Paul) ^^though our
tongues be silent: and it is as plain in Scripture, that bad Doctrine is
Fornication although the false Prophet be never so cha^te. It Is true then Men
may speak Rocks as well as act them, and make the ways of the Church as
dangerous by their stony Opinions, as by their foul Examples. Who doubts but a
Corinthian Elder might give as great offense by teaching falsely concerning
those meats, as he could by eating in a forbidden place? nay, it is plain* this
passage is concerning Doctrine too: for (without all doubt) the Apostle did not
more labor to correct the Deeds of this Church, then to mend the Errors of
their misled Opinions. Give then no scandal* neither by Life nor Doctrine*
neither by wicked acts, nor more vile Opinions, let neither your hand cast
stones, nor your tongue utter rock^ to the People; (...), Give none offense in
things unlawful.

The application follows, Neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to
the Church of God.

But what? In one Corinth so many factious varieties? Jews against Gentiles,
and both these too divided from the Christians? amidst these distractions, it is
best sure to be Neutrall; for who would yet make choice of any Faith? Let the
Scribe either yield to the Gospel, or the Sophies of Greece to the Law of
Moses, or else let S. Paul give way to the Philosophers. As things here stand,
to look on is the best course, and the most compendious way to avoid all
scandal, is to turn Atheist.

Good, politic bl^sphemy! pendulous Corinthians, (...) whirled about with
every wind, which blows them whither it lists* Now they turn wi^h the
Jewish Scribes, anon with Christ's Apostles, ere long they change this holy
faith, if either a Stoic chance to dispute with them, or an Epicure to invite
them. Sometimes they approve highly of the Christian Belief, because they see,
it is backed by the Jews own Prophets, and guarded with such armed Legions of
convincing arguments. Again, they remember, that Paganism is Corinth's old
Religion, and their giddy brains straight dote upon Antiquities. In the mean
time, these Changelings give none offense, their ambiguous postures are so far
from displeasing, that you would think S. Paul's* own carriage was not more
absolute. To the Jews they become plain Jews, to the Grecians Gentiles, and
(for a spurt too) they can believe as much, as the most firm Apostle* yet here
is the difference: S. Paul altered the clothes of Religion, but these men
change the body. He was content to yield in Ceremonies, but these (with greater
ease) put off their faith too. Our Apostle did it, that he might by all means
save some, these, that by no means they may displease any; and so that all be
friends, no matter for salvation.

Is this the way to live inoffensive? must the Remedy be worse then the Disease
it self? and is there no course to cure a scandal* but by more horrid Atheism?
If our Faith displease, let us answer with Tertullian, Bonae res neminem
scandalizant, nisi malam mentem* Good meats displease none, but the
distemperate Pallates: and must the wholesome dishes be barred the Table,
because they offend the Aguish? no scandal, in this case, is medicinable: You
know a Physician offends the sick, that he may the more surely cure him. If to
do well, cause discontent, we then offend, not against men, but their errors,
and in this regard we are tender to the Persons themselves, when we strike down
their ignorance.

There are men of a resolved opinion, to whom S. Paul here writes: for sure
those unsettled brains have not more need of Physic then of an Apostle. It is
the Apostles ^ule* Stand fast in the faith, and then yet, Give none offense,
neither to the Jews etc.

A large compass to a Christian man, the whole world is made his Theater, his
Charity must negotiate with all men* and (for his Masters gain) he must hold
commerce with all, even with those that hate him too. He is apt enough to
provide for the Household of Faith; but Jews and Gentiles are made his charge
too.

It were to be wished, that Saint Paul had written these words to Rome, because
(sure) they never heard of what is here said to Corinth: For would they then
within the same Walls entertain Jews, and yet worship Images? Would they make
themselves as accursed by Sc^^dall, as the Jews by Infidelity? Nay, that's not
enough to Worship them, they must be taught to do wonders too, to Groan, and
Weep, and Bleed, that the people may be sure to think so many Pictures* so many
Deities. So that there is now no better sport in Rome, then to see a Picture
play a Miracle, and a sly Jew discover it.

But is not this Offense the Wisdom of the Sea? this scandal is public
policy, and the whole world is beholding to it. For the Jews conversion is a
sign too fatal, and argues an end, not of their power only, but of the
universe; and better an offense perhaps, then this great dissolution.

They may reply, the scandal is passive only, the Jews indeed are offended,
but the fault lies in themselves. For, to paint God the Son in the same shape
he took, or the Holy Ghost in that shape wherein he descended, is so
reasonable that it needs no Proof* And because Daniel styles God the Father;
The Ancient of Days, does it not follow, that he may well undergo the
similitude of a Grave old man? Yes sure: and so they might paint Cato like a
Woman too, because Paterculus describes him, ^omo Virtuti simillimus: A man
like to Virtue her self, and Virtue may be pictured. Bellarm. 2. Eccl. Triumph.
cap. 8.

But they must know, to paint a Deity, besides the scandal, it is unlawful too;
Thou shall make no similitude, for you saw none in the day that the Lord spoke
unto you in Mount Horeb, Deuteronomy. 4.15. They must make no Image of God then, for
it was of Him they saw no similitude: In this Truth the Fathers are all
peremptory, that God must not be portrayed: So Clem. Alexandrinus, Athanasius,
Hierom, Augustine, Theodoret, and others: nay, Rome's own Doctors, Durand,
Abulensis, and the Jesuits acknowledge it; only with a nice fixion (which they
learn from Trent) they can avoid both all these Authors, and the strict Law in
Deuteronomy; You must make no similitude: True, of the Nature of God, or of his
Essence; but you may of his Attributes, as by an old man you may represent his
Eternity.

A mere Invention! But yet, some Jew may say, Old age is rather an Emblem of
Mortality. If such distinctions may be suffered, Christ died in vain to take
away the curse of the Law, for these men's wits could abrogate it. Admit but
this Art, and say, what Law can hold us? we may then sin confidently, and
(instead of Repentant tears) laugh at some new distinction; You may not use
Sorcery: True, not with that Witch at Endor, to get some poor reward; but you
may perhaps with Sylvester the second, that you may gain a Popedom.

'Twere good they would learn from the Civilians, Non est distinguendum, ubi
non distinguit Lex, To distinguish without warrant from the Law it self, is not
Art, but presumption.

Yet, I would they did but make them: the Scandal is intolerable, when they
adore an Image. And yet, see! they grow more offensive by desending it. The
di^tinction between Service and Worship, between an Idol and an Image, what
Jew does not deride? and when they say, they worship not the Pictures
themselves, but that which they represent, this does increase their laughter.
For, what Jew will think, his ^ore-Fathers (whom yet the Prophets called
Idolaters) could so far dote, as to terminate their Worship upon Gold and
Stones? They worshipped God in an Image: and what is it else, that he forbids
in our second Commandment? for, to think, that he there prohibits either the
worship of an Image it self, or of a false Deity under an Image, were to accuse
the Lawgiver of vain repetitions: for they we^e both forbidden in the
precedent words, Thou sh^lt have none other Gods before me. In th^^ therefore
his meaning is not, to forbid the worship of a False God, but the false worship
of a Tru^; not the Adoration of Images themselves, but of God in Images. There
is no Jesuit so ^mpudent, as to deny Aarons Calfe to have been an Idol; and
yet, that in this similitude the people did worship to the God of Israel,
(besides the Circumstance of the Text) it appears by the confession of their
own Divines. The Text I quote from N^hemiah in the ninth of his History, at
the 18. verse, where he relates this passage: yea, when they had made them a
molten Calfe* and said, Iste est De^s Tuus, This is thy God, which brought thee
up out of Egypt: Thy God, that is, the similitude of thy God. For Israel could
not think the Image brought them up: that were to make the power of the Calfe
older then the Calf it self: and as much as to say, the Idol brought them up
out of Egypt forty days before it was made.

To say, That in this Image they did worship to the Egyp^ian gods, is a conceit
fit for none but a Jesuit. For, what color has it? The Jews well knew, that
it was Abraham^ God who had destroyed their Land, and slain their firstborn
children, who had made the same Sea a W^lke to ^h^^n, and a Gulf to Pharo^h.
They knew too, tha^ while they lived by the Egyptians gods, they felt nothing
but slavish bond^ge, and yet more bloody cruelty. Is it probable then, they
could imagine that they owed their deliver^nce to those savage Deities? Could
they think that Egypts gods would preserve strangers* and drown their own
known Votaries? What? shall Pharaoh die, who sacr^ficed to them, and yet they
triumph who d^d neglect them?

I know, the Scripture speaks it often, the Jews by this molten Calfe did
forget God that redeemed t^em: but who knows not the meaning of this common
Phrase? To offe^^d God is not to remember him: our sins are our Forge^fulness.
To serve God contrary to his express commands, is both to worship and forget
him.

The Text I quoted is yet more forcible, They said before the Molten Calf, This
is thy God which brought thee forth: and (if they will believe their own
Burgensis) it is a sure Rule in Scripture, when ever Elohim is taken either for
Great men, as Judges, or the like; or else for false gods, it is still joined with
an Adjective, or a Verb of the plural number (it is in his Additions to Lyra
upon the first of Genesis:) But in this Text, the Verb is singular, Iste Deus
Tuus, quifecit te ascendere. It follows then, they worshipped not an Egyptian
God, but the God of Heaven in an Egyptian manner; they adored not the Idol it
self, but God in the Idol.

To make all sure: Hear Aarons Proclamation: He built an Altar before it, and
cried, saying. To morrow shall be a Feast to Jehovah. To Jehovah, Gods own
proper Name, and not communicable to any (as all Learned men acknowledge) a
Name held by the Jews so superstitiously peculiar, that they will now a days
scarce sound it. So that, he who affirms Aaron called his Calfe Jehovah, but
yet sure he meant it was some Egyptian Deity, might as well say too (were it
for his purpose) that when the Priest called for Moses ^e sure did still mean
Pharaoh.

I end his words: To morrow shall be a feast to the Lord: to the Lord then,
though under an Idol. Rome's own Doctors do confess this Truth: Abulensis, in
7 Quaest. upon Exodus 22. Ferus upon the 7. of the Acts, Peers. de Tradit. part.
3. and (which they must stand to) the new Catechism put out by Pius Quintus,
cap. 14. upon the first Commandment; Bellarmine too, though he calls it a flat
lie in Calvin (2. de Eccles. Triumph, cap. 13.) he strait says, it is probable
in the same place, F. alterum.

I might further instance in Ieroboam's Calves, Idols, as all acknowledge, and
yet that in them they did worship to the God of Jacob, appears by Josephus (a
polite learned Jew) who lived much about the time of our Savior, and therefore
in this point rather to be heard, for his Persons sake, then these men for
their Art. In the 8. of his Antiquities a^ the 38. Chapter he makes Jeroboam
^hus speak to the People: Behold, as Solomon bu^lt God a Temple, so have I
honored him by these Golden Calves; Worship now that God at Dan and Bethel*
which ye once did at Jerusalem. And Iehu (a Prince of Ieroboams faith (for the
Text says, From hi^ sins he went not) with what courage did he massacre the
Priest^ of B^al, and crie^ unto Iehonadab, Come see my zeal for the Lord of
Hosts, 2 Reg. ^0 16. He could not endure that Baal should be God, but still he
had his Calves too, he worshipped, it seems, the God of Heaven, but yet it was
in his Idols.

Judge now, I pray you, which are more tolerable, the worst at Corinth* or the
best at Rome? There some few took meat in an Idol-Temple, but here all deal
with Idols themselves. They say, they fix their hearts on God: so did those
worst Corinthians* and yet their mouths made them Idolaters, and then how these
men's knees can escape, I know not. For (me thinks) in case of false Religion,
less hurt should come by eating, then adoring. It were good, if (for the Jews
^ake at least) they would leave their C^ucifixes, and their whole Heaven of
Poppets, an Heathenish (they are their own Cassanders words) and gross kind of
worship. For, to what purpose? unless perhaps His Holiness imagines that he
can neither truly succeed Peter, without denying his Master, nor represent
Aaron without Idolatry.

Nor are their Laws less offensive, then their Divinity. For, would it not
make a Jew smile to see a Priest more severely punished for Marriage, then for
Fornication? as if the Christian Religion held Wedlock criminal; or at least
did more zealously endeavor the execution of her own fancies, then of Gods own
Will and Commandments: Nota unum mirabile; plus puniter Castitas quam Luxuria
(the gloss upon Lancell in his Instit. de his qui promoveri non possunt) It Is
strange (says the Canon^st) with us; Nuptial chastity i^ more strictly
punished, then the most wanton lust.

Yet, I wish that Rome only were to be found guilty of these scandalous
transgres^ions, or that our Land were as free from those sins which offend the
Jews, as it is from the Jews themselves: Adulteries then would be less frequent,
and ^his day be accounted a Day of Rest, and not of Riot. That biting Trade
would then be left, wherein (I know not by what incestuous gain) Coin begets
Coin upon it self: and we should take care either to strangle the gnawing
Serpent, or else to make it tooth-less: shall I call it the Circumcision of the
Land? It is a burden (they say) that neither we, nor our forefathers were
well able to bear: must not this crime make the Jews to abhor our Christian
cruelty? for with this tearing Engine they oppress strangers only, but we
grind our own Brethren.

Nor is it improper to speak here of Jews and of Gentiles too, the whole
World is a fit subject for this great Auditory. I doubt not, there are here
present, who converse with both Nations, some for Profit, and some for Delight;
no people, but some here may either by command perhaps, or else by Curiosity,
be brought to deal with them. You then that go down to the Sea in Ships, and
whose way lies in the midst of great Waters, give ye none offense, neither to
the Jews, nor Turks, nor Infidels, least your ill lives beget their blasphemy,
and whilst you make your selves a scorn, you make your mighty God
contemptible. Use no fraud in bargaining, nor deceit in your slack performance,
lest Christ himself suffer, while your tongues offend. For, will strangers
think him a God, whose servants are all Atheists? Will they be brought to
worship Christ* when your own works deny him? Think not to thrive, if for
your sake your Savior prove a loser.

May they please to hear too: If any here has to do with our late plan^ed
Colonies, whether in Virginia, or in other places; they are seated (you know)
in the midst of the Gentiles, and therefore my Text affords this Caution: Let
them give none offense; let care be taken that those men you send, be taught
first to know God at home; lest our Plantations be held to be but
Goal-deliveries, and our Land be thought rather to transport her Crimes, then
her Religion. Let them be forced to forbear a Savage cruelty, lest (what
others have already done) they make our Saviors name grow odious to the
Pagans, and cause them to speak through bitterness of soul, There is no Hell
but Ch^istendome.

But (that all may partake) I must turn this Application into a Song of praise.
Glory be to God* that we a^e not constrained to dwell in Meshek, nor to h^ve
our habitation among the Tents of Kedar. For our British Church is herein
blessed beyond this of Corinth, that she neither hears the Gentiles to question,
nor the Jews to blaspheme her Savior. We all here accord in that one
Halelluj^h, Praise, and Honor, and Glory, and Renown, and Power be unto him
that sits on the Throne, and to the Lamb for evermore.

But yet (in too true a sense) we want not them without, men which owe their
birth to the Womb of this Church, and yet now they scorn to call her Mother,
Recusants in the hearts of our chiefest Cities. Nemo tam prope proculque nobis.
The Grecians at Constantinople live not so far from us, as these men do in
England.

There are too, who separate upon more slight pretenses, because (I think) our
Church consists of Men: for, sure, their strict profession must have us all
turned Angel^. You see our state, as the Lilly among the Thorns, so should our
Church bear her self amidst these oppositions. Corinth had I^wes and Gentiles,
whose conversation did (no doubt) pierce her soul; and yet she must be
inoffensive, her flower must still remain smooth and harmless: so we have those
too, who will needs be without, and to these we shall perform what S. Paul
injoins us, if (with the L^lly) the scent of our Doctrine remain still sweet*
and our lives be kept white and innocent.

But are we not condemned already? It seems by our Opposites, that we give
sca^dall, and that we give Offense. We teach (say they) that God is the Author
of sin, and their fat cares are prick^ wi^h this sharp blasphemy. Do we t^ach
it? but where, I wonder? in what place? in what Author? you see, if the Lilly
will bear no Thorns* these men can sow them on. If our Church can give no
scandal, yet they will* make her to do it. Yea, this is Ro^es choicest Art, first
to ^eign us Her^ticks, and then to rail at us. But yet, they learnt this
cunning from the Gentiles; for just thus (says Minutius) did they deal with
the primitive Christians: Obstruunt pectora, ut ante nos incipiant homines
odisse, quam nosse. They possess men's minds with forgeries, that they may make
their Hate to prevent their knowle^ge, that men may learn to detest and abhor
us, before they know what we are. Nor yet do they here cease to quarrel: our
scandals (it seems) are yet more numerous. It offends them that we hold Faith
to be a strict personal confidence: that we say, A man may sometimes be sure of
his salvation. It troubles them that we allow not Free Will to be a main Agent
when we are first converted; and they endure not to hear, when we deny Works
to be meritorious. In the 8 of Saint Matthew (where our Savior taught the
abrogation of Jewish Ceremonies, and that the worst Meats could not de^ile us)
the Text intimates, the Pharis^es were ^ffen^ed; nay, and his Disciples from
hence seem to intre^t his silence. Master, see thou not that they are
^ffended? But did our Savior regard it? Let them alone (says he) They are
blind leaders of the blind. Christ meant to teach us, when men grow
discontented at the Truth it self, the offense is taken only, not given; and
they be said then, rather to make, then to receive a scandal.

But yet, is it Rome that cavils? will that See censure, as if she meant to call
our Doctrine Scandalous? Hypocrite! Let her first cast out the Beams out of
her own eyes, and so perhaps those things which in ours are thought Motes,
s^ee'l then account for ornaments. In her, there is murdering of Princes
maintained by Mariana, Aequivocation by Cardinal Tolet, and some other
Casuists; Dispensations and prices upon Remission of sins; Inprimis for
Adultery so much, Item for Sodomy so much; it is urged by their own Espansaeus
upon the first of Titus from the Book called Camer. Apost. Desperate
conclusions! plain enough in their Writings, and yet made more legible by the
bloody Commentaries of their detestable attempts, witness the death of the
late King of France, and Garnets Examination in England.

But I leave her: they are not her crimes that can make us innocent. Our
Doctrine may soon be cleared; but these take offense at our bad lives too, and
both sorts of opposites appear most eager in this hot pursuit: Bellarmine
proclaims it openly; With the Catholics (says he) there are some wicked; but
not one good among the Protestants: in his 13 Chapter de Not. Eccl. Indeed our
answer to this may be a smile; and let it suffice the Jesuit, that we now know
his Faith by his Charity; it is magna proposito, sed nimium audax (says their
wandering Spalatensis.) The Cardinal (by his place perhaps) did there speak big
indeed, but yet, 'twas very rashly: and (for ought I know) he has not yet
recal'd it.

He that reads S. Bernard to Eugenius, or Petrarch, or Mantuan, would wonder
the Divines of Rome should grow so censorious, since ^hey have so displayed the
foul abominations of that impious City, that I am sure the Scripture scarce
speaks worse of Sodom.

I dare not call Sanctity of life a true note of the Church; for then Plato,
when he had feigned a Common^wealth had almost feigned a Church too: but yet I
am sure it is a Duty* ^and concerns thi^ place no less (nay perhaps more) then
Corinth. She had a Church ( Christian indeed) but 'twas corrupt: it had abuses
in the H. Eucharist, and doubts too about ^he Resurrection. But we profess
our Faith reformed, and what shall we answer, when men demand, Show us this
Faith by your Works? It Is easy to say* the Belief is reformed, but show it in
your manners. For, do not they live in the midst of ignorance, whose works are
works of darkness? If our People remain still profane, our Gentry Luxurious,
and our Clergy careless: If our Devotions be grown so cold, that they scarce
afford either Alms to others, or Prayers to our selves: If our poor yet pine
before us, and our wealthy become most maliciously covetous, possident ad hoc
taentum, ne possidere ^lteri liceat, as S. Cyprian speaks in his second
Epistle, they grow rich for spite, and hoard up the fruits of the Earth, not
so much that they may fee^ themselves, as that they may starve others: If
corruption bear Rule in our Courts of Justice, and inter leges docetur, quod
Legibus int^rdicitur (as the same Father speaks in his Book de Spectac.) and
men learn crimes from those that profess the Law themselv^s: If Felix blush not
to turn Tertullus, and (rather then Saint Paul shall evict a cause) a Judge
will be an Orator: If our Trades be grown to Cozenage, and he accounted the
best bred Artisan, that knows to cheat most smoothly: if our streets still
smell of Sur^ets and our whole Land mourn for the Riot of her People: Say,
gives not this scandal to those without? will not they deride our Faith, which
bears no better manners? I hope far otherwise. But if these things be so, may
we not then take up those words of Aeschines, (...), we are borne the Paradox
and Riddle of our Times, A Reformed Church without a Reformation?

Know (Beloved) to win those who now scorn our Communion, not so much our
Tongues, as each of our Lives must Preach. They Will not hear us speak, to wh^m
yet the sound of our good works will prove most shrill and audible. Your
strict, upright carriage will teach them how pure our Doctrine is. Thus may you
turn each place into a Temple, your Examples will be for Sermons; and so
(un^wares) these men will be at Church, in ^espite of their Recusancy. But if
Charity has not, as yet, wrought in you such tenderness of heart, as to
regard Jews and Gentiles, yet forbear notorious offenses at least, in favor of
the Church of God; the second part of this application, Not to the Church of
God.

(...) in my Tex^* S. Paul might (with more ease) have said, Neither to the
Jews nor Gentiles* n^r to the Christians. Why these words [ Neither to the
Church of God?] He meant sure, to add some strong persuasion unto a Law so
requisite. For see, it is (...), a selected number; and you know, choice things
must be handled with care. It is (...), the choice of God; and who dares offend
what he delights in? For this Churches s^ke cease from open sins; their sight
is contagious, we wo^nd not our selves alone, we murder out Spe^ta^^^^
Goodness (indeed) may dwell by it self, as Lot in the midst of Sodom: but Sin
is far more plausible; her winning carriage will soon gain Troops, and quickly
invite whole multitudes. Judas may with more ease be an Apostle alone, then a
Traitor without company.

Hear this, ye Rulers of the People, whose actions are as commanding as your
Authority, who by reason of your eminency in place, have as many to imitate, as
obey you; let this fear you into innocence: ponder hence the weight of your
future account. For their transgressions are begotten by your Examples, other
men's sins increase your reckoning* It was Satan's Master-peice, that the Gods of
the Gentiles were (for the most part) feigned Criminous, Vt vitiis hominum
(says Minutius) quaedam Authorita^ p^raretur, That men might then think they
sinned by Authority. For, what Pagan would not be angry or wanton, when Jupiter
(his greatest god) did as well lust, as Thunder? I have said ye are Gods, says
the Psalmist. Yea, Magistrates are gods* and therefore when their sins grow
open to the World, each mean man will think^ ^^^^elf privileged: I said, Ye
are Gods, but ye shall dye like men: and therefore Saint Cyprian can best
forewarn you, Faenore quan^o fuerit amplior summa dignitatis, tanto magis
exigitur usura poenarum: Take heed, upon your sins Gods vengeance will turn
Usurer, according to the Loan of your place and eminency; such interest must
you pay in pain and destruction.

Consider this too, ye that affect to sin before a Witness, as if their
testimony were as delightful, as the sin it self. You that have made your
selves Factors for Hell, and endeavor by all means possible to make a
Proselyte; that ensnare tender years, and turn goodness of disposition into
the confusion of him that bears it. Alas, Hos pudet non esse impudentes (as
Saint Aug. has it) It makes these young ones blush, that they cannot be more
impudent, and they admire to see, how well it becomes you to be wicked. Your
example works not only upon their lives, but their opinion too: for, to see men
sin so confidently, to see crimes become daily practices, makes them ^hink that
sins are but mere Complements, and this dull Innocence, want of Breeding,
Peritior, quo turpior judicatur (as Saint Cyprian speaks) they are in love with
this your Art of sinning, and think it no less then a great commendation, to
be so courtly impious. Think not to escape with this fond excuse, I entreat
them not, I desire not their presence: know (vain man) that such deeds have
their Eloquence, and that those sins are more persuasive, then honest,
invitations. Avoid, shun all such company, and if you will needs be wicked, yet
be not scandalous.

Nor is it enough to forbear vice only; in case of Scandal; a Christian
Statesman must ^oregoe his Liberty, he must be content to cast himself into
bonds, that he may free his neighbor. Indeed we are a Royal Priesth^od, and
each here may speak it (without any note of tyranny) All things are lawful for
me: but yet, in these things indifferent, we must confine our selves to the
good of others. Each man should be a Law un^o us, and we must be as well
fearful to offend a Brother, as to break a Commandment. All things are
lawful for us* but all things ^re not expedient. We may do all things: yet
lend an ^ar to what is here mentioned in the second Precept: Give none offense,
by an uncharitable carriage in these things of indifferency.

It is a Rule of the Canonists (and they borrowed it from their own
Innocentius, lib. magnae de Vol. Ext.) In all our actions three things must be
observed: Quid Liceat, Quid D^ceat, Quid Expediat: What Is Lawful, what Decent,
and what Expedient. Our actions must not be Lawful only; for he that does no
more then he is bound to, is rather Wary then Good, and has learnt only safe
Dishonesty, how by keeping the Kingdoms Laws, he may abuse her people. Non
omne quod licet, etiam honestum est, says Paulus the acute Civilian: That
Pagan could distinguish between strict Law and Honesty. In Rigor things may be
done, which yet are neither Decent in the actor himself, nor expedient for the
Commonwealth. It Is thus in the Church too: Many things has God here left in
their own selves indifferent: he has therefore not forbidden them, because
they may oftentimes be done with safety* And yet, cannot we be free, except we
become injurious? Is there no way to show our own Liberty, but in our
neighbors destruction? Grant these things to be lawful, yet they may be
unseemly, and shall we shame our selves? they may be expedient too; and shall we
endanger others? It is not enough to keep the first Precept, to forbear
things unlawful; a Christian man must be wary too in matters of indifferency.

But did not Christ dye to free us? shall Precepts then still bind us in these
slights of Ceremonies? What? shall meats and Vestments, and each gesture
trouble us? If in these things we remain yet solicitous, what Jew can be more
servile? Lo! see a Canaan in the midst of Egypt* freedom in the house of
bondage; and in the ^hains of the Gospel of Christ, no less then a true
Royalty. The Jews were to abstain, as well from eating those consecrated meats,
as from imbrewing their hands in the blood o^ their Neighbors; for such things
being unto them both made in themselves unlawful, these meats were as well a
Crime, as the Murder. But, when Christians were enjoined to abstain, it was
not for any impurity in the things themselves, but lest they should give
^candall to those they lived with. They were forbidden to eat: but yet taught
too, that al those meats were in th^mselves most lawful. Thus were they at the
same time both free and fettered: their consciences were enlarged by*
Knowledge, and their mouths shut up by Charity.

For observe, our Christian liberty consists rather in that we know, then in
what we do* If we be firmly resolved, that such things are indifferent, our
Freedom remains untoucht, although for our outward act, we be either ruled by
Decency, or else awed by Scandal; though either the Princes Sword does command
our actions, or the Keys of the Church direct them. In the Civi^l Law, when a
Servant received his Freedom, he straight left off to be slavish to his Lord;
but yet, he was still bound to be obsequious, he was tied to some few
employments, and the Law calls them Opera libertorum, a Free man's services: It
is so with us* God has freed our souls from that old Jewish Vassalage; but
yet (know this too) we must now still be dutiful. All things are lawful for
us, there is our manu^ission; yet says my Text, Give none offense, we still
owe these Free-services. Nay, in such things indifferent, my Text, and the
Church, and the Magistrat^, all these may bind the conscience, and yet the
conscience be free: yet here is the difference: my Text binds immediately
because it is Scripture: the Prince and the Church by means of Scripture, because
of this, and such like Texts, Ye must be subject for conscience sak^* Romans 13.

Understand then* Conscience is two fold: there is a conscience of the thing it
self, or else a conscience of our outward actions. 1. For the things, neither
does my Text attempt^ it, nor can any humane power make that in it self
unlawful, which God has left for indifferent. Meats offered up to Idols may be
forbidden indeed but yet they are not unlawful. My Text (I grant) prohibits
their use; but yet it turns not their nature. Nor can the Laws of the Church
make a Corinthian conceive as bad of these meats, as of Adultery. It Is this
first conscience, this free opinion* wherein dwells Christian liberty, and it is
therefore a gift most fit for God, because no man can alter it. 2. For our
outward acts, these may be limited* and in them, we are bound in conscience, as
to keep my Text, so to observe Authority, Give none offense* by eating things
offered up to Idols: what Corinthian, whose hands were not bound by the strict
tie of this most solemn precept? Nay, this Law did bind his conscience too, yet
was his conscience free, because he was taught to abstain, not so much from
the meats themselves, as (in them) from offenses* he learnt to forbear (not in
a I^wish slavery* as if those meats were in themselves impure, but) in a
Christian, tender respect, because they were then found scandalous. You see
here, this Precep^ binds our Consciences, and yet preserves our Liberty in
things indifferent; it injoynes a duty, and yet implies no bondage. I thus
leave it: and now take up this Application:

Give no offense in matters of indifferency, neither to the Jews nor to the
Gentiles. Does then the Gospel take care of Jews? and shall Gentiles find
respect among these Christian precepts? Here is Charity most proper to our
Faith, that can first love her Enemies, and make pious mention of Jews and
Gentiles, before it name Gods own Church. It seems in the conversion of these
Aliens, it is not enough to pray for them: no, nor to preach alone: Ceremonies
must be employed too in this most Christian assault* that what we cannot ^ffect
by strength, we may, at least, work ^y stratagem. This was S. Paul's own Art,
when he meant to vanquish the unbelieving Jews under our Lords dominion. He
prays for them, My hearts desire and Prayer to God for Israel, is, That they
may be saved, Romans 10. And he Preaches too at Iconium, and Jerusalem, and Rome,
as you may read in S. Lukes History. These Batteries may fail, and therefore he
tries one Engine more: In indifferences, To the Jews, (says he) I became a
Jew, that I might win the Jews (in the 9. of this Epistle, verse 2.) S. Paul
attempts both Nations: At Jerusalem he abstaines from meats, he vows and
purifies, no Jew seems more Leviticall: But, in Greece, all things are lawful
for him: an Epicure may go beyond him in Gluttony, but yet no man in Freedom.
This practiced Soldier did truly apprehend, that the Gentiles were as well to
be won by a careless carriage, a^ the Jews by his Austerity. Nay, the whole
Church was taught this policy, to yield in Ceremonies, that she might gain in
Faith. For it was a Canon in that first Christian Council: They must abstain
from meats offered up to Idols, from blood* from things strangled, etc. in the
15. of the Acts. It was the only way to make the Jews accept our Faith,
because it embraced their Manners.

What ^qual eye hence, discries not the Christian course of our first
Reformation? We had to deal wi^h neither Jews nor Gentiles, but yet with a
Church so corrupted, that it was not so much a Church as corruption. It was
indeed, and is most foully blemi^ht, most mortally deformed; but yet may deserve
the same respect, that these gross strangers did. We owe (at least) so much to
Romes Votaries, as the first Church paid to the Jew, and to the Gentiles* What
marvel then, if we reform, and so use her Liturgy? if we first rectify, and
then keep her Ceremonies? see here, S. Paul (with the Jews) commands to
abstain from meats, yet it was for no Jewish reason. We may yet keep Roman
indiff^rences, if we leave Romes opinions. For, though the Body of her Faith be
sick, yet may her Garments be com^ly: nay, that Church may be dead in her
clo^ths, and yet her clothes not infected.

But violently to scorn old Rites, to reject all Ceremonies, therefore only
because they are now worn at Rome, must not this needs give scandal? Will not
they hence think our Zeal but Malice, our Reformation Enmity, and that we
desire not so much to be in the Truth, as to be in Opposition? Many err, says
Calvin (yea, they are Calvin's own words) many now err by indiscretion in
Ceremonies, Videas quosdam quibus sua Libertas non videtur consistere, nisi per
esum carnium Die Veneris, in ejus possessionem venerint (it is in the 3. of his
Institut. the 9. Cap.) Many (says he) think themselves not Lords of their
Christian Liberty, unless they take possession of it, by eating ^lesh on a
Friday. I hope this place affords none such; you can content your selves with a
more modest Freedom* and have learnt with them, at least to forbear too when
meats may be scandalous. Here is none (I hope) that do purposely affect to
F^ast and to Revell upon those days of Fasting. You know, that such are rather
lawless then ^ree, and by their ostentation of Liberty* do give notice only,
what slaves they are to their ill-tempered zeal.

Had S. Paul been of some men's opinions, he should have said rather, Give
offense to the Jews: for their only way was, to cure a Church by complete
opposition. If a stick (says Cartwright) be crooked, i^ must be bent as much
the other way, that it may (at length) gain straightness. Since Rome has been
too full of Ceremonies, our only care is, to have none at all. A wooden Rule!
fitter for the Workmen at L^baenon, then the Priests of the Sanctuary* (unless
perhaps their Priests be workmen) But, keep the Allegory: It seems, they have
bent the stick, and it is now the other way as crooked as before. If they intend
to make all straight (by their own confession) they must loose their hands, and
from hence they may learn to commend our Church. Before, we are straight
already; but why should England be so crooked backwards, ^ince the most strict
Reformer^ have been content to keep some Romish Ceremonies? In Geneva they use
Godfathers in Baptism, and unleavened Bread at the Supper of the Lord; yea,
Romes own Wafer-Cakes. Should our Church have given entertainment to such
questioned Ceremonies, what divisions would have insued? What great thoughts
of heart? Reuben (one Tribe) would have controlled all Israel, though Deborah
(the Church it self) should have excused it, though Barack and all her
Champions should have grown valiant in her defense. Yet, take heed Reuben; to
scorn a Mothers-Authority, is as well rebellious, as to impair a Fathers
honor; and for this offense, thou may justly be barred of all Dignity.

Nor did we choose those Rites only because Rome approved them (I would not
that ye should so conceit me) no, they are Ancient; and so as well ours, as
theirs: They are Decent, in affording Garments fit for our Faiths own wearing:
They are Expedient too, and serve as expressions of our zeal, and helps to
Devotion. So that, in the choice of these our Rites, respect was had, not to
the Jews alone and to the Gentiles, that is, to those who will needs be
without; but to the Sons of this our Mother, but to the Church of God: which is
the second part of this last Application, Nor to the Church of God.

And sure she deserves respect: For, our Church is not (as some pretend) (I
know not whether with more hate or folly) grown ore with Rust; not so, but
(with the Eagle) she has renewed her age; she is very ancient, but yet young
in Beauty: and ^aving worn out the wrinkles of Error and Corruption, she is now
again grown primitive. A Church become so famous for her Faith* that foreign
parts entreat her Communion, as a more special favor, an Estern Patriarch, and
an Asian Bishop. I have seen their Letters (says C^saubon^) to our most
Reverend Metropolitan (it is in his Epistle to the King before his Exercit.)
that Learned Frenchman does there further profess, That no Church comes nearer
to the first, then this of ours* and that ever they who do e^vy her felicity,
do praise her moderation: Buc^rs words may deserve your attention (they are in
his Discourse upon our Common Prayer Book, written at the entreaty of
Archbishop Cranmer) So soon (says he) as I underst^od the English Liturgy, I
gave thanks to God, by whos^ grace your Ceremonies we^e b^come so purely
performed; for there I found nothing* but either borrowed from the Word of God,
or (at least) what did not oppose it, if it be taken in a fair construction.

Shall our Church gain this respect from strangers, and will we (her own
Sons) offend her? Are they within the Curtains of her own Tent, that can first
neglect her Rites, and then scorn at her Censures? A Scandal in an high
degree! It offends those that are weak in the Church, and makes them to
suspect our Doctrine it self, to see our Rites so questionable: It abuses the
good that are obedient, and makes some imagine, that their filial conscience is
nothing else, but a time-serving policy: It hinders the strong too, and
consumes their time, to recall a wilful son, which should be spent to gain a
foreign Enemy. But, I see it is with the Church, as with our Savior: He is
neglected at home, and yet from the East men come to reverence him: and, for
our Liturgy, it is sure with the Prophets works, as with their persons, They are
not without honor, save in their own Country, and amongst their own people.

Some there are indeed, who still cry out of Weakness, who sit not easy,
though on their Mothers Knees. They complain, her clothes do offend their
tender eyes, her Rites (they say) are scandalous, and they must be relieved by
that Text in S. Paul: If meat offend my Brother, I will eat no ^lesh while I
live, that I may not offend my Brother. It follows then, that for their weak
sakes, we must forbear these Ceremonies. But is the reason the same? To eat,
is a private action in common converse, wherein each man is true Lord of
himself, he may command his actions, and therefore (in this case) to use
connivences is still to be thought most commendable; nay, S. Paul's Example has
bound us to do it. But, we speak of actions public, solemnly designed for
our Religious Meetings, actions enjoined by Laws, and approved by the far
more, which is the Rule of Laws.

And must Statuts be altered upon the suggestion of each private subject? or
Cannons, upon the unresolved thoughts of each Private voluntary? this course
would soon bring a kingdom to ruin, and a Church into confusion. Should we
give such content to these few that dislike, we should displease multitudes
that approve our Ceremonies; and so, instead of a pretended slight offense, we
should run our selves upon a true gross Scandal. Those who cry out so much,
Their weakness is offended, should be mindful of this our Precept too, Give ye
none offense to the whole Church of God.

But, these weak men, when mean they to grow strong? Si nunquam grandescunt,
non Lacte, sed Aceto educatos fuisse certum est, (says Calvin upon the like
occasion, in the place I quoted) If these will grow no stronger, its apparent,
they were still nursed, not with milk, but with Vinigar. Good Satyrists!
instead of drinking in the Christian faith, they suck naught but Invectives.
Let these men hear Peter Martyr speak: Non semper, etc. We must not always
(says that worthy Dr. of our first Reformation) yield to the weak in things
indifferent, but so long only, till they have been perfectly instructed; if
yet they stagger, their infirmity deserves no further respect: (it is in his Loc.
Com. 2. lib. 4. cap. 32.) And it is plain, that these have had Time and Means
to learn that these things are indifferent; and will they neglect, or (rather)
refuse instruction? If they neglect it, then that of the Civilian holds: Data
culpa aequiparatur dolo: There is guilt in this gross negligence. And if they
refuse it, the Casuists agree, that in this case, Scandalum pusillorum fit
Pharisaeorum, when men will not hear, their infirmities turn pure malice, and
of weak Christians they become stout Pharisees, and then we are taught to
offend such men from our Lords own Example.

But, while I endeavor to follow my Text, I do mistake my Auditors. The words
enjoyne me to speak of this subject, although (I presume) it is in this place
less necessary. If any here be weak indeed, Sanari potius, quam oppug^ari
volo, (as Saint Aug. speaks of the Manichees) I desire to cure rather then to
oppose him. Sure, the greatest fault lies in our own Tribe, who had rather be
factious then poor; and will choose sooner to Please the itching ears of some
liberal people, then to advance this our cause of the Church of God. It comes
from these unworthy Levites, who sell their Tongues to speak like Micah (their
good Master) and can be content to tear the Church-Garments, so they go whole
themselves.

But would you know how to direct your Carriage in these things indifferent?
Saint Ambrose givs you a Rule, (and him Saint Augustine did still ^ccount for
an Oracle:) Ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva* si cuiquam ^on
vis esse scandalo, nec quenquam tibi. ('it is in his 118. Epistle) Keep still the
Ceremonies of the Church you live in, if you desire neither to give a Scandal,
nor to take it. A direction grounded (sure ^) upon Saint Paul's own practice,
who (you see) could both eat at Corinth, and yet abstain a^ Jerusalem: and
Saint Ambrose followed him, On Saturday (says he) I ^ate at Mi^laine, because
it is there the Custom; but I fast at Rome, for that great City does use
another Cerimony. So Monica (Saint Agustins pious Mother) on Saturdaies did
fast in Afric, and yet still eat at Millaine* as you may see it in the same
Epistle. I Will add but one more of Calvin, (as Baza relates it in his life) who
at the supper of the Lord did always communicate with common bread at
Stratsbourg; and yet he still used W^f^rs at Geneva. And let the same mind be
in you; so shall ye perform what is here enjoined, and neither give Scandal
to the Church it self, nor yet offense to your own opinions; so the God of
Peace and of Truth shall be with you, the blessings of Truth upon your Faith,
and peace upon your Actions.

Here then is Corinth made your Example, a Church that's truly militant, that is
besieged with the Tents of the Jews, and Legions of the Gentiles? the Laws of
her warfare are ^^range; she is bound to fight with her opposits, and yet she
must not offend them; nay, she loses the field, if she destroy her enemies;
She is to give no scandal, neither in unlawful things, nor matters of
indifferency, neither in sins, nor in Ceremonies. Innocence must guide her
life, and Charity her Carriage. The end of the war is peace, that Christians
may agree among themselves, and Jews and ^entiles may be the Church of God.

You see now a Precedent, be ye now followers of it: be firm in the faith, and
then (as much as in you is) have peace with all men. Give no just offense in
unlawful things, let not your sins make your lives scandalous; and in things
indifferent, let not your scandals make you sinful; let your conversation be
still found spotless, and your whole carriage charitable, that they who will
needs be without our Church, may still be too without an Apology. And Thou O
(Three and yet one) God unite our great distractions; take the Veil from the
eyes of the Jews, and blindness from the Gentiles: Teach the Errors of our
Time to submit to the Truth, and Factions to thy peace; that so there may be
one Sheepfold and one Shepherd, that all may be one Church of God, under one
Son of God: and then Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Amen. Amen.

(...)
A SERMON Preached on EASTER Day,
The Text. S. MATTHEW. 28.6. Come, see the place where the Lord lay*
THE powers of the Grave are shaken, and now Death it self is become Mortal.
She seemed to take a ^oile from some former assaults, as when Eliah restored
the Widows son, etc. but these again being led captive in the bonds of
corruption, were no abatement, but luster to her strength; for opposition adds
glory to a Conqueror. Only now she received a fatal overthrow. Christ can die
no more: and in his Resurrection all Mankind becoms victorious. She met with an
Adam here too: one, whose goodness was as diffusive, as the first man's sin: In
him we all Died; in this we all Live again; He was the Author of her strength;
this, of her destruction.

And i^ not all yet finished? Christ has ^vercom Death; and remains there any
enemy beyond the last? yes, the strangeness of the Victory has raised a new
war; and now mankind is as mortally threatenned by Infidelity, as formerly by
Death* Olim vitio nunc remedio laborat: The Remedy is so admirable, that it
confounds the patient and maks health it self appear as fabulous.

Christ is Risen: But who knows? who believes it? The Disciples remember not
what was so often foretold, but are as ready to forget their Masters words, as
(before) to forsake his Person. The Woman (more officious then faithful)
prepares Spices and sweet Odors, complements (...) for his Funeral, but not
his Resurrection. Their Ceremonious piety has brought them to the Sepulcher,
and there (inst^ad of a Corpse) they find an Ang^ll.

Heaven had now dispatched a Champion, who was to encounter with their
unbelieving thoughts, and that with such a winged diligence, that he makes
answer before he be questioned, I know ye seek Jesus; believe me, He is Risen;
or else believe him, He is Risen as he said; If your distrust remains yet
unsatisfied, behold a further testimony; my strength has removed the stone, my
countenance the Watchmen.

Now, come and see the place. The Grave it self is become an Evangelist, and
seems to speak without an Epitaph. Ipsa evidentia vox est, says S. Austin: It
is so evident a token of Christ's rising from the dead, that it turns vocal:
Each circumstance is articulate, and seems both to challenge, and to constrain
belief. Siste gradum viator, and see more in an empty S^pulchre, then when the
Corpse was in it. For, those things, which before were but the Ensigns of
Death, are now become the Trophies of the Resurrection. Come, see the Nap^in
that bound his head, the Clothes which inwrapped the sacred body, and then
smile at the Jewish purchases, who (as if sin were the only merchan^dise) buy
Treason of Judas, Forgery of the watchmen: They must report, that The Disciples
have stolen him away*

But say then, what mean these L^nnen clothes? is it possible they would leave
them behind? In the midst of so many Soldiers, dare they now stay to unwind
him, who before did scarce dare to follow him? Thefts are still done in have,
and do as much hate delay, as light it self. Ask your own Barabbas, if he
purpose to steal a Jewel, will he stay to unfold the paper i^ lies in? The
difficulty here was far greater; these Clothes were spread with Myrrh, then
which no ^itch is more tenacious, it glewes clothes to the body. Suppo^e the
Disciples should attempt to unwrap him (for Nicodemus his cost had made the
body much heavier) yet they would soon leave that which they found extreme
difficult, and choose rather to undergo the trouble of a greater burden, then
to adventure the hazard of a longer delay. Look yet with a more curious eye,
the Napkin is wrapped up by it self in ^ place: (...), (the Text says) It was
wrapped up with diligence. Say, Jew, would the Disciples stay too, that they
might leave the Grave-cloaths handsome? or was this circumstance brought forth
by hap only? They are both equally credible, that either these men should be so
grossly simple, or that chance it self should become industrious.

You see* the Grave has filld her mouth with Arguments, and is become as apt
to Teach* (as before) to devour. The Cloath^, the Myrrh, the N^pkin, do not
more evidently witness that he was once dead, then now that He is risen again.
Their silent eloquence is able to convince the most spightfull Jew, much more
these women, and the Disciples too.

My Text th^n (in general) has proved a Resurrection: A part, it affords thus
much variety: 1 An Action entreated, shall I say, or enjoined? (...), Come and
see. 2. The Object; (before) a spectacle of mortality, but (now) o^ power,
(...),


The place.

The Grave (you hear) is described by a Periphrasis; and where the Text is
pleased to expatiate, each word must needs be Doctrinall.

Consider then with me: 1. The Sepulcher it self; (...), The place 2. The
Person included, (...), The Lord. 3. The Time of his abode, (...), The Lord did
lie there, Com^ and see.


There is nothing more injurious to the Power of God, then not to know his
Power. For it is true what Minutius has observed: Non minoris est sceleris
D^um ignorare, quam laeder^. Because he that knows not the might of his
Creator, must needs rob him of that glory he deserves by it. To prevent so
great a sin, God has showed himself no less ready to manifest, then to use
his power.

1. He has given us his scriptures (the most faithful Commentaries both of
his strength and Wisdom) and lest that unbelief should keep us still worse then
ignorant, he makes it self its Agent; that so, by the testimony of so familiar
an In^ormer, his Word may appear as full of probability, as salvation. He
might have done by Christ as he did by Moses, both have interred his Corpse, and
hid his Sepulcher; nor yet could the Disciples then have challenged him of
concealing the Truth. They had variety of Prophecies, their Masters own word,
confirmed by so many miracles, all jointly witnessing, That it behoved Christ
to suffer, and to rise again the Third day. Yet such were the Riches of his
Goodness, that he vouchsafed a more apparent testimony. This Angel calls their
eyes as Iudge^, and the Grave gives in so clear an evidence* that neither
Hatred nor Art can avoid it. Do distracted thoughts prevent thy Faith, and (in
despite of Scripture) make thee almost deny? Then, come and see,

2 The heavens declare the glory of God* and the Firmament shows his handy
work. Sicut and vocibus, ita et rebus Prophetatum est, (says Turtullian:) He
has made each Creature a Prophecy, and this Article of the Resurrection as
legible in the least herb, as in the Word it self: Had the Athenians as well
employed their Eyes to discover Truth, as their Ears to receive Novelties, the
Resurrection might have found more serious entertainment. For, throughout the
whole Frame of Nature, what more visible*

Come and ^^e (Philosophers*) Flower^ fade and live* again; Seeds are not
quick^ned, ^xcept they dye, and their destruction is the chief cause of their
continuance: Dies in noctem moritur, (as the some Tertullian speaks) Each night
is the last day^s Funeral: and then what is the Morning but a Resurrection? Is
it not a shame for Athens, that Rome should afford more subtle Naturalists?
For, S^neca did there find out this very observation, and from his sight
concludes, Mors intermittit vitam, non eripit; venie^ it^rum, qui nos in lucem
reponet, di^s: ('it is in the later part of his 36. Epistle) Death is an
intermission only, no loss of life; there shall come a day of Restoration, and
th^se eyes shall enjoy their former light. With how settled a countenance, would
this man have harkened to the Resurrection of the dead, whom sight it self had
made thus Orthodox.

It Is true then, sensible speculations may serve as h^lps to Faith, and have
their uses as well in the School of Christ, as in that of Nature. For Religion
admits ^o Sceptick^. She is indeed a Mistress to sense, but not an Enemy. Let
Rome re^ounce her eyes, and call the Host the ^ery Body of Christ, when yet she
sees ^ought but Bread. We find no such di^ection: For, what? shall we leave off
to See* that we may Believe? or to be Men, that we may become Christians? We
grant, Religion to be above our Nature, but yet not against it: She may Exceed,
(we confess) but not contradict our Senses. For, look here, these two are ^t
perfect unity: The Angel joyneth Gods word and our Senses together, and that to
the proof of a divine conclusion: He is Risen, as he said: and yet, Come and
see too. For it is the same God of Peace, who is the Author both of our Faith
and Sight; and who dares say, that his works are at variance? Had our eyes
been stark blind in these outsides of Religion, Christ had not so often
appealed to a de^eitfull testimony: Go tell John what ye have heard and seen,
Matt. 11. Handle me and see, a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me
have, Luke 24. You hear, he himself imploys sense in many Articles, as first to
confirm his Office, and then his Resurrection.

Not that I maintain these meaner faculties to be either the Author, or Rule
of Faith. No we must Believe more then we See, and our Faith must issue from a
higher fountain; otherwise we may know perhaps, but we cannot Believe. For this
Virtue is still Royally descended, and acknowledges no father under a Deity.
Senc^, indeed, may beget Knowl^dg (and that in a most eminent and high degree)
(...), says the Philosopher: proofs of sense command our assent: A
Demonstration may be more artifitiall perhaps, yet not more powerful: but
Faith proceeds from the inward operations of the Holy Ghost, and relies only
upon the Scriptures Authority; yet must we understand what Valentia has
observed: S^nse may concur with Faith; and so may the same object be both
known^ and believed; and the rather believed, because it is known. Simeon might
both See and believ^ the Messiah? and the rather Believe, because he ^aw him.
As the meat may nourish, though not beget a man; so sense may confirm our
Faith* though not produc^ it. And therefore that Text in S. John [Because thou
have seen me Thomas thou have believed] Calvin does thus interpret: Non quod
solo aspectu adductus est Thamas, ut creder^t; sed quod expergefactus. This
Disciple had before received the Mysteries of salvation; only the storm^ of the
late troubles had laid his belief asleep. It Is one thing then, to beget Faith;
another to awaken Faith: this may come from our eyes perhaps, that from the
Word alone.

Again, is it true of sense only as if that brutish faculty were of it self
able to confirm our Belief? No, it is, Ego animus (as S. Aug. speaks) per
sensus corporis mei: It Is I, my soul, but yet not without my senses. Quae per
naturalem rationem innotescunt (says Thomas) non sunt Articuli Fidei, sed
praeambula ad Articulos: Humane helps are but preparations to Religion, and
beget rather Introductions of Faith then Articles. To behold this goodly
Fabric of the Wo^ld, may soon force a Pagan to confess, that there is a Deity.
But to know, that this God is both Three and One; or, that of these Three, One
was incarnate; here nature is blind, and requires help from a clearer light. Or
(that I may instance in our own circumstances) to see the Grave open, the
Earth trembling* the Angels attending, did (no doubt) persuade the Watchmen
themselves, that Christ was Risen: But to believ^ that he rose both God and
Man, o^ that his Resurrection was the cause o^ ours; this proceeds from the
spirit alone, who only can inlighten them that sit i^ darkness. In a word, our
domestic abilities may (some way) prepare us to entertain^ Faith; when it is
received, they may (perhaps) confirm, or awaken it: but we must confess the
Author of it to be the Holy Ghost alone, and the Word his Instrument.

Notwithstanding, where thou may^t use their help, neglect not the benefits of
such outward testimonies. For, though Faith come by Hearing, yet let Christians
be Spectators too, and learn as well to see God in his Works as to Believe him
in his Scriptures. Know, that he who made thine Eyes as well as thy Soul,
exacts a tribute, no less from thy S^nse then from thy Reason. These lower
powers were made for his glory; and when they are employed to viler ends,
remember, that thou do not more abu^e thy self, then wrong thy Maker.
Religion has use even of these faculties: For, He (who does nothing in vain)
that he might manifest the Truth of his glorious Resurrection, took order,
that his Disciples should enjoy the ^enefit of a sensible assurance; and
therefor, besides his Word, he left his Sepulcher, which is my second part.

(...), The place.
To describe the Sepulcher by our mo^ern relations, might injure your
atten^ion. For I should show you a Tomb (indeed) full of state and Beauty: but
yet, it is ^carce The place where the Lord lay; because Art has gone beyond her
Commission, and (almost) abolished Nature, instead of adorning it. So that,
when I read the Sepulcher described with such magnificence; me thinks it stands
like a Grave Matron in a loose Attire, who may win thereby more eyes Perhaps,
but not more respect. How it is beautified with the purest Marble, hanged round
with burning Tapers, and the like, I purposely omit: choosing rather to insist
upon those circumstances which the Text delivers. For we shall find more true
state in that first simplicity; and perceive that we need not require more
helps of Art, to make the Grave see me Glorious.

It Was made by Joseph of Arimathea (one who wanted neither wealth nor honor; for
he is called by my Evangelist, A Rich man: and by S. Mark, an honorable
Counselor) he caused it to be hewn^ out for his own use. It seems, it should
as well teach him to die, as receive him when he was D^ceased. How our Savior
got possession, S. John has told us (in the last verse of his 19. chapter.)
There laid they Jesus therefore, because of the Jews preparation day, for the
Passover was nigh at hand. It seems, had their Sabbath been more remote, the
Disciples had not here interred him: but it was so ordered by a higher hand,
that as Malice had provided his Death, so Conscience should a Sepulcher. The
Cross had put an end to all shame and disgrace, when he himself pronounced the
Epilogue, (...), It is finished: His Glory was now to enter, and (in despite of
the powers of Death) his first honor must be the Grave it self. He must be
buried like a Prince, although he die like a Malefactor. For so we read, his
Funeral was attended by Nobles, Nicodemus a Ruler of the Jews, Joseph a
Senator; his Corpse enclosed and inwrapped in a costly composition. Myrrh to
perfume* Aloes to preserve it, and then laid in a new Tomb, hewn out of a Rock,
^ Monument therefore the fuller of honor, because so durable.

Sure now (if ever) did this place deserve a Religious Worship, when these
goodly Ceremonies were so latly performed: and yet, it is the voice of an Angel:
Come see only; but not adore it. No, such superstition is of a later birth, and
so far from his Angles patronage, that Men are scarce so bad as to defend it:
For, Bellarmine speaks in this point, as Bassianus did when he had slain his
Brother Geta, Intelligi mavult, quam audiri: He is still willing that such
Relics should be worshipped, and yet it stands not with his Art plainly to
say so; lest while he instructs his fri^nds, he might Perhaps give advantage to
his Enemies.

But how gross the Romish practice is, let that of Danaeus testify of his
own Countri-men (the Fountain of Monks) who in their publik Liturgies did
insert this Petition: Sancte Sudari, ora pro nobis* Holy Napkin, pray for us.
If they did this Worship to the Cloth only, that bound our Saviou^s head, how
(think you) would they have adored the Sepulcher? a substance sure fitter to
make a God of* because of a more lasting Nature, and therefore would more
resemble an Eternity? But pe^haps they quarrel with mine Author: if so, they
may consult their own Breviaries, where they shall find a solem^ Prayer to the
very same Relic, only i^ another respect; namely, to the print ^f Christ's
Visage, which (they say) was ^e^ in the Napkin: nay, and that Prayer penned by
a Pope too, ( John the 22.) with a promise of a 10000 days pardon to all that
repeated it. The Book ^ saw, seemed Ancient, and the Rubricks were English* I
might remember you of many such Oraisons, from the testimony of their own
Authorities, did I not think these vain superstitions, as unfit for your ears,
as for your imitation.

That Relics are to be honored with a Divine Worship, the Car^inall denies
in words, when yet indeed, he does but sophisticate. For, throughout the
passage of his whole discourse, he still intimates, that The respect we give,
must be Religious, and more then Civil. What Is this, but to be learnedly
sacrilegious? to rob God of his honor, and then to blind men with a fond
distinction? For, if it be more then Humane, it must needs take part of that
Worship, which he calls Divine; and so he takes that is due to the living God,
that he may superstitiously add respect to these dead Remembraces.

But the Grave must be honored: For, so it is written (say the Jesuits) Isay
11.10. There shall be a root of Iesse, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and (as
the Vulgar reads it) His Sepulcher shall be glorious. The word is, (...) from
(...) Quievit. It signifies, a place of abode, wherein we delight, as well as
rest: not a Grave then, properly, for there may be rest indeed* bu^ yet not
delight. The Septuagint agree with our Translation, and render it (...), Rest;
Pagnin and Vatablus, Requies; whereupon the most sound Interpreters expound it,
not of the Grave, but the Church of Christ, according to the Psalm 132. There
shall be my rest for ever: Here will I dwell, for I have a delight therein. But
grant, that the word may sign^fie a Sepulcher; must it then needs be Worshipped
because it is called Glorious? A good Apology for Idolaters! for ye know, it is
also written, There is one Glory of the Sun, and another of the Moon, 1 Cor.
15.

I conclude then of these superstitious Votaries, what in like case was falsely
objected to the elder Christians by that Pagan in Min^tius: Id clount, quod
merentur: Their devotions are a direction to Justice, and show, they deserv^ a
Grav^, that worship it.

Nor may we approve of their ungrounded zeal, who are not content, that God
has made this life a pilgrimage, except they make it so too; as if this Angels
words had been as proper to these times, as to that of the Resurrection, Come,
see the place. But a weak understanding may descry a difference, and perceive
that the Grave has now quite lost her former eloquence. Indeed, it once stood
as a Book open, wherein it pleased Almighty God to impress the visible
Characters of his Sons Resurrection, but now the chief leaves are perished. For
(as I showed you) this Truth was written in the Linen-cloaths; so that now it
may almost be said of this testimony, as before of Christ himself, Surrexit,
non est hic: that is gone too, for it is not here. Whence Gregory Nyssen has
confessed ingeniously, that he returned from the Sepulcher, the very same man
he came, without any, either abatament or increase of Faith, ('it is in his
Oration, Of them that go to see Jerusalem.) And (indeed) what needs so
painful, and so dangerous an Expedition? For, Faith has her eyes too, and (as
the case now stands) The best way to see the Sepulcher is to believe the
Gospel: a Truth able to supply what either Art has altered, or Malice defaced.
What needs that place inflame devotion? his heart's of stone, that melts not
to think upon the Grave; and he is worse then dull, who then frames not as many
pious thoughts, as he here reads circumstances.

Christian, believe thou the Scriptures? I know thou belivest: Come, see the
place* where thy Lord was laid. Consider, his dead Corpse were there once
enclosed; and then think, they were thy sins that slew him. The nails had no
power to pierce, nor the Spear to wound him, had not they been sharpened by
thy transgressions. 'Twas the Stoics meditation upon an Earthquake only:
Ingens mortalitatis solatium est* Terram quandoque videre mortalem: It Is a
strong comfort against the fear of mortality, to think* that the Earth it
self may become mortal. But I show you a more weighty encouragement: it is a
small thing to have the Earth a Partner; behold, here he lay dead, who was Lord
both of Heaven and Earth. Remember, the Grave* lay ordered in a Princely
fashion; it was the first honor which ere the world did thy Savior; it was to
teach thee, that Death is the beginning of thy chiefest Glory; that thou
might hence learn to neglect this Conqueror, and rather to embrace thy
captivity, then to fear it, For, it is thy advantage to lose: and thine only
way to triumph, is to be overthrown. Do thou think it disgraceful, that this
Place shows thy Savior was once mortal? or seemed he then overcome, when he
here lay buried? my Text informs otherwise: He reigned even in the arms of
Death, and was the Lord, though in his Sepulcher: which is my third part, The
Person enclosed, (...), he was still the Lord.

What? Dead, and yet the Lord too! did his power outlive his life? or could he
then rule others, when he had lost himself? If he yet lived, why did they then
intombe him? if he was vanquished by the Powers of the Grave, how was he still
the Lord? Why thus: Because his Corpse was then personally conjoined with his
Divinity; for so inseparable was the hypostaticall union, that Death it self
could not unloose it, She might perhaps have full power upon the Son of Mary,
but not against the Savior of the World: she might for a time destroy the Man,
but not the Mediator. A Truth founded upon the first Principles of
Christianity: for so our Creed runs: I believe in the Son of God, who was
crucified, dead and buried. If it be true, a God was buried, then still was the
Corpse joined to the divinity: otherwise* the Sepulcher had contained the Man
Jesus perhaps, but not Christ the Lord. You know, to be dead and buried are
attributs proper to the body only: and yet the Christian Faith has taught us
to say, Deus mortu^s, Deus Sepultus: it was a God that died, and a God that was
buried,

We must confess then, that these extremities could not violate the
hypostaticall union; for it is by virtue of this conjunction, that we truly
apply those things to the whole person of Christ; which indeed do properly
belong but to one nature only. True, if he were not a man, how could he then
here lie buried? And if he were not still the Lord, whence had he power to
raise himfelfe again? yet so he testifies: Destroy this Temple, and I will
raise it up in three days, John 2.19 were he not a Man, he could not have here
layn dead; were he not then the Lord too, he could not hereby have merited: for
the person must needs be infini^e, who was to give satisfaction for our
boundles^ offene^s.

Both Churches have subscrided to this Conclusion: For the Greek, Damascen in
his third Book of the Orthodox Faith, at the 27. chapter: (...): Although he
died indeed, and his body was then divided from his soul^; yet his Divinity
remained still insep^rable, both with his soul and his body. S. Austin* for
the Latin, in his 14. chapter, Contra Felicianum: Sic in Sepulcro carnem suam
moriendo non deseruit: Sicut in utero Virginis connascendo formavit: As Christ
made his flesh in the Virgins Womb, so he did not forsake it in the Sepulcher;
he was there said to be born, and h^re to dye with it.

But was his Corpse still joined with his Divinity? why then moved he not? why
did he show no signs of life? Is there more power in a Soul then in a Diety?
Can that quicken a body, and cannot this inliven it? That he still lived, I
deny not* for my text calls him Lord, whilst as ye^ his Grave enclosed him. He
lived Vitam Personae, (for that must be perpetual) yet not Vitam Naturae: as
Biel has it upon the third of the Sentences the 21. Distinct. and no doubt,
his Divinity was able to supply the life of Nature: For in him we live and
move, and have our being, Acts 17.18. Notwithstanding, where that does
personally reside, it does not straight follow, that the actions of a Natural
life must needs be there. No, there is a great difference between a Soul and a
Deity: the Soul is a necessary Agent, and in what body that is, there must be
Life: the Deity is Voluntary, and works nothing but what it pleases. It might
have give^ motion to the Corpse of our Savior; but it therefore would not, lest
perhaps the Disciples might have imagined, that their Master had rather feigned
a death, then suffered it. And therefore that admirable ejaculation ( My God my
God, etc.) is not so to be understood, as if our Savior had then feared the
loss of his Divinity: for it would thence follow, that the Godhead then left
him, when he was yet a live, because his complaint runs in the Praeter^^nse,
Thou have forsaken me. S. Austin is far more orthodox in his 120. Epistle, at
the 6. Chapter: In eo derelinquitur depr^cans, in quo non auditur: He was
therefore only forsaken, because he wa^ not heard, when (in the anguish of his
Soul) he poured out that sad Petition: Father if it be possible, let thi^ Cup
pass from m^e, Matthew. cap. 26. verse 39. Or (as the Master of the Sentences
has closed that Text) Seperavit se foris Divinitas, ut non adesset ad
Defensionem; sed non intus defuit ad Vnionem: ('it is in his 36. and 21.
Disti^ct.) The Divinity was ever a Companion to the Manhood, but not alwaye^ an
H^lper; it nev^r ceased to be with our Savior, it did to aid him. The Sun (you
know) may be present, although it shines not: So might the Divine Nature be
personally here united, yet no effects seen of so great a Majesty.

It Is true then, God has forsaken him so far, as to suffer his Body to be
torn from his Soul; yet not his Manhood from his Divinity. I must therefore
alter that voice of Pilate, Behold the man; (...), behold him, who (in despite
of the Grave) did still remain both God and Man! wonder and joy together: For
our Savior lived when he was dead, and Behold he live^h for evermore, Amen.

Daughters of Jerusalem Worship, instead of Weeping; for the Sepulcher is as
yet a Throne, and not a Corp^ only, but the Lord, he, is in it. And let us
begin to tremble at the might of our Redeemer, to think how unresistable is his
power in Heaven, whose glorious title the ^rave it self could not abol^sh;
because he was the Lord, strong and mighty, even ^he Lord mighty in battle. At
thy name, O Jesus, shall every knee hence ^ow both of things in H^aven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth; and let all tongue^ confess, that
thou (O Christ) were still the Lord, unto the Glory of God ^he Father. Come,
Wor^^ip, and fall down before this Lord our Savior: Let our hearts be filled
with glad^esse and our tongue^ with that victorious noise: O Death* where is
thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory?

Phar^oh could insult, while he was yet in the Court of Egypt, and
Nebuchadnezzar b^ast himself within the compass of his own Palaces; but let
the Sea shut her mouth upon the falfe Egyptian: let B^bel's King be gathered
to his Fathers and their glory become as the morning-Dew, both their thoughts
and their honors are Perished. That then Christ should leave his own heavenly
mansion, that Death should seize upon him, the Grave enclose him* and yet he
still retain the honor o^ his former Majesty: this shows, he was (...), King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords: because he there remained both Lord and King,
where all Princes lay down their Scepters, and all Lord their dominion. The
Grave p^rceiv^d their Power and soon resigned her Name and Him; for instead of
(...), a Sep^lchre, it is here called but (...), a Place; and retaining nothing
of Christ* except the memory of his absence only, (...), The Lord did lie
there: which is my last part.

Our discourses of Christ are then most p^oper, when they imitate his person*
when they treat together, as well of his Manhood as of his Divinity: For, the
Divine Nature without that other, i^ like ^he Law without the Gospel, more full
of power then comfor^, and seems rather to terr^fie, then encourage us.

You have heard of his Godhead. (...), He was still the Lord. It follows,
(...), He did lie here. He was then contained in some certain place: and that
shows his Manhood. Indeed* what was spoken of Crassus, Factus est morti suae
superstes, is much more true of Christ's Humane nature: It has survived his
Death, and is now become as free from mortality, as before from sin; yet
still it retains the truth of it is native properties, and contents it felfe
with the circuit of one place: (...), it did lie there; but now it is gone; it was
once in the Grave, and it is now in Heaven. The iniquity of these last times
has made this Truth become questionable; so that it does now as well concern
us to Prove, as to Believe it. I am engaged to undergo this burden my Text
has now imposed, and anon will raze it.

When God foresaw that Man would rebel, and, by an affectation of Knowledge,
would forfeit his integrity; it pleased him (in his eternal Council) that the
same Nature which caused our Fall, should work our Restoration; that* as we
lost our selves by presuming of Men to b^com as Gods; so the means of our
recovery should be this alone, God himself must become Man. Hence the Word
took flesh* and Christ was made in all things like to ^is brethren, Heb. 2.17.
He was made a Man: He was con^ined therefor within the compass of our own
limits, and, as Experience has taugh us* that we cannot be here, and yet
possessors of another place: So the Scripture does direct us to judge of Him;
for the Text is evident: He was made in all t^ings like unto u^* sin only
excepted: and therefore to ascribe Ubiquity to the body of Christ, what is it,
bu^ to cancel Gods ow^ D^cree? For he had then delivered us perhaps; yet not
by a Man, not by ^ne that is like unto our selves.

Christ's own mouth has disclaimed this Fancy: Laz^ru^ is dead* and I am glad
for your sakes, that I was not there, John 11.14. He was not (you see) at the
same instant both beyond Jordan, and yet in Beth^ny. But that was spoken in his
exinanition only, while he as yet went in the form of a Servant. Behold him
therefore upon moun^ Tabor, when (accompanied with Moses and Elias) his ^ody
becam^ so gloriously transfigured; and yet, Peter is so far from conceiving
Ubiquity, that ^you know) he counsels to enclose h^^ in a Tabern^cle. If that
Apostle knew not wha^ he said, then here this Angel spoke (and it is of Christ
too, when he now was in glory) He is ^ot here, for he i^ ri^en, as he said: and
in my Text (...), He did lie here, but now he is risen* M^rk; his words are,
Come and see: he makes their eyes the Judges of their M^sters presence; and so
concludes, where Christ's body is not v^sible, (...) is not present. Indeed,
their sig^t may sometimes be holden perhaps* that they cannot know him;
notwithstanding, either this Angels proof is frivolus; or else, where his body
is, it must needs be visible. In this point that of doubting Thomas, becomes
most Christian: Except I see, I will not believe: I see no body present, and I
believe it not.

And yet there are, who think to do Christ honor, by being injurious; as if
the only way to increase his Glory, were, to destroy his Manhood. They
maintain, it is every where, and attri^ute that which nature is not able to
bear: they clap their hands at his Universal presence, and call it, Christ's
Majesty. Speciose quidem errant: indeed at first sight it seems a goodly Error,
and being clothed in so glorious a title, it may be thought impiety to
question it; for is it not Treason to oppose a Majesty? Romani, ubi solitudinem
faciunt, pacem appellant, says he in Tacitus: where the Romans make a
desolation, they call it a Peace. And (upon just inquiry) we shall find our
selves no less abused by this appellation. [ To be every where] this they call
the Majesty of Christ's Human Nature; when, indeed, it is no whit better, then
its destruction. For, to divest an Essence of its propper attributes, is to
dissolve it; and so he that leaves a man no Place l^aves him no Body.

Tell me: Is silver of no value, except it be changed into Gold? Is the Manhood
of Christ despiseable, except it be made Infinite, and so transformed into a
Deity? He that will needs add Reason to a Beast, instead of a Panegyr^que,
frames a Metamorphosis; for, while he thinks to commend, he does quite change
his nature: so, he that ascribes Vbiquity to a perfect man, is more injurious
then bountiful, because h^ subverts his essence; and, while he hopes to do him
honor, he makes himself no less then guilty of his overthrow. Seems not our
Savior glorious enough, except he become All God? To please these men, must he
needs lose his Manhood? Tanti non est, ut place at vobis, perire.

Nor do we so strictly confine Christ to Heaven, as if the Earth might not (in
some sort) partake of his Humanity. He did and he does lie here; but yet in a
different manner. If you respect a corporeal position, my Text is most
infallible; the Grave is a place where the Lord did lie. But, if you admit of
other Exceptions; Christ's Manhood has an universal presence, it is every
where, as well by a Virtuall cooperation with his Deity, as by an
Hipostaticall union. His Humane nature makes one person with his Godhead: as
therefore this is truly every where, because it is infinite; so may That be
said to be, because it is no where severed from that nature, which is in it
self infinite.

Again, Christ works every where; for All power was given to him in the ^8*
v^rse of this chapter: 'Twas given (says the Text) and therefore to his
Manhood. Yet is this one Government exercised by both his natures: and he rules
every where, as God by his essential presence; as Man* by the cooperation
with that which is essentially present. Hence are his actions mixed and the
Scepter of his Regency no less pleasing then powerful: ^here is Pity and
strength together, that we might in every place as well Love him in his
Manhood, as Fear him in his Divinity.

But, if you respect his corporal presence* it is not here: Christ is so like
us, that he cannot so be with us. And (in this regard) I know not whether his
presence be more full of Glory, or such absence of Consolation: For* what? is
the God of Heaven so very a Man? what? confined to some one place? flesh of our
flesh, and bone of our bone? take courage then (thou wounded Soul) approach
with boldness; for this thy Brother is become thy Judge, and he sits to hear
thee who has born thy griefs, and pitied thy infirmities. It is expedient for
thee that He is not here, he is gone to prepare a place for thee. Cease to seek
thy Savior carnally; begin to imitate him, and think it not enough to Die,
except thou Rise again. We are buried with Christ in baptism, (says S. Paul,
Romans 6.4.) See! the Font's a Sepulcher, and we are no sooner Borne, then
Buried: but we must now Rise to newness of life; it is enough, that we did lie
there, our future time must be a Resurrection.

Thus have I led you into Ioseph's Garden, where (instead of common delights)
you have seen a Conquest; our Enemy, the Grave, made empty, and thereby
forced to confess an overthrow. The Resurrection has now seized upon it, and
(like a mighty Conqueror) shows his Vassal in sign of Triumph. The Victory
must needs lose much honor when an unskilful Tongue supplies an Angels place.
What Is therefore wanting in Speech, I Will strive to supply in prayer: Belive,
and (so) See the place. And (thou O God of Comfort*) do unto thy people, as
thou did unto these women returning to the Sepulcher, Fill their hearts with
great joy.

To God etc.

(...).
A FUNERAL SERMON
The Text. 1. Corinthians: 15.29. If the Dead rise not at all, why are they then
baptized for the Dead?
ONe good means to arm^ us against the fear of Death, is, daily to think that
we must needs die. For, Necessity is the Mistress of Patience, and by often
meditations teaches us to account those things Easy, which we once held
insufferable. In illis quae morbo finiuntur, magnum ex ipsa Necessitate
solatium est, (as Pliny writes to a friend of his): where our Loss comes by
sick^ess, the same Necessity does both wound and relieve us; when neither
strength can resist the stroke of death, nor Art avoid it, 'twere madness to be
too solicitous in preventing it, folly to fear^ it.

Yet were our hopes built only upon this foundation, we should be like other
men; Confidently miserable: Seneca might then contend with S. Paul, and a
Philosopher perhaps grow more resolute then a Christian. But our consolation is
far more surely founded; besides these Sands, it has a Rock too; besides the
certainty of death, the infallibility of a Resurrection. Thou errest, Stoic, (
Natural. Quaest. lib. 6 cap. 1.) Non majus est mortalitatis solatium, quam ipsa
mortalitas; yes, majus solatium immortalitas: it is indeed, a strong
encouragment against mortality, to think that we must needs die; but yet it is a
far greater, that we should live again: that may cause us to neglect the stroke
of Death; but this to embrace it.

So comfortable (and therefore fit for this occasion) is this Article of our
Belief, That we must rise again. For, what discuorse yields more content in a
painful seeds-time, then to talk of an Harvest? what more cumfort at a
Funeral, then to treat of the Resurrection? By the virtue of this faith, we
triumph, though sure to be overcome: this fills our hearts with gladness, and
our tongues with that victorious noise: O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave,
where is thy victory? Thus these happy Captives deride their Conqueror; for his
bonds are their enlargement; and their only way to obtain a Crown, is by thi^
great Captivity. Did this Text then but intimate a Resurrection only, S.
Austin's Judgment would approve my choice: Curatio Funeris vivorum solatium
('it is in his 1 de Civ. Dei, cap. 12.) The dead are to have the last part in
their own Funerals; for they are then only b^st performed, when the living are
most comforted* yet (that I may not be thought singular) this Scripture is more
apposite: Here is comfort for the Living, and honor for the Dead too, here is
(as you shall anon perceive) as well a Funeral Sermon, as a Resurrection: If
the Dead rise not at all, (...)*

A Text (I confess) full of dific^lties: the H. Fathers agree not in their
Comentaries; and our modern Interpreter^ do more violently dissent. Their
Opinions are (for the most part) Orthodox; and yet so variable, that you would
wonder to hear so good an Harmony, and yet so little Concord; to find them
almost all agreeable to the analogy of Faith, and yet scarce one subscribe to
an other. I might acquaint you with the teno^ of these several varieties, did
I not think the repetition of them would be as tedious, as the search
troublesome. Besides, an exact Narration would be more injurious, the^
profitable; for, I should thereby wrong your expectations, and instead of a
Sermon present you with a Commentary.

Yet pardon the discourse which disdain suggests: who would not be impatient to
see a Text abused, and forced to speak what the Author himself knew not? The
Jesuits out of this place conclude a Purgatory; so the more ancient of the
Schools, and after them Bellarmine (in his 1. lib. de Purgatorio, cap. 4.)
understands the word (...), de Bap^ismo lachrimarum and paenitentiae, of
Baptism of Tears and Affliction; and so brings in mine Apostle discoursing
like himself: If the dead rise not at all, why do men fast and pray? why do
they mourn and afflict themselves for the deliverance of the Faithful
deceased, whom they desire to set free from the pains of Purgatory? Good
wits, you see that can extract Fire out of water, those Flames out of this word
(...). Surely, these men think the world bound to be cheated by their
Sophismes; else they would never hope to persuade us, that the Sea burns. But
the Gospel it self gives countenance to this Exposition: Mat: 20.22. Can you
drink of the Cup that I shall drink of? (...); and Luke* 20.50. (...), says
our Savior, and what is thereby meant, but Affliction?

But their own Estius (on the Text) derides the Argument; and it is plain by
him, such Italian tricks are not allowed at Doway. For suppose we grant this,
it confirms not their Commentary: for, That afflicting Baptism was necessary
and imposed by others; theirs volunt^ry, and undertaken by themselves. Had mine
Apostle intended their sense, he should not then have said, Why are they
baptized by others? but, why do they baptize them selves? Besides, it is plain,
our Savior by that phrase of Speech understands his Death: they then should
die themselves to redeem their Brethren. But, no doubt, the Cardinal would
rather have renounced their Purgatory, then suffer his Robes to be washed in
such a Baptism.

Again, admit their interpretations, and the Corinthians might as easily have
satisfied mine Apostel's Argument, as we may Bellarmines. For, suppose his
Readers Papists, and S. Paul inditing like a Iesuit^ If the dead rise not, why
baptize ye? that is, why are ye afflicted? why do ye pray for the dead? your
actions therefore shall be your Judges, your own deeds confirm a Resurrection.
What Corinthian (though he never saw Athens) would not deride the weakness of
his fond opposition? they might soon reply, It concluds not* for we pray not
for the body; but that his soul may be freed from Purgatory. We are indeed
baptized for the dead; but it is the Soul only; our devotions imply no
Resurrection. We reject then the metaphorical acception of this word (...),
and accuse that gloss, as well of weakness as of falsehood.

Nor dare I join my self to their opinion, who conceit that this Scripture
aims at the Sacrament of Baptism, and therefore do thus interpret it. Why are
they then baptized for the dead? that is, why are they baptized into the Faith
of the Resurrection of the dead? For* that were to bring in a Maxim to confirm
it self, and to use that for a proof which is indeed the Question. Neither is
it probable my Apostle would have argued in the third person, but in the first:
(...); Why are we baptized? For, Ananias had made him partaker of this
Baptism, Act. 9.18. Besides, it weaken's mine Apostle's argument; for the
answer would then be obvious: Why are they baptized for the dead? yes, for
their souls sake, though their bodies should eternally perish.

To omit Tertullian's Vicarium Baptisma used by the Marcionites (as he tells us
lib. de Resurrect. Carnis.) there is yet a third more natural acception of the
word (...), most usual among the ancient Greeks, and not altogether infrequent
among the Penmen of the Holy Ghost; it signifies to wash, and purify by
washing. To omit others; in this sense S. Mark uses it, cap. 7. verse. 4. The
Jews* when they come from market, (...). And in the same place they observe
(...), for the vulgar washing of Cups. And mine Apostle (Heb. 9.10.) speaking
of the Jews: Their Sacrifices stood in Meats and Drinks and (...), diverse
washings. According to which. acception of the word, this Scripture (as I take
it) is to be interpreted. If the dead rise not at all, to what end are your
Funeral solemnities? Do men give respect where there is no hope? If the Corpse
shall for ever perish, to what end do you wash them? weak Corinthians! is there
more faith in your Ceremonies, then in your selves? Do you Act, and yet not
Believe a Resurrection? Pagans indeed, in the performance of the last Rites,
may be transported with by-respects, and affect nothing, but to give life to
their own glory by the death of others: but this stands not with the
simplicity of your Christian profession; your Ceremonies must serve as
handmaids to your Faith: they must both teach others, and confirm your Faith
too. Or down then with these Funeral solemnities, or else confess a
Resurrection. Thus he, who took occasion to preach Christ from the Inscript^on
of an Alter in Athens, knew as well how to prove that our bodies shall rise
again, by a Cerimony in Corinth.

An Interpretation, both agreeable with the structure of the Text, and very
consonant with the History of those elder Times. For the Text, you may either
(with Beza) take the word [(...)] in the middle voice, and so render it, Cu^
Ablutione utuntur? or else take the word Passively, and then (by a Hebraism)
understand in the Verb Substantive of the same signification, Cur baptizantur
Baptismate super mortuos? why are they then washed with the washing men use
over the dead? Or, lastly, with Paraeus and others, who come nearer our English
Translation, and render the Praeposition (...) by Pro, Why are they then
baptized for dead? that is, why do men wash their Corpse? and so leave out the
particle [the] which our Translations have added, I know not for what reason.
Only Bellarmine in the place I formerly alleged, (disputing against S.
Chrysostom) seems to overthrow this very construction: Inauditum est (says
the Cardinal) ut sub nomine mortuorum intelligantur Corpora mortua, quum in
Graeco ^it (...), in genere masculino; and Corpora sunt Nutrius generis, (...).
A Criticisme (Jesuit) unworthy of thy learning. What? is it so unusual that
the word (...) should signify a Corpse only? Is not that acception most
frequent among the Classique Writers? I Will note but one; Xenophon, in the 7. of
his Paed. about the middle: where discoursing of Abradad's death: (...). She
took away his Corpse: in the masculine Gender, (...). And in the same Book,
(...). I might instance in the language of the Holy Ghost, out of this very
Chapter at the sixteenth verse: (...) there signifies the very corpse: for how
can the soul be said to arise? Caducae r^i est Resurrectio, as Tertullian has
it in his book d^ Resurrectione Carnis.

And for the practice of those former Ages, what Cerimony more obvious, then to
wash their dead? not one Nation only, but the World received it. Ennius
intimats it among the Latins: you may see it in his fragments restored to him
out of diverse Grammarians: Tarquinii corpus bona foemina lavit and unxit.
And Virgil has it of Misenus the Trojan Aeneid. 6.

Corpusque lavant frigentis, and ungunt. Amongst the Greeks, Homer in the 18.
of his Iliads, describing the piety of the Myrmidons to dead Patroclus: (...).


Nay, this Cerimony (at length) became Christian: the Church saw it harmless,
and embraced it. For so we read done to Tabitha: Act. 9.37. They washed her and
laid her in an upper Chamber. Nor was i^ peculiar to the men of Ioppa only:
you may find this custom (like the Church her self) spacious, practiced both
in the East and Western Congregations. Tertullian intimates it, Apolog. contra
Gente^ cap. 42. and Epiphanius in his Oration d^ Sepultura Christi, about the
middle of it, and many others: it is not then probable that they whom my
Apostle here deals with, were strangers to this custom: or that Corinth only
had not received what both Greece and the World acknowledged.

My Text then contains what I first intimated, matter of Cerimony, and Faith
too: washing of the Dead, and a Resurrection. The Interrogation must be
resolved into an Argument: You wash the Dead: Ergo, they shall rise again,
Argumentum a Fundamento: for, to be respective where there is no hopes, were
but a pious vanity. The parts are two: 1. The Cerimony it self: Baptizing or
washing the Dead. 2. The Use: It serves to con^irm Faith, proves a
Resurrection; Ergo, Resurgent mortui.

I have been so long in laying a foundation, that I fear, the height of the
wall^ will scarce prove answerable: yet pardon it; I desire my building should
rather prove firm then statly. The Division has inverted the Text, first then
of the last words (...); Why are they then baptized?

The Corinthians wash their dead, and are blamless, for my Apostle reprehends
it not; and he knew not how to be silent at obliquities: It seems, though we
may not too much sorrow, yet we may care for the Dead. Indeed, Tears and
Lamentations are opposite to Hope; but a Cerimonious Respect does both
manifest, and increase it. When Mary Magdalen came to visit the Sepulcher of
our Savior, we shall find her both Respective and Sorrowful: her Hands were
full of sweet Ointments, her Eyes of Tears: both (at tha^ time) very
impertinent; for the Body which she then sought, was already glorified. Yet the
Angel censures her Tears only: Woman, why weepest thou? indeed, those odours
testify thy hope; and show, that (though thou err in the time, yet) thou
believe one day he shall rise again. Only, why do thou Weep? That passion
becomes not a Disciple: thine eyes argue more incredulity* then thine hands do
faith. But, for the respect she showed, 'twas so far from deserving reproof,
that the like of it did once find great Commendations, Matthew. 26.19. etc. The
Disciples murmur whilst the Woman poured rich ointment on our Saviors head,
and accuse Mary of wastfulnesse: But their Master was of an other Opinion: She
has (says Christ) wrought a good work on me, she did it to bury me: nay,
further, her care of my Funeral has raised her a Monument: For, I say unto
you, wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the World, this that
she has done shall be told for a memorial of her.

If the Anointing of the Dead be commendable, washing sure cannot be condemned:
a Cerimony altogether harmless; and whether it can be cause of waste, or no,
let Judas himself be Judge.

I speak not thus, as if ^his practice of Corinth should therefore bind all
future succession, because it seems approvable. No, Ceremonies (are like Laws)
fittest commonly for the Times and places they are made in. Let Corinth, and
the Christian World sometime wash their Dead; yet it is no impiety in us to leave
it: ^or the same Faith is not always clothed with the same Ceremonies. To use
Spices or perfumed Coffins, are as good testimonies of our Hope, as water was
of theirs; and were my Apostl^ writing to us, they might all afford Argument to
prove a Resurrection* Rome then (for ought I know) may still Wash their Dead*
for so Bellarmine says she does, in the last Chapter of his second Book de
Purgatorio. Let her renounce her superstitious consequences, I condemn not the
bare Cerimony: for I always think of such indifferences, what Saint Austin
did of Perfumes: Quum adsint non respuo; quum absint non requiro: it is in the
10. of his Confessions.

But were not my Corinthia^s too sparing in their Ceremonies? Did they well, to
express their care of the Dead by a little water only? Yes: for Christianity
has taught us, not so much to consider the Deed it self, as the Mind of him
that does it. Mites, (in our Master's judgment) may outweigh large sums: and
(no doubt) the Disciples expressed as much Hope in washing T^bitha, as the
Patriarchs in imbalming Jacob. For it is as true of Faith as Nature; Paucis
contenta est, It can live without state. Indeed, it must still be doing, but
(for the most part) her works are rather Good then sumptuous. Why then should
Washing the Dead be condemned as a custom too mean and trivial, seeing, To
give a Cup of cold water to the Living, is so far from losing Commendations,
that it gains a Reward.

But, me thinks, it is not enough to vindicate, except I commend this custom,
and show, it deserves not your approbation only, but (in some sort too) your
Imitation* For (as we may perceive in Moses Law) there were Ceremonies which in
themselv^ were fading, yet they do still yield us a perpetual Moral: So may
this Baptism in it self safely be laid aside, and yet it affords a Tr^th, that
we may teach for ever. VV^ may now sow our ground with two kinds of Seeds; but
it were impiety in us, to plant our ^ouls with two sorts of Religions: so,
though this Corinthian custom injoynes us not this day to apply mee^ water to
the Dead; yet we may hereby learn, That it is not consonant to the purity of
our Elder Church to be profuse in Funerals* For* to what end is this sad
prodigality? Is it to manifest thy noble dispo^^^ion? But that is fitter to be
shown at a Tilting, then a^ a Funeral. Is it to give a token of ^hy sorrow and
passion? But know this too, it is a Solacisme to mourn in pomp. Perhaps thou
do affect the people^ voice, and desire that they should speak of thee, as
the Jews did o^ our Savior when he came to raise Lazarus: Behold (say they)
how he loved him! But remember, that it is there written too: Jesus wept. 'Twas
not a profuse expense* but a passionate carriage that raised that opinion. Art
thou then truly sorrowful? Fear it not; thine outward gestures will interpret
thy thoughts: and if thou desire only to counterfeit a grief, it is a more
th^i^ty hypocrisy to feign a few Tears, th^n ^o cloth so many mourners. Nor
dare I condemn all cost in these Solemnities, (especially if it be husbanded by
worth and discretion): For, no doubt, we are to put a difference between on^
Corpse and an other, although they are in themselves equaly insensible. A field
may be purchased to bury Sarah in, when we do not so much as read of Agars
Funeral. In this case, Vlpians Counsel may serve for good directions: Expenses
mus^ here be made, Secundum Dignitatem and Facultates defuncti. And the Law did
well to join them: for as it is unfit that Demetrius a Craftsman (though he
prove Rich) should be buried as a Senator: So is it not seemly, that Joseph a
Senator (if he consume his substance) should be buried as a Craftsman. But
where Wealth and Honor both meet in the same Testator, if the Heir be too
sparing, it is a shame; nay, it is injustice, and a mere usurpation upon the Goods
of the De^d. And therefore the Law taks ordor, that in case the Heir be
negligent, if either friend or stranger shall interre the Dead, according to
his place and substance, he may recover the expense from the Inheritance,
Action Funeraria. And the Reason is ingenuous: Qui propter Funus aliquid
impendit, cum defuncto contrahere videtur. (Leg. 1. F^^odem.) See! in favor of
a Funeral, the presumption of the Law gives a dead man life, makes him capable
of a Contract, and binds his Heir over, in despite of silence. He, that shall
read with what artificial care Jacob was imbalmed in Egypt, and with what
princely attendance inter^ed in Canaan, must either condemn wise Joseph of a
needless folly; or else confess, that a sumptuous Funeral may beseem a
Patriarch. Who is there that condems Nic^d^mus for that costly composition he
inwrapped our Savior in? Suppose he did not, as yet, account him a God; yet he
well knew, those solemn ob^equies might become a Prophet. Th^s Water then may
be turned into Balm, or perhaps some other substance* when Princes are to be
washed, when Pa^riarch^ or Prophets shall expect a Sepulcher. Less state may
beseem a common Corinthian; and all may hence learn some^hing: Let this
ancient simplicity teach all to avoid ostentation in Funerals; for that
absurdity is too exstreamly gross, when grief it self becomes vaine-glo^ious.

If the elder Christians were so careful to wash the Corpse of ^he Dead; it is
probable, they were no less solicitous to keep fair their Reputations. You
know our good Names are apt to soil as well as our Bodies; and oftentimes
though we our selves walk in the cleanest ways, yet our Neighbors hand may
cast filth on us. Let the heart of Mephibosh^th be most loyal to his Prince,
yet by the malice of Ziba's false suggestions, David may (though a Just King)
account him treacherous, and perhaps confiscate his goods too. What act more
eminently charitable, then to wash the dead from such foul imputations? For, a
Good Name is the dead man's life; and so he (in some sort) prevents a murder,
who in this case withstands detraction. If a viperous tongue does palpably cast
aspertions upon the memory of the Dead, we must (...), Wash them in our
meetings, in our Assemblies. The Pulpit it self is no unfit Font for such
Baptism. These Sermons must wash the Dead, and not suffer an ill opinion to
stain good deserts: imitating herein the example of God himself, who makes
Right^ousness as clear as the Light, and just dealing as the noonday*

Not that I approve their officious eloquence, who upon these occasions are
equaly ready to commend all alike; Who make the height of thire own Wits the
Rule of their Discourse; and so speak not what they can prove, but what ere
they can invent. These affect to make all dead men seem virtuous; and think
themselves most artificially charitable, if they can make a Dives to be taken
for an Abraham. But such lavish Orators mistake this Cerimony, and paint the
Dead instead of Washing. Indeed, the Rule is, Majus ab exequiis nomen: the next
way to b^ famous, is to die; for then all envy cease, and if a man be
deserving* his very enemies will judge impartially. But where that Passion
ends, shall there Forgery begin? Because I heard an Enemy content to speak the
Truth, shall I take liberty to feign and invent a Lie? no, that of Salomons
would deter me: He that justifies the wicked, and condemns the Righteous,
both these are an abomination to the Lord* But if such Funerallists will needs
be declaming, they may go on; who can forbid a man to do with his own what he
pleases? Qui autem mendacium loquitur* de suo loquitur, says S. Austin in his
6. Epis^*

I have done with the Ceremonies. The Use follws: it serves to confirm Faith,
to prove a Resurrection: Therefore the Dead shall rise again. For if the Dead
rise not, why then is their Washing of the Dead?

The practice of Ceremonies (were the true use unknown) is like a dumb show
without an Interpreter; which may perhaps cause laughter or astonishment, but
yield little benefit to the spectators. Did not Zipporah wonder at the
Sacrament of Circumcision, and call Moses (that meek man) a Bloody Husband? It
seems she knew not, that this sign was the seal of the Covenant, and to teach
her Son in his ripe years, that he should not walk after the Lusts of ^he
Gentiles, but according to the Faith of his Father Abraham. What made Judea so
rediculous to other Nations, but her religious observance of many outwa^d
Rites, which such strangers understood not? Durst Iuvenals wit have been so
profane, as ( Sat. 14.) to style the Sabbath Day, Lux ignava, a day of ^loath,
had he either known the majesty of the Author, or that it self was a
representation of that Eternal Rest, whereof his fellow-Poets had seen a
shadow?

And again: Nec distare putant humana carne Suillam,


He smiles to see the I^ws abhor Swine^ flesh. But know ( Satyrist) that very
Nation was a Sacrament, all gestures and Emblems; and what she practiced on the
Body, was to teach us to do the like on the Soul. The Jews abstained from so
foul a Creature, that the Gentiles might learn purity, that their me^ts might
be the Hieroglyphiques of our conversation; for as the Law runs; No polluted
person may approach the Sanctuary: So the Gospel; No unclean thing shall enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven. You see then, it is the moral commends a Cerimony;
and that in these figurative gestures, the act it self is not so considerable,
as the end of it.

Wh^t these Ancients did imply, by Washing the Dead, Calvin intimates upon the
9. of the Acts* verse. 37. Vt in morte ipsa visibilis aliqu^ Resurrectionis
imago piorum animos in bonam spem erigeret, For, they did undoubtedly hope,
that that very body should hereafter appear as unblameable before the
Tribunal of Jesus Christ, as after Washing it seemed clean, and spotless
before the ^yes of men. Nam quia mors speciem interitus habet (says that
judicious Interpreter) ne Resurrectionis fidem extingueret, species contrarias
opponi utile fuit, quae Vitam in Morte representarent. When Death seemed to
threaten a perpetual Destruction, it behoved them by such Ceremonies to
meditate upon their Eternity; that in the midst of the Trophies of Death, they
might also appear Conquerors by Faith in the Resurrection.

Thus did their Belief obscure mortality, and in the midst of their Obsequies
they kept a solemn Triumph. Tell me (says Saint Austin, de Civ. Dei. 1.) why
was Toby registered for burying the Dead? Why the Woman for anointing, Joseph
for imbalming our Savior? Non quod ullus cadaveribus sensus, sed quod ad Dei
providentiam Corpora quoque mortua pertinere significantur, propter fidem
Resurrectionis astruendam.

Learn here the true use of Funerals; learn to make them serve as
nourishment to thy Hope? Imitate my Apostles act, and set thy Faith on work in
these outward solemnities. when thou see men so readily officious to conveigh
the Corpse into the Earth, think that the Angls were no less serviceable to see
his Soul inshrined in Heaven; for they are all ministering spirits, sent forth
to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of salvation, Heb. 1. ult. Let these
perfumes quicken thy hope, and make thee conceive the worth of Christ's imputed
Righteousness, his Life and Death, was accounted a sweet smelling savor in the
nostrils of God the Father. When thou beholdest them interred in the mould of
^he Earth, think him not lost but sown; and as the Harvest restores the Seed
again with advantage; so shall the Resurrection this deceased Brother, with an
increase of Glory.

Such thoughts are, of all other, most Christian obsequies; and do as much
t^nd to the renown of the Dead, as to the encouragement of men alive; because
he does more honor to a deceased friend* who believes he shall rise again,
then he who (with out all hope) imployes all the Physicians in Egypt to defer
his putrefaction. For, I find Beasts partaking of this respect; so you may read
Bo^tius writes of Ptolemy the Son of Lagus, that the Egyptians were as
pompously Cerimonious in the Funerals of their Apis (in English a Bull) as if
the Obsequies had been performed upon Ptolemy himself: and where men bury
their Gods, such stupidity is no wonder. Alexander made himself a Mourner,
when he buried his Bucephalus: and I Am sure (in that regard) the Hors^ had far
more honor, then the Rider. Nay, (if Alexander ab Alexandro fail not in his
collections) Lacides, the Philosopher, Anserem elatum in funere, etc. (I will
non English it) effusis lachrymis* sepelivit: yet, 'twas none of thos^ holy
Fowls neither, that preserved the Capitol. But I leave Lacides to Athens,
where he may be mocked by Philosophers.

Stupid madness! sure, these men first buried their Reason, before they became
Actors in such hoplesse Funerals; and then it was no great marvel to see them do
honor to the Beasts, their fellows. And yet these very Obsequies may serve to
shame some of our dry Dissemblers: for, out of doubt, it must make some true
Mourners, to see so vast a pomp of empty Lamentation. When there is cost
without Faith, how contemptible is the Cerimony? Do thou imbalme thy friend
only? it is no greater honor. Do thou believe he shall rise again? This is
to selebrate a Funeral; and this is that wins regard to the Dead Do we no^
know that expectation gets respect, and makes us become Obsequious even to
them that are but the Heirs of Honor? Belief then of the Resurrection must
needs enforce u^ to regard these very Bodies, as to whom belongs an
Inheritance, and eternal glory, as a possession. We thence know, that he that
is the God of Abraham, is the God of these Corpse too. And shall a man there
deny respect, where God himself vouchsafes providence? If this deceased
person has still the same God with us, the case then stands as before his
Death; we are still his Brethren. Thus may a Funeral increase our Faith, and
our Faith adorn a Funeral. Art thou poor, and yet desire to do honor to thy
d^ceased Friend? say only, that he shall rise again, and thou have more then
imbalmed him. Art thou Rich, and thereby able to express thy regards? yet
bring Faith too; otherwise such Rites are prodigies, shadows without a
substance: nay* the Cerimoni^s are abused, and mak^ thy friend no ways differ
from the Beasts that perish.

The men of Corinth wash their Dead; and hence my Apostle preaches a
Resurrection. Funerals (you see) give oc^asions to Sermons: nay, Death and
misery are the best preparatives to Instruction. For, lowliness is the
forerunner of wisdom; he is more then half taught, who by such means is
made a fit Auditor. When we see by others that we our selves must die, how
willing are we to talk, that we must Rise again? That of the Tragaedian [Quod
nimis miseri volunt, hoc facil^ credunt] shows, that these Spectacles
facilitate our belief: for when we thence perceive a neces^ity of Death, we
gladly give entertainment to Faith in the Resurrection.

These occurrences are yet more Doctrinall: (...), etc. (as Suidas has it out
of some more ancient) the best way to mortify thy rebellious works, is to
behold these Spectacles of mortality. For, what? dares flesh and blood be
proud* when she considers her Beauty to be but Rottenness? shall parentage
make that man swel, that must say to Corruption, thou art my Father, and to the
Worm, thou art my Mother? (Job 17.14.) These sights may serve to strangle
ambitious thoughts; for see how little room contains a man! to correct thy
Covetousness; for is it not a madness to live poor, that thou may die
rich? Look, wretch! Does this Corpse possess any thing?

Death affording such variety of Instruction, I wonder what moved the Belgiqu^
Fathers to banish these Discourses. For, so they decreed ( Can. 5. de
Exercitiis Ecclesiasticis) Conciones Funebres nunquam intr^ducendas, and ubi in
usu sunt, commode tollendas censet Synodus. Was it therefore because they have
been sometimes formerly abused and made to commend those Lives that were as
full of Scandal, as Vice? By this reason, they might have forbidden the Lords
Supper too: For, what more gross abuse, then when Rome of a Sacrament had made
an Idol? If some Luxuriant wits have been offensive upon these occasions;
Vitium hoc Hominum, non Concionum, this Custom should not have been abrogated,
but such Preachers checked. I dare say, they know not the true use of Funeral
Sermons, who think these Discourses must still be Panegyric.

Nay the Dead serve to the increase of Faith, and must the Sermon needs tend to
nothing but vain glory?

Yet, where there is Desert, I hope, the Synod intends not to forbid
commendations. For, God himself has spoken it, The name of the just shall b^
had in everlasting remembrance: and what fitter place to execute h^s D^cr^e
then the Pulpit? Nay, that little good we find in bad men deserves a Register:
David himself penned Saul an Epicaedium: Saul and Jonathan were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided. Ye Daughters
of Israel weep over Saul, who clothed you in scarlet with other delights, etc.
as you may read, 2. Sam. 1.23. I have a Warrant then to mention, and (where I
see Reason) to commend the Dead I may preach these circumstances: what we find
in the Text it self, you need not doubt but it may become the Sermon. The
manner of my Discourse I Will take from Corinth, my Speech shall resemble their
Ceremonies; it shall be plain and simple, mere Water: Let more happy inventions
Imbalm the Dead; it shall suffice me to wash him.

(...).
Amen
A SERMON Preached at S. PAUL'S Cross in London, the 27. day of October, Anno
Reginae Elizabethae 26.
by Samuel Harsnet then Fellow of Pembroke Hall in Cambridg, but afterward
Lord Archbishop of York.
The Text. EZEKIEL 33.11. As I live (says the Lord) I delight not in the death
of the wicked.
THere was a conceit among the Jews (as appears by the verse going before my
Text) that when they sinned, they sinned* of necessity, so that they could not
but sin: and so when Almighty God did send unto them his Prophets early and
late, calling and inciting them to Repentance; they thought he did but dally
and mock with them, for it was his pleasure, they should sinn^ and die therein*
Almighty God was much offended with this their conceit, it being against his
Justice and fidelity both* and therefore bids his Prophet here protest unto
them, and bind it with an Oath, (no less then his Life) that they did him
wrong: As I live (says the Lord) I do not delight in the death of the wicked.

The Text then I have in hand (Right Honorable, Worshipful, and Beloved) is a
solemn Protestation made by Almighty God in his own cause to clear himself
of Infidelity and Injustice; that the Judge of this world does not delight to
see men sin, and then punish them with Death because of their si^ne. As I
live, says the Lord, etc.

The form of the Protestation is in the nature of an Oath: As I liv^ says the
Lord etc. and in it I consider these three things:

1. The Oath it self; that it pleased God to swear.

2. The manner of the Oath he swears, y his life; As I live, says the Lord.

3. The Matter of the Protestation is an absolute Negative made unto the Jews*
avowing, that it was all false they charged God withal, I do not delight in
the death of the wicked. And in this Negative, God does avow five simple
Negatives, every one upon the credit of his Oath: as, 1. I do not delight in
death. 2. I delight not in the death of man. 3. I delight not in the death of a
sinful man. 4. I delight not in the death of wicked sinful man. 5. I delight
not in the death of any sinful man.


Of these (by your patience) as God shall assist me*

For the first, that the Phrase of speech ( As I live) is an oath, I show it
plainly out of 1. Sam. 28.10. where it is said* that Saul did swear, and he
used no other words then these, As the Lord lives. This form then of speech,
As I live says the Lord, is an Oath, By the life of the Lord. S. Austin (upon
the 94. Psalm) says, Magnum est loqui Dominum, quanto majus jurar^ Deum? It is
a great thing that the Lord should speak; and so it i^ indeed; for, at the
first word he spoke, he made a world, Dixit et factum est, he spoke the word,
and it was done: but he that could make the world with a word, could not find
c^edit in the world for his word, but he must needs bind it with an Oath* so
that it cost him more to be believed in the World then it cost him to make the
World it self. Durum est (says Vincentius) cum non tantum tribuamus Deo,
^uantum viro honesto: It Is hard when we will not give so much credit to God, as
we do to an honest man; for we will give credit to him upon his Word; but we
will not believe God though he swear. Sed durum est cum non tantum tribuamus
Deo, quantum Diabolo: It is very hard, when we will not trust God so far forth
as we trust ^he Devil; for we took his word in Paradise, At non moriemini, Ye
shall not die: (being the Father of lies) and we will no^ trust God on his
word, At cupio ne moria^ini, I desire you should not die (I the God of truth;)
but we must have this Oath, As I live etc.

There are two bonds ( H^b. 6.18.) (...) and (...), Gods Word and his Oath: and
the slighter of these two does hold all things in the world (Man only
excepted.) The Sea rages and roareth terribly (says the Psalmist, 95.11.) yet
Gods word is his band, and in his greatest rage he never passed it ( Prove.
8.29.) The Sun rises like a Giant, and like a mighty man to run his race; yet
D^us dedit legem, God's word is his list, and in his greatest swiftness he
never passed it. God himself being infinite, and having no bond has made
himself finite, and put on his list: Cinxit se cingulo veritatis. Isa, 11.5.
He has bound himself in the girdle of Truth, and in his greatest might he
never broke it. Only man (o^t of wantonness) broke his bond in Paradise; the
Garden would not hold him, and so he put God to his second bond, his Oath: and
if that will not hold him, there is but a third in the Epistle of Jude, Vincula
tenebrarum, Bonds of darkness, and they shall surely hold him; for they have
held stronger then he, the Angls of disobedience, and do hold them sure against
the day of wrath. I will then shut up this poin-with the Counsel of S. Ierom,
Si non obedii mus promittenti Deo, at credamus Iurant Deo: If we will not
believe God when he promises us life, yet let us believe him when he swears
by his Life, that he wishes us Life: least we provoking him to anger, he
swear in his Wrath, we shall not enter into the Kingdom of Life.

The second thing in the form of the Protestation was the manner of the Oath,
that it pleased Almighty God to swear, By his Life: and this does teach us the
certainty of the truth of the Protestation. If he had sworn by his H^linesse,
as he did to David, Psalm. 89.34. it was taken exception against, Ezekiel. 18.29*
If by his Truth as Psalm. 89.48. it was doubted of Numb. 14.11. How long will it
be ere ye believe me? If by his Omnipotency, as he did to Abraham Genesis 17. it
was called in question, Psalm. 78.20. Can God prepare a Table in the Wilderness?
But his Life was never doubted of* as a thing above all challenge and
exception: and therefore it pleased the Almighty God to choose his Life to
confirm his Truth, As I live (says the Lord) I do not delight in the death of
the Wicked.

When we swear, we swear by an higher ( Heb. 6.16.) and man's wit cannot devise
a higher or more precious thing; then Life. Satan knew it well (in the 2. of
Job) Skin for skin (says he) and all that a man has, will he give for his
life, health, wealth, Lands, Liberties, Honor, Possesions, Dignities,
Learning, Wit, Memory. A man will strip himself of all, to save his Life. This
was the Egyptian Oath, By the life of Pharaoh. The Heathen's title to their
Great God, (...)* The Liver, The first Begetter, The first Mover: and there
they made their stop. And so it pleased the Almighty God to stop here; and
making it his rest* as a thing most clear to all Nations of the World; that as
verily as they did see* know, and confess, that there was a God in whom they
lived, moved and had their being: so verily should they say and profess, that
he was a God of the Living, and not of the Dead; and that he delighted not in
Dead but in the Living, As I live, says the Lord, etc. And so much of the form
of the Protestation.

The matter of the Protestation, I told you was absolutely Negative, and it
issues into five branches to be severally touched:

The first. I delight not in death.

I will not idle away the time in an empty discourse about the several
Translations of the original word. Vatablus translated it, Non cupio, I wish
not: the Sep^uagint, (...), I will not: the common Translation, Non desidero, I
desire not: Tremelius, Non delector* I delight not: whose conceit I follow. So
of Death; it is taken so many way^, a man cannot miss it what way soever he
take; but there is but one way to the Truth, and that is plain* More, ad
Gehennam; not Gods, but the Divel's high way leading to destruction, and so God
neither likes the Journey, no^ the Journey's end.

I touch my first branch; I delight not in Death. If God had spoken no more
words but these [ As I live, I delight not] and any man of mean wit had been
bidden to put to the rest; that man by his mean wit would easily have guessed
at Death: for there are no two things so opposite, as Life and Death: and it is
plain, God (in his wisdom) made choice to swear by his life, to let us see how
far at ods he is with death. Fire and Water, Light and Darkness, Heaven and
Hell, God and Satan can stand nearer together then Life and Death: and
therefore we read in the first of Job, that God would abide Satan standing at
his right hand in Heaven: but of Death, we shall never read of him in Heaven,
but upon a Horse posting from the presence of God, and (to show how little God
likes him) his mounting is with the meanest too (or like himself) I saw a
pale horse in Heaven (says Saint John) and he that sat upon him his nam^ was
Death (Apocal. 6.8.) Now, as God is all light, and in him is no darkness at
all; so he is all Life, and in him is no shadow of Death at all. And therefore
if King David could truly say of the wicked, that he hates the wicked with a
perfect hatred, because there was nothing like unto him in them* God may
trulier say and swear of Death* that he hates him with a perfect hatred,
because there is nothing in Death like unto him. And indeed, how can he but
hate him? the Father of Lights, the Child of Darkness* the Prince of Heaven,
the Sergeant of Hell? the Maker of the world, the Marrer of the World? Glory,
Ignominy? Beauty, Deformity? Honor, Shame? Majesty, the Urchin of Hell* and
companion for worms and rottenness? There is a true saying of our Learning:
Facilius est destruere quam astruere: It is ^asier to pull down then to build
up again. Yet (as easy as it is) S. Bernard has wisely observed, That God is
quick in making, slow in marring: Cito struit (says he) Tar^e destruit: He was
but six days in making the whole world, and he was seven days in destroying
one City, Jericho. And this marring quality that this age so much glories in
(as it loves to be called after that name) is it that made God so far out with
Death, as (it seems) he hates him worse then Hell, Hos. 13.14. O Mors, ero mors
tua; O Inferne, ero morsus tuus: O Death, I will be thy death; O Hell, I will
be thy sting, The Author of Life cannot become Death if he would; but yet he
threatens, that he will become that he cannot, rather then Death should be what
he would not: And it is clear, that God is far enough from delighting in Death.

The second branch of Gods protestation is, I delight not in the death of man.
God had an Image before all Worlds: for he had his Son, the engraven Image of
his Father: and he was so delighted in his Image that he would needs have an
Image of his Image; and so he made Man after his own Image. If any other then
God had ^ade Man, or if he had not been made after the Image he eternally
loved, it may be he would not have cared so much for him: but being the
workmanship of his own hand^, and made after the Image he so tenderly loved;
if he had not loved him for his Workmanship sake, yet he must needs love him
for his sake whose Image he bare, and loving him, could not delight to spoil
him. Nature (God's Nurse) had bred in us such a fond desire of our Image, that
it brought Idolatry into the world; and when we cannot have a lively image, we
will have an Image though it be but of colors and clouts: and if we be Kings,
then none must paint that Image but Apelles, and when it is drawn it must have
a Curtain; and if it be the Engraven Image, it must go for current; then who
so dishapes or defaces that Image, the Prince takes it as done unto himself,
and it is Capitale a matter of Life and Death. Tu Domine fecisti (says S.
Jerome) O Lord, we have this love (though not this fond love) from thee; for
thou tookest the blotting of ^hine Image in Paradise, as a blemish to thy
self; and thou said to the blotter* Quia fecisti, because thou have don it,
on thy belly shall thou creep, and dust shall thou eat all the days of thy
life* Genesis 3.14.

The H. Fathers are wonderful in the ^ontempla^ion of man's excellency at the
first: Cedrus Paradisi, Imago Coeli, Gloria terrae, Dominus mundi, Delici^
Domini. The Cedar of Paradise was too good wood to be cut into Chips for Hell
fire. The Image of Heaven was not made to b^ the Vizard of Hell; the Glory of
the World, the Dungeon of Darkness, the Lord of the World, the bond-slave of
Satan; the Darling of the Lord of Heaven, the scorn to all the Fiends of Hell.
When the Holy Ghost had accounted the Genealogy from Christ to A^am (Luke 3.)
at the last vers^, he brings up Adam to hi^ Father, and calls him by the name
of the Son of God. Can a man live to delight in the death of his Son? David (a
man after Gods own ^eart) denies it, 2 Samuel 19. O Absolon my Son, would to God
I had died for thee* ^y Son Absolon, my Son, my Son: And ^f David could have
forgotten Absolon his Son, yet God could not forget Adam* his Son; for he says
not to him* Would I ^ad died for thee my Son; but, I die for ^^ee my Son: nay*
(that is too little) I have died* for thee before thou were, that when thou
were, thou might not die: and so I may safely swear by my Life* that I do
not delight in the Death of man.

When Ulysses played the Madman (because he would not go with the Grecians to
the siege of Troy) and getting a plough, he ploughed and marred all that came
in his way; It was Palimedes wise counsel that they should lay his young Son in
his way: which when ^hey had don, and that the plough came to it, he took it
up, and would not let it hurt his Son; and so ^hey discovered that he was but
counterfeitly mad; but* if he had ploughed up his Son, they would have
accounted him perfectly mad indeed. If God had made the world (like the man of
Crete) and put Death in (as the Minotaure was put into the Labyrinth there) and
reserved all creature^ as meat for his jaws; yet, when it had come to the lot
of man to be cast in with the rest, if he had not spared Man (being his Son)
the Grecians wise account of our Gracious God would have been much like after
the account of their Ulysses.

There is a conceit in the world (beloved) speaks little better of our
gracious God, then this: and that is, That God should design many thousands of
souls to H^ll before they were, not in eye to t^eir faults, but to his own
absolute will and power, and to get him glory in their damnation. This opinion
is grown huge and monstrous (like a Goliath) and men do shake and tremble at
it; yet never a man reaches to David's sling to cast it down. In the name of
the Lord of Hosts: we will encounter it; for it has reviled, not ^he Host of
the living God, but the Lord of Hosts.

First, it is directly opposite to this Text of holy Scripture, and so turns
the Truth of God into a Lie. For whereas God in this Text does say and swear,
that he does not delight in the death of man: this opinion says, that not one
or two, but millions of men should fry in Hell; and that he made them for no
other purpose, then to be the children of death and Hell, and that, for no
other cause, but his mere pleasure's sake; and so says, that God did not only
say, but swear to a Lie; for the Oath should have run thus: As I live (says
the Lord) I do delight in the death of man.

Secondly it does (not by consequence, but) directly make God the Author of
sin. For, if God, without eye to sin, did design men to Hell, then did he say
and set down, that he should sin: for without sin he cannot come to Hell: And
indeed does not his opinion say, that the Almighty God in the eye of his
Counsel, did not only see, but say, that Adam should fall, and so order and
decree, and set down his fall, that it was no more possible for him not to
fall, then it was possible for him not to eat? and of that which God does
order, set down, and decree (I trust) he is the Author: unless they will say,
that when the Right Honorable Lord Keeper does say in open Court, We order, he
means not to be the Author of that his order.

Thirdly, It takes a way from Adam (in his state of innocence) all freedom of
will, and liberty not to sin. For, had he had freedom to have altered Gods
desigment, Adams Liberty had been above the designment of God. And here I
remember a little witty Solution is made: that is, if we respect Adam's will,
he had power to sin, or not to sin; but if God's Decree, he could not but sin.
This is a silly solution: And indeed it is as much, as if you should take a
sound strong man (that has power to walk and to lie still) and bind him hand
and foot (as they do in Bedlam) and lay him down; and then bid him Rise up and
Walk* or else you will stir him up with a Whip; and he tell you that there be
chains upon him, so that he is not able to stir: and you tell him again, that
that is no excuse, for if he look upon his heal^h, his strength, his legs, he
has power to walk or to lie still; but if upon his chains, indeed in that
respect he is not able to walk: I trust, he that should whip that man for not
walking, were well worthy to be whipped himself. Or (if you will give Adams will
a little more scope) this pretty solution makes it as a bird in a Cage, and the
door fast shut: if you look ^p on the wings of the Bird, she has power to fly
and flap away; but if you turn your eye and look to the Wicke^ of the Cage,
you may well see, that she may flutter thither but she can get no further.
Almighty Gods Decree is stronger then the Wicket and Chains too; for he that
made the bonds of Ori^n so sure, that no man can loose them, has made the
bonds of his Decree so sure, that no man can break them: and therefore if God
set i^ down for a Decree, that Adam should fall, Adam had no more liberty not
to fall, then the man in the chains had liberty to walk, or the Bird in the
Cage liberty to fly away.

Fourthly, as God does abhor a heart and a heart, and his soul detesteth a
double-minded man: So himself cannot have a mind and a mind, a face (like
Ianus) to look two ways. Yet, this opinion makes in God two Wills, the one
flat opposite to the other: An Hidden will, by which he appointed, and willed
that Adam should sin; and an Open will, by which he forbad him to sin. His open
will said to Adam in Paradise: Adam thou shall not ^at of the Tree of Good and
Evil: his hidden will said, Thou shall eat; nay more, I my self cannot keep
thee from eating, for my Decree from eternity is passed, Thou shall eat, that
thou may drown all thy posterity in sin, and that I may drench them (as I
have designed) in the bottomless pit of Hell.

Fifthly* among all the abominations of Queen Iezabel, that was the greate^t, (1
Kings 21.) when as hunting after the life of innocent Naboth, she set him up
among the Princes of the Land, that so he might have the greater fall. God
planted man in Paradise (as in a pleasant Vineyard) and mounted him to the
World, as on a stage, and honored him with all the Soveraignity over all the
Creatures, he put all things in subjection under his feet; so that he could not
pass a Decree from all eternity against him to throw him down headlong into
Hell: for God is not a Iezable, Tollere in altum, to lift a man up, ut lapsu
graviore ruat, that he may make the greater noise with his fall.

Sixthly, Almighty God at the Creation* when he called a Counsel to add a
glorious con^lusion to all his works; it was well he himself propounded the
case: Let us make man: for this conceit would feign alter the cas^, and put it
thus: Let us mar man* For what is it else to mar man* but to make him and mar
him? And it had been hard, if in all that glorious Assembly, there had not been
any one that had loved man so well, as to plead one word for him: O Lord, if
thou delightest in Death and Hell, behold the Fowls of the air, the Beasts of
the field, the Fishes in the Sea; their hugeness, their voice* their roaring is
greater then man's; let them be there: and if thou will not spare man for thy
Work^anship-sake, yet spare him for thy Image-sake: who did ^ver make his Image
to mar it? Let us not make man after thine own Image.

Seventhly, if King Ahassuerus had put Mordicai in his own Chariot, clad him
in so Royal Robes, and put a Ring on his finger, and caused him to be
proclaimed before him, Thus shall it be don to the man whom the King
delights to honor; and then had caused him to be carried away ^o Haman's
Gibbet, to be hanged up; and ha^ there proclaimed, This shall be done to the
man whom the King delights to honor; would it not have made all the People
at their wits ends? God mounted Man on the Chariot of Majesty, and clad him
with the Royal robe of Righteousness (that shone more bright then the Sun in
his highest luster) and put upon his fingers health, wealth, and immortality;
and caused to be proclaimed before him, that he was his delight: and yet all
this had been with an eternal purpose and Decree, to spoil, disrobe, and hang
him in Hell. Hic durus Sermo, this h^d been an hard Decree* man's weak capacity
could hardly digest it.

Eighthly, the Poets had a device of their old God Saturn, that he eat up his
children ^ssoon as they were borne, for fear lest some of them should disposess
him of heaven: Pharaoh King of Egypt had (almost) the same Plea, for he made
away all the young Hebr^w males, lest they should multiply too fast: Herod, for
fear our Savior Christ should supplant him in his Kingdom* caused all the young
children in Galilee to be slain: those had all some color for their barbarous
cruelty. But, if any of those had made a Law, designing young children to
torments before they had been born; and for no other cause and purpose, but his
own absolute will; the Heavens in course would have called for revenge. It is
the Law of Nations, No man innocent shall b^ cond^mned; of Reason, not to hate
where we are not hurt; of nature, to like and love our own brood. (...) (says
the H. Ghost) we are God's kindred, he cannot hate us when we are inocent, when
we are nothing, when we are not. Now, touching God's Glory (which is to us all
as de^re as our life) this opinion has told us a very inglorious and shameful
Tale: for it says, The Almighty God would have many souls go to Hell; and
that they may come thither, they must sin, that so he may have just cause to
condemn them: who does not smile at the Grecians conceit, that gave their God
a glorious Title for killing of Flies? Gods Glory in Punishing arises from his
Justice in revenging of sin: and for that it tells (as I said) a very sad and
unpleasant tale; for who could digest it, to hear a Princ^ say after this
manner? I will beget me a Son that I may kill him, that I may so get me a
name: and, that I may have some color to kill him, I will beget him without
both his feet* and when he is grown up, having no feet; I Will command him to
walk^ upon pain of Death: and when he braketh my Commandment, I Will put him to
Death. Oh Beloved, these glorious phansies, Imaginations, and shows, are far
from the nature of our Gracious, Merciful, and Glorious God: who has
proclaimed himself in his Titles Royal: Jehovah, The Lord; The Lord strong
and mighty, and terrible, flow to Anger, and of great Goodness. And therefore
let this conceit be far from Jacob, and let it not come near the Tents of
Joseph.

How much holier and heavenlier conceit had the holy Fathers of the justice of
God! Non est ante punitor Deus, quam peccator homo: God put not on the person
of a Reveng^r, before man put on the person of an Offender says S. Ambrose.
Neminem coronat antequam vincit; neminem punit, antequam peccat: he crowns non^
before he overcoms, and he punishes no man before his offense. Et qui facit
miseros ut misereatur, crudelem habet misericordiam: He that puts man into
misery, that he may pity him, has no kind but a cruel pity. And so I come
to the third branch: I delight not in the death of a sinful man.

God could not delight in the Death of a sinner, who parted with his Delight to
save a sinner. Old Jacob, when he should part from his youngest son Benjamine,
G^n. 42. ult. he told Sim^on, that he had as lieve part with his life: Ye will
bring my gray head with sorrow to the grave: yet Jacob had many Sons more
alive. But to part with a Son, an only Son, a beloved Son; this is more bitter
then death it self; ye shall see it plain in Gods temptation of Abraham: Take
thy Son, thine only Son, thy Son Isaac whom thou love, and offer him up to me
upon the Mount: And when as Abraham did but offer to offer him, God cried from
heaven, Sufficit* It is enough: as if he should have said, Thou being Man can
do no more for God. But he, being God, did more for Man, and sinful Man too:
For he took his Son; his only Son, his beloved Son. Math. 3. This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; and he did not offer to pa^^ with him,
but did part with him, not in the Mount, but in Golgotha, the Valley of skuls:
and that which all the world does wonder at, God himself was Pater and
Sacrificulus, The Father and the Sacrificer too. For, he slew him in heaven,
ere the Jews slew him on Earth: Hic ^st Agnus Dei immolatus ab origin mundi.
This is the Lamb of God slain from the be beginning of the World. And so God
brought up Death from Earth into Heaven, that i^ might bring down Life from
Heaven into Earth* Nolo mortem peccatoris, qui mo^r^ volui pro peccatorib^s
(says S. Bernard) Well may thou say, thou willest not the death of a sinner,
who die thy self to save a sinner. O mors! vulneratus est pr^ me, qui morte
sua fecit, ut vinoami^e, says S. Austin: O Death! he has been wounded for me,
that made me by his death to overcome thee. Pastor i'lle magnus vicinis
Angelis, etc. (says S. Gregory) That great Shepherd of heaven was so full of
joy that he could not keep it in, but out it must among his Angels. Et quae
causa. (says he) And what was the cause of such a shout in Heaven? Drach^a
inventa est: The lost Groat is found. Tantum gaudii de re tantilla (says he?)
so great joy for so small a thing? How then could he joy to have it lost, that
so much rejoiced to have it found? O Lord, the holy Angls in Heaven are thy
Witnesses. that Thou delightest not in the death of a sinner.

The fourth branch of Gods protestation is* I delight not in the death of a
wicked sinner. In the 7. of Matthew. there are sins that are motes, and sin^ that
are beams: In the Epistle of Jude there are spots in Feasts: in the 64. of
Esaias, there are menstruous clothes: In the Canticles there are Matulae, stains:
And Esaias 1. there be sinners of skarlet dye: If our sins be as moats in our
eyes, and cause them to water, God has his handkerchiefe wherewith he wipes
away all tears from our eyes, Apoc. 7. If they be Menstruous, he has his
hysop, Psalm. 51. If they be of skarlet Dye, he has his Fullers Soap, Esaias
1.18. Shall we then sin, (says the Holy Ghost) that Grace may abound? God
forbid. Yet if sin chance to abound, Grace has over-abounded, it has the
Superlative of sin: and does superabound. Abundat delictum, superabundat
gratia: Sin does abound, but Grace has abound above it, it does superabound.
There is a Sin so strong, that it does pierce the Heaven^: and that is the
sin of the men of Sodom, that would not stay till God came down unto it,
but it came up, and rang in the ears of God, it peirced the Heavens. At
Misericordia supra omnia opera manuum ipsius* (Psalm. 145.) The Mercy of God is
above all his works: And Sin is man's proper handy-worke; it wa^ the reaching
of an Apple that first brought sin into the world. When our Savior Christ
sweat blood in the Garden, it was but a preparative to his pot^on on the
Cr^sse; for there he sweat (not like unto blood, but) Blood and Water: Water*
to wash away the stains of our daily infirmities; Blood to wash away our sins
in grain; and a deeper color then blood* our sins cannot bear.

If God could have delighted in the death of a sinful wicked man, he must
needs have delighted in the death of Ahab; for he sold himself to work
Wickedness, and that before the Lord: but God was so far from such delight,
that he took great delight in his feigned humiliation, and withdrew his hand
from the plague he had devised against him. Venit salvare, non Baptistam,
Magdalenam, Matrem suam; sed peccatores, quorum ego sum primus (says S.
Basil:) Our Savior Christ came into the world to save, not John Baptist, Mary
Magdalen, or Mary his Mother; but sinners that wore Paul's colors, and fought
under his banner; and he bare in his banner, fire, sword, and persecutions,
menaces, revilings, railings, blasphmies, sins of the upper house, borne as
high as Lucifer himself. Perpendo Petrum, considero Latronem, intueor
Zachaeum, aspitio Mariam, Apostatum, Furem, Vsurarium, Meretricem. I think upon
Peter, I consider the Thief, I behold Zachaeus, I look upon Mary (says St.
Gregory) and I see that an Apostate, a Theife, an Usurer, an Harlot, these are
Christ's favorites, and such darlings unto him, that some of them must needs sup
with him in Paradise at his instalme^t: Hac nocte, this very night shall thou
be with me in Paradise.

Fifthly, the last branch of Gods protestation is, I delight not in the death of
any sinful wicked man. Si non impii, nullius (says S. Jerome) if not in the
death of a wicked sinner, not in the death of any sinner. And therefore, lest
we should deem God like King Saul (that spared the fairest, and the fattest of
the Amalekites, and put the least and worst to the Sword) S. Peter makes it
plain, (2 Epist. 3.9.) non vult aliquem perire, God would not have any one to
perish, but to come to the knowledge of the Truth. Unnatural Cain when he had
slain his brother Abel, and that his conscience so stung him, as that he feared
every one that met him would have done as much to him; God set a mark upon him
that he should not die* Treacherous Judas, when he had sinned in betraying the
Innocent blood, and had laid his hands (his bloody hands) upon himself; when
he had so done, the Holy Ghost says ( Acts. 2.25.) Abiit in locum suum: he
went to a home, not of Gods, but of his own providing. The fearful doom at
the last day, is Ite, non Auferte; Go your ways; not, Carry them away; go
the way your selves have chosen: And it is to the sheep, Venite benedicti
Patris mei: Come ye blessed of my Father: and to the Goats, Ite maledicti in
ignem paratum: Go into the fire, ye ^ursed: but it is not, Ite maledicti
Patris, Go ye cursed of my Father. God intitles himself to the blessing only*
And the fire is prepared, but for whom? Non nobis, sed Diabolo and Angelis
ejus: Not for you, but for the Devil and his Angels. So that God delights to
prepare neither Death nor Hell for damned men.

This last branch of Gods protestation, ( I delight not in the death of any
sinner) I resolve into six Consequences, as Links depending on this Chain.

1. God's absolute will is not the cause of Reprobation; but sin. 2. No man is
of an absolute necessity the child of Hell, so as by God's Grace, he may not
avoid it. 3. God simply wills and wishes every living Soul to be saved, and
to come to the Kingdom of Heaven. 4. God sent his Son to save every Soul,
and to bring it to the Kingdom of Heaven. 5. God's Son offers Grace
effectually to save every one, and to direct him to the Kingdom of Heaven. 6.
The neglect and contempt of his Grace, is the cause why every one does not come
to Heaven; and not any privative Decree, Counsel, or determination of God.
These six I will briefly discuss, and so commend you to the Grace of God.

For the first, Almigty God at the Creation, when he took a view of all his
Creatures (as men use to do* that have newly drawn an Image, they view and pry
to see what is amiss in it) it seems, when he looked upon them he found they
were Good; and when Man was made, behold, They were very Good, Genesis 1.31. Now
if God had cast a way man before he had sinned; (not in eye to sin, but in
absolute judgment) the malicious would have cried; the Kingdom of God is worse
then the kingdom of Satan; For Satan is not divided against Satan, and
Beelzebub the Prince of Devils does not cast out Devils Matt. 12.26. But by this
Device. Ipsa bonitas, Goodness it self is divided against goodness; the
Goodness of the Creator against the Goodness of the Creature; God is at
defiance with his own Creature and Image; the Fountain of Goodness that God
did see in Man, what was it, but Radius divinae bonita^is, a beam of that
Goodness, which issues from the Fountain God himself?

Secondly, God's Hate does not arise as his Love does: for his Love arises of
and from himself. For being all beautiful and glorious (which cannot be but
all lovely and amiable within) and seeing himself, cannot but love and like
himself; ^o that, he has in him to move him to Love, but he has not in him
to move him to Hate; but that comes from without, and there is nothing from
without which God hates, but sin. The man of sin had so much goodness, as to
say; Odi quia Inimicus: I have hated him, because he is my enemy. Now, sin only
is ^he sworn enemy to God: Enemy to his Goodness, being badnesse it self;
Enemy to his Majesty, being baseness it self; Ene^y to his Glory, being
Ignominy; to his lightness being Darkness; to his Beauty, being Deformity; to
his Justice, being Iniquity; to his Pity, being Cruelty; to his Life being
Death; to his very Being it self having no Being: Sin was an intruder into the
World, and had not where to lay his head. So that God cannot hate any thing,
but sin; and what he hates he hates for the sake of sin.

The second consequence is: No man is of absolute necessity the child of Hell,
so as by God's grace he may not avoid it. And this is a sprig of the former
Branch: For, if God cannot hate any man, but for sin, and himself cannot
delight in sin; then can he not delight that any man should go to Hell, but he
that delights himself to die in sin. Let us look back to the Garden from
whence we came: God planted in the Gardan of (...) a Tree of Life, and it was
(...) to be found as the Tree of Death; A^am with the same ease, might have
reached out his hand to the Tree of Life, and saved all; as to the Tree of
Death, and marred all: So that, it was not absolutely necessary, that any should
go to hell. When Adam had erred in making choice of the wrong Tree, and had
barred himself from the Tree of Life, God put him out into the open field of
the World and in it planted a Tree of Lif^ (better then the Tree in the Garden
of Ed^n) a Tree that came down from heaven, Apocal. 2.7. and cansed his Herald
to proclaim before it: This is the Tree of life that came down from Heaven;
whosoever tastes of this Tree shall not die, but have ^verlasting life. The
Tree which was in the Garden of Eden did never seek men, and reach forth fruit
unto them; but man was to seek, and to reach forth his hand unto it and so
taste it: But this Tree seeks us, and reaches forth fruit unto us. Nay, God
himself plucketh off the fruit, and follows us with it, as a Nurse does
follow her child with meat ( Psalm. 81.11.) Aperi os tuum late: Open thy mouth
wide, and I will fill it. And if w^ will not be at the (...) our mouth* that we
may be (...) Heaven, Death will be at the pains to o^en her jaws, that we may
feed him in hell: They lie in hell and Death knaweth upon them, Psalm, 49.14.

The third consequence is: God simply wills and wishes every living soul to
be saved, and to praise God for his goodness among the Angels in heaven. And
this Truth, the Holy Ghost has taught us by the mouth of holy Paul, 1. Tim. 2*
4. Deus vult omnes salvos esse* God would have every man living to be saved,
and none to die eternal Death. And here the Genevian conceit has dealt with
this gracious bounty of God, and this blessed saying [ God will have all to be
saved] as Hanan did with the Ambassadors of David, he cut off their Garments to
the hips, and this has curtailed the grace of God at the stumps: for it says:
It must not be meant, that God would have every living soul to come to Heaven;
but one or two out of every Order and Occupation to come unto heaven. As if our
gracious God were fallen out of liking with Christian souls, and suddenly
fallen in love with Orders and Occupations. And yet I fear me, beloved, it
were as easy to bring up all Christian souls unto heaven, as it is to bring
all Orders and Occupations thither. But the spirit of Peter (a great deal
wiser then that of Geneva) says plainly, 2. Ep. 3.9. Deus non vult^ Aliquem
perire, God would not have any one to perish, but to come to the knowledge of
the Truth. And, since it has Pleased Almighty God there to say it, and here in
my text to swear it, that he does not delight ^n the death of a sinner: I
trust, we shall ^^ve grace to believe him; since himself can better tell what
himself would have, then the man of Geneva can*

Now, if any man's mind does put this doubt: How it comes to pass, that so many
souls are dam^ed, if it be Gods will that every one should be saved? (for who
has resisted the will of the Lord?) I will easily resolve and clear him that
case. Gods will is plainly revealed in his holy Book* to be of two sorts: 1.
his absolute Will: and 2. his will with condition. His absolute Will said, Let
there be light, and there was light; Let there be a Firmament* and there was a
Firmament; Sun, st^nd thou still in Gibeon, and it stood still. This Will,
indeed, cannot be resisted, for it speaks but the word, and the thing is done.
But God has not this Will in the matter of our salvation, for then so should
we be saved, as the Heavens were made; but in the matter of our salvation God
uses his will with condition. And he has set us three conditions (according
to our three states) which if we break, we ^ustly forfeit our estate. The
first condi^^on was in paradise: Ne ede, and vives: (...) not, and thou shall
live: and that we would no^ keep. The second was under the Law, Fac hoc, and
vives: Do this, and thou shall live: and that we could not keep. The third is
under the Gospel? Creed, and vives: Believe, and thou shall live: and that we
may all keep: and if we keep it not, we forfeit our estates in Christ, and are
wilfully guilty of our own damnation. The Reason is sweet out of S. Austin: Qui
creat te sine te, non salvat te sine te: He that created thee without thee,
does not save thee without thee: but thou must seek, and thou shall find* ask
and thou shall have: knock and it shall be opened unto thee. For, not one of
every Order or Occupation, but every Christian Soul, that seeks, finds:
that asks, receives: and that knocks, it is opened unto him.

Fourthly, our next consequence is: That Almighty God (in his infinite love and
mercy toward man) sent his Son to dye and suffer hellish Torments, not for
Peter, James and John, and a few of the Elect only: but for the sins of every
sinful Soul in the world, and this Doctrine is so clear in the Book of God, as
that the Sun at midday shines not more bright. The Sun of man is come to seek
and to save that which was lost 19.10. Behold the Lamb of ^od that takes away
the sins of the world (Ioh 1.29) who is a propitiation for our sins, and not
for our sins only* but for the sins of the whole world. (1. Ioh. 2.2.) and here
the new Synechdoche chops off at a blow from the death of Christ all the
sensible parts in the world, and leaves him only the center to carry his wares
in. For it would teach us thus to say: God would have all to be saved, that is,
God would have a few to be saved: God would not have any to perish, that is,
God would that almost all should perish: so God loved the world that is, so God
loved a small number in the world: this is the Savior of the world* that is, a
Savior of an handful of the world. Satan's Synechdoche uses to be of the long
size, and the shortest last. Luc. 4.5.6. having there taken our Savior Christ
up into a high mountain, and showed him all the Kingdoms of the world, then he
begins to proclaim, all ^his is mine* and the glory of it all* and to
whomsoever I will, I give it all. Nothing ^ut all in the Devils mouth; yet if
he had been put to it, he would have perform^d nothing at all, or not part a
foot or two in the kingdom of darkness. When they are ashamed of th^s silly
shift, they take up another as bad as ^his, and that is, sufficiienter and
effi^^enter: Christ died (say they) sufficently for all, but not effectually;
that is, he meant not the good of his death to all: this device (beloved)
shadows the wisdom of our Savior Christ* and therefore they had as good
have kept it to themselves* For* I am sure, ye are persuaded in soul that our
Savior Christ by his death and passion made a full satis^action, for ^he sins
of all the sinful souls in the whole world. Which since he did, it sto^d as
much with his ease and more with his goodness, to communicate his goodness,
and ^he benefits of his precious death unto us all, as to appropriate them to a
few. But what an odd delusion were this, that a Christian Prince should
proclaim himself Redeemer of all ^he poor Christians under the Turk, and
should send over sufficient ransom for all the^r freedoms; and all the poor
captives (hearing the proclamation) should verily think they should be
redeemed; and then the Princ^ should thus interpret himself; I pro^laimed
indeed sufficiently to All, but I meant effectually but to a few? this gay
interpretation, what does it else, but shut up the gates of the Kingdom, and
will neither suffer the Interpreters themselves, nor others (that would) to
enter in.

The fith consequence is: Our Savior Christ offers saving Grace effectually to
all, to direct them to the Kingdom of Heaven; and all and every one may be
saved, that does not despise nor abuse the Grace of God. It Is a ^trang
doctrine, we should see, and say, that our Savior Christ calls and invites all
to repentance and amendment of life; and yet we should also say, and teach,
that he means not as he says; for he would not have every one to repent and
amend. Is God as a man, that he should dissemble? The Cripple that lay at the
beautiful Gate of the Temple, and fastened his eyes upon Peter and John; if
Peter and John had said unto him; up, arise, and follow us, and we will do thee
good; and yet had neither given him strength to rise, nor power to walk; would
not the Scribes and Pharisees have scoffed at them? We are by nature (beloved)
poor and miserable Cripples; we have neither hand to lif^ up to Heaven nor feet
to walk in the way of Gods Commandments, nor joints to move toward God:
Alas! poor miserable creatures that we are! What meant our Savior so to say
unto us?

A Noble man invites to his Table the Honorable Lord Mayor, and the Aldermen
his brethren, and (for the more grace unto them) send^ his Son and Heir to
meet them; and he tells them in his Fathers Name, that they should be right
welcome to his Fathers house, and that he has provided room and diet for them
all: and yet the Noble man (his Father) has a purpose to welcome but one or
two, and has provided room and diet but for one or two, and shuts up the Gate
against the rest. Having so solemnly invited them all, would they now then
think this Noble man had dealt nobly with them? Its our case (beloved): The
joys of Heaven are a feast of joy; and the King of Heaven has sent no less a
personage, then his only Son and Heir to invite us thither; and he tells us in
his Fathers name, that the King (his Father) had provided room and meat enough
for us, and that the Angels of Heaven will be glad to see us at their Masters
house, and that there will be a great Iubile in Heaven at our coming thither;
and yet the King his F^ther (says this new device) has a purpose to
entertain but one or two, and has provided cheer and room but for one or
two; and shuts up the everlasting doors against the rest (though solemnly
invited) eternally. Is this the royal word of a King? and here they come in
with Bellarmines dreaming; that is, Christ offers Grace to all sufficiently;
but it is not effectual or saving Grace. This is verily as drowsy a dream, as
ever dropped from that Phlegmatique head. First, there is nothing sufficient
for any thing, which is not efficient to that use too, Then whereas we teach
and say, that our Savior Christ offers saving Grace effectually to all; we
plainly mean that Grace, which has power, strength, and virtue to save all:
though all in effect are not saved by that Grace, and the want is not in the
^race, but in them who despise and abuse the Grace; it is a beam of the same
brightness that falls upon a clear, and upon a bleere-ey'd man, yet both do
not see, a Talent of the same we^ght wrapped up in a Napkin, and put to use, yet
both does not yield increase: Seed of the same goodness sown among Thorns,
and in good ground, yet both do not bring ^orth fruit, the cause is not in the
Beam, the Talent, the Seed; but in the Eye the Napkin the Ground. For, the
very same kernel of seed choked of Thorns, sown in good Ground would have
brought forth fruit: the very same Talent wrapped up in a Napkin, put to use
would yield increase: the very same Beam, that dazeled the bleere-eye, would
have made the clean eye see: and the very same* saving Grace, that is a savor
of Life unto one, is the savor of Death unto another: no odds in the Grace,
but in the Man, We all ten have Lamps and Light alike to light us to the
Kingdom of Heaven: yet but five of us with wise usage, shall keep our Lamps,
and Light, and enter in; and five of us, by foolshnesse shall let our Lamps
out, and stand without.

The Kingdom of Heaven (says our Savior in the same place) is like a man
that went into a far Country; and he committed to his servants, to one five
Talents, to another two, to another one; some ods in the number, but none in
the nature of the thing. For he that had least, had a Talent and (by all rules
of proportion) had as much ability to produce a Talent, as two to gain two, or
five to beget five; and he that had it, had as much liberty to use it, as he
that had two, or five: and if he had used it, and gained a Talent, he had been
as sure of a City in the Kingdom of God, as either of the other: and if he had
had a City, he had been well. For, a disciples reward is but a bare place,
without either cap, or covert upon it ( Ioh. 14.2.) I go to prepare a place
for you.

If thou blowest the spark (says the wise man Eccles. 28.12.) thou shall have
fire, and if thou spit upon it, it will go out: and both these came out of the
same mouth. I am come (says our Savior Christ) to send Fire o^ the earth: and
what is my desire, but that it may be kindled? so, he that has least of this
Fire has a spark at least. And there was never man so desperately wicked, but
at some time or other, he felt this spark of Gods Spirit glowing in his heart.
He that blows that spark may have a flame to light him to the Kingdom of
Heaven: and he that spits upon it, makes himself a brand fit to increase the
fire of Hell. The Apostle Paul therefore had a special care of this very
thing. 1. These. 5.19. Quench not the Spirit.

Sixthly, our last consequence is, that contempt and neglect of Grace is the
cause why any man does not come into Heaven: and not any privative decree,
council, or determination of God. God quits himself of our destruction by an
universal assertion; against which (upon the Genevian supposition) the house
of Israel might have said, and answered with ease: O God of our Fathers, what
meanest thou to say unto us, why will ye die, when thou have from all eternity
decreed, that we cannot but die? Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem (says our Savior)
thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are sent unto thee, how
often would I have gathered thee together, as a hen does gather her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not! there is Ego volui, I would, salus ex me,
thy salvation is wrought by me: tu noluisti thou would not: perditio ex te,
destruction is willed by thy self. Now, whereas it is devised by some, that
our Savior should weep over these Jews, as man, and laugh at them, as God,
(himself having decreed their destruction from all eternity,) this is a very
bad and profane device. For, it would make our Savior Christ to shed
Crocodiles tears, to laugh and lament both at once. And if this fancied
decree, of eternal designement to Hell without sin, had any sooth in it; then
must it needs be, that our Savior Christ was at that holy counsel in Heav^n,
when as this decree was pronounced and made, for God the Father (in wisdom)
could not make a decree, but by him who is the Wisdom of the Father) and if he
was in the bosom of his Father at this decree, and himself gave his voice and
consent unto it, that these I^ws should never come to heaven; neither by the
death, nor medi^tion of our Savior Christ; then would he not of his goodness
thus come down on the earth, and weep, and lament, that they would not be
saved. And the tenor of our Saviors deploration must then needs have been
this: Oh Jerusalem, Jerusalem* thou that killest the Prophets* and stonest them
that are sent unto thee; how often would I have gath^red thee together, as an
^en gathere^h her chickens under her wing^! but ye could not. For I and my
Father have sat in council in Heaven, and from all eternity have made a
decree, that ye should never come to heaven, though I my self a thousand times
should be crucified for you. And now, beloved (as the H. Ghost says) say not
ye, when ye have sinned, that God incited you to sin, for God cannot tempt you
to sin, and then condemn you for sinning: every man is his own tem^ter, and
his own tormentor.

To conclude: let us take heed and beware, that we neither, (with the Papists)
rely upon our free will: nor (with the Pelagian) upon our Nature: nor (with the
Puritan) Curse God, and die, laying the burden of our sins on ^is shoulders,
and the guilt of them at his everlasting doore^: but let u^ all fall down upon
our faces, give glory to God, and say, Unto thee, O Lord, belongs mercy and
forgiveness; unto us shame and confusion; for we have gone astray, we have
offended, and dealt wick^dly as all our fathers have done. But thou art the God
of mercy, that have swo^ne by the life* that thou d^st not delight in the death
of a sinner. And this grace God grant unto us, etc. Amen.

FINIS
BOOKS Printed for, and sold by, Gabri^l Bedel, and Thomas Collins, 1658. viz.
Books in Folio.
THe Complete Ambassador, containin^ the (...) of Sir Fran^is (...) and other
eminent (...) S^ries of the most rema^k^^le ^as^ag^s o^ sta^^ b^th at home and
abroa^ (...) of blessed memo^y, co^lect^d by Sir (...) D^^gs.

The Hist^^y of ^ivil w^rs (...) Fr^^ce, written in Italian by (...) Advila^
the whole fifteen books translated into English by Sir Ch^rls Cotterel and
William Alesbury.

Idem, The Continuation being Ten Books*

A Complete Chronicle of England, begun by John Stowe, and continued by Edmond
Howes Gent, With An Appendix of the Universities of England.

A French English Dictionary with an other in English and French, compiled by
Randal Co^grave Gent. Whereunto are added, The Annimadve^sions and Suppliment
of James Howel Esquire.

Annals Veteris Testam^nti, a prima mundi O^igine deducti, una cum rerum
Asiaticarum and Egyptiacarum Chronico temporis Historici Principio usque ad
Maccabaicorum initia producto, Iac^bo Vsserio Arm^chano digestore.

Idem Secunda pars. Vsque ad imperii Vaspatiani initia atque Extremum Templi
and Reipublicae Judiacae excidium deductu^, Authore Iacobo Vsseri^

Of Government and obedience, as they stand directed and determined by
Scripture and Reason, in Four Books, by John Hall of Richmond Gent.

Daltons Country justice, corrected and enlarged by the Authors own hand
before his death: unto which is annexed, An appendix or Abridgment of ^ll the
late Acts and Ordinances that relate to the Off^ce of a Justice of Peace, to
the year 1655, by a Barrester learned in the Laws.

I Ra^guagli di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parn^ssus, two Centuries, with
The Polyticke* Touchstone, written Originaly in Italian, by that famous Roman,
Trojano Bocalini, and now put into English by the right Hon. Henry E^r. of
Monmouth

The History of Philosophy in eight Parts, containing those on whom the
At^ribute of Wise was conferred, with the pictures of several Philosophers, by
Thomas St^nly Esquire,

Historical Relations of the United Provinces of Flanders, containing the
natural conditions of the people, with the forms of Government; With the
Complete History of the Wars of Flanders, written in Italian by the Learnad and
Famous Cardinal Bentivo^lio, Englished by the Right Honorable, Henry, Earl of
Monmouth, the whole Work illustrated with many Figures of Chief personages
men^ioned in this History.

Politic Discou^ses; written in I^alian by Paalo Peruta, a noble Venetian
Cavileer, and procurator of S. Mark: Whereunto is added, A short Soliloquy, in
which the Author briefly examines the whole course of his Life; rendered into
English by the Right Honorable Henry Ear. o^ Munmout^

E^dmeri Monachi Cantuarien^^s Historiae novorum sive s^i S^culi res Gestas sub
Gulielm. 1. and 11. Henric. 1. Emis^^ Johannes Seldenus.

Seldeni Mare Clausum, seu de Dominio Maris.

The History of King Henry the VII. written by the Right Honorable, Francis
Lord V^rulam, Viscount S. Alban, unto which i^ annexed a very useful Table.

Orlando Furioso, in English Heroical verse, illustrated with Figures, with an
adition of Epigrams, by Sir John Harrington.

The Marrow of the French Tongue, by John Woodro^^h Gent.

Pyrotechnea, Or the Art of Fire Works, with an addition of Logarithmes, by
John Babyngton, Student in the Mathematics.

Devotions upon certain Festivals, piously and learnedly expressed in
meditations, by that accomplished Genesis William Austin of Lincolns Inn Esquire.

* The Philosophy, commonly called The Morals; Written by the learned
Philosopher Plutarch. translated out of Greek into English, and conferred with
the Latin and French Translations, by Philemon Holland, Doctor of Physic.

The History of the Low Country Wars, written in Lattine, by Fami^nus Strada,
Englished by S. Robert Stapleton Knight; illustrated with diverse Figures.

Thirty Sermons lately preached at the Parish Church of S. Mary Magdelen
Milkstreet London. unto which is annexed, A Sermon preached at the funeral of
Sir George Whitemore Knight; by Anthony Farindon, B. D.

Books in the Press.
The Roman History of Titus Livius, Englished by Philemon Hollond, Doctor of
Physic, purged from many errors in the former Impression.

The first and second Volumes of the Annals of the World, written in Latin by
the Reverend James Usher, Bishop of Armagh, and Lord primate of Ireland; and
now faithfully translated into English by the aprobation of the said Bishop
before his death.

Books in Copartnershih with W. L. and D. P Folio. A Collection of Acts in the
years 1648, 1649, 1650* 1651, very useful, especialy, for Justices of the
Peace, and other Officers; with several other Ordinances of like concerment;
by Henry Scobel Esquire, Clerk to the Parliament, and Clerk of his Highnes^
Council.

A Collection of those Ordinances, Proclamations, Decl^rations, etc. which have
been Printed and published since the Government was established in his
Highness the Lord Protector, viz. from December 16. 1653. unto September 3.
1654. with their several date^ and dependencies; comprised in a lesser volume
then before, for the b^tter use and benefit of the Reader, Printed by his
Highness Printers.

An Epitome of all the common and Statute Laws of this Nation, now in force;
Wherein more the^ 1500. of the hardest words or terms of the Law are explained,
and all the most useful and profitable Heads or Titles of the Law by way of
Common place, are largly, plainly and me^hodically handled; with an
Alphabetical Table by William Shepherd, Esquire, Sergeant at Law; published by
his Highness ^peciall Command.

Lanes Reports in the Exchequer.

Reports of that Reverend and learned Judge, Sir Humphrey Winch knight,
sometimes one of the Judges of the Court of Common Pleas; containing many
choice Cases, and excellent matters, touching Declarations, Pleadings,
Demurrers, Judgments and Resolutions in point of Law in the four^ last years of
the Reign of King James*

The Reports of Edward Bulstrode of the inner Temple Esquire. Chie^ Justice of his
Highn^^^ in North Wales, containing many choice Cases, learnedly argued by the
Judges in the seventh, eight, ninth and tenth years of King James, l^gally
licensed and published by Authority.

* The Second Volume of the Reports of Edward Bulst^ede of the Inner Temple
Esquire. Chief Justice to his Highness In North Wales containing many choice Cases,
learnedly argued by the Judges, ^nding in the eleventh and twelfth ye^re of
King James, legally licensed, and published by Authority.

* The Eleven parts of Rep^rts of Sir Edward Cook ^ll faithfully translated
into English in one Volume.

Books in quarto
Caebala sive Scrinia Sacra, Mysteries of st^te and Government in several
Ambassies, and Letters b^ the great Ministers of state in the Reigns of ^
James, and the late K. Charles, collected by a noble hand, in two parts.

The Histo^y ^f Tit^es; that is, the practice of payment of them, the positive
Laws made for them, and the Opinions touching the right of them* And A R^vew of
it, is also annexed, which both confirms i^, and directs in the use of it, by
John Selde^ Esquire.

Miscell^n^a Spi^itualia, or Devout Essays, the f^r^t and second part wri^ten
by the Honorable Walter Mount^gue Esquire

The Christian Man, or the Reparation of Nature by Grace, Wri^ten in French by
that Elegant and pious Author Io. Francis Senault, Englished by H* G* sometime
Student of Christ. Church in Oxford

Potters Interpretation of ^he Number 666. or the number of the beast.

The History of the Grand Seignor Seraglio; ^o which is ^dded, ^he History of
China.

^oss* against Cope^nicus and Gallelaus, a ^earn^d and Philosophical piece,
concerning the ^arths motion.

An Ass^ze Sermon preached before the reve^^nd Judges* at Warwick, 1651* by W
Dur^am*

* The Regulating of Law Suits, Evidences an^ Pleadings; An Assize Sermon
preached at Carmarthen, March 16. 1656. by W. Thomas Vi. of Laug^orn^

Palmeri D' Oliva both parts complete.

The Recantation of an ill led life* or, The Discovery ^f the Highway Law, by
I. Clavel Genesis D. in Physic.

Obse^vations upon some particular persons and Passages, in a Book lately made
public; entitled, A complete History of the Lives and Reigns of Mary Queen of
Scotland and of her Son James the Sixth of Scotland, and first of England,
Fran^e an^ Ireland; Written by a Lover of the Truth.

Powels Search of Records

Books in Copartnership with W. L. and D. P. quarto.
Three Readings of the Lord Dier, Brograve and Risden, upon the Statute of
Wills, Iointures and Forcible E^^ries.

The Argument of the Learned Judges upon the wr^^ of Habeas Corpus, with the
Opinion of the upper-Bench Court thereupon; and Sir John Elliots Case.

The Atturneyes Academy, being the manner of Proceedings in all Courts of
Record at Westminster, and in all other Courts of Law or Equity, with the Fees
of the said Courts, collected by Tho. Powel.

Re^orts of certain Cases arising ^n the several Courts of Record at
Westminster in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, K. James, and K. Charles with the
Resolutions of the Judges, reviewed and approved, by Justice Go^bol^

The Touchstone of Common Assurance by William Shepherd Esquire.

The Parso^s Guide, or the Law of Tithes, by William Shepherd Esquire.

Plays in Folio, Quarto and Octav^*
Bartholomew Fair The Staple of News The Devil a^ Ass*
By Ben. Johnson in folio.

The I^s^ Gener^ll; by Cosmo M^nuch, in quarto.

The Wits The Platonic Lovers The triumphs of Prince D' Amou^, A Mask.
Written by Sir William D' Avenant in quarto

The Faithful Shepherdess by John Fletcher in quarto.

The Merry Wives of Winsor, by Shackspear in quarto.

Edward the 4, the first and second part, in quarto Michaelmas Term, in quarto.

Fine Comp^nion, in quarto.

The Phaenix, in quarto.

The Combat of Love and Friendship, by Do^tor

Mead, in quarto.

Polieuctes, or the Martyr, a Tragedy in quarto.

Horatius, a Tragedy in quarto.

The Hectors, or the false Chellenge in quarto.

The Raging Turk or Bajazet the second The Courageous Tur^ or Amurah the First
The Tragedy of Oxestes
Written by Tho. Goffe: Master o^ A^^s, and Student of Christs-Church, Oxfo^d,
newly reprinted in Octavo.

Books in Octavo.
Selected Odes of Horace, Englished by Richard Fanshaw Esquire.

An Apolo^y for Learning, and Learned Men, by Edward Waterhous Esquire.

Idem* His two Divine Tracts.

Lamberts A^ch^ion, or a Comment on the High Courts of Justice.

The Parsons Law.

^^lendarium Pastoral^, a Theodor^ Bathurst, in Latin and English.

The Cou^t-Keep^^s Guide, or a familiar Treatise of keeping of Court Leet and
Court Baron, by William S^e^hea^d Esquire* now Sergeant ^t Law.

Nature u^bowelled, or rare experiments in Physic^ and Chyrurgery, by Al^t^^a,
Countess of Arundel.

An Essay upon the first Book of Titus Lucretius Carus, de Rerum Na^ura;
Interpreted and made English Verse by John Evelyn Esquire, illustrated with
Historical Annotations.

Phinet^i Phyloxenes, Some choice Observations of Sir John Finnet Knight, and
Master of the Ceremonies to ^he two last Kings, touching the reception and
Precedence, the Treatmen^ and audience, the Punctilioes and Contests of Foreign
Ambassadors in England.

Two Romances. The Nuptial Love^ Hipolito and Isab^lla


Brinsleyes Small Coppy-Booke.

A Synopsis, or Compendium of the Fathers. The triumphant Lady, or, The Crowned
Innocent* a Choice and Authentic Piece of the Famous De Cereziers, Almoner to
the King of France, in English.

Gassendus his Li^e of Pereski^s, rendered into english.

A Golden Chain, or a Miscellany of Divine Sentences of the Sacred Scriptures,
and of other Authors, by Edward Bulstrode Esquire.

Books in Co^artnershi^ ^i^h W. L. and D. P. in Octavo.

Ashes Table to the Lord Cooks Eleven Repor^s, translated into English.

The New Natura Brevium, by An^h. Fitz-He^bert, translated into English.

The Whole off^ce of a Country Iu^tice of Peace, in two parts, reprinted with
Additions, by William Shepherd Esquire. now Ser^eant at Law.

I^em, His Clerks Cabinet, with Presidents and Forms.

A Learned Treatise in Commendation of the Common Laws of England, by Francis
Whit^ of Grayes Inn Esquire.

A Treatise collected ou^ of the Statutes of the Common-weal^h, and according
to common experience of the Laws, concerning the Office and Authorities of
Cor^ners and Sheriffs, together with An eas^er Method ^or keeping Court Leet,
Court Baron and Hundred-Courts, b^ John Wilkinson, to which is added, The
R^tu^n^ of Writs, by John Kitchen; all published in English.

The Clerks Vade Me^um, or a Choice Collection of Modern Pr^sidents, according
to the best Forms extant, and such as have not formerly been printed, useful
for all persons that have relation to the pr^ctick part of the Common Law.

Repo^ts and Pleas of Assizes a^ York, held before several Judges in that
Circui^e, with some Pre^idens useful for Pleaders at the Assizes.

Reports and Cases in Chancery, Collected by Sir George Carry, one of the
Masters of the Chancery in Anno 1601. out of the Labors of Mr. William
Lambert, with the Kings Order and Decree in Chancery, exemplified and enrolled
for a perpetual Record 1616.

Synopsis or an exact Abridgment of the Lord Cooks Commentaries upon Littleton*
being a brief explanation of the Grounds of the Common Law by the Learned
Lawyer Sir Humphrey Dave^port Knight, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, with
a Table of the most remarkable things.

A perfect A^ridgment of the Eleven Books of Reports of the Learned Knight Sir
Edward Cook, Chief Justice of the Upper Be^ch, Originally in French, by Sir
John Davi^s, Atturny General in Ir^land, done into English.

A ^reatise of the Principal Gr^unds and Maxi^s of the Laws of this Nation,
very useful and Commodious for all Stud^nts, toward the knowledge and
understanding of the Laws; written by that learned Expositor of the L^w,
VV^lliam No^ ^squire.

The reading upon the Statute of the thir^eenth of Elizabeth chap 7. touching
Banckrupts; le^rnedly and ^mply exemplified by John Stone of Graies Inn,
Esquire

* The Office of a Justice o^ Peace, whereunto is added, The Authors Iudgmen^
upon reading the Statu^es, very useful; by the learned William Fleetwood
^squire, sometime Recorder of London; now continued and fitted to this present
Government.

Books in Twelves*
The Books of Oaths, and the several forms thereof, both Ancient and Modern.
faithfully Collected out of several Authentic Books and Records not heretofo^e
extant, very useful for all persons whatsoever, especially those tha^
undertake any office of Magistracy or Public employment in this Commonwealth;
in Copartne^ship with W. L. and D. P,

Reliquiae VV^ttonianae or a Collection of Lives, Letters and Poems by Sir
Henry VVo^ton: Provost of ^aton, with the Authors Life.

The Picture o^ a Christian Man's conscience by Al^x. Rosse.

O^ liberty and servitude, Englished by L. E. Esquire.

Iac^^ons Evang^licall Temper.

Balzacks Prince, Englished by H. G. Master of Arts, and student o^
Christ-church in Oxford.

The Politic Christian Favorite, w^itten in Italian by the Marquess Malvezzi;
with the Life of Count de Olva^ez the King of Spaines great favorite, with
Political Observations and Maxims.

The Life and Reign of King ^dward the Sixth, by Sir John Heyward, Doctor of
the Civil Law.

Supplementum Lucam. per Thom^n May* Angl^-Lugduni Battavorum.

The Accomplished Woman, written by the honorable Walter Montague Esquire.

This Book.

T^ree Sermons Preached by the Reverend and Learned Doctor, Richard Stuart,
Dean of Saint Paul's, a^terwards Dean of Westminster, and Clerk of the Clo^et to
the late King Charles; Whereunto is added, A ^ourth Sermon of Vnivers^ll grace,
by Archbishop Harsne^.

The Ladies Ca^inet ^nlarge^ and opened, Comprised under three general heads:
viz. Pr^serving, Conserving, and Cand^ing. 2. Physic and Chyrurgery. 3.
Cookery and Housewisery: to which is added, a Choice extraction of waters,
Oiles, etc. Collected and Pr^ctised by the Right Honorable and Learned
Chimist, the Lord R^uthu^n.

Excellent and approved Receipts and Exp^riments in Cook^ry: with the best way
of preserving: as also, Rare forms of Sugar-works, according to the French and
English manner, Copyed from a Choice Manuscript of Sir Theodore Mayern Knight
Physician to the late King: never before printed.

Steps of Ascension to God: or A ladder to heaven: containing Prayers for every
day of the week: and all other occasions by Edward Gee Doctor in Divinity, the
ninth Impression: in 24.

FINIS*

