A DISCOURSE Concerning the UNREASONABLENESS OF A New Separation, On account of
the OATHS. WITH An ANSWER to the HISTORY of PASSIVE OBEDIENCE, So far as
relates to THEM.

LICENSED, October the 25th. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXXIX.

THE CONTENTS.
SOme general Reflections upon the New Separation, on account of the Oaths p.
1, etc. Of Oaths in general p. 3. Whether the Obligation of the former Oaths
continues ibid. The general Good the Measure of Obligation p. 5 Of the State of
Slavery p. 6 No such thing as absolute Power in Nature p. 7 Of a State of
Usurpation p. 8 Allegiance to be measured by the Laws ibid. No Apostasy from
the Church of England by taking the present Oaths. The History of Passive
Obedience considered, and the Force of the whole resolved into three Points,
viz. p. 9. 1. That the present Oath is to the Prejudice of a third Person 2.
That it is contradictory to our former Oaths p. 11 3. That the Person who had
the Right has given no release p. 12 Dr. Hammond's Arguments considered ibid.
Our Constitution considered, and that it is a Branch of it for the three
Estates to limit the Succession, and determine the Oaths of Allegiance p. 13 So
it was under the British and Saxon Government ibid. England a true successive
Monarchy, and yet Reason of State and the public Good was wont to overrule p.
19 And it was lawful to transfer Allegiance accordingly ibid. Of the Norman
Line p. 20 The Case of Maud and Stephen ibid. of York and Lancaster p. 23 The
Agreement of Richard Duke of York and Hen. vi. ibid. An Oath of Allegiance,
declarative of Right or Submissive p. 25 Of a King in Possession, according to
our Constitution, and the difference between a King de Jure and de Facto, and
an Usurper p. 28, 29, 30 Of the Rise and Reason of that Difference de facto and
de jure p. 32 The Case of the Lady Jane p. 31 The Case of K. John and Lewis.
The Homilies considered p. 32 The Case of Tiberius p. 34 and of the Jews under
him p. 36
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 21. read of England. P. 10. l. 24. r. to preserve the Right of,
etc. P. 18. l. 8. r. tied. P. 27. l. 28. But it may be said, Our -- P. 36. l.
ult. after place r., P. 37. l. 1. r. as at that -- and after state r., P. 38.
l. ult. for can r. such: Marg. l. 6. r. confestim.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation On account of
the OATHS.
SIR,
YOur former Letter gave me an Account of Your own and others Dissatisfaction
about the Oaths; but your second carries the Point a great deal farther; for
therein you tell me, Those who are unsatisfied, think themselves bound to
separate from the Communion of those who have taken them; and that if Ease be
not given to the Scrupulous, new Congregations will be immediately formed; and
therefore you beg my Assistance in clearing these Points, in order to the
preventing a New Separation.

I was not a little surprised at the reading these Passages; and I soon
apprehended the mischievous Consequence of a new Schism, especially among the
Members of the Church of England: But I can hardly think it possible that those
who have expressed so great a Sense of the Mischief of it in others, should be
so ready to fall into it themselves, and that upon the mere Account of
Scruples; when the Difference is only about the Resolution of a Case of
Conscience, wherein Wise and Good Men may easily differ: But it cannot be a
Mark either of Wisdom or Goodness, to separate from those who do so. Some think
the Oaths lawful, and therefore take them; others do not, and therefore
forbear: But is taking the Oaths made a Condition of Communion with us? Is it
required of all who join in our Worship, at least, to declare, That they think
the taking of them to be lawful? If not, what Color can there be for breaking
Communion on the Account of the Oaths?

Suppose those who take the Oaths are to blame; If they act according to their
Consciences therein, what Ground can there be of Separation from them for so
doing, unless it be lawful to separate from all such who follow the Dictate of
an Erroneous Conscience? And so there can be no End of Separations, till all
Men's Consciences judge alike: for a Man's Conscience in his practical Judgment
concerning Moral Actions; and there are so many Circumstances, which vary the
Nature of such Moral Actions, as Oaths, that I do not wonder to see Men differ
about them; but I should wonder and lament to see them separate from each other
for the sake of such a Difference.

But, there is a great deal of Difference between a Tenderness and a Sowreness
of Conscience. There is a natural Tenderness in the Eye, which makes it apt to
be offended with Mores; and in that Case it is to be gently dealt with: But
when an ill Humor falls into it, there seems to be greater Tenderness, but
from a worse Cause; and then the best way of Cure is to sweeten or remove the
bad Humor which caused it. I cannot imagine why, because some Men's Consciences
are so tender in the Point of Loyalty, that they cannot take the Oaths, that
they must be so tender too, as not to join in Communion with those who do it.
This seems to come from another Cause, and not from the Original Scruple: Are
they afraid of joining with others, not so tender as themselves? This is the
Scruple about mixed Communion, which has been so long exploded among us. What
then? Have we hereby changed the Standard of our Communion, or are there in
this Case imposed any new Terms of Communion with us? How then comes a Scruple
about the Oaths, to lead men to think of a Separation? How come they to make so
much Conscience of one, and so little of the other? Is a Separation from our
Church become a Duty with those, who so lately looked on it as so great a Fault
in others? But, I perceive, a tender Conscience is like a tender Constitution,
it is soon put out of Order: So much greater Care then ought those to have who
forsake any worldly Advantages for the sake of their Consciences, lest that
which begun with a Scruple, at last end in Humor and Faction, and the Ruin of
that Church, which they have always pretended to value.

But to leave these general Reflections, I shall now apply my self to the main
Point, Whether there be any Reason for these Scruples about the Oaths? for if
there be not, it will be granted that there can be no Reason for a Separation
on the Account of them. If there be any Reason, it must arise, either from the
continuing Obligation of the former Oaths; or from the Nature of the present
Oaths: And therefore I shall enquire into two things:

First, The Nature and Measure of the Obligation of Political Oaths in general.

Secondly, The Difficulties which relate to our Oaths in particular.

First, As to the Nature and Obligation of Political Oaths; by which I mean
such as have immediate and particular Respect to Human Society, and the
Government we live under; as all Oaths of Allegiance do.

And herein the Difference lies between those and the common Oaths between Man
and Man; because these are founded on an Equality of Right, but the other on
the general Security of Human Society.

In Political Oaths we must distinguish the particular Intention and Designs of
the Persons to whom they are made, from the general End and Scope of the Oaths
themselves. I do not deny but such Oaths at first came from the Mistrust, which
those in Power had, of such as were at present in Subjection to them. And
because the Fears of a Deity made the strongest Impressions on People's Minds,
therefore they were not contented with bare Promises, but they added the
Solemnities of Oaths, that they might look on God as concerned, both as a
Witness and a Judge.

But if we search narrowly into this Matter, the Obligation comes not from the
bare Oath, but from something antecedent to it, or from the Promise contained
in it, to which the Oath adds greater Solemnity on the Account of Religion.
Less. de Just. and Iure, l. 2. c. 17 n. 52.
And therefore it is generally resolved by the Civilians as well as Casuits,
That an Oath follows the Nature of the thing about which it is conversant; for
that, say they, is the Principal, and the other is but the Accessory; and the
Accessory still follows the Nature of the Principal.

Even Molina, Molina de Just. and Iure, tr. 3. disp. 150.
who is noted for singularity in this Matter, (for asserting, That an Oath
added an Obligation of Justice besides that of Religion) yet when he comes to
explain himself, he founds it on the Promise included in the Oath, and not in
the Oath it self: For after an Oath taken, such as the Obligation was before,
such is it after, and the Promise contained in an Oath admits of the same
Conditions, which it would have had, if no Oath had been joined with it.

If there be a Law, which makes a Contract void, on the Account of the Public
Good, the adding an Oath to such a Contract does not make it valid: As for
Instance, if the Law of a Country makes void all clandestine Marriages; if a
Man marries a Woman after such a manner, although this be an Obligation of the
strictest Nature: Yet such is the Force and Power of Laws made for a Public
Good, that although the Intention of one Person was to tie the other in an
indissoluble Bond; yet the Law supersedes that Obligation, or else it is made
to no purpose, at least, so far as it relates to the Civil Contract, which is
as much as is necessary to my purpose; for, even that has an obligation of
Conscience going along with it, which however in this Case is superseded for
the Public Good.

I do not deny, that the chief Intention of those who require Oaths of
Allegiance to themselves, is to bind men as fast as may be to them; and there
is a Personal Obligation consequent upon it. But then, I say, that the Rule and
measure of it, is not to be taken from such Intention of the persons, but from
the General Good, which was chiefly intended in such things. For, there is a
Common Good of humane Society, which Mankind have an obligation to, antecedent
to that obligation they are under to particular persons. For, as Magistrates
were designed for a general Good, so the obligation to them must be understood
so, as to be still in subordination to the main end.

And it is agreed on all hands, That an Antecedent and Superior Obligation
does void that which is subsequent and inferior, when they contradict each
other; else an Oath might bind a Man to sin; which no man will assert.

Therefore whatsoever the Intention of the Persons was, How strict soever the
Expressions may be, if the keeping of the Oath be really and truly inconsistent
with the welfare of a People, in subverting the Fundamental Laws, which support
it; I do not see how such an Oath continus to oblige: For, there is no Relation
of Mankind one to another, but there is some good antecedent, which is the just
measure of that Obligation they stand in to each other. Thus it is between
Parents and Children, Husbands and Wives, Masters and Servants; and therefore
it is most reasonable to be so between Princes and their Subjects.

A Vow to God is as solemn a thing as an Oath; but our Savior declares, if it
hinders that Good which Children are bound to take care of with respect to
Parents, it cease to oblige. If Parents, instead of regarding the Good of
their Children, do openly design their Ruin, and contrive ways to bring it
about; none will say but that they are bound to take care of their own welfare,
although such Parents may call it Obstinate Disobedience. For, even the
Government of Parents, as natural as it is, is not Absolute, but is limited by
Reason and the Good of their Children. And when they are of age, they are
allowed to judge of what concerns their welfare, and (if it be necessary) to
withdraw from their Parents immediate care, but preserving a due Reverence and
Respect to them.

The hardest Case we can suppose, is that of Slavery, i.e. of Dominion by
Force; but although the Law of Nations allows it, yet it is with such
limitations, as still show, That whatever the condition of men be, with respect
to one another, there is still a Regard to be had to the Benefit of those who
are in subjection to others.

The only thing which makes a state of Slavery reasonable, is, That when men
are taken Captive by others, they are at their Mercy; and the giving of life is
so great a benefit, as cannot be compensated by any thing less than a perpetual
Service; and in consideration of it, the Master is to afford Protection and
Maintenance. Still we see all reasonable subjection is in order to some Good of
those who are under it; and without it, as Aristotle says, They are not used
as Men, but as Tools. And it is agreed by the best Writers on this Subject,
That if the Slave be kept in Chains, he is under no obligation of Conscience to
him that keeps him; but he may find his own way to escape, because he is
treated as an Enemy, and therefore has all the Right of War on his side. But
if he yields upon Terms, then he is under Obligation, but it is according to
the Terms upon which he yielded himself.

Mr. Hobbs indeed says, De Cive c. 8. n. 7.
That those who submit upon Compact, are capable of no Injury afterward;
because they have given up their Wills already, and there can be no Injury to a
willing mind. But this is very false reasoning; for himself grants, That where
there is such a Compact, there goes some Liberty or Privilege along with it.
And it is not to be imagined, that such who entered into compact for their
Benefit, should renounce all right to it when they have done it; and if they
have Right, they may be wronged. And in the case of the greatest Slavery,
Natural Equity was required, and a Common Right was still due to Slaves, Arist.
Nic. l. 8. c. 13. Sen. de Clem. l. 1. c. 18.
as Men: So that Nature owns no such thing, as mere Absolute Power in some over
others, merely for their own advantage; but all Reasonable Power supposes
Consent, and a Good to be attained by it. But when it is carried to a contrary
end, it is against the Intention of Nature, which lays an obligation on some
men toward others, with regard to a Common Good, which cannot otherwise be
attained.

It is not denied by the strictest Casuists in these matters, but that under a
state of usurpation, notwithstanding their Oaths to the Rightful Prince, men
are bound to do those things which tend to the Public Safety as well as their
own. But then they found it upon a presumptive Consent of the absent Prince;
whereas, the true Reason is, That Men are in the first place bound to promote
the Public Good, and consequentially, and with respect to it, to regard the
Will of their Princes, who are appointed by God and Nature for that end. And if
such be rendered incapable of doing it, yet the Obligation on others remains.
Whereas, if it depended on the Will of the absent Prince, his presumptive Will
would not be sufficient; for that can lay no obligation.

But, that the Public Good is the true and just measure of the Obligation in
these Oaths, does further appear, in that the Oaths are reciprocal. Whereas, if
only the Good of the Persons to whom Oaths of Allegiance are made, were to be
our Rule, then there would be no mutual Oaths. I am not now enquiring how far
in reciprocal Oaths one Party's failing disobliges the other, but I am showing,
That it must be a General Good that is aimed at when both Parties are sworn to
each other; so it was in the strictest Feudal Allegiance, the Lord was as much
sworn to the Tenant to protect and defend him in his Rights, as the other was
to attend him in his Wars for the security of his Person. And this was
certainly founded on a mutual Contract, called by the old Feudists Liga, and
thence Ligeas and Ligeantia, and so our Allegiance. The words of Glanvil and
Bracton and the Customary of Normandy, Mutua quidem debet esse Dominii and
Homagii fidelitatis connexio, ita quod quantum debet homo Domino ex homagio,
tantum illi debet Dominus ex Dominio praeter solam Reverentiam. Glanvil. l. 9.
c. 4. Bracton. l. 2.. 2. Cust. Norm. c. 43.
are plain, to show the Reciprocal Obligation in this Case, and the measures on
both sides were to be the Rights, and Customs, and Laws of the Land. So that
Allegiance originally implies a Compact, and is to be measured by the Laws,
which are the Standard of the Public Good of a Country.

2ly, Having thus in general fixed these grounds to proceed upon, I come to the
particular examination of the difficulties which relate to the present Oaths;
and because we are charged with Apostasy from the Principles of the Church of
England, and that is made the main ground of the designed Separation, I would
fain know what this Charge is built upon, with respect to the Oaths, for that
is all we are concerned in. If any particular Persons have advanced new
Hypotheses of Government, contrary to the Sense of our Church, let them answer
for themselves. The Case of the Oaths is quite of another Nature.

Here is no Renouncing the Doctrine of Passive Obedience, or asserting the
Lawfulness of Resistance; but the single Point is, Whether the Law of our
Nation does not bind us to Allegiance to a King and Queen in actual Possession
of the Throne, by consent of the Three Estates of the Realm? and whether such
an Oath may not lawfully be taken, notwithstanding any former Oath?

And by this very stating of the case, any one may see how impertinent to this
purpose the Book called the History of Passive Obedience is; the truth is,
there are not many passages in it which come near the business; but those that
do, contain in them the main difficulties which relate to the Oaths, and
therefore I shall impartially consider them. Which are these, I. That they are
to the prejudice of a third Person. II. That they are contradictory to a former
Oath. III. That the Person to whom they were made, has given no release or
discharge from them.


For the first we have these Testimonies; Bishop Hall, p. 46. says, That a
Promissory Oath, which is to the certain Prejudice of another man's Right,
cannot be attended with Justice.

Bishop Sanderson, p. 61. An Oath imposed by one that has not a just
Authority, is to be declined as much as we can; if it be forcibly imposed, it
is to be taken with reluctance, upon this condition, that the words imply
nothing unlawful or prejudicial to the Rights of a third Person; for if so, we
must refuse the Oath at the peril of our lives.

I grant, it is a Rule among the Casuists, That an Oath ought not to be taken
to the Prejudice of a third Person; but so it is likewise, That it ought not to
be taken against the Public Good; Zoes. in Dig. l. 12. Tit. 2. n. 66
and these two are often put together. It is a sin, says Zoesius, to make a
compact to the public prejudice and injury of another; and an Oath that is
conversant about such a matter, is unjust, and not to be kept. So that the
Right of a Third Person is not to be taken as distinct from the Public Good;
for, if it be inconsistent with it, there is no ground to set up a personal
Interest against a General Good. And so far a Mischief is better than an
Inconvenience; for it is a standing Rule in Reason as well as Law, Jus publicum
privatorum pactis mutari non potest.
The public Right cannot be changed by the Contracts of particular Persons,
ff. l. 2. tit. 14. If a Man takes an Oath to a third Person, to do something
which the Law forbids; although he suffers by it, yet it is concluded, That
such an Oath does not bind, because the Public Good is to be preferred, As
often as a Compact does depart from the Common Right, it ought not to be kept;
nor is an Oath requiring it to be observed. ff. l. 2. tit. 14. Iuris Gentium.
16. And again, An Oath against the Force of Law and Authority of Right is of no
moment. What is the Reason that an Oath does not bind against the Law? Is not
the Authority of God above that of Men? No doubt of it; but since God has
established Government and Laws for a Public Good, their meaning is, That Men
cannot by any Act of their own be bound to overthrow it, in what solemn manner
soever it be done.

It is resolved in the Text of the Canon Law, in the King of Hungary's Case,
That an Oath taken against the good of the Kingdom, does not oblige, de
jurejur. c. 33. intellecto; although it were to the Prejudice of others,
because it was in Praejudicium Regni sui, to the Prejudice of his Kingdom;
which was more to be regarded; and because it was contrary to the Oath which he
took at his Coronation, Iura Regni sui illibata servare, That the Rights of the
Kingdom were to be preserved inviolable.

Sylvester in sum. 6. juram. 4. n. 16. says roundly, That an Oath does not
bind against the Public Good in the first Place; but if it be for a Private
Benefit principally, and consequentially for the Public, then the Oath holds;
because still the public Good is to overrule in all such Oaths.

If a Man swears to keep a Secret, and that be to the Prejudice of a third
Person, the Casuists say, That Oath does not oblige; how much less, where the
Public Interest and safety is concerned?

And it is generally agreed by our Divines, That an Oath of Secrecy, where the
Public Safety is in Danger, does not bind; as in Garnet's Case, who pleaded
his Oath for not discovering the Gun-powder-Treason. Now if an Oath does oblige
against the common Good, Garnet made a good Plea; for his Discovery was to the
Prejudice of others: but if his Plea was naught, then the Public Good does
make the Obligation of an Oath to cease.

Suppose a Man makes a Contract with another, who thereby acquires a Right; yet
if that Contract be against the common Good, and be confirmed with an Oath;
that Oath does not oblige, says Bonacina, de contract. disp. 3. q. 1. p. 1.

There are two sorts of Law, says Suarez, which respect the Public Good; some
which concern ipsum statum Reipub. and utilitatem communitatis; the general
State of the Commonwealth, and Benefit of the Community: Others which concern
Bonum commune mediante privato; that common Good which results from every Man's
Good: against the former, he says, an Oath cannot oblige; but in the latter,
it may, as far as concerns his own Benefit. Suarez de juram. l. 2. c. 26. No
Obligation, though sworn to, is of any Force against those things which are
owing to God and the Kingdom, says Zei^lerus in his Notes on Grotius de jure
B. and P. l. 2. c. 13.. 7.

From all this it appears, That if the Right of a third person be inconsistent
with the public Good, such an Oath does not oblige. And it is to be observed,
That those Persons, whose Testimonies are alleged, never put the Case of the
Right in a third Person and a Public Good standing in Competition; and
therefore they do not reach our present Case.

II. It is alleged, That this Oath is contradictory to a former Oath.

Bishop Hall again, History of passive Obedience, p. 46. No Oath is or can be
of Force that is made against a lawful Oath formerly taken; so that he that
has sworn Allegiance to his Sovereign, and thereby bound himself to maintain
the Right, Power and Authority of his said Sovereign, cannot by his second Oath
be tied to do ought that may tend to the infringement thereof; and if he has
so tied himself, the Obligation is, ipso facto, void and frustrate.

No Doubt, if the first Oath continues in Force, the second is void, so far as
it contradicts it. But we say, The former Oath is not in Force, as it is
repugnant to the public Good, and so the second may be taken without any
Contradiction: And if the Doctrine there laid down holds in our Case, I cannot
see how it is consistent with the former Oath, for any such Persons to continue
under the Protection of the present Government, or to enjoy the Benefit of the
Laws; or to take out a Writ in their Names, any more than to pray for them; the
one being owning their Authority as much as the other.

III. Because the Person who had the Right has given no Release.

For this Dr. Hammond is quoted, in his Practical Catechism, History of Passive
Obed. p. 54. S. but was not Tiberius an Usurper, and yet Christ says, Render
to Caesar the things that are Caesar's. C. Julius Caesar wrested the Power out
of the Hand of the Senate; but before the Time of Tiberius the Business was
accorded between the Senate and the Emperors, That the Emperors now reigned
unquestioned, without any Competition from the Senate; which Case, he says, is
distant from other forcible Usurpations, where the Legal Sovereign does still
claim his Right to his Kingdoms, and to the Allegiance of his Subjects, no way
acquitting them from their Oaths, or laying down his Pretensions.

To clear this Matter, I shall enquire into two things.

1. How far a Discharge is necessary from the Person concerned.

2. How far our Savior's Rule holds in our Case?

As to the former, I say, The Resolution of Conscience in this Case does not
depend upon the Will and Pleasure of the Person to whom the former Oath was
made, but upon the Grounds on which it was made, and from which it had its
force to oblige: And if those cease, the Obligation of the Oath ceases together
with them. And whether they do or not, no particular Person is so fit to judge
as the three Estates of the Realm; as I shall now prove from several remarkable
Instances to this purpose in our Histories and Parliament Records; whereby I
shall make it appear, That when a Dispute has happened about the Right of
Succession, and to whom the Oaths of Allegiance were to be made, they have
looked on it as their proper Right, To limit the Succession, and to determine
the Oaths.

Under the British Government, we find a considerable Instance to our Purpose;
Vortigern the British King had entered into a Secret League, To bring over the
Saxons; upon which the Great Men of the Nation deserted him, and chose Vortimer
in his room. Here it is plain, They thought the introducing a Foreign Power, A.
G. 454. Magnates Brit. Regem Vortigernum penitus deserentes, unanimiter filium
suum in Regem sublimaverunt. Mat. West. p. 83,
a sufficient Discharge of their Obligation to him, it being so directly
contrary to the public Good of the Nation, although Vortigern gave them no
Discharge.

In the Saxon Times, Sigebert King of the West Saxons, was complained of for
Misgovernment, and for changing their Laws for his own Ends; but when he
persisted in his Way, there was a Convention of the Nobility and People,
(convenerunt Proceres Regni cum Populo universo, says Matt. Westminster) and
they declared themselves free from Allegiance to him, Cum autem modis omnibus
male tractaret eos, legesque antecessorum suorum propter commodum suum, vel
depravaret, vel mutaret. Matt. West. A. D. 756. H. Huntingd. l. 4. p. 196.
and chose Kineulfus in his room.

In the Kingdom of Mercia Beornredus for not governing by the Laws, was by a
Convention of the Nobility and People set aside from the Government, and Offa
chosen King; who was of the Royal Stem, but not the next Heir; and so William
of Malmsbury observes, in the West Saxon Kingdom after Ina, A G 758. Genesis de
Regno Merciorum, contra Regem suum Beornredum insurgens, pro eo quod Populum
non aequis legibus, sed per tyrannidem gubernaret, convenerant in unum omnes,
tam nobiles quam ignobiles, and Offa Duce ipsum a Regno expulerunt, Mat. West.
That no lineal Succession was then observed; but still some of the Royal Line
sat in the Throne. Nam and ipse Brithricus and caeteri infra Inam Reges licet
Natalium splendore gloriantes, (quippe qui de Cerdicio originem traherent) non
parum tamen a linea regiae stirpis exorbitaverant, Will. Malmsb. de Gestis Reg.
Angl l. 1. c. 2.
And of Ina himself, Regnum per Inam novatum qui Cinegisli ex Fratre Cuthbaldo
pronepos magis pro insitlvae virtutis industria, quam successivae sobolis
prosapia in Principatum ascitur. id. ib.
That he was rather put into the Throne for his Virtue, than by Right of
Succession.

Aethelulphus, Matthew. West. A. D. 854, 867.
King of the West Saxons, went to Rome, and there crowned Alfred, his youngest
Son, King, and married the King of France's Daughter in his Return, and made
her Queen, against their Laws; for which Reasons he was excluded his Kingdom:
His eldest Son and Alstan, Bishop of Shireburn being at the Top of this Act of
Exclusion; and he came back only upon the Terms of receiving his Son into a
Share of the Kingdom: Which shows, That they looked on the Laws as the Measure
of their Allegiance; and where those were openly broken, that it was in their
Power to transfer it.

If our Allegiance cannot be transferred by the States of the Realm, it must be
because (as some think) by the fundamental Constitution of this Kingdom we are
bound in Allegiance to the next right Heir in a Lineal Succession; but I find
no such thing in the Saxon Times: for although generally they kept to the Royal
Line, yet not so, but that when it appeared to be much more for the Public
Good, they did not stick upon the Point of Proximity. I shall not meddle with
the Kingdom of the Northumbers, which alone was originally Elective, Mat. West.
p. 101.
as appears by Matt. Westminster; wherein there happened so great Disorders and
Confusions, Bromton p. 862.
that at last William of Malmsbury says, W. Malmsbur. l. 1. c. 3. p. 14.
None could be persuaded to accept of the Kingdom; and so it continued thirty
three Years, till at last Egbert took it into his Hands; and so it became a
Part of the English Monarchy; which was established in him.

But if by the fundamental Constitution, Allegiance were indispensably due to
the next Rightful Heir in this Monarchy, how came Athelstan to be crowned,
magno consensu Optimatum, says Malmsbury, when he was not the Rightful Heir?
Some say (from an old Monk in Malmsbury) That his Father left him the Crown by
his Testament; (which does not clear the Difficulty as to the inviolable Right
of Succession by the Constitution). But this cannot be true, for his elder
Brother Elwardus died after his Father; and none pretend that his Father
disinherited him: And if Athelstan were lawful Heir, what made him to dispatch
his Brother Edwin out of the way, Mat. West.
and to build two Monasteries for Expiation of that Guilt? A. D. 934.
How came Alfred to oppose his Election, A. D. 939.
as being illegitimate, as Malmsbury confesses? But Matt. Westminster gives the
Reason, The Times were then difficult, and Edward's other Sons were too young
to manage the Government, and therefore they set up Athelstan, as one fit for
Business.

How came Edred to succeed Edmond, and not his Sons Edwin and Edgar? Mat. West.
A. 946. Bromton. p. 862. Flor. Wigorn. A. 949.
Matt. Westminster and Bromton give the same Reason; They were incapable by
reason of their Age, Repugnante illegitima aetate, Patri succedere non
valebant. Florence of Worcester says, The Northumbers swear Allegiance to
Edred; and he says, He was next Heir, and yet there were two Sons of Edmond
before him; for he confesses, That they were the Sons of Edmond and Algiva his
Queen.

After the Death of Edred, the eldest Son of Edmond succeeded; but being found
under a Moral Incapacity, (for in Florentius his Words, A. 957.
and Matt. Westminster, In commisso Regimine insipienter egit) he was set
aside, as to all the Government beyond Thames, and Edgar put into it: And not
long after into the whole Kingdom, by general Consent.

How came a Dispute to happen about the Election, after the Death of Edgar,
between his eldest Son Edward, and Etheldred his youngest? I lay no Force on
his Mother's Endeavors to advance him; but if there had been such an
unalterable Right of Succession, there had not been any Color or Pretense for
it; especially since it is said, That his Father declared his Mind, That the
elder should succeed. A. 975.
But says Florentius Wigorn. There was a great Contention among the great Men,
about the Choice of the King: How could there be any Dispute, if they knew the
Constitution of the Kingdom to be, That the next Heir must inherit the Crown;
and that those are perjured who transfer their Allegiance?

After the Death of Ethelred, Florent. Wigorn. A. D. 1016.
the Nobility and People were divided, some choosing Canutus the Dane, and
swearing Allegiance to him; others to Edmund the Son of Ethelred.

The former pleaded for themselves, W. Malm. l. 2. p. 35. 2.
That Ethelred had broken his Faith with them, and therefore they deserted him,
so as he was fain to fly into Normandy; and that Edmond was not his legitimate
Son.

Matt. Westminster says, Mat. West. A. D. 1013, 1015, 1016
That the greatest part of the Nation, Clergy as well as Laity, did swear
Allegiance to Canutus; without any Discharge from Ethelred, while living, or
his Son after him.

After the death of Canutus, A. 1055.
a new difference arose about the Succession; some were for Harold his supposed
Son by Algiva, others for Hardecnute, his Son by Emma. If the lineal Succession
were a part of our Constitution, How come such perpetual Disputes to be
concerning it? For, if it had been owned as a Fundamental Law, the Right of
Succession must have been clear beyond Dispute. But Reason of State and the
Public Interest still overruled this matter, and so Ethelred's Sons by Emma,
who were the true Heirs by Legal Succession, were set aside, and Harold, being
upon the Place, and so best able to manage the Affairs of the Kingdom, carried
it.

Hardecnute being dead, how came the banished Sons of Edmund Ironside, if he
were lawful Heir, not to be sent for to succeed? If Edmund had no good Title,
how was the Right of Succession then preserved? How could Allegiance on these
Principles be sworn to him? If he had a good Title, How could the Oaths be
taken to Edward the Confessor, when the Heirs of Edmond Ironside were living? I
perceive some, to salve the Succession, make the Mother of Edmond to have been
Ethelred's first Wife, and call her Elgiva Duke Thored's Daughter; but William
Malmsbury says, She was so obscure a person, Will. Malm. l. 2. p. 40.
that she was not known; and that Edmond Ironside made up what was wanting in
the management of his Father, and the Quality of his Mother. And the same is
said by Matt. Westminster. Mat. West. A. 1015. Florent. A. 102.
Florentius Wigorn, shows the reason of the mistake; for he says, That Emma,
Ethelrede's Queen, was in the Saxon Language called Algiva; and so, out of two
Names, Append. 7. ad vit. Alt. Bromton inter 10. Script. p. 877.
they have made two Queens. Bromton leaves the matter in Dispute, and says
some affirm, The Mother of Edmond was betrothed to King Ethelred, and was the
Daughter of Count Egbert: Others, That she was a Stranger and a Concubine. Now,
if a Man's Conscience be strictly hid in such Oaths of Allegiance, to the Right
Heir in a lineal Succession, what satisfaction can he have as to the taking
them, since he is then bound to satisfy himself in the strict Justice of a
Title? For, if Edmond's Mother was not married, he had no Title, and no Oath of
Allegiance could be taken to him; and whether he was married or not, for all
that we can perceive, there was a great doubt at that time, and so continued.
And, it is not easy to determine what is to be taken for Marriage in a Prince,
unless the Law be the Rule. And, if the Law determines the nature of Contracts
in Princes, why not as well the Obligation of Subjects? For, if there be no
Rule, it is not possible to satisfy Conscience in the Niceties of Titles; if
there be a Rule, the general Consent of the People, joined with the Common
Good, seems to have been that which our Ancestors proceeded by.

I do not hereby go about to set up the Power of the People over Kings, which
is in effect to overthrow Monarchy; for then the whole Sovereignty lies in the
People, and Kings are but their Servants: And so there is but one sort of
Reasonable Government, viz. that of a Commonwealth. Whereas, from the eldest
times, the Rights of Sovereignty have been placed in single Persons, before any
Popular Governments were known; and Monarchy has been ever esteemed a distinct
and a reasonable Government, especially where it is limited by Laws, and those
Laws made by the Consent of the People, i.e. by the Three Estates of the Realm;
which are together the true Representatives of the People.

I see no necessity of going about to undermine the Monarchy, that I may come
at a resolution of the present case; for, I take Ours to be a true Original
Monarchy, especially after the Rights of the lesser Monarchs were swallowed up
or delivered into that of the West Saxon Kings. And farther, I do not stick to
affirm, That it was Hereditary, where the Right of Succession and the Public
Good did not interfere; i.e. where there was not a Natural or Moral Incapacity:
a Natural, as in the Sons of the elder Edmond, when Edred was made King before
them; a Moral, as when Edgar's elder Brother was set aside for his ill
Government, by one half of the Nation, and the other never disputed the matter
with them; and when Ethelred was so far deserted, that he went into Normandy,
and was recalled upon Promise of better Government. Si ipse vel rectius
gubernare, Florentin. Wigor. A. D. 1014.
vel mitius eos tractare vellet, are the words in Florentius; and to the same
purpose Matt. Westminster, and Bromton, and Malmsbury: H. Huntingdon adds, That
he promised omnia Rege and Populo digna; H. Huntin. l. 6. p 207. 2.
all things worthy of the KING and People. These things I mention to show, That
although this were a true and successive Monarchy in ordinary course; yet where
the Public Good was by the Estates of the Realm judged to require it, they
thought it no Perjury, or Breach of Faith, to transferr their Allegiance,
although it were without the Consent of the actual Governor, or the next
lineal Heirs.

Having thus far cleared this Point, as to the Saxon Constitution of our
Government, I come to that of the Norman; and here I shall not go about to show
how broken the Succession was by Force and Faction, but what the Judgment of
the Nation was, as to the transferring Allegiance.

And, the first Instance I shall bring, is in the Case of the Oath taken to
Maud the Daughter of Henry the First, in the One and Thirtieth year of his
Reign; and there is no question, Malmsb. hist. Novel. l. 1. p. 100, 105. 2.
but he designed her to succeed him; Legitima and perenni successione, as
Malmsbury's words are; but Stephen, (who had before sworn Allegiance to her)
watched his opportunity, and by the help of a Party made by his Brother, (the
Bishop of Winchester) he was Crowned KING; and although at first, Malmsbury
says, but three Bishops, and very few Noblemen, joined with him, yet he soon
after says, That most of them went in to him: And even Robert of Gloucester,
King Henry the First's natural Son, took an Oath to him, but with the condition
of his preserving his Honor and Covenants. There are several things worthy our
observation in this Affair, with respect to Oaths of Allegiance.

(1) That those who excuse them from Perjury, who had Sworn Allegiance to Maud
before, do it upon this account, Because it is said by Rad. de Diceto, That
Hugh Bigod swear, that King Henry the First, on his Deathbed, disinherited his
Daughter, and made Stephen his Heir. Supposing the Story true, what is this to
the Discharge of the Oath as to Maud; (for the Oath was not made to Henry the
First, but to his Daughter, and her Right was chiefly concerned in it.) If this
hold, an Oath of Allegiance may cease, without discharge from the Party to whom
it is made. And so the Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Bishops of Winchester
and Salisbury, as well as the Nobility, thought themselves at liberty to take a
New Oath of Allegiance, without a Release from the Party concerned in the
former Oath.

(2.) That upon the Agreement between K. Stephen and H. 2. Maud her self was
set aside, and Stephen was to continue King for his Life, and H. 2. to succeed
him. Now if Oaths of Allegiance must not be interpreted by the Public Good,
here are insuperable Difficulties as to the Obligation of these Oaths. For the
Allegiance was transferred from the right Heir to an Usurper, as Stephen must
be owned to have been by those who deny that Allegiance can be transferred from
the right Heir. And they must continue Allegiance to the Usurper for his Life;
which is repugnant to the Nature of our Constitution, if it be founded in a
Lineal and Legal Succession. And again, Maud, to whom they had sworn, is set
aside, and the Reversion of the Crown is entailed on her Son, although she was
living. Fortescue, in a Manuscript-Discourse about the Title of the House of
Lancaster, says, this was done in Parliament, Communi Consensu Procerum, and
Communitatis Regni Angliae. Rad. de Diceto, A. D. 1153.
Rad. de Diceto, who lived nearer the time, says no such thing; but Fortescue
appeals not only to the Chronicles, but to the Proceedings of Parliament, Matt.
Westminster. A. 1153.
for it. And Matt. Westminster and Paris say, The Right of H. 2. was declared
by K. Stephen in Conventu Episcoporum, Mat. Paris. ib.
and aliorum de Regno Optimatum; which was the Description of a Parliament of
that time; for, as yet, the Baronage represented the Nation. Gervas. A. D. 1153.
Gervase says, The Great Men were summoned to perfect the Agreement, by giving
their Assent to it, and confirming it by their Oaths. Fortescue says further,
that H. 2. was crowned King in the Life of his Mother, (who lived to the 13 of
H. 2.) by the general Consent of the Kingdom. Which shows how far the Public
Good was thought to be the Measure of the Obligation of these Oaths. For Gul.
Neuburgensis says, Gul. Neoburg. l. 1. c. 30.
That the Bonum Publicum was the Foundation of this Agreement. And Matt.
Westminster, That the King and the Lords did all swear to it, Matt. Westminster. S.
1153.
and a solemn Charter was made of it, and kept in a most secure Place. And thus
the Oaths of Allegiance were continued to one that had no Right for his Life;
and made to one who pretended to no Right, but after his Mother, who was set
aside in this Agreement. So that here were three Oaths of Allegiance at once,
that to Maud the Empress, that to K. Stephen, and to H. 2. and yet the General
Good of the Nation must give an equitable sense of these Oaths, or there must
be Perjury on all sides. For those who had first sworn to Maud, could not
transfer their Allegiance on any other account, either to Stephen, or H. 2.
during her Life. For we never read that she was present at the Agreement, or
resigned her Right to the Crown.

The next Instance I shall produce, is in the Oaths that were taken during the
Controversies between the Houses of York and Lancaster. Which was not so plain
a Case as Men commonly imagine; and in Truth, if the just legal Title be the
only Rule of Conscience in this Case, it was hard to take the Oaths on either
side. For, as on the one side, a lineal Descent was pleaded from the Daughter
of the Duke of Clarence, who was elder Brother to John Duke of Lancaster, from
whom by Marriage the Duke of York claimed his Title; so, on the other side, it
was objected, that there was no sufficient Evidence of the Legitimacy of
Philippa Daughter to the Duke of Clarence; because, as Fortescue observes, the
Duke of Clarence was abroad from before the time of her Conception till after
her Birth, and that he never owned her Mother after; that she never assumed the
Arms of the Duke as her Father, nor those descended from her, till the Duke of
York pretended to the Crown; that E. 3. made an Entail of the Crown upon his
Heirs Male; (of which I have seen a written Account as old as the time of H. 6.
which not only affirms the Absence and Divorce of the Duke of Clarence; but
that E. 3. seized all his Lands into his Hands, and in Parliament soon after
entailed the Crown on his Heirs Male, and that his Daughters there present
agreed to the same.) But besides they pleaded, that so long a Prescription as
the House of Lancaster had of above threescore years, was allowed by the Ius
Gentium, to purge the Defects of the first Title: These are things which
deserved Consideration against such a mere lineal Descent as the House of York
insisted upon. And against the House of Lancaster, the Intrusion of H. 4. upon
the Deposition of R. 2. is an invincible Objection to such as found Allegiance
on the Right of Succession.

But that which I lay the greatest weight upon, is the Way of ending this
Difference in Parliament, which has several remarkable things in it:

(1.) That the Duke of York, notwithstanding his Title, takes an Oath of
Allegiance in Parliament to H. 6. during his Life; Rot. Pa l. 39. H. 6. n. 21.
reserving to himself the Right of Succession after him. For he swears to do
nothing to the Prejudice of his Reign or Dignity-Royal, nor against his Life or
Liberty; and that he would to the utmost of his Power, withstand all Attempts
to the contrary. The same Oath was taken by his Sons Edward Earl of March
(afterward E. 4.) and Edward Earl of Rutland. Was this a lawful Oath or not? To
say it was unlawful, is to reflect on the Wisdom of the Three Estates, who
looked on this as the best Expedient for the Public Good, as being the way to
prevent the Effusion of Christian Blood. And it is not easy to prove such an
Oath unlawful; as containing nothing unlawful, nor to the Prejudice of a third
Person, when he who was chiefly concerned voluntarily took it. If it were a
lawful Oath, then an Oath of Allegiance on the account of Possession, is a
lawful Oath. For the matter of Right is not mentioned in it, and Richard Duke
of York did not renounce the opinion of his own Right hereby, (whether true or
false) but did bind up himself to do nothing to the Prejudice of the Royal
Dignity of H. 6. and yet he looked on him as mere Possessor of it; therefore in
his Judgment and the Parliament's, an Oath of Allegiance may lawfully be taken,
on the account of the Possession of the Crown, although Persons be not
satisfied of the Right of it.

The Words of his Agreement are remarkable to this Purpose, N. 20.
as they are to be found in the Parliament-Rolls. The said Title
notwithstanding, and without Prejudice of the same, the said Richard Duke of
York tenderly desiring the Weal, Rest and Prosperity of this Land, and to set
apart all that might be trouble to the same; and considering the Possession of
the said King Henry the sixth, and that he has for his time be named, taken,
and reputed King of England and France, and Lord of Ireland, is content,
agrees and consents, that he be had, reputed and taken King of England and
of France, with the Royal Estate, Dignity and Preeminence belonging thereto,
and Lord of Ireland, during his Life natural; and for that time the said Duke,
without hurt or prejudice of his said Right and Title, shall take, worship and
honor him for his Sovereign Lord. Here was certainly an Oath taken to a King,
whom the Person taking it looked on only as a King de facto, and not de jure;
and yet this Oath was taken and allowed, nay contrived in Parliament; and that
for no less an end, than for the Weal, Rest, and Prosperity of the Land, i.e.
for the Public Good.

It may be said, That the Case is different; for Richard Duke of York parted
with his own Right; but we cannot with another, which we have sworn to
preserve.

I answer, That he did not look on such an Oath as parting with his Right, but
as a thing fitting to be done on the account of Possession for the Public
Good. And so many others taken such another Oath of Allegiance, wherein there
is no Declaration as to Right, but the same things required, which the Duke of
York promised in his Oath to Hen. 6.

But Allegiance is not due but where there is a Right to claim it; and that
cannot be, where there is no Right to the Crown.

I answer, That an Oath of Allegiance may be twofold: 1. Declarative of Right;
and in that case none can be owned to have Right, but he that has it.

2. Submissive Allegiance; where no more is required than is contained in the
Duke of York' s Oath, and yet he declared this was no Prejudice to his Right.
But it may be said, He declared so much before he took the Oath, and so gave
the Sense in which he took it.

I answer, That

His putting in his Claim, and his Title being allowed after the King in being,
had been sufficient; but in our case there is no need of a Declaration, since
the declaratory part is left out; which is a fuller Declaration of the sense of
the Oath, than our Words can make.

But to proceed;

(2.) The first Objection the Parliament made to the Duke of York's Claim was,
from the Oaths they had taken to H. 6. To which the Duke of York gave a large
Answer, that Oaths must not bind against Truth and Justice. But this was to
take it for granted, that he had the Truth and Justice of his side, whereas
there was a long Possession of threescore Years against him; surely Matters of
Fact which were necessary to the disproving his Title, were then so far out of
Memory, that it was impossible to make clear Evidence about them; and others
were not examined, as whether the Duke of Clarence were absent so long from his
Wife abroad, when Philippa was born? Whether one Sir James Awdely suffered
about it? Whether he was divorced from her upon it? Whether E. 3. after the
Death of the Duke of Clarence, did entail the Crown on his Heirs male? Whether
upon the Deposition of R. 2. the Claim of Right on behalf of the Duke of
Clarence's Heir, ought not to have been made? How far Edmond Mortimer's owning
the Title of H. 5. and the Duke of Cambridge's Attainder did affect him?
Whether he had not renounced his own Pretentions, by owning H. 6. to be his
Supreme and Sovereign Lord, as he had often done in a most solemn manner,
particularly in his Oaths at the Altar at St. Paul's, which is to be seen in the
Book of Oaths, p. 146. and elsewhere. But at that time, H. 6. was under the
Power of the Duke of York; and that was a very unfit time to clear a sinking
Title.

But however the Lords in Parliament were concerned for their Oaths to H. 6.
and proposed the former Expedient, not only for the public Welfare, but in
regard to their Oaths, notwithstanding that they allowed the Duke's Title to be
good. Their Words are, It was concluded and agreed by all the said Lords, that
since it was so, that the Title of the said Duke of York cannot be defeated,
and in eschewing the great Inconvenience that might ensue, to take the Mein
above rehearsed, the Oaths that the said Lords had made unto the King's
Highness at Coventry and other places saved.

From whence it is plain that they looked on their Oaths to Hen. 6. as
consistent with owning the Right to be in the Duke of York; and that Possession
was a sufficient Ground for continuing their Oaths.

(3.) In 1 E. 4. where the Right and Title of the D. of York is most amply set
forth, yet there this Agreement, 39 H. 6. is recited, and the Proceedings
against H. 6. are grounded upon his Breach of it. Which shows farther that
those Parliaments which did assert the Right of Succession highest, (among
which, this of E. 4. ought to be reckoned) yet it was never disputed, whether
those who had taken the Oaths to H. 6. were perjured; for they look on the
Possession of the Crown as a sufficient Ground for the Allegiance required.

But it may be said, That from hence we see that he was looked on as having the
best Title, who had the best Right by lineal Succession. I answer, that we are
not enquiring into Titles, but searching into the Reasons and Measures of Oaths
of Allegiance; and whether those do require full Satisfaction about the best
Title? Or supposing one unsatisfied about that, he may not yet be satisfied in
taking such an Oath as the D. of York and his Sons did?

But such Precedents prove nothing, unless they be agreeable to our Laws and
Constitution. Yes, a great deal, while we are enquiring into our Legal
Constitution; and we find such things allowed in Parliaments; and not only so,
but in such Parliaments which allowed not the Title of the King to whom those
Oaths were made.

Our Law owns no King merely as in Possession, but the Right Heir is the legal
King, whether in Possession or not. Our Law does own a King in Possession, if
Treason may be committed against Him; and for this we have not only the
Authority of Sir E. C. but of the Year-Books, 9 E. 4. Where it is delivered for
Law at that time; and with a particular Respect to H. 6. Et home sera arraigne
de Treason fait a dit Roy. H. and therefore Sir E. C. had good Authority for
what he said; and that not in the Reign of a King de facto, but when a King
thrust out another for want of Right, and derived his whole Right from a lineal
Succession. Bagot's Case goes farther than Grants and judicial Proceedings of a
King de facto; for therein it is declared Treason to compass the Death of a
King de facto; and it is very absurd to imagine Treason against one whom the
Law does not own: for Treason is a high Violation of the Law, and how can the
Law be violated against one whom the Law does not own? Besides, in Bagot's Case
there is a distinction made between a mere Usurper, and one on whom the Crown
is settled by Parliament; and so H. 6. is denied to be a mere Usurper. Et six le
dit Roy H. de fait Merement, come Usurper, Car le Corone fuit taille a luy per
Parliament. So that by our Constitution a great Deference is to be showed to
the Judgment of the three Estates in matters that concern the Right of the
Crown; Or else, an Entail made by them could make no difference; but the whole
Resolution must be into the lineal Desent. And thus I look on the Statute, 11
H. 7. as agreeable to our Constitution; for if it be Treason to compass the
Death of a King de facto, there is great Reason there should be Indemnity for
those who act for Him.

But what does this signify to the Consciences of Men? Very much, if they are
to be satisfied by our Constitution. I grant mere Indemnity does not clear a
Man's Mind; but its agreeableness to former Proceedings and Judgments shows how
far our Constitution allows us to go, and that there is no Argument from thence
which can hinder the Satisfaction of Conscience so far.

But suppose a King de jure be in Possession of this Act, and another comes and
dispossesses Him, and so is King de facto, Does this Law indemnify those who
Fight against the King de jure for the King de facto?

Whosoever is in actual and quiet Possession of the Crown, by Consent of
Parliament, has the Right to challenge the Benefits of this Act for those who
serve Him. But I do not say, that this Act gives any Man Right to oppose a
Rightful King; but it only provides for the Indemnity of those who assist the
present Possessor, although another had the Right by Descent. For, after the D.
of York's challenging the Crown by Right of Succession against the Possessor,
there were two Parties in the Nation, the one was for the Right of Succession,
and the other for the Right of Possession by a National Consent. And the
Disputes between these two continued as long as the Differences between the
Houses of York and Lancaster lasted. When H. 7. was settled in the Throne,
without regard to the Right of Succession, although there was a general
Submission, yet there was still a great Dissatisfaction in the York Party;
which occasioned all the Disturbances of H. 7th's Reign, from setting up an
Heir of the House of York. (And Sir William Stanly was gained to that Party,
which cost him his Life.) And they went so far as to conclude it Treason to
stand by the Possessor against the next lineal Heir. Which I take to have been
the true Occasion of the Statute 11 H. 7. which does certainly Indemnify those
who adhere to the Possessor, although another may claim a better Right; and
thereby declares a Possessory Right to be a sufficient Ground of Allegiance, as
far as that Act goes.

There are three sorts of Persons may be said to have Possession of the Crown,
an Usurper, a King de jure, and a King de facto; and because the distinction
between these does not seem to be well understood, I shall briefly explain it.

An Usurper is one, who comes in by Force, and continues by Force.

A King de jure is one, who comes in by lineal Descent, as next Heir, and whose
Right is owned and Recognized by the Estates of the Realm.

A King de facto is one, who comes in by Consent of the Nation, but not by
Virtue of an immediate Hereditary Right; but to such a one being owned and
received by the Estates of the Realm, the Law of England, as far as I can see,
requires an Allegiance. Or else the whole Nation was perjured in most of the
Reigns from the Conquest to H. 8. for the two Williams, six at least of the
seven Henry's, King Stephen, and King John were all Kings de facto, for some
time at least, for they came not in as next Heirs in a lineal Descent. But
still Oaths of Allegiance were taken to them; and no such Scruples appear to
have been made all that time; nor any charge of Perjury, on those who did what
our Law and Constitution required. Was the Nation perjured in the Time of H. 7.
who, as all know, had no Pretense of an Hereditary Right? Yet being received
and Crowned, the Oaths of Allegiance were taken to Him, before he was Married
to the Daughter of E. 4. For, he was Crowned 30 October. 1485. Had the Crown
entailed in Parliament Nov. 7. and was Married Ian. 18. But the first
Parliament of R. 3. endeavored to make void the Title of the Children of E. 4.
upon pretense of a Precontract with the E. of Shrewsburies Daughter; and of
George Duke of Clarence by his Attainder, thereby to make R. 3. Right Heir to
the Crown; but lest these things should fail, to his Claim of Inheritance, they
join their own Election, and desire him to accept the Crown* as to him of Right
belonging, as well by Inheritance as by lawful Election. It seems, they would
have made him a King de jure as well as de facto; but the excluding the
Children of E. 4. never gave Satisfaction since the Lady Lucy her self disowned
it to the Mother of E. 4. And if such an Allegation would hold, the whole
Succession both of York and Lancaster might be questioned; for both derive from
H. 3. whose Mother was believed at that Time to have been precontracted at
least to Hugh le Brun, Mat. West. A. 1200.
before She was married to K. John, and was married to Him, whilst his former
Wife was living. And if Q. Eleanor's Divorce from the K. of France were not
Good (as it is hard to prove it so) what becomes of all the Line of H. 2. who
married Her, after She had two Children by her former Husband? But if Men's
Consciences are tied to a strict legal and lineal Descent, they must be
satisfied in all these Points.

But supposing the Right of the Children of E. 4. to have been never so Good;
what does this make toward the justifying the Oaths of Allegiance, which were
made to H. 7. whom some will not allow to have any Claim by the House of
Lancaster, since they say, the same Act which legitimated John of Gaunt's
Children by Kath. Swinford, did exclude them from any Title to the Crown? Yet
the Oaths of Allegiance were taken by the whole Nation in the time of H. 7. and
no Dispute was then made about it; because it was then believed, that quiet
Possession was a sufficient Ground for Allegiance.

It is objected, That it cannot be agreeable to the Law of England to swear
Allegiance to a King de facto, when the Duke of Northumberland suffered by the
Law for adhering to a Queen de facto.

A King de facto according to our Law (as I said) is one in quiet Possession of
the Crown, by Consent of Parliament, without Hereditary Right; such as H. 4, 5,
6, 7. were all thought to be, by those who made this Distinction. For, as far
as I can find, the Distinction of a King de facto and de jure was then started,
when the House of York so much insisted on their Hereditary Right; and so many
of our Kings had governed the Kingdom by Consent without it. Therefore the
Lawyers, to find a sufficient Salvo for the Kings of the House of Lancaster,
framed this Distinction of Kings de facto and de jure; but still they meant
Kings Regnant, as they called them, or in full Possession of the Royal Dignity
by a National Consent. (The Distinction had been better of a twofold Right,
viz. Possessory and Hereditary.) But this was far from being the Case of Queen
Jane, who was set up by a particular Party against the General Sense of the
Nation, as soon appeared; for the main Point her Title stood upon was this,
Whether the King by his Grant could dispose of the Crown against an Act of
Parliament which settled the Succession? and that this was the true Point,
appears evidently by Judge Mountague's Papers, who was employed against his
Will, in drawing up the Grant. So that the Duke of Northumberland's Case does
by no Means reach the Point of a King de facto.

But it is further urged from our Homilies, Sixth Part of the Homily against
wilful Rebellion.
That our Church therein condemns those English who did swear Fidelity to the
Dauphin of France, breaking their Oath of Fidelity to their Natural Lord the
King of England. To which I answer,

(1.) That King John was only a King de facto himself, if a Legal Succession
makes a King de jure. For, (1.) His eldest Brother's Son Arthur was then
living, as all confess. (2.) He was convicted of Treason against his Brother R.
1. and the Sentence pronounced against him by Hugo de Pudsey Bishop of Durham,
Mat. Paris. f. 280.
as the King of France pleaded to the Pope's Legate who came to solicit for him.
Matt. Westminster. A. 1216.
(3.) Hubert Archbishop of Canterbury declared at his Coronation, that he came
not in by Hereditary Right, Mat. Paris. A. 1199.
but by Election; and he accepted of it so. (4.) What Right he had after the
Death of his Nephew, he gave up by the Resignation of his Crown to the Pope. He
could have no Hereditary Right while Arthur's Sister lived, who survived him,
and was kept in the Castle at Bristol. But supposing it, I do not understand
how he that gave up his Right of Dominion to the Pope, could still retain it?
And if he was Feudatary to the same, he could not challenge Allegiance as due
to him, but to the Pope as Lord Paramount. And it was pleaded against him, Mat.
Paris. A. 1216. l. 281.
That although he could not dispose of his Crown without Consent of his Barons,
yet he might demise it. And upon his Resignation he ceased to be King; and so
the Throne was vacant. And by that means there was a devolution of Right to the
BARONS to fill up the Vacancy; who made choice of LEWIS by the Right of his
Wife, who was Heir to King John. If after all this, an Oath of Allegiance to
him was lawful, then, I say, an Oath to a King de facto is so, for King John
was no more.

(2.) As to the Barons calling in Lewis, and forsaking K. John, it is necessary
to observe on what Reason it is that our Homilies condemn it. For the whole
design of that Homily is, to show the Popes Usurpations over Princes, and their
stirring up Subjects to Rebellion against them, by discharging them from their
Oaths; and for those the Instance of King John is produced. As appears by the
words just before; Now had Englishmen at that time known their Duty to their
Prince set forth in God's Word, would a great many Nobles, and other
Englishmen natural Subjects, for this foreign and unnatural Usurper his vain
Curse of the King, and for his feigned discharging them of their Oath and
Fidelity to their Natural Lord, upon so slender, or no Ground at all, have
rebelled against their Sovereign Lord the King? Would English Subjects have
taken part against the King of England, and against English Men, with the
French King, and French Men, being incensed against this Realm by the Bishop of
Rome?

(3.) This does not concern the present Case. For Men may condemn those English
Men who sent for Lewis, and yet may lawfully take the present Oaths. By which
Men are not bound to justify such Proceedings, but to promise Faith and
Allegiance to such as are in actual Possession of the Throne. Which the Oaths
taken to K. John will justify.

Thus I have considered the greatest Difficulties I have yet met with about
taking the Oaths, and have not dissembled the strength of any of them.

There is only one thing remains, and that is the Answer given to the Case of
Tiberius, who was an Usurper, and yet our Savior said, Give unto Caesar the
things that are Cesar's. The Answer is, That although it were a forcible
Usurpation in Julius Caesar, yet before that time the Matter was accorded
between the Senate and the Emperors, and they reigned unquestioned without any
competition from the Senate.

So that it was not lawful to swear Allegiance to Julius Caesar, who had the
full Possession of the Power, but it was to Tiberius: And why so? Where was the
Right of Government in the time of Julius Caesar? In the Senate and People. And
so it continued all Julius Cesar's time. But how came the Senate and People to
lose their Right in the time of Tiberius?

(1.) Had they given it up by any solemn Act of theirs, as many say they did by
the Lex Regia, which Justinian confidently affirms? Then all the Right which
the Emperor had, was by Devolution from the People; and so they acted by virtue
of that Power which the People gave them; (Populus comprehends both Senate and
Community.) And then the Emperors had their Rights of Sovereignty from the
People, and not from God. For here was no other Act but that of the People
giving up their Right. And then the Case of Obedience to the Roman Emperors
will be found very different from that of the Northern Kingdoms, where the
People never gave up their Rights in such a manner; but in Cases of Difficulty
concerning Succession, the three Estates did look on themselves as particularly
concerned; as might be easily proved, if it were needful, in all the Northern
Kingdoms.

(2.) But suppose they did not formally give up their Right, but were partly
wheedled and partly forced out of it; Does this give a good Title? Suppose
Augustus had by his Acts procured the Consent of the People, as to his own
Government; What was this to Tiberius? Did they give him a Power to make whom
he pleased his Successor? Something may be said from Dion and Strabo as to the
former; but there is no Pretense as to the latter: For it was a mere Arbitrary
Act in Augustus to nominate Tiberius; and all the Title he had at first was
from the Praetorian Band and Legions: Afterward the Consuls, Tacit. l. 1.
and Senate, and Soldiers, and People did swear Allegiance to him, as the
Historians tell us. Now here I desire to know, whether Tiberius were any more
than Emperor de facto, when they did thus swear to him? For all the Right he
had was from their voluntary Submission to him at Rome.

As to the Roman Provinces, Tacitus says, They were content with the present
change of Government, Tacit. ib.
because they suffered by the Factions and Avarice of the great Men; which made
them weary of the Government by the Senate and People. But this only shows they
were willing to change their Masters, hoping they might mend their Condition,
but signifies little to the matter of Right. Since after they were made
Provinces, they owned their Subjection to the Roman Government, by paying
Tribute, and receiving Magistrates from it, however that Government was
managed, whether by Senate or People, or by one who had the Imperial Power,
whatever Name he were called by. But as to the Province of Judea in particular,
there are several Conditions of it to be considered.

(1.) While it was tributary to the Kings of Persia and Syria. Jaddus the High
Priest told Alexander that they had taken an Oath of Fidelity to Darius,
Joseph. l. 11. c. 8.
and therefore could not bear Arms against him while he lived. But was Darius
King de jure or de facto over the Jews? He was not King over them by a lineal
Succession from their own Princes; nor by the Fundamental Constitution of their
Government, Deuteronomy. 17. 15.
which owned no legal King that was not of their Brethren: I do not say they
were not to submit to, but not to choose any other. But what Right had Darius
over the Jews, any more than succeeding in the Persian Monarchy gave a Right to
the Chaldean Conquests? I grant, the Jews did act under the Persian Monarchs,
Neh. 8. 9.
as Nehemiah was Governor under Artaxerxes, and that they did swear to them,
appears by Iaddus; but the Question is, On what Right that Oath was founded?
and whether upon Alexander's Conquest, they could not as well take a new Oath
to him? For why should not present actual Dominion give as much Right, as
succeeding into another Right of Dominion, which was at first gained by
Conquest? If Possession gives Right in one case, why not in the other; since
there is more Reason for Allegiance, where there is a Power of Protection, than
where there is none. And so we find Iaddus and the Jews did submit to Alexander
afterward, and some of them went into his Army, although Darius was still
living; which shows, that as they were not forward to break their Allegiance
sworn to Darius; so they were not obstinate in opposing Alexander, but yielded
to the overruling Hand of Providence.

(2.) When the Jews had their Liberty granted them by the Kings of Syria. For
Antiochus Eupator made Peace with them, Joseph. 12. c. 13.
by which they were to have the Liberty of their own Laws; and although he soon
brake his Agreement with them; yet the Lacedaemonians and Romans owned them as
a Free-People, and treated with them as such. And Simon pleaded to Athenobius
in this War; We have neither taken other Men's Land, nor holden that which
appertains to others; 1 Maccab. 14. 16. 40.
but the Inheritance of our Fathers, which our Enemies had wrongfully in
Possession a certain time. Wherefore we having Opportunity, hold the
Inheritance of our Fathers. Which plainly shows, that they looked on those who
ruled over them as unjust Possessors; 15. 33. 34.
at that time when they were so far under them, as to swear Allegiance to them.
After this Antiochus Pius did grant them their Liberty upon Composition; which
they enjoyed as their Neighbors did, and suffered not as Slaves to the Kings
of Syria, but as sometimes oppressed by them.

(3.) When they were reduced into the form of a Roman Province; which was done
by Pompey. And from that time they were in Subjection to the Roman State; being
only permitted to enjoy the Liberty of their Religion.

But I shall take notice only of the case of the Jews Subjection to the Roman
Emperor in our Savior's time. Suetonius takes notice of the strange Impudence
of Tiberius, in seeming so long to decline the accepting the Sovereignty, when
from the very first he had assumed the Sovereign Power, without asking the
Leave either of Senate or People. Principatum, quamvis neque occupare confetim,
neque agere dubitasset, et statione milirum, hoc est, vi et specie dominationis
assumpta, diu tamen recusavit impudentissimo animo. Sutton. c. 24.
Tacitus says, That he took upon him the Government immediately upon the Death
of Augustus; and did exercise the Imperial Power every where; only when he was
in the Senate he seemed to demur, for Fear of Germanicus and his Legions.

Sed defuncto Augusto, signum praetoriis cohortibus, ut Imperator dederat,
Excubiae, Arma, catera Aulae; Miles in forum, miles in curiam comitabat;
literas ad Exercitus, ranquam adepto Principatu misit; nusquam cunctabundus
nisi cum in Senatu loqueretur. Tacit. l. 1. Dio. l. 57.
Dio, That he exercised all the parts of the Government, having secured the
Italian Forces to himself; but he declined the Name, till he understood the
Design of Germanicus.

So that here we have a plain Original Usurpation in Tiberius; there being no
consent of Senate and People to his assuming the Sovereign Power. And yet
Tacitus says, First the Consulls and great Officers, then the Senate and
People did swear Allegiance to him. Which was before he had their Consent. For
he used his own Art afterward, that he might seem to be chosen by them; and
not to come to his Power by the force of Arms, or the Intrigues of his Mother.
But what Appearance of consent soever afterward he gained from the Senate, it
was extorted from them by Force or Fraud; as is evident from the same
Historians. But what Right can such a Consent give? And he took away the
Remainder of the Peoples Liberties in their Comitia, and never asked their
Consent.

What then was the Right of Tiberius to the Government founded upon? Augustus
had several repeated Acts, whereby they continued his Government from time to
time, and thereby showed their Consent, as Dion and Strabo affirm, that the
whole Government was committed to him from the Senate and People; But what is
there like this in the Case of Tiberius? He was Augustus his Wife's Son, and he
made him his Heir by his Testament: And what was that to the Roman State? Was
not Agrippa Posthumus, then living, much nearer to Augustus, who was his own
Grandchild? And by, the Story in Tacitus of Fabius Maximus, seemed designed by
him to succeed him; but upon the Discovery of it, first Augustus, and then
Agrippa was sent out of the World to make way for Tiberius, who had beforehand
engaged the Italian Legions. So that he trusted to no Testamentary Right, as
appears by all his Collusions with the Senate, which there had been no place
for, if he had assumed the Government by virtue of Augustus his Testament or
Adoption.

Here we have then a plain Instance of one who was in the Possession of Power
without Color of Right, and yet Oaths of Allegiance were taken to him, both by
the Senate and People. And when these Oaths were taken, there was no adjusting
the matter between him and the Senate; for he had newly assumed the Government
by Force when they took these Oaths. Here was no unquestioned Authority from
the Senate (whatever Vell. Paterculus pretends) but when he had gotten the
Power into his Hands, he required them to own it.

Augustus was so wise, as when they offered him their Oaths, he refused them
for this Reason; He considered well, Dio l. 54.
says Dio, that if they gave their free Consent, they would do what they
promised without swearing; and if they did not, all the Oaths in the World
would not make them. But Tiberius was of another Mind, and he required their
Oaths in the first place; and it is not improbable that the same were required
in several Provinces.

When our Savior appeared in Judea, Tiberius was in Possession of this Power,
over the Roman Empire; and because the Jews were more scrupulous than other
People, on account of their Fundamental Laws, as to the owning any usurped
Jurisdiction over them; some among them put the Question to him about paying
Tribute to Caesar, i. e. about owning any Act of Subjection to an Usurped
Power. For there were plausible Arguments on both sides; one was from the
Strictness of their Laws; the other was from the Benefit they received from the
Roman Protection. The former seemed to have more of Conscience, and the latter
of Human Prudence. Our Savior takes a wise Method to answer the Doubt; he asks
for the Current Tribute-Mony, and finding it had Cesar's Superscription, says,
Give to Caesar the things that are Cesar's. They might have replied, they are
his de facto, but not de Iure. Why did not our Savior answer this Difficulty,
but leave them to collect their Duty from the use of Cesar's Coin among them?
Might not one that had no Right, have the Power of coining Money, and dispersing
it, so that it should be in common use? And was not Tiberius such an one? What
then does he mean by this Answer? Either we must say, that he declines the main
Question, or that he resolved it to be lawful, upon general Reasons, to show
Acts of Subjection to such a Power, which we may not be satisfied, is according
to our Laws. For so it is plain the Roman Power was not agreeable to the Jewish
Constitution; and although that were from God, yet our Savior, who gives the
best Directions for Conscience, would by no means have Men to be peevish or
obstinate in such Matters.

But paying of Tribute is quite another thing from Oaths of Allegiance. It is
so, as to the manner of testifying our Subjection; but the main Question is,
Whether any Act of Subjection be lawful or not? If it be lawful to testify it
one way, why not another? If in paying Tribute, why not in solemn promising to
pay it? If in promising, why not in swearing, i. e. in calling God to witness
that I do it? Thus far then we may go; we may swear to pay Tribute; But on what
account? Is it not as a Token of Allegiance, i. e. of a Duty owing on the
account of Protection? Then we have gained one step farther, viz. that we may
swear to perform some parts of Allegiance. But why then may we not do so as to
all that such an Oath implies? If it respects no more than the Duty which we
owe, with respect to the Public. And that is certainly the meaning of an Oath,
when all Declarations of Right are left out, and only those of Duty expressed,
as it is in our present Case.

As to the dreadful Charge of Perjury and Apostasy, which some, of much greater
Heat than Judgment, have made use of against those who hold it lawful to take
the Oaths; If what I have said be true, it is little less than ridiculous: And
it would have had more appearance of Reason, if the Pharisees had urged it
against our Savior's Resolution of the Case about Tribute-Mony. For, had not
God by his own Law settled the Government among them? And was it not a
Fundamental Article of that Law, that none should rule over them, but one of
their Brethren? Was the Roman Emperor, or Pontius Pilate such? Have not all the
ancient Zealots of the Law opposed any such Foreign Power? What can it be then
less than Perjury and Apostasy to give any Countenance to such an open
Violation of this Law, and to encourage Men to renounce it; when they find such
Liberties allowed by such a Teacher? But I forbear.

To conclude then; I have, at your earnest Desire, taken this Matter into
serious Consideration, and have impartially weighed the most pressing
Difficulties I have met with; I cannot promise to give you Satisfaction, but I
have satisfied my self, and have endeavored to do the same for you. I am
heartily sorry for any Breaches among us at this time, and it is easy to
foresee who will be the Gainers by them. But I am glad to understand that the
chiefest of those who scruple the Oaths, have declared themselves against the
Attempts of such an unseasonable Separation, and I hope others will be so wise
as to follow their Example.

I am, Sir, Yours.
October. 15. 1689.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
THE Case of Allegiance in our present Circumstances considered, in a Letter
from a Minister in the City to a Minister in the Country, 40.

A Breviate of the State of Scotland in its Government, Supreme Courts,
Officers of State, Inferior Officers, Offices and Inferior Courts, Districts,
Jurisdictions, Buroughs Royal, and Free Corporations. Fol.

Some Considerations touching Succession and Allegiance. 4to.

Reflections upon the late Great Revolution: Written by a Lay-Hand in the
Country, for the satisfaction of some Neighbors.

The History of the Desertion; or an Account of all the public Affairs in
England, from the beginning of September, 1688, to the Twelfth of February
following. With an Answer to a Piece called, The Desertion Discussed, in a
Letter to a Country-Gentleman. By a Person of Quality.

K. William and K. Lewis. Wherein is set forth the inevitable necessity these
Nations lie under of submitting wholly to one or other of these Kings; And that
the matter in Controversy is not now between K. William and K. James, but
between K. William and K. Lewis of France, for the Government of these Nations.

A Sermon preached at Fulham, in the Chapel of the Palace, upon Easter Day
1689. at the Consecration of the Right Reverend Father in God Gilbert Lord
Bishop of Sarum: By Anthony Horneck, D. D.

The Judgments of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first rigid
Laws for universal Conformity to it, unto its last End. With a prospect of
these near approaching Revolutions, viz. The Revival of the Protestant
Profession in an eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. The last End
of all Turkish Hostilities. The general Mortification of the Power of the Roman
Church in all parts of its Dominions. In Explication of the Trumpets and Vials
of the Apocalypse, upon Principles generally acknowledged by Protestant
Interpreters. By Drue Cressener, D. D.

A Discourse concerning the Worship of Images; preached before the University
of Oxford. By George Tully, Sub-Dean of York, for which he was suspended.

Two Sermons, one against Murmuring, the other against Censuring: By Simon
Patrick, D. D. now Lord Bishop of Chichester.

An Account of the Reasons which induced Charles the Second, King of England,
to declare War against the States General of the United Provinces in 1672. And
of the Private League which he entered into at the same Time with the French
King to carry it on, and to establish Popery in England, Scotland, and Ireland,
as they are set down in the History of the Dutch War, printed in French at
Paris, with the Privilege of the French King, 1682. Which Book he caused to be
immediately suppressed at the Instance of the English Ambassador. Fol.

An Account of the Private League betwixt the late King James the Second and
the French King. Fol.

Dr. Wake's Sermon before the King and Queen at Hampton Court.

Dr. Tennison's Sermon against Self-love, before the House of Commons, June 5.
1689.

Mr. Tully's Sermon of Moderation, before the Lord Mayor, May. 12. 1689.

An Examination of the Scruples of those who refuse to take the Oath of
Allegiance. By a Divine of the Church of England.

A Dialogue betwixt two Friends, a Iacobite and a Williamite; occasioned by the
late Revolution of Affairs, and the Oath of Allegiance.

The Case of Oaths stated. 4to.

A Letter from a French Lawyer to an English Gentleman, upon the Present
Revolution. 4to.

The Advantages of the present Settlement, and the great danger of a Relapse.

The Interest of England in the Preservation of Ireland.

The Answer of a Protestant Gentleman in Ireland to a late Popish Letter of N.
N. upon a Discourse between them, concerning the present Posture of that
Country, and the Part fit for those concerned there to act in it. 4to.

An Apology for the Protestants of Ireland, in a brief Narrative of the late
Revolutions in that Kingdom; and an Account of the present State thereof: By a
Gentleman of Quality. 4to.

A true Representation to the King and People of England how Matters were
carried on all a long in Ireland by the late K. James, in favor of the Irish
Papists there, from his Accession to the Crown to the 10th of April, 1689.

The Mantle thrown off: or the Irishman dissected, 4to.

Reflections upon the Opinions of some Modern Divines, concerning the Nature of
Government in general, and that of England in particular. With an Appendix
relating to this Matter, containing, 1. The Seventy fifth Canon of the Council
of Toledo. 2. The Original Articles in Latin, out of which the Magna Charta of
King John was framed. (...) The true Magna Charta of King John in French: By
which the Magna Charta in Matthew, Paris is cleared and justified, and the
Alterations in the Common Magna Charta discovered. (Of which see a more
particular Account in the Advertisement before the Appendix.) All three
Englished.

The Doctrine of Non-Resistance, or Passive Obedience no way concerned in the
Controversies now depending between the Williamites* and the Iacobites.

Jacobi Usserii Armachani Archiep. Historia dogmatica Controversiae inter
Orthodaros and Pontificios de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis, nunc primum
edita. Accesserunt Ejusdem dissertationes de Pseudo-Dionysii scriptis, and de
Epistola ad Laodicenos ante hac inedite. Descripsit, digessit and notis atque
Auctuario completavit Henricus Wharton, A. M. R. Archiep. Cantuar. a Sacris
Domest. 4o.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a new Separation on Account of
the Oaths. With an Answer to The History of Passive Obedience.

A Discourse concerning the Ecclesiastical Commission opened in the Jerusalem.
Chamber, October. 10. 1689.


