A DISCOURSE Concerning the DOCTRINE OF Christ's Satisfaction; OR, The True
Reasons of his Sufferings; WITH An ANSWER TO THE SOCINIAN OBJECTIONS.

To which is added A Sermon concerning the Mysteries of the Christian Faith;
Preached April 7. 1691.

With a Preface concerning the True State of the Controversy about Christ's
Satisfaction.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

The Second Edition.

LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of the following Discourse, is to vindicate the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction from the Socinian Objections. Which, that I might do more
effectually, I set my self to consider the Force and Strength of all that
Crellius had produced in his elaborate Answer to Grotius. For I have always
endeavored to understand the right state of a Question, before I undertook it;
and when I had done that, I have taken as much Care, as I could, to represent
it truly to others. Which made me not a little surprised, when I found our
modern Socinians in their late Pamphlets to charge Me as well as others,
Considerations on the Explications of the Trinity in the Archbishop's Sermons,
etc. p. 31.
with not reading their Books upon this Question, and wholly mistaking the
State of the Question between the Church and them. Whereas, if I had not read
their Books I might peradventure have entertained a more favorable Opinion of
them, than I now have. But it was upon a diligent Consideration of the utmost I
could find was said by their best Writers, that I so long since satisfied my
self, that if the Books of the New Testament are to be our Rule of Faith, they
were extremely mistaken. Indeed, our Unitarians (as they call themselves) seem
to go another way to work; which is, by undermining the Authority of these
Books, and so to introduce Deism among us; (of which I hope to give an Account
in another Discourse.) But my present business is to lay open the true state of
this Controversy between us. In their Answer to my Sermon (which is here
Reprinted) they say, Answ. to Sermon. p 12.
That the Unitarians never denied, as I fancy, that Jesus Christ made himself a
voluntary Sacrifice for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind. If this be true, I
confess, I have mistaken them; but if the contrary prove very true from their
own Writings, what do these Men deserve, for denying that which they know to be
true? For it is hardly possible to suppose such bold Undertakers, as they are,
should be ignorant that Socinus absolutely denied, That Christ made himself a
voluntary Sacrifice for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind. For in his Answer to
Volanus, he says, Socin. Op. T. 1. p. 391.
That he and most others are greatly mistaken when they say, that Christ
offered up himself to God, when his Blood was shed upon the Cross: And he
positively affirms, That the Sacrifice which Christ offered was not upon the
Cross, but in Heaven. These Passages gave great offense to one Niemojevius, a
Friend of his, who in his first Epistle to him, calls it, Socin. Epist. p. 196.
Ed. Racov.
A horrid Paradox, and directly contrary to Scripture, and wonders what he
meant to write so confidently against the plain Testimonies of Scripture.
Socinus in answer to him, says, It is no more than himself had asserted some
Years before, in his Book De Servatore; p. 204.
and others of their Party before him. And he lays down, as his Conclusion,
which he desires his Friend to bring his Arguments against, viz. That the
Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ for our Sins was not performed on the Cross, but
in Heaven. Niemojevius brings express places of Scripture against this Opinion;
and says, p. 224.
He could by no means excuse such plain Opposition to the words of Scripture.
Socinus in his Reply persists in saying, p. 226.
That there was no Expiatory Sacrifice for Sin in the Death of Christ; and that
it ought to be considered as an Intervening Condition in order to the Expiation
in Heaven, p. 254.
p. 265.
and not otherwise; but he will by no means allow any Proof of any Sacrifice of
the Expiation on the Cross. And so the Dispute ended. With what face can they
now say, That the Unitarians never denied this, when Socinus not only does it,
but defends it, to the last, and says, That others had done it before him:
Which shows, that it was no singular Opinion of his own, but that which had
been received among the Unitarians before him.

But say they, The Unitarians ever acknowledged that the Lord Christ was an
Expiatory Sacrifice for our Sins, as may be seen in the Racovian Catechism.
This is indeed a wonderful Proof, they ever acknowledged it, as may be seen in
the Racovian Catechism: Were there no Unitarians before the Racovian Catechism?
And was that always the same? Suppose the Unitarians before, were of another
Opinion; suppose the Racovian Catechism it self has been altered in this
matter: how can any man of Sense be satisfied with such kind of Arguments as
these? One would think, they wrote only for such as would take their Words;
they join so much Confidence with so very little appearance of Reason. All that
know any thing of these Matters, know very well, that the Racovian Catechism
was first framed by Smalcius, a strict Follower and Defender of Socinus, from
whose Opinions he did not vary at all as to this matter, as will appear from
all the old Editions of it. In which the Question is put, Catech. Racov. c. 8.
q. 4.
What is the Reason of the Sufferings of Christ? The Answer is two fold; 1. To
be an Example of Patience. 2. To confirm the Truth of God's Promises. And after
these are explained, another Question is asked, Q. 12.
Is there no other Cause of the Death of Christ? The Answer is very short,
Nulla prorsus, None at all. And in the Conclusion of that Chapter a Question is
put about Sacrifices, Q. 38.
and the Answer is, That the Death of Christ was no Sacrifice, but only a
Preparation to it, and a kind of Introduction to it, for the Sacrifice was
offered in Heaven and not before. Have we not now great Evidence to believe
from the Racovian Catechism, that Jesus Christ made himself a voluntary
Sacrifice for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind? But besides the Racovian
Catechism, they referr me to Schlictingius and Ruarus. For what, I pray? For
what the Unitarians always held? That is impossible, when there is such evident
Proof to the contrary. I suppose their meaning is, That the Racovian Catechism,
being reviewed by them speaks otherwise. And is this a good Proof, that they
were always of that mind, because from hence it is evident they have changed
it? And so it will appear to any one that will compare the latter Editions with
the former. Catech. Racov. Staurop. A.D. 1680.
In the last Edition I have seen, as it is reviewed by Schlictingius, Ruarus,
and others, there is a Preface, wherein they confess it is changed in several
things from what it was, when it was first published by Moscorovius, A. D.
1609, and yet the Unitarians were still of the same mind, although some more
softning Expressions were for mere shame thought fit to be inserted. In this
Correct Edition, the Question is put, Why was it necessary for Christ to suffer
as he did? And the Answer is twofold; p. 141.
1. That Christ suffered for our Sins by God's appointment, and underwent a
cruel Death as a Sacrifice of Expiation. Who could imagine this to be the
Racovian Catechism still? 2. Because those who are to be saved by him are
subject to the like Sufferings. This is somewhat a dark Reason; but the former
is that which we are to consider.

Christ, say they, suffered for the sins of Mankind, and was a Sacrifice of
Expiation by his Death. What can we desire more? shall we always maintain
disputes about Words, when we agree in Sense? No, that is not the Case, but we
may seem to agree in Words and differ in Sense. That therefore must be more
strictly examined. But because they sometimes seem to be displeased that we
take their Opinion from foreign Writers, Considerations on the Explications of
the Trinity by Dr. W. etc. p. 32.
(since they here set up for themselves and are so able to express their own
Sense) and because they refer me to their own late Prints in the English
Tongue, therefore I shall apply my self to them, to find out what their true
Sense in this matter is. And they seem freely to tell us what they deny and
what they affirm. Answer to my Sermon. p. 12.


1. They deny that this Sacrifice was by way of true and proper Satisfaction or
full and adequate Payment to the Justice of God.

2. They affirm, that this Sacrifice was only an Oblation, or Application to
the Mercy of God.

In another place they complain, Answ. to Milb. p. 58.
that very few of their Adversaries have really understood what they affirm or
deny concerning the Causes or Effects of our Savior's death. And they say, the
Question is only this, Whether the Lord Christ offered himself as such a
Sacrifice, Oblation or Price as might be made to the Justice of God, by way of
Equivalent for what we should have suffered; or was an Oblation or Satisfaction
as all former Sacrifices under the Law were, to the Mercy of God by way of
Humble Suit and Deprecation? So that they will no longer Dispute with us, about
the Death of Christ being an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of Mankind; and
so this Point seems wholly gained. But we must have a Care of being deceived by
them. For the Scripture was too clear and full to be born down by the Authority
or Evasions of Socinus; and therefore they found it necessary to comply in
Terms, as long as they could keep to their own Notions under them. But what is
the true Meaning of an Expiatory Sacrifice to the Mercy of God? If it be no
more but as a Condition intervening, Socinus would not allow that to make an
Expiatory Sacrifice, and therein he was in the Right.

The main Point then between us seems to be whether the Death of Christ had
Respect to the Justice or to the Mercy of God? Answ. to Milb. p. 53.
And here we must consider what they understand by the Justice of God.

1. They say, that Almighty God as King and Proprietor of all Persons and
Things, can forgive any Offense or all Offenses, even without Repentance or
Amendment, nor is it contrary to his Justice so to do.

2. That it is not the Justice of God, by which he is prompted to punish
sinners, but his Holiness and Wisdom, and that Justice has no other share or
interest in Punishment, but only to see that Punishment be not misplaced, and
that it do not exceed the Offense.

3. That God could not (justly or wisely) substitute an innocent and well
deserving Person to undergo Punishment, p. 54.
properly so called in the Place of the unrighteous and worthless, because it
is of the Nature of Justice not to misplace Punishments.

4. That Christ could not offer himself freely for us to undergo the Punishment
due to us, nor could God accept of it, or allow it: because it is of the very
Essence of Justice not to misplace Punishment and not to exceed the Desert of
the Offense, p. 55.
which they say are the two things that constitute the Nature of Punitive
Justice.

Trinitarian Scheme of Relig. p. 18.
In another place, they say, That Christ made himself an Oblation, an Expiatory
Sacrifice on the Altar of the Cross for our Sins. But his Sufferings were not
(as Trinitarians teach) designed as a Punishment laid on him in our stead,
because Punishment is the evil of Suffering inflicted for the evil of Doing;
but Christ having done no sin; what he underwent was only labor and suffering
and no Punishment. And again they say, the Oblation was not made to the
Justice, but to the Mercy of God. But the Sufferings of Christ being graciously
accepted by God, p. 19.
as an Intercession on our behalf, God was satisfied with them, and this, they
say, is the proper Notion of Satisfaction. Answ. to the Archbishop, p. 32.
The same they repeat in other places. And if no more were to be regarded but
mere words, this Controversy were at an End; for they own Christ's Death to be
an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Mankind, and that he made by his
Sufferings Satisfaction to God.

But I shall now make it appear, that whatever they pretend, they do really own
no such thing as the Death of Christ being an Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins
of Mankind. However, we have this Advantage by these Concessions, that the
Scriptures are yielded to be on our side, and that they are forced to speak as
we do, whatsoever their meaning be. But that they do not own any proper
Expiatory Sacrifice in the Death of Christ, will best appear by an Account of
the Rise and Progress of this Controversy, and of the true State of it.

The first Rise of it was from the Multitudes of Places of Scripture, which
Attribute all the proper Effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice to the Death of
Christ. And that by those who best understood for what End it was that Christ
suffered, and had no Intention to deceive or to amuse Mankind, I mean our
Savior and his Apostles. Our Blessed Savior himself says, That the Son of
Man came to give his Life a Ransom for many. Matt. 2^.28. Mark 10.45.
A Ransom as to what? Surely not as to the Mercy of God. But Christ's Death was
a Ransom as it was an Expiatory Sacrifice; and if the one respects the Mercy of
God, the other must do so too. They may say, the Ransom is from the Punishment
of Sin, but this Ransom might be made as to the Mercy of God, which delivers
from it. But a Ransom is something which is paid or laid down as a Price of
Redemption; and was very well understood in that Sense among the Jews; who all
knew that by their Law, the Blood of the Sacrifices was appointed to be a
Ransom for their Souls. Levit. 17.11.
For it is the Blood that makes an Atonement for the Soul. To which the
Apostle refers, Heb. 9.22.
when he says, that without shedding of Blood there is no Remission. So that
hereby the Jews understood these things, (1.) That there was a Punishment due
to their Sins, from which they could expect no Deliverance but by the Blood of
Sacrifices as a Ransom or Price of Redemption for them. (2.) That as the
Punishment became due by the Law, and the Execution of it was by the Justice of
God, so the Ransom or Price of Redemption must be by way of Satisfaction to the
Law, in such a manner as it had appointed. (3.) That they had no other Notion
of an Expiatory Sacrifice, but the Offering the Blood of the Sacrifice for an
Atonement in order to the Averting the just Displeasure of God against them for
their Sins; and this was that, which they understood by Expiation or Remission
of Sins. (4.) That the Expiation did not depend upon the Sacrifice, as an
intervening Condition, as to the Party who thereby performed an Act of
Obedience, but upon the Nature of the Sacrifice which was offered to God. For,
whatever had been required, the Obedience had been the same; but here the great
Force is laid on the Blood being offered for Expiation. (5.) That however the
Mercy of God was seen both in the Appointing and Accepting the Ransom; yet the
Expiatory Sacrifice was never understood by them to Respect the Mercy of God,
but his Just Displeasure against their Sins. What strange Language would it
have been thought among the Jews to offer an Expiatory Sacrifice to the Mercy
of God? But Men that bring in New Doctrines, must make a New Sense of Words and
Phrases; or else they can never reconcile them to each other. And it is a
mighty Advantage to our Cause, that we understand the Expressions of the New
Testament with Respect to these Matters, no otherwise than the Jews understood
them, among whom they were spoken; and who had their own Law to interpret them
by. Our present Unitarians do not deny that the Sacrifices under the Law had an
immediate Respect to God; but they say, it Was not by way of Satisfaction to
the Justice of God, but by way of Application to the Mercy of God, by way of
humble Suit and Deprecation.

But if there were such a Sanction of the Law, whereby an Obligation to
Punishment did follow the Offenses forbidden by it; If the Justice of God were
concerned to see the Punishment executed, if the Law were not satisfied; If the
Sacrifice of Atonement or Expiation were designed for satisfaction of the Law;
and God did accept it for that End, then it follows, that these Sacrifices were
intended not merely as Rites of Intercession and Deprecation to the Mercy of
God; but by way of Satisfaction to his Justice. For was it not Justice in God
to punish Offenders against his Law? Was it not Justice in God to require a
Satisfaction to his Law when it was broken? Was it not Justice in God, when he
had declared that he would accept a Sacrifice of Atonement, to require that
instead of the Punishment of the Offenders, and to punish those who wilfully
neglected or despised it? How then, can they pretend that these Sacrifices had
no Respect to the Justice of God? We never read in Scripture any Expressions,
as to the Methods of Supplication like this, That the Blood of the Sacrifices
was to expiate for their Sins* and that it was given for an Atonement for the
Soul. Is it ever said, that Prayer and Supplication was to make a Sacrifice of
Atonement, and that it was appointed for that End? Prayer is a Natural and
Necessary Duty and a Condition in order to Pardon, but the Life and Force of
that lies in a Man's own Breast, in the inward and fervent Desires of the Soul:
but a Sacrifice of Atonement was a thing of another Nature, the Blood was to be
shed and then offered up to God, as a Sacrifice of Atonement, which God himself
had appointed for that End; and without which no Remission of Sins was to be
expected. But was not this from the Mercy of God to appoint such a Sacrifice of
Atonement? No doubt of it, and so it was that he would accept it for such an
End. But that is by no means the present Question; for it is, Whether the
Sacrifice, which God appointed for an Atonement, was only a Rite of
Supplication to the Mercy of God? In one Sense a Sacrifice of Atonement is a
way of Deprecation: but then it relates to the Wrath and Displeasure of God;
for it is that which God has appointed as the Means of Averting his Wrath, and
Preventing the Execution of his Justice. But the main Question is, Whether the
Sacrifice of Atonement as to God's just Wrath and Displeasure, be not a Real
Satisfaction to his Justice? For if he be justly displeased, and might justly
punish, but does accept a Sacrifice of Expiation in stead of it, although there
be a Concurrence of Mercy, yet there is a Real Atonement to his Justice: unless
they will say, the Justice of God is not concerned in preserving the Honor of
his Laws. But of this more afterward. If an Expiatory Sacrifice under the Law
were nothing else but a Solemn Rite of Supplication to the Mercy of God it
would take away the Typical Nature of those Sacrifices, and especially those on
the Day of Expiation. For what does a Rite of Supplication and Intercession
represent as a Figure of something to come? Why were the Goat and the Bullock
for the Sin-Offering to be presented alive before the Lord; Levit. 16.10, 11.
then their Blood to be shed, and to be sprinkled before the Mercy-seat and
upon the Altar? 14, 15, 19.
Why was the Scapegoat to have the Sins of the People confessed over him and
put upon his head? Why was the Flesh of the Bullock and Goat that was
Sacrificed burnt without the Camp? v. 21.27.
Do these look like Applications to the Mercy of God, by way of humble Suit and
Deprecation? But the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, Heb. 9.9, 12, 13, 14.
these things were a Figure representing Christ offering himself up to God by
his own Blood, who having obtained eternal Redemption for us entered into the
Holy Place (in Heaven) whose Blood was far more effectual for the Purging away
of Sin, than the Blood of Bulls and Goats could be; and to answer to the
burning of the Flesh of the Sacrifices without the Camp, 13 12.
that he might Sanctify the People with his own Blood, he suffered without the
Gate. Was all this nothing but an Oblation to the Mercy of God by way of Prayer
and Intercession? Why all this Ceremony about an Oblation of Prayer, which
depends on the hearty Devotion of him that makes it? Why did not the
High Priest enter without Blood into the Holy of Holies, if it were nothing but
a Rite of Supplication? Why was the Blood sprinkled upon the Altar for
Atonement, after he came out from the Mercy-Seat? Why was the Flesh burnt
without the Camp? Was that for Intercession too? But says the Correct Racovian
Catechism, all this does not prove that the whole Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ
was performed on the Cross, but only that it was begun there and perfected in
Heaven. This does evidently prove, that the Blood of Christ was shed for the
Expiation of Sins, and that as the High Priest went into the Holy of Holies
with the Blood of the Sacrifice of Atonement there to make Intercession; so
Christ as our High Priest with his Blood shed entered in Heaven, Heb. 7.25.
where he ever lives to make Intercession for us. But say they, the Sacrifices
under the Law did not make any proper Satisfaction for Sin, therefore neither
did Christ's Sacrifice. So that at last they confess that Christ's death was no
proper Expiatory Sacrifice; for whatsoever is so, must make Satisfaction to the
Law and Justice of God. But say they, the Sacrifices were not offered for
Payment but for Remission. I say, they were a Payment in order to Remission. I
mean such a Payment as the Law appointed and God accepted, and that is true and
proper Satisfaction. But we must distinguish a Legal Payment and Satisfaction,
from Pecuniary Payment to a Creditor. And all the Confusion these Men have run
into, has been from want of distinguishing these; of which I have treated at
large in the following Discourse.

Thus far it appears that they have by no means allowed the Death and
Sufferings of Christ to have been an Expiatory Sacrifice in the Sense of the
Jews, as it was a Ransom or Price of Redemption.

But there is something farther to be considered in an Expiatory Sacrifice, and
that is a Substitution in place of the Offenders. For that the Jews and others
understood by a Sacrifice of Expiation; when the Punishment of one was laid
upon another in order to his Deliverance. Not that the very same was to be
undergone, as appears by the Sacrifice of Atonement on the Day of Expiation;
which was not that which the People of Israel were to have suffered without it,
but it was what God Appointed and Accepted instead of their Punishment: and
therefore the Scapegoat is said to bear upon him all the Iniquities of the
People, Levit. 16.22.
which was supposed to be so much charged with them, that he that let him go
was to Purify himself before he could come into the Camp. 26.
So in the Sin-offering for the Congregation, 4.15.
the Elders were to lay their hands upon the head of the Bullock before the
Lord: and in other Sacrifices the Rule among the Jews was, 1.4.
that none but the Owner was to lay on his hands; to show on whose Account he
was offered up as a Sacrifice of Atonement. For here the Right of Dominion was
sufficient for Substitution; but in a Rational Agent, Consent is necessary to
make it Just.

Having thus seen, what the true Nature of an Expiatory Sacrifice was, we must
now consider, how far this can agreee with the Suffering of Christ for the Sins
of Mankind. And we have already found our Savior himself declaring that he
gave his Life a Ransom for many. But that is not all; for, when he instituted
his last Supper for a Commemoration of his Suffering, he said, Matt. 26.28.
For this is my Blood of the New Testament which is shed for many for the
Remission of Sins. His Disciples, to whom he spoke these words, must understand
them as the Jews commonly did; when the Blood of a Sacrifice was offered for an
Atonement in order to the Remission of Sins. And one great end of his Preaching
was to declare that he came into the World with that design; that it was the
Will of God he should suffer, Heb. 10.9, 10.
and that he came to do his Will. And therefore speaking of laying down his
Life, he says, No man takes it away from me but I lay it down of my self.
John 10.17, 18.
I have power to lay it down and I have power to take it again. This
Commandment have I received of my Father. So that here we have God's
Appointment of such a Sacrifice of Atonement for Mankind; Christ's free and
voluntary Consent for the undertaking it, and a Translation of the Punishment
of our Sins upon him; 2 Cor. 5.21.
which St. Paul calls God's making him to be sin for us who knew no Sin; which
shows that the Sufferings of Christ were on the Account of our Sins, being laid
upon him by his own Consent as our Sin-offering; or a Sacrifice of Expiation
for our Sins. And in another place says, that he has redeemed us from the
Curse of the Law, being made a Curse for us. Gal. 3.1^
How could he be made a Curse for us in order to the Redeeming us from the
Curse of the Law; if his Sufferings were only a mere voluntary Condition in
order to his Exaltation, without bearing the Burden of our Sins? But St. Paul
adds, that we have Redemption through his Blood, Ephesians. 1.7. Coloss. 1.14. Romans
3.25.
the Forgiveness of Sins. That, God has set him forth as a Propitiation
through Faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the Remission of
Sins. That, when we were enemies, 5.10. Ephesians. 5.2.
we were reconciled to God by the Death of his Son. That he has given himself
for us, an Offering and Sacrifice to God. That, Heb. 9.26, 28.
he appeared to put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself; and that he was once
offered to bear the Sins of many. That, 1 Timothy 2.6.
he gave himself a Ransom for all.

Neither was it St. Paul only who speaks after this manner; but St. Peter
says, that his own self bare our Sins in his own body on the Tree. 1 Pet.
2.24. 3.18.
That Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust. 1 John
1.7. 2.2. 4.10.
And St. John, that the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all
sin, and that God sent his Son to be the Propitiation for our Sins. So that
Christ and his Apostles agree in the same manner of expression; and great
weight is laid upon Christ's being a Propitiation for us, and our Hopes of
Remission of Sins and the Favor of God depend upon it. What now is to be said
to all these places of Scripture? Were they designed only to humor and impose
upon the Credulity of Mankind by telling them of such an Expiatory Sacrifice in
the Death of Christ, which never was, nor could be, being Repugnant to the
Justice of God? For Christ, say they, being Innocent could not suffer the
Punishment of our Sins, and God being Just could not accept of it, although he
freely offered himself as a Sacrifice for our Sins. Does this agree with the
Force and Design of all these Expressions? Had not Christ the Power and Will to
offer up himself as a Sacrifice of Propitiation to God? And where lies the
Injustice of accepting such a Sacrifice which he freely offered? But it could
not be, say they, by way of Punishment for our Sins. What then is the meaning
of all those places, wherein he is said to bear our Sins and to suffer in our
stead, the just for the unjust? What is this but to contradict the Tenor and
Scope of the New Testament with respect to the Death of Christ; and to turn
their Sense quite another way from what they were thought to signify at that
time? which is no reasonable way of interpreting Scripture.

Do they deny that Christ suffered, what we say he did? No; that they dare not
do. But they say, What he underwent was only Labor and Suffering; but not the
Punishment of our Iniquities. Then, I say, it could be no Expiatory Sacrifice,
which implies a Substitution, and the contrary appears by the many places of
Scripture already mentioned, wherein our Sins and the Sufferings of Christ are
joined together.

Thus we see the true Rise of this Controversy was from the many places of
Scripture, which seem very plain and clear in this matter; and therefore I
shall now give an account of the Progress of it.

F. Socinus seeing the bent of the Scripture so much against him, sets himself
to the finding out ways to avoid the force of them.

1. To those which speak of Christ's being a Ransom or Price of Redemption for
us, Socin. de Serve. l. 2. c. 1. in fin.
he answers, That these Expressions are to be understood only Metaphorically,
and Christ's Death being an Intervening Condition in order to our Deliverance,
it is therefore called, a Price of Redemption. And to the same purpose, the
Correct Racovian Catechism; only there it is added, That God did accept of the
Death of Christ as a most Acceptable Sacrifice. But not by way of Satisfaction
or Payment of our Debts, because he as a Sacrifice was given by God himself;
but that he might give us the greater Assurance of Pardon and Eternal Life.

So that here we have the true state of this matter before us; viz. Whether the
Death of Christ, when it is said to be a Ransom or Price of Redemption for us,
is only to be looked on as a hard Condition on his side Intervening, or as a
proper Sacrifice of Atonement, which God had appointed, for the Expiation of
Sins? The Question is not, Whether God appointed or accepted him, for that we
have allowed in all Sacrifices of Atonement by the Law of Moses; but whether
his Sufferings were not required in order to the Satisfaction of Divine Justice
for the Sins of Mankind; not by way of strict Payment, as in case of Debts; but
by a Legal Satisfaction to the Justice of God as it is concerned in the Honor
of his Laws.

Our Unitarians grant, Answ. to Milb. p. 58.
That Christ was a Ransom and Price of Redemption for us; but they deny, That
he was an Adequate Price, or a Sacrifice to the Justice of God. But still they
run upon the Notion of Debts and Payments, as though there were no other Notion
of Justice and Satisfaction but between Creditors and Debtors; or as if their
Notions of these things were rather taken from the Shops than the Schools. And
the monstrous Contradiction they conclude the charge of our Doctrine with, is,
That God freely Pardons the whole Debt of Sin, and yet has been infinitely
over-paid for both in the Death and other Sufferings of the Lord Christ.

But in the following Discourse, Chapter I.
I have endeavored to lay open this Mistake, by showing, That Debts and
Punishments are of a different Nature; and therefore the Satisfaction in one
Case is not to be measured by the other. But I shall not here anticipate the
Reader, as to what follows; but I shall take notice of what they say, which
seems to relate to this matter.

Almighty God, say they, as King and Proprietor of all Persons and things, can
forgive any Offense or all Offenses even without Repentance or Amendment, nor
is it contrary to his Justice so to do.

This is a very strange Assertion. For then there is no Obligation on God's
part in point of Justice to punish the most Impenitent and Incorrigible
Offenders. But there is a great deal of difference, between making the Exercise
of Punitive or Vindictive Justice necessary upon every Offense, and saying that
the Justice of God does not require that any Offenses should be punished.

The former makes Justice in God to proceed by a natural Necessity, which would
leave no place for Mercy, nor any Satisfaction by a Mediator, for that must
suppose Liberty and Relaxation, as to the Executive Part of Justice. And if God
must punish Sinners as they deserve, there can be no stop to the Execution of
Justice short of Annihilation; for our very Beings are the Gift of God which we
have deserved to be deprived of. But on the other side, to say, that the
Justice of God does not require the Punishment of any Offenses without
Repentance or Amendment, is to overthrow any such thing as Punitive Justice in
God; by which I do not mean, the actual execution of it, and the due measures
which belong to it, but the Will to punish Obstinate and Impenitent Sinners.
And that results from his Hatred and Abhorrency of Evil, and his just
Government of the World. For how can any Men, who believe that God is really
displeased with the Wickedness of Men, and that he is a Just and Righteous
Governor, ever think that it is not Repugnant to his Justice to forgive all
Offenses without Repentance or Amendment? How can his Hatred of Sin and the
Justice of his Government be reconciled with the Impunity of the most Obstinate
Offenders? Is there no such thing as Justice to himself and to his Laws; which
lies in a just Vindication of his Honor and of his Laws from Contempt? And who
can be guilty of greater Contempt of him, than those who persist in their
Wickedness without Repentance or Amendment? And after all, Is it not contrary
to his Justice to forgive such as these, because he is absolute Lord and
Proprietor of all Persons and Things? This might signify something, if we
could imagine God to be nothing but Almighty Power without Justice: but if his
Justice be as Essential an Attribute as his Omnipotency, we must not so much as
suppose the Exercise of one without the other.

Answ. to Milb. p. 53.
But they do not deny, That it is inconsistent with the Wisdom and Holiness of
God to let the Incorrigible and Impenitent escape unpunished, or to forgive Sin
without Repentance or Amendment. But if the Wisdom and Holiness of God will not
permit the Impunity of Impenitent Sinners, is it not just in God to punish
them? Not barely as to the Degree and Desert of Punishment; but as to the Will
of Punishing them according to their merits? Whence does their Punishment come?
Is it not from the Will of God? Is that Will just or not? If the Will to punish
be just? whence comes it to be so? From the Wisdom and Holiness of God? Then
Punitive Justice, when it is agreeable to God's Wisdom and Holiness, is a
proper Divine Attribute as well as they. And they must have strange Notions of
Punitive Justice, who would separate it from them.

But Justice, they say, has no other share or interest in Punishment, but only
to see that Punishment be not misplaced, and that it do not exceed the Offense.
We are far from denying these things to belong to the Measures in the Exercise
of Punitive Justice: But whence comes Punitive Justice to belong to God? Is it
not because it is just in him to punish Offenders according to those measures?
And whence comes this, but from that Universal Justice in God, which is always
joined with his Wisdom and Holiness: and implies an Universal Rectitude in all
he does? And from thence it comes that all the Measures of Justice are observed
by him in the Punishment of the greatest Offenders.

Now this Universal Justice in God is that, whereby he not only punishes
Obstinate and Impenitent Sinners, but he takes care of preserving the Honor of
his Laws. And therefore, although Almighty God out of his great Mercy were
willing that Penitent Sinners should be forgiven; yet it was most agreeable
thereto, that it should be done in such a manner as to discourage Mankind from
the practice of Sin, by the same way by which he offers Forgiveness; and for
this end, it pleased God in his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness to send his Son to
become a Sacrifice of Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind; which being freely
undertaken by him, there was no breach in the Measures of Punitive Justice with
respect to him; and so by his Death he offered up himself as a full, perfect
and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the Sins of Mankind.
And this is that Doctrine of the Satisfaction of Christ which we own and defend.

But these bold Assertions, That God as absolute Lord may forgive all Offenses
without Repentance, and it is not contrary to his Justice so to do; that, it is
not the Justice of God which prompts him to punish Sinners, arise from too mean
and narrow a Conception of Divine Justice; as though it lay only in the manner
of the Execution of it. But that there is an Essential Attribute of Justice
belonging to the Divine Nature, appears from hence, that there are some things
which are so disagreeable to the Divine Nature that he cannot do them; he
cannot break his Promises, nor deceive Mankind to their Destruction; he cannot
deny himself, nor pervert that Order, or due Respects of things to each other,
which he has established in the World. He cannot make it the Duty of Mankind
to dishonor their Maker, or to violate the Rules of Good and Evil, so as to
make Evil Good and Good Evil; he cannot make Murder and Adultery to be Virtues,
nor Impiety and Wickedness not to deserve Punishment. But whence comes all
this? Is it that God wants Almighty Power to do what he pleases? No doubt, he
is supreme Lord over all, and has all things under his Will. But there is an
Essential Justice in God, which is a supreme Rule of Righteousness, according
to which he does always exercise his Power and Will. And so Moses says of him,
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
All his ways are perfect, a God of Truth, and without Iniquity, just and right
is he; and the Psalmist, Psalm. 145.17.
The Lord is righteous in all his ways and holy in all his works. He not only
is so, but he can be no otherwise, for this Universal Righteousness is as great
a Perfection and Attribute of God, as his Wisdom, or Power. It is not one Name
which stands for all; but it is a real and distinct Attribute of it self: It is
as a Rule and Measure to the Exercise of the rest. And he particularly shows it
in all the Acts of Punitive Justice: So Nehemiah; Neh. 9.33.
Howbeit thou art just in all that is brought upon us, for thou have done
right, but we have done wickedly. And Daniel; Righteousness belongs unto
thee, Dan. 9.7, 14.
but unto us confusion of Face: For the Lord our God is righteous in all his
Works which he does, for we obeyed not his Voice. And Zephaniah; Zeph. 3.5.
The just Lord is in the midst thereof, he will not do Iniquity. From whence it
appears that the Exercise of Punitive Justice is according to the Essential
Justice or Righteousness of the Divine Nature. And so Abraham pleaded with God,
Genesis 18.25.
Shall not the Judge of all the Earth do right? i. e. Will he not punish
according to the Righteousness of his Nature? And so Abimelech argues from the
natural Notion he had of God^s righteous Nature, Lord, will thou slay also a
righteous Nation? 20.4.


But here the main Difficulty which deserves to be cleared is this, How far
Punitive Justice is founded on that Universal Justice which is an Essential
Attribute of God. For the want of understanding this, has been the great
occasion of so much Confusion in the Discourses about this matter. And for the
clearing of it, these things must be considered;

1. That there is a difference between that Justice in God, whereby he hates
Sin, and that whereby he punishes the Sinner. The hatred of Sin does
necessarily follow the Perfection of his Nature. Therefore God is said, To hate
the Wicked; Psalm. 11.5. Prove. 6.16. Psalm. 45.7. Zech. 8.17.
and Evil to be an Abomination to him; to love Righteousness and to hate
Wickedness. But if the Punishment of the Offender were as necessarily
consequent as his Hatred of Sin, all Mankind must suffer as they offend, and
there would be no place for Mercy in God, nor for Repentance in Men. But Sin in
it self is perfectly hateful to God, there being nothing like God in it; but
Man was God's Creature and made after his Image and Likeness; and however God
be displeased with Mankind on the account of Sin, yet the Workmanship of God
still remains; and we continually see that God does not exercise his Punitive
Justice according to the Measures of their Iniquities. And they who plead most
for the necessity of Punitive Justice, are themselves a Demonstration to the
contrary; for they cannot deny, that they are not punished as their Iniquities
have deserved. And if Punitive Justice be necessary in it self it must reach
the Persons that have deserved to be punished, if there be no Relaxation of the
Severity of it.

2. That it is very agreeable to the Divine Justice, to exercise the Severity
of Punitive Justice on obstinate and incorrigible Offenders. And this is that
whereon the Justice of the Punishments of Sinners in another World is founded;
because God has been so merciful to them here, and used so many ways to
reclaim them, and it is the Not exercising his Punitive Justice upon them in
this World, which makes it so much more reasonable in another. For thereby they
have showed their Contempt of God and his Laws, of his offers of Mercy and
their wilful obstinacy in offending him. And the reasonableness of the
Punishment of such Offenders is not denied by any of our more Learned
Adversaries, as I have showed in the following Discourse from Socinus and
Crellius, Chapter I. p. 20.
and might do from several others. But I need not mention any more, since in
the late Correct Edition of the Racovian Catechism there is this Note, Catech.
Racov. p. 179.
That they have always asserted, that the Wicked shall be raised up at the
great Day to undergo the Punishment of their Sins, and to be cast into the Fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And for this, besides their Public
Confessions, they quote Crellius, Schlictingius, Volkelius, Wolzogenius,
Schlictin. in Joh 5.29.
etc. And Schlictingius says, The Doctrine of future Punishments was necessary
to be preached, as being part of the Christian Faith; and that God's Veracity
is concerned in the Execution of his Threatenings. Which is a part of Natural
Justice. And those Learned Men, who have been thought most favorable to the
Socinian Opinions have declared themselves very frankly as to the Justice of
the Punishment of Impenitent Sinners.

Curcellaeus, whom they often mention with respect, says, Curcel. Instit. l.
2. c. 13.. 5.
The Justice of God requires, that he should inflict the Punishments he has
threatened on Contumacious Sinners. And Limborch (whom they sometimes appeal to)
says, Limborch. Theol. Christ. l. 2. c. 12.. 35.
That the Justice of God does not permit the Impunity of Refractory and
Impenitent Contemners of his Grace. Because, says he, God by his declared Will
has tied himself up from the Exercise of his Absolute Power; and his Laws
would be trampled upon, and his Majesty slighted; nor would God's hatred of Sin
ever be fully discovered. And therefore the Day of Wrath is called by St. Paul,
Romans 2.5.
The Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God. Episcopius says, Episcop.
Inst. Theol. l. 4. c. 29.
That although in such Punishments, which depend only on the Will of the
Lawmakers, he does not think, that God in Justice is obliged to make good his
Threatenings, as he is to perform his Promises; (but that in such Cases God is
not bound in Justice to execute all that the Law threatens; but when he thinks
fit to punish, then his Justice requires him not to punish beyond the
Commination) yet in the Case of obstinate and incurable Offenders, he does not
deny, that the Justice of God requires the Rigor of the Law to be executed
upon them. And he adds, That the Day of Judgment will fully manifest the
Justice of God in the Threatenings he has made to Impenitent Sinners. Vorst. de
Attrib. Disp. 9.. 38.
Even Vorstius, who was supposed to be too much inclined to the Socinian
Doctrine, owns it to be a part of God's Justice to punish wicked and impenitent
Persons; that his Patience and Goodness may not be always contemned with
Impunity. And afterward, That although God does no Injury to the Offender,. 47.
if he does not execute his Threatenings; yet out of regard to the Justice of
his Word, he does not recede from what he has declared: But all Threatenings
under the Gospel are Conditional; and none are damned by it, but such as
continue in Impenitency and Unbelief. And in his Explication he says,. 50.
Not. ad. 46.
That where God has absolutely declared his Will to punish in such a manner,
he cannot forgive without Injustice.

But our Unitarians speak without any Reserve, That it is not the Justice of
God, which prompts him to punish Sinners, and so it is not contrary to his
Justice to forgive all Offenses without Repentance or Amendment. And thus the
Justice of God is not concerned in the Punishments of the great Day, although
the Apostle calls it, The Revelation of the Righteous Judgment of God.

And by this the World may see how very far our Modern Unitarians are from
handling this Subject more Carefully, Judiciously and Exactly than others;
However one of their own Party has lately affirmed it; Vindic. of S. R. H. p.
128.
with as much Confidence and as little Ground as they have done other things.

3. That it is very agreeable to Divine Justice to accept of a Satisfaction on
behalf of the Sins of Mankind, who do not persist in their evil ways, so that
their Sins shall be forgiven upon their Repentance and Amendment. For since the
Exercise of Punitive Justice is not necessary on the Persons of the Offenders,
and since God in this Life abates so much of his just Severity against them; he
thereby shows, that he does not proceed with Mankind here according to the
Rigor of his Justice; but yet, since God has given to them very just and
righteous Laws, since those Laws have been broken and his Authority contemned,
it is very just for God to require a Sacrifice of Atonement for the Sins of the
World, that Man^ind may see that God was justly displeased at them, and that
none take Encouragement to go on to commit them; but yet, that upon their
hearty Repentance and sincere Obedience, they may be assured of the Remission
of Sins and the Promise of Eternal Life. All the Difficulty now remaining is
about Christ's Suffering in our stead, of which the Scripture speaks so fully
in the places already mentioned. But we must consider what is Answered to them.

II. To those places of Scripture which speak of Christ's Suffering the
Punishment of our Sins; all that Socinus says, comes to these two things.

Socin de Servat. Part. 2. c. 4. etc.
1. That Christ suffered on the occasion of our Sins, and with a Design to take
away our Sins.

2. That by his Sufferings he came to have a Power to Forgive Sins; and that
this is the proper Expiation of Sin. But by no means that he suffered in our
stead; for he has these Words; C. 7.
Ut nihil aliud sit Christum pro nobis mortuum esse, quam vice seu loco nostro
mortem subiisse, id adeo a veritate abhorret ut nihil magis. Which in plain
English is, that nothing is more false than that Christ suffered in our stead.

The old Editions of the Racovian Catechism follow Socinus, and there the
Answer to the Places which speak of Christ's Dying for us, is, that they do not
signify in our stead; but for our good. Which they are very careful to
distinguish, because they think that the latter implies no more than a
Condition in order to the Expiation in Heaven; but the other makes him a true
Propitiatory Sacrifice for our Sins. But if Christ did not suffer in our stead;
how can they possibly Reconcile his undergoing this Condition with their own
Measures of Divine Justice? All they pretend to say, is, that it was Labor and
Suffering but not Punishment. Which is to speak against the Common Sense of
Mankind; and is a ridiculous piece of Stoicism. They say, it was a mere Act of
Dominion as to Christ and not of Justice. But if there be such an Essential
Attribute as Justice in God, then the Exercise of Dominion must be regulated by
it; especially where there was nothing but perfect Innocence. The Case is very
different as to the sinful Race of Mankind, who having the Guilt of Sin upon
them, God may justly exercise his Dominion over them as he sees cause; but he
always does it justly, although the particular Reasons may not be within our
reach. But here is no Guilt of Sin considered, either of his own, or others;
according to their Principles; and yet they make him to undergo as great
Sufferings, as we do, who assert that he suffered for our sakes in our stead;
which alone gives a Reasonable Account of it.

But in the late correct Edition of the Racovian Catechism they say, the Sense
of Christ's Suffering for our Sins is twofold, but both come to one at last, 1.
That Christ suffered as a Sacrifice in our stead; tanquam victima pro nobis
Succedanea. How can Socinus and the Racovian Catechism agree? 2. That he
suffered for our good. But they deny any Commutation which they say, was not in
the Expiatory Sacrifice among the Jews. What does a Substitution differ from a
Commutation in this Case?

But how do suffering in our stead and for our good come all to one at last?
Either it must be, that Christ did truly suffer in our stead, when he underwent
the Punishment of our Sins in order to our Redemption and Expiation; and that
is a very good and true Sense; which we readily embrace, and are very well
content that they should come all to one: Or if the meaning be only, that
Christ may be said to suffer in our stead, because we have Benefit by the
Consequences of his Death; then his dying is only considered as a bare
Condition and not as a Sacrifice in our stead. As to make it plain by an
Instance; we all agree that Joseph's Suffering in Egypt was designed by the
Wise Providence of God for the good of his Brethren, which they received after
his Advancement, to which his Suffering was an Antecedent Condition. But can
any Man say, that he suffered in stead of his Brethren? But now if Joseph's
Brethren had been sold for Slaves in Egypt, and Joseph had gone down thither
and offered himself a Prisoner for their Deliverance; this had been truly
Suffering in their stead, as well as for their Advantage. And suppose the King
of Egypt had agreed with Joseph, that if he would become Prisoner for his
Brethren, he would advance him, and he should himself deliver them by his own
Power; this does not at all hinder his Suffering in their stead. But if it had
no Relation to their Deliverance by his being made Captive himself; but was
only a step to his Advancement; then it cannot be said to be in their stead,
although it might turn to their Advantage. And so much for the Sense of the
Racovian Catechism.

But our Unitarians fly higher, for they say,

1. That God could not justly or wisely substitute an Innocent Person to
undergo Punishment in place of the Guilty.

2. That Christ could not freely offer himself as a Sacrifice in our stead, nor
could God accept of it, or allow it.

So that here we have the true State of this Controversy between us, viz.
whether Christ were a Real Expiatory Sacrifice for the Sins of Mankind. For, if
he could not be Substituted in our stead, nor God accept of his offering up
himself for us; all the other Expressions are mere Words given out on purpose
to Amuse and Deceive us.

And this is that which I have undertaken to make out in the following
Discourse, viz.

1. That the Scripture does as plainly set forth that Christ suffered the
Punishment of our Sins and in our stead, Chap. II.
as it could do; and that no Expressions could be thought of to that purpose,
but might be answered in the same way that they do these. And therefore it is
in vain to contend with such Men, who are resolved that Words and Phrases shall
signify no otherwise, than they would have them. And yet at last they cannot
deny but a kind of Substitution is implied as a Victima Succedanea; but how?
That he suffered for our good and by the occasion of our Sins, but not the
Punishment of them. Thus far then we have gained, that the Words of Scripture
are for us; but say they, what ever the Words are, they cannot mean any real
Punishment, because he was an Innocent Person. Therefore I have showed;

2. That there is no Repugnancy in Reason, Chap. III.
nor to the Justice of God for an Innocent Person to suffer by his own Consent
and for so great an End, what the Scripture attributes to our Savior. And I
have fully answered the Arguments brought by our Adversaries to prove that God
could not justly or wisely substitute an Innocent Person to suffer for the
Guilty.

Chapter IV. v. 4.
3. That Christ did offer up himself, as an Expiatory Sacrifice to God in our
stead; and that God did accept and allow of it. Which is the Design of the
three last Chapters. And till an Answer be given to what I have there
discoursed at large, I shall refer the Reader to what is already said; and
shall suppose those Answers to be sufficient, till I see some better Reasons
for their Opinion in this matter, than I have yet met with, although I have
been no stranger to their late Writings, as, God willing, they may see on
another Occasion.

E. W.
April 24. 1696.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THere are already published Two Volumes of Sermons, Preached upon Several
Occasions, by the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of
Worcester, in Octavo: Sold by Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard.

A Third Volume will speedily be prepared for the Press.

A DISCOURSE Concerning the Sufferings of Christ.
CHAP. I.
I. Of the Socinian way of interpreting Scripture; and of the uncertainty it
leaves us in as to the main Articles of Faith, manifested by an Exposition of
Genesis 1. suitable to that way. II. The state of the Controversy in general
concerning the Sufferings of Christ for us. He did not suffer the same we
should have done. III. The grand mistake in making punishments of the nature of
Debts. IV. The difference between them at large discovered, from the different
reason and ends of them. V. The right of punishment in God, proved against
Crellius, not to arise from mere dominion. VI. The end of punishment not bare
Compensation, as it is in Debts; what punishment due to an injured person by
the right of Nature; proper punishment a result of Laws. VII. Crellius his
great mistake about the end of punishments. VIII. Not designed for satisfaction
of Anger as it is a desire of Revenge. Seneca and Lactantius vindicated against
Crellius. IX. The Magistrates interest in punishment distinct from that of
private persons. X. Of the nature of Anger in God, and the satisfaction to be
made to it. Crellius his great arguments against satisfaction depend on a false
Notion of God's anger. XI. Of the ends of divine punishments. XII. The
different nature of them in this and the future state.

SIR,
ALthough the Letter I received from your hands contained in it so many
mistakes of my meaning and design, that it seemed to be the greatest civility
to the Writer of it, to give no answer at all to it; because that could not be
done, without the discovery of far more weaknesses in him, than he pretends to
find in my discourse: Yet the weight and importance of the matter may require a
farther account from me, concerning the true reason of the Sufferings of
Christ. Wherein my design was so far from representing old Errors to the best
advantage, or to rack my wits to defend them, as that person seems to suggest;
that I aimed at nothing more than to give a true account of what upon a serious
enquiry, I judged to be the most natural and genuine meaning of the Christian
Doctrine contained in the Writings of the New Testament.

I. For finding therein such multitudes of expressions, Of the Socinian way of
interpreting Scripture.
which to an unprejudiced mind attribute all the mighty effects of the Love of
God to us, to the obedience and sufferings of Christ, I began to consider what
reason there was why the plain and easy sense of those places must be
forsaken, and a remote and Metaphorical meaning put upon them. Which I thought
my self the more obliged to do, because I could not conceive if it had been the
design of the Scripture, to have delivered the received Doctrine of the
Christian Church, concerning the reason of the sufferings of Christ, that it
could have been more clearly and fully expressed than it is already. So that
supposing that to have been the true meaning of the several places of Scripture
which we contend for; yet the same arts and subtilties might have been used to
pervert it, which are employed to persuade men that is not the true meaning of
them. And what is equally serviceable to truth and falsehood, can of it self,
have no power on the minds of men to convince them it must be one, and not the
other. Nay, if every unusual and improper acception of words in the Scripture,
shall be thought sufficient to take away the natural and genuine sense, where
the matter is capable of it, I know scarce any article of Faith can be long
secure; and by these arts men may declare that they believe the Scriptures, and
yet believe nothing of the Christian Faith. For if the improper, though unusual
acception of those expressions of Christ's dying for us, of redemption,
propitiation, reconciliation by his blood, of his bearing our iniquities, and
being made sin and a curse for us, shall be enough to invalidate all the
arguments taken from them to prove that which the proper sense of them does
imply, why may not the improper use of the terms of Creation and Resurrection,
as well take away the natural sense of them in the great Articles of the
Creation of the world, and Resurection after death? For if it be enough to
prove that Christ's dying for us, does not imply dying in our stead; because
sometimes dying for others imports no more than dying for some advantage to
come to them; if redemption being sometimes used for mere deliverance, shall
make our redemption by Christ, wholly Metaphorical; if the terms of
propitiation, reconciliation, etc. shall lose their force, because they are
sometimes used where all things cannot be supposed parallel with the sense we
contend for: why shall I be bound to believe that the World was ever created in
a proper sense, since those persons against whom I argue, so earnestly contend
that in those places in which it seems as proper as any, it is to be understood
only in a metaphorical? If when the world and all things are said to be made by
Christ, John 1.3, 10.
we are not to understand the production but the reformation of the World and
all things in it, although the natural sense of the Words be quite otherwise;
what argument can make it necessary for me not to understand the Creation of
the World in a metaphorical sense, when Moses delivers to us the history of it?
Why may not I understand in the beginning, Genesis 1. for the beginning of the
Mosaical Dispensation, as well as Socinus does in the beginning, John 1. for
the beginning of the Evangelical? and that from the very same argument used by
him, viz. that in the beginning is to be understood of the main subject
concerning which the author intends to write, and that I am as sure it was in
Moses concerning the Law given by him, as it was in St. John concerning the
Gospel delivered by Christ. Why may not the Creation of the Heavens and the
Earth, be no more than the erection of the Jewish Polity? since it is
acknowledged, that by New Heavens and New Earth wherein dwells righteousness,
no more is understood than a new state of things under the Gospel? Why may not
the confused Chaos import no more than the state of Ignorance and Darkness
under which the World was before the Law of Moses? since it is confessed that
it signifies in the New Testament such a state of the World before the Gospel
appeared? and consequently, why may not the light which made the first day be
the first tendencies to the Doctrine of Moses, which being at first divided and
scattered, was united afterward in one great Body of Laws, which was called
the Sun, because it was the great Director of the Jewish Nation, and therefore
said to rule the day; as the less considerable Laws of other Nations are called
the Moon, because they were to govern those who were yet under the night of
Ignorance? Why may not the Firmament being in the midst of the Waters, imply
the erection of the Jewish State in the midst of a great deal of trouble, since
it is confessed, that Waters are often taken in Scripture in a Metaphorical
sense for troubles and afflictions? and the Earth appearing out of the Waters,
be no more but the settlement of that State after its troubles; and
particularly with great elegancy after their passage through the Red Sea? And
the Production of Herbs and living Creatures, be the great increase of the
People of all sorts, as well those of a meaner rank (and therefore called
herbs) as those of a higher, that were to live upon the other, and sometimes
trample upon them, and therefore by way of excellency called the Living
Creatures? And when these were multiplied and brought into order, (which being
done by steps and degrees, is said to be finished in several days) then the
State and the Church flourished and enjoyed a great deal of pleasure, which was
the production of Man and Woman, and their being placed in Paradise: (for a
perfect Man, notes a high degree of perfection, and a Woman is taken for the
Church in the Revelations) but when they followed the Customs of other Nations
which were as a forbidden tree to them, then they lost all their happiness and
pleasure, and were expelled out of their own Country, and lived in great
slavery and misery, which was the Curse pronounced against them, for violating
the rules of Policy established among them. Thus you see how small a measure of
wit, by the advantage of those ways of interpreting Scripture, which the
subtilest of our adversaries make use of, will serve to pervert the clearest
expressions of Scripture to quite another sense than was ever intended by the
Writer of them. And I assure you, if that rule of interpreting Scripture be
once allowed; that if words are ever used in a Metaphorical sense, there can be
no necessity of understanding them any where in a proper; there is scarce any
thing which you look on as the most necessary to be believed in Scripture, but
it may be made appear not to be so upon those terms. For by reason of the
paucity, and therefore the ambiguity of the Original words of the Hebrew
language, the strange Idioms of it, the different senses of the same word in
several Conjugations, the want of several modes of expression which are used in
other Languages, and above all the lofty and Metaphorical way of speaking used
in all Eastern Countries, and the imitation of the Hebrew Idioms in the Greek
Translation of the Old Testament, and Original of the New, you can hardly affix
a sense upon any words used therein, but a man who will be at the pains to
search all possible significations and uses of those words, will put you hard
to it, to make good that which you took to be the proper meaning of them.
Wherefore although I will not deny to our adversaries the praise of subtilty
and diligence; I cannot give them that (which is much more praiseworthy) of
discretion and sound judgment. For while they use their utmost industry to
search all the most remote and Metaphorical senses of words, with a design to
take off the genuine and proper meaning of them, they do not attend to the ill
consequence that may be made of this to the overthrowing those things, the
belief of which themselves make necessary to salvation. For by this way the
whole Gospel may be made an Allegory, and the Resurrection of Christ be thought
as metaphorical as the Redemption by his Death, and the force of all the
Precepts of the Gospel avoided by some unusual signification of the words
wherein they are delivered. So that nothing can be more unreasonable than such
a method of proceeding, unless it be first sufficiently proved that the matter
is not capable of the proper sense, and therefore of necessity the improper
only is to be allowed. And this is that which Socinus seems after all his pains
to pervert the meaning of the places in controversy, to rely on most; viz.
Socin. de Servat. Part. 2. Cap. 4.
That the Doctrine of satisfaction does imply an impossibility in the thing it
self, and therefore must needs be false; nay, he says, the infallibility of
the Revealer had not been enough in this Case, supposing that Christ had said
it, and risen from the dead, to declare his own Veracity; unless he had
delivered it by its proper causes and effects, and so showed the possibility of
the thing it self. And the reason, he says, why they believe their Doctrine
true, is not barely because God has said it, but they believe certainly that
God has said it, because they know it to be true; by knowing the contrary
Doctrine to be impossible. The controversy then, concerning the meaning of the
places in dispute is to be resolved from the nature and reasonableness of the
matter contained in them? for if Socinus his reason be answerable to his
confidence, if the account we give of the sufferings of Christ, be repugnant
not only to the Justice, Goodness and Grace of God, but to the nature of the
thing; if it appear impossible, that mankind should be redeemed in a proper
sense, or that God should be propitiated by the Death of his Son as a Sacrifice
for sin; if it enervate all the Precepts of Obedience, and tend rather to
justify sins than those who do repent of them; I shall then agree, that no
industry can be too great in searching Authors, comparing places, examining
Versions, to find out such a sense as may be agreeable to the nature of things,
the Attributes of God, and the design of Christian Religion. But if on the
contrary, the Scripture does plainly assert those things, from whence our
Doctrine follows, and without which no reasonable account can be given either
of the expressions used therein, or of the sufferings of Christ; if Christ's
death did immediately respect God as a sacrifice, and was paid as a price for
our redemption; if such a design of his death be so far from being repugnant to
the nature of God, that it highly manifests his Wisdom, Justice and Mercy; if
it assert nothing but what is so far from being impossible, that it is very
reconcilable to the common principles of Reason, as well as the Free Grace of
God in the pardon of sin; if, being truly understood, it is so far from
enervating, that it advances highly all the purposes of Christian Religion,
then it can be no less than a betraying one of the grand Truths of the
Christian Doctrine, not to believe ours to be the true sense of the places in
controversy. And this is that which I now take upon me to maintain.

II. For our clearer proceeding herein, nothing will be more necessary, than to
understand the true state of the Controversy; The state of the Controversy in
general.
which has been rendered more obscure by the mistakes of some, who have managed
it with greater zeal than judgment; who have asserted more than they needed to
have done, and made our Adversaries assert much less than they do: And by this
means have shot over their Adversaries heads, and laid their own more open to
assaults. It is easy to observe, that most of Socinus his Arguments are
levelled against an opinion, which few who have considered these things do
maintain, and none need to think themselves obliged to do it; which is, That
Christ paid a proper and rigid satisfaction for the sins of men, considered
under the notion of debts, and that he paid the very same, which we ought to
have done; which in the sense of the Law, is never called Satisfaction, but
strict Payment. Against this Socinus disputes from the impossibility of
Christ's paying the very same that we were to have paid; because our penalty
was eternal Death, and that as the consequent of inherent guilt, which Christ
neither did nor could undergo. Neither is it enough to say, That Christ had
undergone eternul Death, unless he had been able to free himself from it; for
the admission of one to pay for another, who could discharge the debt in much
less time than the offenders could, was not the same which the Law required.
For that takes no notice of any other than the persons who had sinned; and if a
Mediator could have paid the same, the Original Law must have been disjunctive;
viz. That either the Offender must suffer, or another for him; but then the
Gospel had not been the bringing in of a better Covenant, but a performance of
the old. But if there be a relaxation or dispensation of the first Law; then it
necessarily follows, that what Christ paid, was not the very same which the
first Law required: for what need of that, when the very same was paid that was
in the obligation? But if it be said, That the dignity of the person makes up,
what wanted in the kind or degree of punishment; this is a plain confession
that it is not the same, but something equivalent, which answers the ends of
the Sanction, as much as the same would have done, which is the thing we
contend for. Besides, if the very same had been paid in the strict sense, there
would have followed a deliverance ipso facto; for the release immediately
follows the payment of the same: and it had been injustice to have required any
thing further, in order to the discharge of the Offender, when strict and full
payment had been made of what was in the obligation. But we see that Faith and
Repentance, and the consequences of those two, are made conditions on our
parts, in order to the enjoying the benefit of what Christ has procured; So
that the release is not immediate upon the payment, but depends on a new
contract, made in consideration of what Christ has done and suffered for us.
If it be said, That by Christ's payment, we become his, and he requires these
conditions of us; besides the contrariety of it to the Scriptures, which make
the conditions to be required by him to whom the payment was made; we are to
consider, that these very persons assert, that Christ paid all for us, and in
our name and stead; so that the payment by Christ was by a substitution in our
room; and if he paid the same which the Law required, the benefit must
immediately accrue to those in whose name the debt was paid. For what was done
in the name of another, is all one to the Creditor, as if it had been done by
the Debtor himself. But above all things, it is impossible to reconcile the
freeness of remission, with the full payment of the very same which was in the
obligation. Neither will it serve to say, That though it was not free to
Christ, yet it was to us. For the satisfaction and remission must respect the
same person; for Christ did not pay for himself, but for us, neither could the
remission be to him. Christ therefore is not considered in his own name, but as
acting in our stead; so that what was free to him, must be to us; what was
exactly paid by him, it is all one as if it had been done by us: so that it is
impossible the same debt should be fully paid and freely forgiven. Much less
will it avoid the difficulty in this case to say, That it was a refusable
payment: for it being supposed to be the very same, it was not in justice
refusable; and however not in equity, if it answer the intention of the Law, as
much as the suffering of the offenders had done; and the more it does that, the
less refusable it is. And although God himself found out the way, that does not
make the pardon free, but the designation of the person who was to pay the
debt. Thus when our Adversaries dispute against this opinion, no wonder if they
do it successfully; but this whole opinion is built upon a mistake, that
satisfaction must be the payment of the very same; which while they contend
for, they give our Adversaries too great an advantage, and make them think they
triumph over the Faith of the Church, when they do it only over the mistake of
some particular persons. But the foundation of this mistake, lies in the
consideration of punishment, under the notion of debts, and that satisfaction
therefore must be by strict payment in rigor of Law; but how great that mistake
is, will appear in the subsequent discourse. But it cannot but be wondered at,
that the very same persons who consider sins, as debts which must be strictly
satisfied for, do withal contend for the absolute necessity of this
satisfaction: whereas Socinus his Arguments would hold good, if sins were only
considered as debts, and God as the mere Creditor of punishment; he might as
freely part with his own right without satisfaction, as any Creditor may
forgive what sum he pleases to a person indebted to him; and no reason can be
brought to the contrary, from that notion of sins, why he may not do it. But if
they be considered, with a respect to God's Government of the world, and the
honor of his Laws, then some further account may be given, why it may not be
consistent with that, to pass by the sins of men, without satisfaction made to
them.

III. And because the mistake in this matter, Of the difference of debts and
punishments.
has been the foundation of most of the subsequent mistakes on both sides, and
the discovery of the cause of errors, does far more to the cure of them, than
any Arguments brought against them; and withal, the true understanding of the
whole Doctrine of satisfaction depends upon it, I shall endeavor to make clear
the notion under which our sins are considered; for upon that depends the
nature of the satisfaction which is to be made for them. For while our
Adversaries suppose, that sins are to be looked on under the notion of debts in
this debate, they assert it to be wholly free for God to remit them, without
any satisfaction. They make the right of punishment merely to depend on God's
absolute Dominion; and that all satisfaction must be considered under the
notion of compensation, for the injuries done to him, to whom it is to be made.
But if we can clearly show a considerable difference between the notion of
debts and punishments, if the right of punishment does not depend upon mere
Dominion, and that satisfaction by way of punishment, is not primarily intended
for compensation, but for other ends, we shall make not only the state of the
Controversy much clearer, but offer something considerable toward the
resolution of it. The way I shall take for the proof of the difference between
debts and punishments, shall be using the other for the Arguments for it. For
besides, that those things are just in matter of debts, which are not so in the
case of punishments; as, that it is lawful for a man to forgive all the debts
which are owing him by all persons, though they never so contumaciously refuse
payment, but our Adversaries will not say so in the case of sins; for although
they assert, That the justice of God does never require punishment in case of
repentance, Non resipiscentibus veneam non concedere, id demum naturae divinae,
and decretis ejus and propterea rectitudini and ^quitati debitum est ac
consentaneum. Socin. de Servat. l. 1. c 1. Non resipiscentes poena non liberare
tum per se aequitati est admodum cons^ntaneum, and positis quibusdam finibus
quos Deus sibi in regendis hominibus pr^fixit facto necessarium. Crell. c.
Grot. c. 2. sect. 29.
yet withal they assert, That in case of impenitency, it is not only agreeable,
but due to the nature and decrees; and therefore to the rectitude and equity of
God not to give pardon But if this be true, then there is an apparent
difference between the notion of debts and punishments; for the Impenitency
does but add to the g^eatness of the debt: And will they say, it is only in
God's power to remit small debts, but he must punish the greatest? what becomes
then of God's absolute liberty to part with h^s own right? will not this show
more of his kindness to pardon the greater, rather than lesser offenders? But
if there be something in the nature of the thing, which makes it not only just,
but necessary for impenitent sinners to be punished, as Crellius after Socinus
frequently acknowledges, then it is plain, that sins are not to be considered
merely as debts, for that obstinacy and impenitency is only punished as a
greater degree of sin, and therefore as a greater debt. And withal, those
things are lawful in the remission of debts, which are unjust in the matter of
punishments; as it is lawful for a Creditor, when two persons are considered
in equal circumstances, to remit one, and not the other; nay, to remit the
greater debt, without any satisfaction, and to exact the lesser to the greatest
extremity; but it is unjust in matter of punishments, where the reason and
circumstances are the same, for a person who has committed a crime of very
dangerous consequence, to escape unpunished, and another who has been guilty
of far less to be severely executed. Besides these considerations, I say, I
shall now prove the difference of debts and punishments, from those two things
whereby things are best differenced from each other; viz. The different Reason,
and the different End of them.

IV. (1.) The different Reason of debts and punishments: The reason of humane
punishment is the public interest.
The reason of debts is dominion and property, and the obligation of them,
depends upon voluntary contracts between parties; but the reason of punishments
is Justice and Government, and depends not upon mere contracts, but the
relation the person stands in to that Authority to which he is accountable for
his actions. For if the obligation to punishment, did depend upon mere
contract, then none could justly be punished, but such who have consented to it
by an antecedent contract: If it be said, That a contract is implied, by their
being in society with others; that is as much as I desire to make the
difference appear, for in case of debts, the obligation depends upon the
voluntary contract of the person; but in case of punishments, the very relation
to Government, and living under Laws does imply it. And the right of punishment
depends upon the obligation of Laws, where the reason of them holds, without
any express contract, or superiority of one over another; as in the case of
violation of the Law of Nations, that gives right to another Nation to punish
the infringers of it. Otherwise Wars could never be lawful between two
Nations, and none could be warrantable, but those of a Prince against his
rebellious subjects, who have broken the Laws themselves consented expressly to.
Besides, in case of debts every man is bound to pay, whether he be called upon
or no; but in case of punishments, no man is bound to betray or accuse himself.
For the obligation to payment in case of debt arises from the injury sustained
by that particular person, if another detains what is his own from him; but the
obligation to punishment, arises from the injury, the Public sustains by the
impunity of crimes, of which the Magistrates are to take Care; who by the
dispensing of punishments, do show that to be true which Grotius asserts, that
if there be any Creditor to be assigned in punishment, it is the public good:
Which appears by this, that all punishments are proportioned, according to the
influence the offenses have upon the public interest; for the reason of
punishment is not because a Law is broken, but because the breach of a Law
tends to dissolve the community, by infringing the Authority of the Laws, and
the honor of those who are to take care of them. For if we consider it, the
measure of punishments is in a well ordered State, taken from the influence
which crimes have upon the peace and interest of the community. No man
questions, but that Malice, Pride and Avarice, are things really as bad as many
faults, that are severely punished by humane Laws, but the reason these are not
punished is, because they do not so much injury to the public interest, as
Theft and Robbery do. Besides, in those things wherein the Laws of a Nation are
concerned, the utmost rigor is not used in the preventing of crimes, or the
execution of them when committed, if such an execution may endanger the public
more than the impunity of the offenders may do. And there are some things which
are thought sit to be forbidden, where the utmost means are not used to prevent
them; as Merchants are forbidden to steal customs, but they are not put under
an Oath not to do it. And when penalties have been deserved, the execution of
them has been deferred, till it may be most for the advantage of the public:
as Ioab's punishment till Solomon's Reign, though he deserved it as much in
David's. So that the rule commonly talked of, Fiat justitia and pereat mundus,
is a piece of Pedantry, rather than true Wisdom; for whatever penalty inflicted
brings a far greater detriment to the public, than the forbearance of it, is
no piece of Justice to the State, but the contrary; the greatest Law, being the
safety and preservation of the whole Body. By which it appears, that in humane
Laws, the reason of punishment is not, that such an action is done, but because
the impunity in doing it, may have a bad influence on the public interest; but
in debts, the right of Restitution depends upon the injury received by a
particular person, who looks at no more than the reparation of his loss by it.

V. We are now to consider, how far these things will hold in Divine Laws, The
right of Divine punishment not mere Dominion. Crell. Respons. ad Grot. cap. 2.
sect. 1. etc.
and what the right of punishment does result from there. For Crellius, the
subtillest of our Adversaries, knowing of how great consequence the resolution
of this is, in the whole Controversy of Satisfaction, vehemently contends,
That the right of punishment does result from God's absolute Dominion, and
therefore he is to be considered as the offended party, and not as Governor in
the right of inflicting punishment; for which his first Argument is, That our
obedience is due to God's Law, on the account of his Dominion; P. 144.
but when that is not performed, the penalty succeeds in its room, and
therefore that does belong to God on the same account: His other arguments are,
from the compensation of injuries due to the offended party, and from God's
anger against sin, in which he is to be considered as the offended party: These
two latter will be answered under the next head; the first I am to examine
here. He therefore tells us, that the right of punishment belongs to God's
Dominion, because the reason of his Government of mankind is, because he is the
Lord of them. But, for our better understanding this, we are to consider,
although the original right of Government does result from God's Dominion; for
therefore our obedience is due, because of his Sovereignty over us; yet when
God takes upon him the notion of a Governor, he enters into a new relation
with his creatures, distinct from the first as mere Lord. For he is equally
Lord of all to whom he gives a being, but he does not require obedience upon
equal terms, nor governs them by the same Laws: Dominion is properly showed in
the exercise of power; but when God gives Laws according to which he will
reward and punish, he so far restrains the exercise of his Dominion to a
subserviency to the ends of Government. If we should suppose, that God governs
the world merely by his Dominion, we must take away all rewards and
punishments; for then the actions of men, would be the mere effects of
irresistible power, and so not capable of rewards and punishments; for there
could be neither of these, where men's actions are capable of the differences of
good and evil, and that they cannot be, if they be the acts of God's Dominion,
and not of their own. But if God does not exercise his full Dominion over
rational creatures, it is apparent that he does govern them under another
notion than as mere Lord, and the reason of punishment is not to be taken from
an absolute right which God does not make use of, but from the ends and designs
of Government, which are his own Honor, the Authority of his Laws, and the
good of those whom he does govern. And Crellius is greatly mistaken, when he
makes punishment to succeed in the place of the right of obedience; for it is
only the desert of punishment, which follows upon the violation of that right;
and as we assert, that the right of obedience is derived from God's
Sovereignty, so we deny not, but the desert of punishment is from the violation
of it; but withal we say, that the obligation to punishment depends upon the
Laws, and God's right to inflict punishment (Laws being supposed) is
immediately from that Government which he has over mankind: For otherwise, if
the whole right of punishment did still depend upon God's Dominion, and the
first right of Sovereignty, then all sins must have equal punishments, because
they are all equal violations of the fundamental right of obedience; then it
were at liberty for God to punish a greater sin, with a less punishment; and a
lesser sin, with a greater: And lastly, this would make the punishment of sin,
a mere Arbitrary thing in God; for there would be no reason of punishment, but
what depended upon God's mere will; whereas the reason of punishment in
Scripture is drawn from a repugnancy of sin to the divine purity and holiness,
and not merely from God's power or will to punish; but if that were all the
reason of it, there would be no repugnancy in the nature of the thing for the
most vicious person to be rewarded, and the most pious to be made everlastingly
miserable. But who ever yet durst say or think so? From whence it appears that
the relation between sin and punishment is no result of God's arbitrary will;
but it is founded in the nature of the things; so that as it is just for God to
punish offenders, so it would be unjust to punish the most innocent person
without any respect to sin. But if the right of punishment depends merely on
God's Dominion, I cannot understand why God may not punish when and whom, and
in what manner he pleases; without any impeachment of his Justice, and
therefore it is to be wondered at, that the same persons who assert the right
of punishment to be merely in God's Dominion, should yet cry out of the
injustice of one person being punished for another faults; for why may not God
exercise his Dominion in this case? yes, say they, he may his dominion, but he
cannot punish, because punishment supposes guilt, and cannot be just without
it; how far that reaches, will be examined afterward; at present, we take
notice of the contradiction to themselves which our Adversaries are guilty of,
that they may serve their own hypothesis, for when we dispute with them,
against absolute remission without satisfaction, then they contend that the
right of punishment is a mere act of Dominion, and God may part with his right,
if he please; but when they dispute with us against the translation of
punishment from one to another, then they no longer say that the right of
punishment is an act of Dominion, but that it is a necessary consequent of
inherent guilt, and cannot be removed from one to another. And then they
utterly deny that punishment is of the nature of debts; for one man's money,
Soc. de Servat. l. 3. c. 3. Pralect. c. 18.
they say, may become another, but one man's punishment cannot become
another: Thus they give and take, deny and grant, as it serves for their
present purposes.

VI. (2.) The different ends of debts and punishments, 2. The end of
punishments not bare compensation as it is in debts.
make it appear that there is a difference in the nature of them; for the
intention of the obligation to payment in case of debt, is the compensation of
the damage which the Creditor sustains; but the intention of punishment, is not
bare compensation, but it is designed for greater and further ends. For which
we are to consider the different nature of punishments, as they are inflicted
by way of reparation of some injury done to private persons, and as they do
respect the public good. I grant, that private persons in case of injuries,
seek for compensation of the damage they sustain, and so far they bear the
nature of debts; but if we consider them as inflicted by those who have a care
of the public, though they are to see that no private person suffers injury by
another; yet the reason of that is not merely that he might enjoy his own, but
because the doing injuries to others tends to the subversion of the ends of
Government. Therefore, I can by no means admit that Position of Crellius,
Crell. c. Grot. cap. 2. Sect. 2. p. 147. Sect. 17. p. 162.
that a Magistrate only punishes as he assumes the person of the particular men
who have received injuries from others; for he aims at other ends than merely
the compensation of those injured persons. Their great end is according to the
old Roman Formula, ne quid Resp. detrimenti capiat: the reason of exacting
penalties upon private men is still with a regard to the public safety.
Supposing men in a state of nature no punishment is due to the injured person,
but restitution of damage, and compensation of the loss that accrues to him by
the injury sustained; and whatever goes beyond this, is the effect of
Government, which constitutes penalties for perservation of the Society which
is under Laws. But herein Crellius is our adversary, but with no advantage at
all to his Cause; for he offers to prove against Grotius, That something more
is due by an injury beyond bare compensation for what the other is supposed to
lose by the right of nature; for says he, in every injury there is not only
the real damage which the person sustains, but there is a contempt of the
person employed in it, for which as well as the former, he ought to have
compensation. To which I answer, 1. That this does not prove what he designs,
viz. that punishment does belong to the injured person in a state of Nature,
beyond bare restitution, but that it is necessary, that men should not continue
in such a state, that so they may be vindicated from that contempt, and others
compelled to restitution. Both which, as they are punishments, are not in the
power of the offended party as such, but show that it is very reasonable there
should be Laws and Governors, that private persons may be preserved in their
just rights, and offenders punished for the vindication not only of their
honor, but of the Laws too. And Laws being established, the injured person
has right to no more, than the compensation of his loss; for that being forced
upon the offending party, is a sufficient vindication of his honor. 2. If the
contempt of a private person makes a compensation necessary, how much more will
this hold in a public Magistrate; whose contempt by disobedience is of far
worse consequence than that of a private person. And by this argument Crellius
overthrows his main hypothesis, viz. that God may pardon sin without
satisfaction; for if it be not only necessary, that the loss be compensated but
the dishonor too; then so much greater as the dishonor is, so much higher as
the person is, so much more beneficial to the world as his Laws are, so much
more necessary is it that in order to pardon there must be a satisfaction made
to him, for the affronts he has received from men. And if the greatness of the
injury be to be measured as Crellius asserts, Crell. c. Grot. cap. 2. p. 174.
from the worth and value of the thing, from the dignity and honor of the
person, from the displicency of the fact to him, which he makes the measure of
punishment; this makes it still far more reasonable, that God should have
satisfaction for the sins of men, than that men should have for the injuries
done them by one another; especially considering what the same Author does
assert afterward, Sect. 29. p. 198.
that it is sometime repugnant to justice, for one to part with his own right
in case of injuries, and that either from the nature and circumstances of the
things themselves or a decree or determination to the contrary: for the first
he instanceth in case of notorious defamation; in which he says, it is a
dishonest and unlawful thing for a man, not to make use of his own right for
his vindication: and for the other, in case of great obstinacy and malice. By
both which, it is most apparent, that Crellius puts a mighty difference between
the nature of debts, and punishments, since in all cases he allows it lawful
for a person free, to remit his debts; but in some cases he makes it utterly
unlawful for a person not to make use of his right for punishment. And withal
if a private person may not part with his own right in such cases, how
unreasonable is it not to assert the same of the great Governor of the World?
and that there may be a necessity for him upon supposition of the contempt of
himself and his Laws, to vindicate himself and his honor to the world, by some
remarkable testimony of his severity against sin.

VII. But Crellius yet urges another end of punishment, Of Crellius his great
mistake about the end of punishments. Crell. cap. 2. sect. 2. sect. 28.
which though the most unreasonable of all others, yet sufficiently proves from
himself the difference of debts and punishments, which is, the delight which
the injured person takes in seeing the offender punished. This he so much
insists upon, as though he made it the most natural end of punishment; for
says he, among the Punishments which a Prince or any other free Person can
inflict, revenge is in the first place, and the more there is of that in any
thing, the more properly it is called a punishment; and he tells us what he
means by this ultio; viz. solatium ex alieno dolor, the contentment taken in
another pain. But says he, P. 191.
no man must object, that this is a thing evil in it self; for although it be
forbidden us under the New Testament, yet in it self it is not unlawful for one
that has suffered pain from another to seek for the ease of his own pain, by
the miseries of him that injured him: and for this purpose, says he, we have
the Passion of Anger in us, which being a desire of returning injuries, is then
satisfied when it apprehends it done. But how absurd and unreasonable this
doctrine is, will be easily discovered, for this would make the primary
intendment of punishment to be the evil of him that suffers it. Where the right
of punishment is derived from an injury received, and therefore that which
gives that right, is some damage sustained, the reparation of which is the
first thing designed by the offended party: Though it take not up the whole
nature of punishment. And on this account no man can justly propose any end to
himself in another evil, but what comes under the notion of restitution. For
the evil of another is only intended in punishment as it respects the good of
him for whose sake that evil is undergone. When that good may be obtained
without another evil, the desire of it is unjust and unreasonable: and
therefore all that contentment that any one takes in the evil another
undergoes, as it is evil to him, is a thing repugnant to humane nature, and
which all persons condemn in others when they allow themselves in it. It will
be hard for Crellius to make any difference between this end of punishment
which he assigns, and the greatest cruelty; for what can that be worse than
taking delight in making others miserable, and seeing them so when he has made
them. I^ it be replied, that cruelty is without any cause, but here a just
cause is supposed: I answer, a just cause is only supposed for the punishment,
but there can be no just cause for any to delight in the miseries of others,
and to comfort themselves by inflicting or beholding them. For the evil of
another is never intended, but when it is the only means left for compensation;
and he must be guilty of great inhumanity, who desires another evil any
further than that tends to his own good, i. e. the reparation of the damage
sustained; which if it may be had without another evil, then that comes not by
the right of nature within the reason of punishment; and consequently where it
does not serve for that end, the comfort that men take in it is no part of
justice, but cruelty. For there can be no reason at all assigned for it; for
that lenimentum doloris which Crellius insists on is merely imaginary, and no
other than the Dog has in gnawing the stone that is thrown at him; and for all
that I know, that propension in nature to the retribution of evil for evil any
further than it tends to our security, and the preservation for the future, is
one of the most unreasonable Passions in humane Nature.

Of the nature of anger and revenge in men, and whether punishments are
designed to satisfy them.
VIII. And if we examine the nature of Anger, either considered Naturally or
Morally, the intention of it is, not the returning evil to another, for the
evil received, but the security and perservation of our selves; which we should
not have so great a care of, unless we had a quick sense of injuries, and our
blood were apt to be heated at the apprehension of them. But when this passion
vents it self, in doing others injury to alleviate its own grief, it is a
violent and unreasonable perturbation; but being governed by reason, it aims at
no more, than the great end of our beings; viz. Self-Preservation. But when
that cannot be obtained without another evil, so far the intendment of it is
lawful, but no further. And I cannot therefore think those Philosophers, who
have defined Anger to be (...), Crell. c. 2. sect. 22. p. 177.
by whose Authority Crellius defends himself, when he makes anger to be a
desire of revenge, did thoroughly consider what was just and reasonable in it,
but barely what was natural, and would be the effect of that passion, if not
governed by reason. For otherwise Iul. Scaliger's definition is much more true
and justifiable, ^^er^. 313.
that it is appetitus depulsionis; viz. that whereby we are stirred up to drive
away from us, any thing that is injurious to us. But because Crellius alleges
a saying of Seneca, that would make vindicta of the nature of punishment,
Seneca de Clem. l. 1. c. 20.
duabus de causis punire princeps solet, si aut se vindicet aut alium: We shall
oppose to this the sense of the same Author in this matter, which may
sufficiently clear the other passage: For, says he, De Ira, l. 2. c. 32.
Inhumanum verbum est, and quidem pro justo receptum, ultio, and a contumelia
non differt nisi ordine: qui dolorem regerit, tantum excusatius peccat. And no
man speaks with greater vehemence against the delight in others punishments
than he does; for he always asserts, the only reason of punishment, to be some
advantage which is to come by it, and not merely to satisfy anger, or to allay
their own griefs, by seeing another: For, says he, the punishment is
inflicted, De Ira, l. 1. c. 6.
Non quia delectetur ullius poena (procul est enim a sapiente tam inhumana
feritas) sed ut documentum omnium sint: So that it is only the usefulness of
punishment according to him, which makes it become any wise man; and so far
from a satisfaction of his grief by another punishment, that he makes that a
piece of inhumanity, not incident to any who pretend to wisdom. Nay, he denies,
that a just punishment does flow from Anger; for he that inflicts that, does it
non ipsius poenae avidus, De Ira, l. 1. c. 9. Cap. 12.
sed quia oportet, not as desiring the punishment, but because there are great
reasons for it: And elsewhere, Exsequar quia oportet, Cap. 13.
non quia dolet: he is far enough then from approving, that imaginary
compensation of one man's grief by another. And he shows at large that the
weakest natures, and the least guided by reason, are the most subject to this
anger and revenge. And although other things be pretended, the general cause of
it is, a great infirmity of humane nature; and thence it is, that children and
old men, and sick persons, are the most subject to it; and the better any are,
the more they are freed from it: -- quippe minuti
Semper and infirmi est animi, exiguique voluptas
Vltio --


He makes Cruelty to be nothing else, but the intemperance of the mind in
exacting punishment; De Clem. l. 2, c. 4.
and the difference between a Prince and a Tyrant to lie in this, That one
delights in punishing, De Clem. l. 1. c. 11, 12.
the other never does it but in case of necessity, when the public good
requires it. And this throughout his discourse, he makes the measure of
punishment. Who then could imagine, that he should speak so contradictory to
himself, as to allow punishment for mere revenge, or the easing ones own
griefs, by the pains of another? In the places cited by Crellius, (if taken in
his sense) he speaks what commonly is, not what ought to be in the world; for
he disputes against it in that very place, therefore that cannot be the meaning
which he contends for. The common design of punishments by a Prince, says he,
is either to vindicate himself or others. I so render his words, because
vindicare, when it is joined with the person injured, as here, vindicare se aut
alium, does properly relate to the end of punishment, which is asserting the
right of the injured person; but when it is joined with the persons who have
done the injury, or the crimes whereby they did it, then it properly signifies
to punish. Thus Sallust uses, Sallust. in Catalin. Cicero. 7. v.
Vindicatum in eos; and Cicero, In milites nostros vehementer vindicatum, and
for the fact very frequently in him, maleficia vindicare: but when it relates
to the injured person, as here it does, it cannot signify merely to punish;
for then se vindicare would be to punish ones self, but to assert his own right
in case of injury, though it be with the punishment of another: For Vindicatio,
Cicero de Invent. 2.
as Cicero defines it, est per quam vis and injuria and omnino quod obfuturum
est defendendo aut ulciscendo propulsatur. So that the security of our selves
in case of force or injury, is that which is called Vindication; which
sometimes may be done by defense, and other times by punishment. And that
Seneca does mean no more here, is apparent by what follows; for in case of
private injuries, he says, poenam si tuto poterit donet, he would have the
Prince forgive the punishment, if it may be done with safety; so that he would
not have any one punished, to satisfy another desire of revenge, but to
preserve his own safety: And afterward he says, It is much beneath a Princes
condition, De Ira, l. 1. c. 21.
to need that satisfaction which arises from another sufferings: But for the
punishments of others, he says, The Law has established three ends, the
amendment of the persons, or making others better by their punishments, or the
public security, by taking away such evil members out of the body: So that in
public punishments, he never so much as supposes, that contentment which
revenge fancies in others punishments, but makes them wholly designed for the
public advantage. For the Laws in punishment do not look backward but forward;
for as Non praeterita sed futura intuebitur; nam ut Plato ait, nemo prudens
punit quia peccatum est, sed Sen. de Ira, ne peccetur. l. 1. c. 16. Lact. de
ira Dei. c. 17.
Plato says, No wise man ever punished, merely because men had offended, but
lest they should: For past things cannot be recalled, but future are therefore
forbidden, that they may be prevented. So to the same purpose is the saying of
Lactantius, produced by Grotius, Surgimus ad vindictam, non quia laesi sumus,
sed ut disciplina servetur, mores corrigantur, licentia comprimatur: haec est
Ira justa. To which Crellius answers, That this signifies nothing, Cap. 2.
sect. 13.
unless it can be proved, that no man may justly punish another, merely because
he is wronged. If he means of the right to punish, we deny not that to be,
because the person is wronged; but if he understands it of the design and end
of punishment, then we deny, that it is an allowable end of punishments, any
further than it can come under the notion of restitution, of which we have
spoken already. When a Master (which is the instance he produces) punishes
his servants because they have disobeyed him: The reason of that punishment, is
not the bare disobedience, but the injury which comes to him by it; the
reparation of which he seeks by punishment, either as to his authority,
security or profit. But he adds, That where punishment is designed, for
preservation of discipline, and amendment of manners, and keeping persons in
order, (which are the ends mentioned by Lactantius) it is where the interest of
the persons lies, in the preservation of these, and is therefore offended at
the neglect of them. To which I answer, That the interest of such a one, is not
barely the interest of an offended party, as such, but the interest of a
Governor; and no body denies, but such a one may be an offended party: but the
question is, Whether the design of punishment be merely to satisfy him as the
offended party, or to answer the ends of Government? For Crellius has already
told us, what it is to satisfy one as an offended party, that is, to ease
himself by the punishment of others; but what ever is designed for the great
ends of Government, is not to be considered under that notion, although the
Governor may be justly offended at the neglect of them. And there is this
considerable difference between the punishment made to an offended party, as
such, and that which is for the ends of Government; that the former is a
satisfaction to Anger, and the latter to Laws and the public interest. For
Crellius disputes much for the right of Anger in exacting punishments; Cap. 2.
sect. 1. p. 143. Sect. 13. p. 161.
the satisfaction of which, in case of real injury, he never makes unlawful,
but in case that it be prohibited us by one, whose power is above our own: nay
he makes it otherwise the primary end of punishment. So that anger is the main
thing upon these terms to be respected in punishment: but where it is designed
for the ends beforementioned, there is no necessity of any such passion as
anger to be satisfied, the ends of punishment may be attained wholly without
it: Sen. de ira, l. 1. c. 14, and 15.
And public punishment, according to Seneca, non ira sed ratio est, is no
effect of anger, but reason; for, says he, nihil minus quam irasci punientem
decet: nothing less becomes one that punishes, than anger does; for all
punishments being considered as Medicines, no man ought to give Physic in
anger, or to let himself blood in a fury: A Magistrate, says he, Chap. 16.
when he goes to punish, ought to appear only vultu legis quae non irascitur,
sed constituit, with the countenance of the Law, which appoints punishments
without passion: The reason of which is, because the Law aims not primarily at
the evil of the man that suffers punishment, but at the good which comes to the
public by such sufferings. For the first design of the Law was to prevent any
evil being done, and punishment coming in by way of Sanction to the force of
the Law, must have the same primary end which the Law it self had; which is not
to satisfy barely the offended party for the breach, any further than that
satisfaction tends to the security of the Law, and preventing the violation of
it for the future. The substance of what I have said upon this subject, may be
thus briefly comprised, That antecedently to Laws, the offended party has
right to no more than bare reparation of the damage sustained by the injury;
that the proper notion of punishment is consequent to Laws, and the inflicting
of it is an act of Government, which is not designed for mere satisfaction of
the anger of the injured person, but for the public good, which lies in
preserving the authority of the Laws, the preventing all injuries by the
security of men's just rights, and the vindication of the dignity and honor of
him, who is to take care of the public good. For these Crellius himself
acknowledges, to be the just ends of punishments, only he would have the
satisfaction a man takes in another evil, to come in the first place; wherein
how much he is mistaken, Quibus (sc. solatio and securitati) addi possint
honoris ac dignitatis, per injuriam violatae, and aliquae ratione imminutae
vindiciae, assertioque juris nostri. Crel. cap. 2. sect. 28. p. 191.
I hope we have already manifested. Because the proper nature of punishment
depending upon Laws, the Laws do not primarily design the benefit of private
persons (supposing that were so) but the advantage of that community which they
are made for.

IX. And in those cases wherein the Magistrate does right to particular persons
in the punishment of those who have injured them, The Interest of the
Magistrate in punishment distinct from that of private persons.
he does it not as taking their person upon him, for he aims at other things
than they do; they look at a bare compensation for the injury received; but the
Magistrate at the ill consequence the impunity of injuries may be of to the
public: they, it may be at the satisfaction of their displeasure; but he at
the satisfaction of the Laws; they at their own private damage; he at the
violation of the public peace. And from hence among those Nations who valued
all crimes at a certain rate, in matters of injury between man and man, the
injured person was not only to receive compensation for his wrong; but a
considerable fine was to be paid to the Exchequer for the violation of the
public peace. De morib. German. c. 12. Grot. de leg. Goth. in Proleg. ad hist.
Goth. p. 67. Lindenbrog. Gloss. ad Cod. Leg. Antiq. v. Freda. Spelman. Gloss.
v. Freda.
Thus Tacitus observes among the old Germans, Grotius of the old Gothic Laws,
and from them (as most of our modern Laws and Customs are derived)
Lindenbrogius of the Salick, Alemannick, Lombardick, Spelman of the Saxon, who
tells us in case of murder there were three payments, one to the Kindred, which
was called Megbote; the second to the Lord, called Manbote, the third to the
King, called Freda, from the German Frid, which signifies peace, it being the
consideration paid to the King for the breach of the public peace. And this,
says he, in all actions, was anciently paid to the King, because the peace was
supposed to be broken, not by mere force, but by any injuries; and if the
action was unjust, the Plaintiff paid it; if just, the defendant. And the
measure of it, says Bignonius, Bignon. not. in Macculphi form. cap. 20.
was the tenth part of the value of the thing as estimated by Law which by the
Customs of the ancient Romans was deposited at the commencing of a suit by
both, and only taken up again by him who overcame; and was by them called
Sacramentum, as Varro tells us. Varro de L. L. lib. 4.
And the same custom was observed among the Greeks too, as appears by Julius
Pollux, Iul. Pollux. l. 8.
who tells us it was called (...) among them, and in public actions was the
fifth part, in private the tenth. But that which was paid to the public in
case of murder, was among the Greeks called (...), the same with poena, for
Hesychius tells us that is (...), and to the same purpose the Scholiast on
Homer on those words, Iliad. 1. (...), by which the Original of the name poena,
comes from a payment made to the public, according to that known rule,
interest reip. delicta puniri, that persons may see how much the public safety
is concerned, that crimes be punished. From which and many other things which
might be insisted on, Crellius his Hypothesis will appear to be false, viz.
that when the Magistrate does judge in the affairs of particular men, he does
it only as assuming the person of those men; whereas it appears from the reason
of the thing, and the Custom of Nations, that the interest of the Magistrate is
considered as distinct from that of private persons, when he does most appear
in vindication of injuries. But all this is managed with a respect to the grand
hypothesis, viz. that the right of punishing does belong only to the offended
party as such, that the punishment is of the nature of debts, and the
satisfaction by compensation to the anger of him who is offended. The falsity
of which this discourse was designed to discover.

Having thus considered the nature of punishments among men, we come more
closely to our matter, by examining how far this will hold in the punishments
which God inflicts on the account of sin. For which two things must be enquired
into, 1. In what sense we attribute anger to God. 2. What are the great ends of
those punishments God inflicts on men on the account of sin. Of the nature of
Anger in God; the satisfaction to be made to it.


X. For the first, though our Adversaries are very unwilling to allow the term
of punitive justice, yet they contend for a punitive anger in God, and that in
the worst sense as it is appetitus vindictae: Crell. cap. sect. 1. p. 145. p.
177.
for after Crellius has contended that this is the proper notion of anger in
general; neither ought any one to say, he adds, that anger as other passions is
attributed improperly to God; for setting aside the imperfections, which those
passions are subject to in us, all the rest is to be attributed to him, taking
away then that perturbation, and pain, and grief we find in our selves in
anger, to which the abhorrency of sin answers in God, all the rest does agree
to him. I would he had a little more plainly told us what he means by all the
rest, but we are to guess at his meaning by what went before, where he allows
of Cicero, Cicer. Tuscul 4. Arist. Rhet. l. 2. c. 2.
and Aristotle's definition of Anger, whereof the one is, that it is libido, or
(as Crellius would rather have it,) cupiditas puniendi, the other (...), etc.
and himself calls it poenae appetitio, and in another place, that it may be as
properly defined cupiditas vindictae, as cupiditas poenae or affectus
vindicandi, as well as puniendi: Crell. c. 2. sect. 22. p. 177.
in all which places, he does assert such an anger in God as supposes such a
motion, or desire, or inclination to punish sin when it is committed, as there
is in us when an injury is done us, only the perturbation and pain excluded.
But he has not thought fit to explain how such new motions or inclinations in
the divine nature every time sin is committed, are consistent with the
immutability and perfection of it; nor what such a kind of desire to punish in
God imports, whether a mere inclination without the effect, or an inclination
with the effect following: if without the effect, then either because the sin
was not great enough, or God's honor was not concerned to do it, and in this
case the same reasons which make the effect not to follow, make the desire of
it inconsistent with the divine wisdom and perfection: or else because the
effect is hindered by the repentance of the person, or some other way which may
make it not necessary to do it; then upon the same reason the effect is
suspended, the inclination to do it should be so too; for that must be supposed
to be governed by an eternal reason and counsel as well as his actions; unless
some natural passions in God be supposed antecedent to his own wisdom and
counsel, which is derogatory to the infinite perfection of God, since those are
judged imperfections in our selves: if it be taken only with the effect
following it, then God can never be said to be angry but when he does punish,
whereas his wrath is said to be kindled in Scripture, where the effect has not
followed; which if it implies any more than the high provocation of God to
punish (as I suppose it does not) then this inclination to punish is to be
conceived distinct from the effect following it. But that conception of anger
in God seems most agreeable to the divine nature, as well as to the Scriptures,
which makes it either the punishment it self, Crell. de vera Relig^ l. 1. c. 30.
as Crellius elsewhere acknowledges it is often taken so; or God's declaration
of his will to punish, which is called the revelation of the wrath of God
against all unrighteousness of men, God thereby discovering the just
displeasure he has against sin; or the great provocation of God to punish, by
the sins of men; as when his wrath is said, to be kindled, etc. By this sense
we may easily reconcile all that the Scripture says concerning the wrath of
God; we make it agreeable to infinite perfection, we make no such alterations
in God, as the appeasing of his anger must imply, if that imply any kind of
commotion in him. And thus the grand difficulty of Crellius appears to be none
at all, Crell. cap. 7. sect. 3. p. 350.
against all those passages of Scripture which speak of appeasing God, of
atonement, and reconciliation, viz. that if they prove satisfaction, they must
prove that God being actually angry with mankind before the sufferings of his
Son, he must be presently appeased upon his undergoing them. For no more need
to be said, than that God being justly provoked to punish the sins of mankind,
was pleased to accept of the sufferings of his Son, as a sufficient sacrifice
of Atonement for the sins of the world, on consideration of which he was
pleased to offer those terms of pardon, which upon men's performance of the
conditions required on their part, shall be sufficient to discharge them from
that obligation to punishment which they were under by their sins. And what
absurdity, or incongruity there is in this to any principle of reason I cannot
imagine. But our Adversaries first make opinions for us, and then show they are
unreasonable. They first suppose that anger in God is to be considered as a
passion, and that passion a desire of revenge for satisfaction of it; and then
tell us, that if we do not prove, that this desire of revenge can be satisfied
by the sufferings of Christ, then we can never prove the doctrine of
satisfaction to be true; whereas we do not mean by God's anger any such
passion, but the just declaration of God's will to punish upon our provocation
of him by our sins; we do not make the design of satisfaction to be, that God
may please himself in the revenging the sins of the guilty upon the most
innocent person; because we make the design of punishment, not to be the
satisfaction of anger as a desire of revenge, but to be the vindication of the
honor and rights of the injured person, by such a way as himself shall judge
most satisfactory to the ends of his Government.

XI. (2.) Which is the next thing we are to clear: Of the ends of divine
punishments. Crell. c. 2. sect. 29. p. 129.
For which end we shall make use of the Concession of Crellius, That God has
prefixed some ends to himself in the Government of mankind; which being
supposed, it is necessary, that impenitent sinners should be punished. What
these ends of God are, he before tells us, when he enquires into the ends of
Divine punishments, which he makes to be, security for the future, P. 195.
by men's avoiding sins, and a kind (...), or pleasure which God takes in the
destruction of his implacable enemies, and the asserting and vindicating his
own right by punishing, and showing men thereby, with what care and fear they
ought to serve him; and so attains the ends of punishment proposed by
Lactantius, and manifestation of the Divine Honor and Majesty, which has been
violated by the sins of men. All these we accept of, with this caution, That
the delight which God takes in the punishing his implacable enemies, be not
understood of any pleasure in their misery, as such, by way of mere revenge;
but as it tends to the vindication of his Right, and Honor, and Majesty; which
is an end suitable to the Divine Nature: but the other cannot in it self have
the notion of an end; for an end does suppose something desirable for it self,
which surely the miseries of others cannot have to us, much less to the Divine
Nature. And that place which Crellius insists on to prove the contrary, Deuteronomy.
28.63. The Lord will rejoice over you, to destroy you; imports no more, than
the satisfaction God takes in the execution of his Justice, when it makes most
for his honor, as certainly it does in the punishment of his greatest enemies.
And this is to be understood in a sense agreeable to those other places, where
God is said not to delight in the death of sinners; Ezekiel. 18. v. 23, 32. c.
33.11.
which does not (as Crellius would have it) merely express God's benignity and
mercy, but such an agreeableness of the exercise of those attributes to God's
nature, that he neither does nor can delight in the miseries of his creatures
in themselves, but as they are subservient to the ends of his Government, and
yet such is his kindness in that respect too, that he uses all means agreeable
thereto, to make them avoid being miserable, to advance his own glory. Grot de
satisfact. c. 2. p. 43. Ed. 1617. Grot. de jure belli, etc. l 2. c. 20. sect. 4.
And I cannot but wonder that Grotius, who had asserted the contrary in his
Book of Satisfaction, should in his Books De Iure belli ac pacis, assert, That
when God punishes wicked men, he does it for no other end but that he might
punish them: For which he makes use of no other arguments, than those which
Crellius had objected against him; viz. The delight God takes in punishing, and
the judgments of the life to come, when no amendment can be expected; the
former has been already answered, the latter is objected by Crellius against
him, when he makes the ends of punishment, merely to respect the community,
which cannot be asserted of the punishments of another Life, which must chiefly
respect the vindication of God's glory, in the punishment of unreclaimable
sinners. And this we do not deny to be a just punishment, since our Adversaries
themselves, as well as we, make it necessary. But we are not to understand,
that the end of Divine punishments does so respect the community, as though God
himself were to be excluded out of it; for we are so to understand it, as made
up of God as the Governor, and mankind as the persons governed, whatever then
tends to the vindication of the rights of God's Honor and Sovereignty, tends
to the good of the whole, because the manifestation of that end is so great an
end of the whole.

The ends of Divine punishments different in this and the future state.
XII. But withal, though we assert in the life to come, the ends of punishment
not to be the reclaiming of sinners, who had never undergone them, unless they
had been unreclaimable; yet a vast difference must be made between the ends of
punishments in that, and in this present state. For the other is the Reserve,
when nothing else will do, and therefore was not primarily intended; but the
proper ends of punishment, as a part of Government, are to be taken from the
design of them in this life. And here we assert, that God's end in punishing,
is the advancing his Honor, not by the mere miseries of his creatures, but
that men by beholding his severity against sin, should break off the practice
of it, that they may escape the punishments of the future state. So that the
ends of punishment here, are quite of another kind, from those of another life;
for those are inflicted, because persons have been unreclaimable by either the
mercies or punishments of this life; but these are intended, that men should so
far take notice of this severity of God, as to avoid the sins which will expose
them to the wrath to come. And from hence it follows, That whatsoever
sufferings do answer all these ends of Divine punishments, and are inflicted on
the account of sin, have the proper notion of punishments in them, and God may
accept of the undergoing them as a full satisfaction to his Law, if they be
such as tend to break men off from sin, and assert God's right, and vindicate
his Honor to the world; which are the ends assigned by Crellius, and will be
of great consequence to us in the following Discourse.

CHAP. II.
I. The particular state of the Controversy, concerning the sufferings of
Christ. The Concessions of our Adversaries. II. The debate reduced to two
heads: The first concerning Christ^s sufferings, being a punishment for sin,
entered upon. In what sense Crellius acknowledges the sins of men, to have been
the impulsive cause of the death of Christ. III. The sufferings of Christ
proved to be a punishment, from Scripture. The importance of the phrase of
bearing sins. IV. Of the Scape-Goats bearing the sins of the people into the
Wilderness. V. Grotius his sense of 1 Pet. 2.24. vindicated against Crellius
and himself. (...) never used for the taking away a thing by the destruction of
it. VI. Crellius his sense examined. VII. Isa. 53.11. vindicated. The argument
from Matt. 8.17, answered. Grotius constant to himself in his notes on that
place. VIII. Isa. 53.5, 6, 7. cleared. IX. Whether Christ's death be a proper
(...), and whether that does imply, that it was a punishment of sin? How far
the punishments of Children for their Fathers faults, are exemplary among men.
The distinction of calamities and punishments, holds not here. X. That God's
hatred of sin could not be seen in the sufferings of Christ, unless they were a
punishment of sin, proved against Crellius. XI. Grotius his Arguments from
Christ being made sin and a curse for us, defended. The liberty our Adversaries
take in changing the sense of Words. XII. The particles (...), being joined to
sins and relating to sufferings do imply those sufferings to be a punishment
for sin. According to their way of interpreting Scripture, it had been
impossible for our doctrine to be clearly expressed therein.

I. THESE things being thus far cleared concerning the nature and ends of
punishments, The particular state of the controversy concerning the sufferings
of Christ for us.
and how far they are of the nature of debts, and consequently what kind of
satisfaction is due for them, the resolution of the grand Question concerning
the sufferings of Christ will appear much more easy; but that we may proceed
with all possible clearness in a debate of this consequence, we must yet a
little more narrowly examine the difference between our Adversaries and us in
this matter; for their concessions are in terms sometimes so fair, as though
the difference were merely about words without any considerable difference in
the thing it self. If we charge them with denying satisfaction, Crell. praef.
p. 7.
Crellius answers in the name of them, that we do it unjustly; for they do
acknowledge a satisfaction worthy of God, and agreeable to the Scriptures. If
we charge them with denying that our salvation is obtained by the death of
Christ, they assert the contrary, as appears by the same Author. Nay, Ruarus in
Epistol. Crell. cap. 9. sect 2. Cap. 10. sect. 10. Cap. 7, 8, etc. Cap. 1.
sect. 57.
Ruarus attributes merit to the death of Christ too. They acknowledge, that
Christ died for us, nay, that there was a commutation between Christ and us,
both of one person for another, and of a price for a person; and that the death
of Christ may be said to move God to redeem us; they acknowledge
reconciliation, and expiation of sins to be by the death of Christ. Nay, they
assert, that Christ's death was by reason of our sins, and that God designed by
that to show his severity against sin. And what could we desire more, if they
meant the same thing by these words, which we do? They assert a satisfaction,
but it is such a one as is merely fulfilling the desire of another: in which
sense all that obey God may be said to satisfy him. They attribute our
salvation to the death of Christ, but only as a condition intervening, upon the
performance of which the Covenant was confirmed, and himself taken into Glory,
that he might free men from the punishment of their sins. They attribute merit
to Christ's death but in the same sense that we may merit too, when we do what
is pleasing to God. They acknowledge, that Christ died for us, but not in our
stead, but for our advantage; that there was a commutation; but not such a one,
as that the Son of God did lay down his blood as a proper price in order to our
redemption as the purchase of it; when they speak of a moving cause, they tell
us, they mean no more than the performance of any condition may be said to
move, or as our prayers and repentance do. The reconciliation they speak of,
does not at all respect God but us; they assert an expiation of sins consequent
upon the death of Christ, but not depending upon it any otherwise, than as a
condition necessary for his admission to the office of a High Priest in Heaven,
there to expiate our sins by his power, and not by his blood; but they utterly
deny, that the death of Christ is to be considered as a proper expiatory
sacrifice for sin; or that it has any further influence upon it, than as it is
considered as a means of the confirmation of the truth of his Doctrine, and
particularly the promise of remission of sins, on which* and not on the death
of Christ they say our remission depends; but so far as the death of Christ may
be an argument to us to believe his Doctrine, and that faith may incline us to
obedience, and that obedience being the condition in order to pardon, at so
many removes they make the death of Christ to have influence on the remission
of our sins. They assert, that God took occasion by the sins of men to exercise
an act of dominion upon Christ in his sufferings, and that the sufferings of
Christ were intended for the taking away the sins of men; but they utterly
deny, that the sufferings of Christ were to be considered as a punishment for
sin; or that Christ did suffer in our place and stead; nay, they contend with
great vehemence, that it is wholly inconsistent with the justice of God to make
one man's sins the meritorious cause of another punishment; especially one
wholly innocent, and so that the guilty shall be freed on the account of his
sufferings. Thus I have endeavored to give the true state of the controversy
with all clearness and brevity. And the substance of it will be reduced to
these two debates.

1. Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a
punishment of sin, or as a mere act of dominion?

2. Whether the death of Christ in particular were a proper expiatory sacrifice
for sin, or only an antecedent condition to his exercise of the Office of
Priesthood in Heaven?

II. (1.) Whether the sufferings of Christ in general are to be considered as a
punishment of sin, Whether the sufferings of Christ are to be considered as a
punishment of sin.
or as a mere act of dominion? for that it must be one or the other of these
two, cannot be denied by our Adversaries; for the inflicting those sufferings
upon Christ, must either proceed from an antecedent meritorious cause, or not.
If they do, they are then punishments; if not, they are mere exercises of power
and dominion; whatever ends they are intended for, and whatever recompense be
made for them. So Crellius asserts, Crell. cap. 2. sect. 1. p. 142.
that God as absolute Lord of all, had a right of absolute dominion upon the
life and body of Christ, and therefore might justly deliver him up to death,
and give his body to the Cross; and although Christ by the ordinary force of
the Law of Moses, had a right to escape so painful and accursed a death, yet
God by the right of dominion had the power of disposal of him, because he
intended to compensate his torments with a reward infinitely greater than they
were: but because he says, for great end^ the consent of Christ was necessary,
therefore God did not use his utmost dominion in delivering him up by force as
he might have done, but he dealt with him by way of command, and rewards
proposed for obedience, and in this sense he did act as a righteous Governor,
and indulgent Father, who encouraged his Son to undergo hard, but great things.
In which we see that he makes the sufferings of Christ an act of mere dominion
in God, without any antecedent cause as the reason of them; only he qualifies
this act of dominion with the proposal of a reward for it. But we must yet
further enquire into their meaning, for though here Crellius attributes the
sufferings of Christ merely to God's dominion, without any respect to sin, yet
elsewhere he will allow a respect that was had to sin antecedently to the
sufferings of Christ, Crell. cap. 1. sect. 7. etc. Socin. de Christo servat. l.
3. c. 10. Crell. cap. 1. sect. 16. Socin. l. 2. c. 7.
and that the sins of men were the impulsive cause of them. And although
Socinus in one place utterly denies any lawful antecedent cause of the death of
Christ, besides the will of God and Christ, yet Crellius in his Vindication
says, by lawful cause, he meant meritorious, or such upon supposition of which
he ought to die; for elsewhere he makes Christ to die for the cause, or by the
occasion of our sins; which is the same that Crellius means by an impulsive, or
procatartick cause. Which he thus explains, we are now to suppose a decree of
God not only to give salvation to Mankind, Crell. c. 1. sect. 11.
but to give us a firm hope of it in this present state, now our sins by
deserving eternal punishment, do hinder the effect of that decree upon us, and
therefore they were an impulsive cause of the death of Christ, by which it was
effected, that this decree should obtain notwithstanding our sins. But we are
not to understand as though this were done by any expiation of the guilt of sin
by the death of Christ; but this effect is hindered by three things, by taking
away their sins, by assuring men that their former sins, and present
infirmities upon their sincere obedience shall not be imputed to them, and that
the effect of that decree shall obtain, all which, says he, is effected morte
Christi interveniente, the death of Christ intervening, but not as the
procuring cause. So that after all these words he means no more by making our
sins an impulsive cause of the death of Christ, but that the death of Christ
was an argument to confirm to us the truth of his Doctrine, which doctrine of
his does give us assurance of these things: and that our sins when they are
said to be the impulsive cause, are not to be considered with a respect to
their guilt, but to that distrust of God which our sins do raise in us; which
distrust is in truth according to this sense of Crellius the impulsive cause,
and not the sins which were the cause or occasion of it. For that was it which
the doctrine was designed to remove, and our sins only as the ca^^es of that.
But if it be said, that he speaks not only of the distrust, but of the
punishment of sin as an impediment which must be removed too, and therefore may
be called an impulsive cause, we are to consider that the removal of this is
not attributed to the death of Christ, but to the leaving of our sins by the
belief of his Doctrine; therefore the punishment of our sins cannot, unless in
a very remote sense, be said to be an impulsive cause of that, which for all
that we can observe by Crellius, might as well have been done without it; if
any other way could be thought suffi^^ent to confirm his Doctrine, and Christ,
without dying, might have had power to save all them that obey him. But we
understand not an impulsive cause in so remote a sense, as though our sins were
a mere occasion of Christ's dying, because the death of Christ was one argument
among many others to believe his Doctrine, the belief of which would make men
leave their sins; but we contend for a nearer and more proper sense, viz. that
the death of Christ was primarily intended for the expiation of our sins, with
a respect to God and not to us, and therefore our sins as an impulsive cause
are to be considered as they are so displeasing to God, that it was necessary
for the Vindication of God's Honor, and the deterring the world from sin, that
no less a Sacrifice of Atonement should be offered, than the blood of the Son
of God. So that we understand an impulsive cause here in the sense, that the
sins of the people were, under the Law, the cause of the offering up those
Sacrifices, which were appointed for the expiation of them. And as in those
Sacrifices there were two things to be considered, viz. the mactation, and the
oblation of them, the former as a punishment by a substitution of them in place
of the persons who had offended; the latter as the proper Sacrifice of
Atonement, although the mactation it self, considered with the design of it,
was a Sacrificial act too: So we consider the sufferings of Christ with a
twofold respect, either as to our sins, as the impulsive cause of them, so
they are to be considered as a punishment, or as to God, with a design to
expiate the guilt of them, so they are a Sacrifice of Atonement. The first
consideration is that we are now upon, and upon which the present debate
depends, for if the sufferings of Christ be to be taken under the notion of
punishment, then our Adversaries grant, that our sins must be an impulsive
cause of them in another sense than they understand it. For the clearing of
this, I shall prove these two things.

1. That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of Scripture which
speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect to sin, but this.

2. That this Account of the sufferings of Christ, is no ways repugnant to the
Justice of God.

III. That no other sense ought to be admitted of the places of Scripture, The
sufferings of Christ proved to be a punishment from Scripture. 1 Pet. 2.24.
Isa. 53.4, 5, 6, 7, 10, 11. 2 Cor. 5.21. Gal. 3.13. Romans 4.25.
which speak of the sufferings of Christ with a respect to our sins, but that
they are to be considered as a punishment for them. Such are those which speak
of Christ bearing our sins, of our iniquities being laid upon him, of his
making himself an offering for sin, and being made sin and a curse for us, and
of his dying for our sins. All which I shall so far consider, as to vindicate
them from all the exceptions which Socinus and Crellius have offered against
them.

1. Those which speak of Christ's bearing our sins. As to which we shall
consider, First, The importance of the phrase in general of bearing sin, and
then the circumstances of the particular places in dispute. For the importance
of the phrase, Socinus acknowledges, Soc. de servat. l. 2. cap. 4.
that it generally signifies bearing the punishment of sin in Scripture: but
that sometimes it signifies taking away. Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 32.
The same is confessed by Crellius, but he says, it does not always signify
bearing proper punishment, but it is enough (says he) that one bears something
burdensome on the occasion of others sins: and so Christ by undergoing his
sufferings by occasion of sins, may be said to bear our sins. And for this
sense he quotes Numb. 14.33. And your Children shall wander in the Wilderness
forty years, and bear your whoredoms, until your carcasses be wasted in the
Wilderness. Whereby, says he, it is not meant that God would punish the
Children of the Israelites, but that by the occasion of their parents sins,
they should undergo that trouble, in wandering in the Wilderness, and being
deprived of the possession of the promised Land. But could Crellius think that
any thing else could have been imagined, (setting aside a total destruction) a
greater instance of God's severity, than that was to the Children of Israel all
their circumstances being considered? Psalm. 95.11. Heb. 3.11.
Is it not said, that God did swear in his wrath, they should not enter into
his rest? Surely then the debarring them so long of that rest, was an instance
of God's wrath, and so according to his own principles must have something of
Vindicta in it, and therefore be a proper punishment. The truth is, our
Adversaries allow themselves in speaking things most repugnant to Humane Nature
in this matter of punishments, that they may justify their own hypothesis. For
a whole Nation to be for forty years debarred from the greatest blessings were
ever promised them; and instead of enjoying them, to endure the miseries and
hardships of forty years travels in a barren wilderness, must not be thought a
punishment, and only because occasioned by their Parents sins. But whatever is
inflicted on the account of sin, and with a design to show God's severity
against it, and thereby to deter others from the practice of it, has the
proper notion of punishment in it; and all these things did concur in this
instance, besides the general sense of mankind in the matter of their
punishment, which was such, that supposing them preserved in their liberty,
could not have been imagined greater. And therefore Vatablus, whom Socinus and
Crellius highly commend, thus renders those words, Doctissime and elegantissime
Vatablus ut fere solet. Soc. de serve. l. 1. c. 8. Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 31.
dabunt poenas pro fornicationibus vestris quibus defecistis a Deo vestro: they
shall suffer the punishment of your fornications. And that bearing the sins of
Parents does imply properly bearing the punishment of them, methinks they
should not so earnestly deny, who contend that to be the meaning of the words
in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 18.20.
The Son shall not bear the iniquity of the Father; viz. that he shall not bear
the punishment of his Fathers sins. Where in bearing iniquity with a respect to
their Parents sins, by their own confession, must be taken for the proper
punishment; for otherwise they do not deny, Crell. cap. 4. sect. 15.
but Children, notwithstanding that sentence, may undergo much affliction on
the occasion of their Parents sins.

Of the Scape-Goats bearing away the sins of the people.
IV. But Socinus further objects, that bearing sins does not imply the
punishment of them, because the Scapegoat under the Law, is said to bear upon
him the iniquities of the people, and yet could not be said to be punished for
them. To which Grotius answers, Socin. 2. c. 4. Lev. 16.22. Grot. de sat. cap.
1.
that Socinus takes it for granted without reason, that the Scapegoat could
not be said to be punished for the sins of the people; for punishment in
general, may fall upon beasts for the sins of men, Genesis 9.5. Exodus 21.28. Lev.
20.15. Genesis 8.21. and Socinus has no cause to say, that the Scapegoat was not
slain; for the Jewish Interpreters do all agree that he was, and however the
sending him into the Wilderness was intended as a punishment, and most probably
by an unnatural death. Crell cap. 1. sect. 56.
To which Crellius replies, That in the general, he denies not but punishment
may fall upon beasts as well as men; but (that he might show himself true to
his principle, that one cannot be punished for another faults,) he falls into
a very pleasant discourse, That the Beasts are not said to be punished for men's
sins, but for their own, and therefore when it is said, before the flood, that
all flesh had corrupted his way; Genesis 6.12.
he will by no means have it understood only of men, but that the sins of the
beasts at that time, were greater than ordinary, as well as men's. But he has
not told us what they were, whether by eating some forbidden herbs; or entering
into conspiracies against mankind their lawful Sovereigns, or unlawful
mixtures; and therefore we have yet reason to believe, that when God says, the
ground was cursed for man's sake, Genesis 8.21.
that the beasts were punished for man's sin. And if all flesh, Isa. 40.5.
must comprehend beasts in this place, why shall not all flesh seeing the glory
of the Lord, take in the beasts there too? for Vatablus parallels this place
with the other. But if, says Crellius, any shall contend that some beasts at
least were innocent, then, he says, that those though they were destroyed by
the flood, yet did not suffer punishment, but only a calamity by occasion of
the sins of men. I wonder he did not rather say, that the innocent beasts were
taken into the Ark, for the propagation of a better kind afterward. But by
this solemn distinction of calamities and punishments, there is nothing so
miserable, that either men or beasts can undergo, but when it serves their
turn, it shall be only a calamity and no punishment, though it be said to be on
purpose to show God's severity against the sins of the world. And this
excellent notion of the beasts being punished for their own sins, is improved
by him to the vindication of the Scapegoat from being punished, because then,
says he, the most wicked and corrupt Goat should have been made choice of. As
though all the design of that great day of expiation had been only to call the
Children of Israel together with great solemnity; to let them see, how a poor
Goat must be punished for breaking the Laws which we do not know were ever made
for them. I had thought our Adversaries had maintained that the Sacrifices (on
the day of expiation at least) had represented and typified the Sacrifice which
was to be offered up by Christ; and so Socinus and Crellius elsewhere contend:
he needed not therefore have troubled himself concerning the sins of the Goat,
Lev. 16.21.
when it is expressly said, That the sins of the people were put on the head of
the Goat; Whatever then the punishment were, it was on the account of the sins
of the people, and not his own. But Crellius urges against Grotius, that if
the Scapegoat had been punished for the expiation of the sins of the people,
that should have been particularly expressed in Scripiure, whereas nothing is
said there at all of it, and that the throwing down the Scapegoat from the top
of the rock, was no part of the Primitive Institution, but one of the
superstitions taken up by the Jews in aftertimes, because of the Ominousness
of the return of it; and although we should suppose (which is not probable)
that it should die by famine in the Wilderness, yet this was not the death for
expiation, which was to be by the shedding of blood. To this therefore I
answer, 1. I do not insist on the customs of the later Jews to prove from
thence any punishment designed by the primitive institution. For I shall easily
yield, that many superstitions obtained among them aftewards about the
Scapegoat; as the stories of the red list turning white upon the head of it,
the booths and the causey made on purpose, and several other things mentioned
in the Rabbinical Writers do manifest. But yet it seems very probable from the
Text it self, Cod. Ioma. tit. 6.
that the Scapegoat was not carried into the Wilderness at large, but to a
steep mountain there. For although we have commonly rendered Azazel by the
Scapegoat, yet according to the best of the Jewish writers, as P. Fagius tells
us, (...) does not come from (...) a Goat, and (...) abiit; but is the name of
a Mountain very steep and rocky near Mount Sinai, and therefore probably called
by the later Jews, (...), the name of a Rock: and to this purpose, it is
observable that where we render it, and let him go for a Scapegoat into the
Wilderness, in the Hebrew it is, Lev. 16.12.
(...) to send him to Azazel in the Wilderness: as the joining the preposition
(...) does import, and the Arabic Version wherever Azazel is mentioned,
renders it by Mount Azaz: and the Chaldee and Syriack to Azazel; so that from
hence, a carrying the Scapegoat to a certain place may be inferred; but I see
no foundation in the Text for the throwing it down from the rock when it was
there; and therefore I cannot think, but that if the punishment intended did
lie in that, it would have been expressly mentioned in the solemnities of that
day, which had so great an influence on the expiation of the sins of the
people. 2. I answer, that the Scapegoat was to denote rather the effect of the
expiation, than the manner of obtaining it. For the proper expiation was by the
shedding of blood, Heb. 9.22.
as the Apostle tells us; and thence the live Goat was not to have the sins of
the people to bear away into the desert, till the High Priest had made an end
of reconciling the Holy Place, Lev. 16.20.
and the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and the Altar; and by the sprinkling
of the blood of the other Goat which was the sin-offering for the people; V. 15.
which being done, he was to bring the live Goat, and to lay his hands upon the
head of it, and confess over it all the iniquities of the Children of Israel,
V. 21.
and all their transgressions in all their sins, putting them upon the head of
the Goat, and shall send him away by the hand of a fit man into the Wilderness;
V. 22.
and so the Goat shall bear upon him all their iniquities unto a land not
inhabited, and he shall let go the Goat in the Wilderness. So that the former
Goat noted the way of expiation by the shedding of blood, and the latter the
effect of it, viz. that the sins of the people were declared to be expiated by
the sending the Goat charged with their sins into a desert place; and that
their sins would not appear in the presence of God against them, any more than
they expected, that the Goat which was sent into the Wilderness should return
among them. Which was the reason that afterward they took so much care that it
should not, by causing it to be thrown off from a steep rock; which was no
sooner done, but notice was given of it very suddenly by the sounding of horns
all over the Land. But the force of Socinus his argument from the Scape-Goat's
bearing the sins of the people, that therefore that phrase does not always
imply the bearing of punishment, is taken off by Crellius himself, Crell. c. 1.
sect. 56.
who tells us, that the Scapegoat is not said to bear the sins of the people
in the Wilderness; but only that it carried the sins of the people into the
Wilderness, which is a phrase of another importance from that we are now
discoursing of. As will now further appear from the places where it is spoken
of concerning our Savior, which we now come particularly to examine.

V. The first place insisted on by Grotius with a respect to Christ, Grotius
his sense of 1 Pet. 2.24. vindicated. Crell. c. 1. sect. 35.
is 1 Pet. 2.24. Who his own self bare our sins, in his own body on the tree,
which, says Crellius, is so far from proving that Christ did bear the
punishment of our sins, that it does not imply any sufferings that he underwent
on the occasion of them. He grants that (...) does signify to carry up, but
withal (he says) it signifies to take away; because that which is taken up,
is taken away from the place where it was. Besides, he observes, that (...)
does answer to the Hebrew (...), he has made to ascend, which is frequently
rendered by it in the LXX. and sometime by (...); but that Hebrew word does
often signify to take away, where it is rendered in the Greek by one of those
two words, 2 Samuel 21.13. Josh. 24.32. Psalm. 102.25. Ezra 1.11. To which I
answer, 1. That the signification of (...) in this place, must not be taken
from every sense the word is ever used for, but in that which the words out of
which these are taken do imply; and in Isa. 53.11. it does not answer (...) but
to (...), a word which by the confession of all is never properly used for
taking away, but for bearing of a burden, and is used with a respect to the
punishment of sin, Lament. 5.7. Our fathers have sinned, and are not, and we
have born their iniquities, where the same word is used; so that the
signification of the word (...) here, must depend upon that in Isaiah, of which
more afterward. 2. Granting that (...) does answer sometimes to the Hebrew
(...) yet it makes nothing to Crellius his purpose, unless he can prove that
(...) does ever signify the taking away a thing by the destruction of it; for
where it answers to that word, it is either for the offering up of a Sacrifice,
in which sense (...) is very frequently used, as is confessed by Crellius; and
in that sense it is no prejudice at all to our cause; for then it must be
granted, that Christ upon the Cross is to be considered as a sacrifice for the
sins of men; and so our sins were laid upon him as they were supposed to be on
the Sacrifices under the Law, in order to the expiation of them, by the
shedding their blood; and if our Adversaries would acknowledge this, the
difference would not be so great between us; or else it is used for the removal
of a thing from one place to another, the thing it self still remaining in
being, as 2 Samuel 21.13. And he made Readiness bones to ascend, (...), he took them
away, says Crellius; true, but it is such a taking away, as is a bare removal,
the thing still remaining; the same is to be said of Ioseph's bones, Josh.
24.32. which are all the places where (...) is used; and although (...) may be
sometimes taken in another sense, as Psalm. 102.25. yet nothing can be more
unreasonable than such a way of arguing as this is; (...), says Crellius,
signifies taking away; we demand his proof of it; is it that the word signifies
so much of it self? No; that he grants it does not. Is it that it is frequently
used in the Greek Version to render a word that properly does signify so? No;
nor that neither. But how is it then? Crellius tells us, that it sometimes
answers to a word that signifies to make to ascend: well, but does that word
signify taking away? No; not constantly, for it is frequently used for a
sacrifice: But does it at any time signify so? Yes; it signifies the removal
of a thing from one place to another. Is that the sense then he contends for
here? No; but how then? why (...) is used to render the same word that (...)
does, and (...), though it signifies too a bare removal, as Ezra 1.11. yet
Psalm. 102. 25. it is used for cutting off, (...), the Hebr. is, make me not to
ascend in the midst of my days. But does it here signify utter destruction? I
suppose not; but grant it, what is this to (...), when the LXX uses not that
word here, which for all that we know was purposely altered; so that at last
(...) is far enough from any such signification as Crellius would fix upon it,
unless he will assert, that Christ taking away our sins, was only a removal of
them from Earth to Heaven. But here Grotius comes in to the relief of Crellius
against himself; for in his Notes upon this place, though he had before said,
that the word was never used in the New Testament in that sense, yet he there
says, (...) is abstulit, for which he referrs us to Heb. 9.28. where he
proceeds altogether as subtly as Crellius had done before him, for he tells
us (...) is put for (...), Numb. 14.33. Deuteronomy. 14.24. Isa. 53.12. but (...), i.
e. (...) is put for (...), Lev. 10.17. Numb. 14.18. A most excellent way of
interpreting Scripture? considering the various significations of the Hebrew
words, and above all of that (...) which is here mentioned. For according to
this way of arguing, (...) shall signify the same with (...), and (...), for
(...) signifies all these, and is rendered by them in the Greek Version, so that
by the same way that Grotius proves that (...) signifies (...), we can prove
that (...) does not signify to take away, but to bear punishment; nay, (...)
signifies the bearing punishment in the strictest sense, Ezekiel. 16.5^, 54. and
bearing sin in that sense, Ezekiel. 16.58. Thou have born thy leudness, and thy
abominations, (...). So that when (...) is more frequently used in this than in
the other sense, why shall its signifying (...) at any time make (...) be taken
in the same sense with that? Nay, I do not remember in any place where (...) is
joined with sin, but it signifies the punishment of it, so (...), Lev. 19.8. to
bear his iniquity* Lev. 20.17. (...), bearing their iniquity, in one verse, is
explained by being cut off from among their people, in the next. And in the
places cited by Grotius, that Numb. 14.33. has been already showed to signify
bearing the punishment of sin, and that Deuteronomy. 14.24. is plainly understood of a
Sacrifice, the other, Isa. 53.12. will be afterward made appear by other
places in the same Chapter, to signify nothing to this purpose. So that for
all we can yet see, (...) must be taken either for bearing our sins as a
sacrifice did under the Law, or the punishment of them; in either sense it
serves our purpose, but is far enough from our Adversaries meaning.

VI. But supposing we should grant them, Crell. his sense examined.
that (...) may signify to take away, let us see what excellent sense they
make of these words of St. Peter. Do they then say, that Christ did take away
our sins upon the Cross? No; they have a great care of that, for that would
make the expiation of sins to have been performed there; which they utterly
deny, and say, that Christ only took the Cross in his way to his Ascension to
Heaven, that there he might expiate sins. But does not S^* Peter say, that what
was done by him here, was in his body on the tree: and they will not say, he
carried that with him to Heaven too. Well, but what then was the taking away of
sin which belonged to Christ upon the Cross? is it only to persuade men to live
virtuously, and leave off their sins? This Socinus would have, Soc. de serve. l.
2. cap. 6. Crell. cap. ^. Sect. 39.
and Crellius is contented that it should be understood barely of taking away
sins, and not of the punishment of them, but only by way of accession and
consequence: but if it be taken ( which he inclines more to) for the
punishment, then ( he says) it is to be understood not of the virtue and
efficacy of the death of Christ, Sect. 44.
but of the effect: and yet a little after he says, those words of Christ
bearing our sins, are to be understood of the force and efficacy of Christ's
death to do it, not including the effect of it in us; not as though Christ did
deliver us from sins by his death, but that he did that by dying, upon which
the taking away of sin would follow, or which had a great power for the doing
it. So uncertain are our Adversaries, in affixing any sense upon these words,
which may attribute any effect at all, to the death of Christ upon the Cross.
For if they be understood of taking away sins, then they are only to be meant
of the power that was in the death of Christ, to persuade men to leave their
sins; which we must have a care of understanding so, as to attribute any effect
to the death of Christ in order to it; but only that the death of Christ was an
argument for us to believe what he said, and the believing what he said would
incline us to obey him, and if we obey him, we shall leave off our sins whether
Christ had died or no: supposing his miracles had the same effect on us, which
those of Moses had upon the Jews, which were sufficient to persuade them to
believe and obey without his death. But if this be all that was meant by
Christ's bearing our sins in his body on the tree; why might not St. Peter
himself be said to bear them upon his Cross too? for his death was an excellent
example of patience, and a great argument to persuade men he spoke truth, and
that doctrine which he preached, was repentance and remission of sins: So that
by this sense there is nothing peculiar attributed to the death of Christ. But
taking the other sense for the taking away the punishment of sins, we must see
how this belongs to the death of Christ: Do they then attribute our delivery
from the punishment of sin, to the death of Christ on the Cross? yes, just as
we may attribute Caesar's subduing Rome, to his passing over Rubicon, because
he took that in his way to the doing of it: so they make the death of Christ
only as a passage, in order to expiation of sins, by taking away the punishment
of them. For that shall not be actually perfected, they say, till his full
deliverance of all those that obey him, from hell and the grave, which will not
be till his second coming. So that if we only take the body of Christ for his
second coming, and the Cross of Christ, or the tree, for his Throne of Glory,
then they will acknowledge, that Christ may very well be said to take away sins
in his own body on the tree: but if you take it in any sense that does imply
any peculiar efficacy to the death of Christ, for all the plainness of St.
Peter's words, they by no means will admit of it.

VII. But because Crellius urges Grotius with the sense of that place, Isa.
53.11. vindicated. Crell. c. 1. sect. 35.
Isa. 53.11. out of which he contends these words are taken, and Crellius
conceives he can prove there, that bearing is the same with taking away sin: We
now come to consider, what force he can find from thence, for the justifying
his assertion, That the bearing of sins, when attributed to Christ, does not
imply the punishment of them, but the taking them away. The words are, for he
shall bear their iniquities. As to which Grotius observes, That the word (...)
which signifies iniquity, is sometimes taken for the punishment of sin, 2 King.
7.9. and the verb (...) is to bear, and whenever it is joined with sin or
iniquity, in all languages, and especially the Hebrew, it signifies to suffer
punishment; for although (...) may sometimes signify to take away, (...) never
does: so that this phrase can receive no other interpretation. Notwithstanding
all which Crellius attempts to prove, That (...) here, must be taken in a sense
contrary to the natural and perpetual use of the word; Crell. c. 1. sect. 44.
for which his first argument is very infirm, viz. because it is mentioned
after the death of Christ, and is therefore to be considered as the reward of
the other. Whereas it appears: 1. By the Prophets discourse, that he does not
insist on an exact methodical order, but dilates and amplifies things as he
sees occasion: for Verse. 9. he says, He made his grave with the wicked, and
with the rich in his death; and Verse 10. he said, Yet it pleased the Lord to
bruise him, he has put him to grief: Will Crellius therefore say, that this
must be consequent to his death and burial? 2. The particle^ may be here taken
causally, as we render it, very agreeably to the sense; and so it gives an
account of the foregoing clause, By his knowledge, shall my righteous servant
justify many, for he shall bear their iniquities. And that this is no unusual
acception of that particle, might be easily cleared from many places of
Scripture if it were necessary; and from this very Prophet, as Isa. 39.1. where
(...) is the same with (...) 2 King. 2^.12. and Isa. 64.5. Thou art wroth, for
we have sinned, (...) where the same particle is made the casual of what went
before. But we need not insist upon this to answer Crellius, Crell. c. 9. sect.
7. p. 463. Soc. Prael. c. 14. sect. 6.
who elsewhere makes use of it himself, and says, They must be very ignorant of
the Hebrew Tongue, who do not know that the conjunction copulative is often
taken casually; and so much is confessed by Socinus also, where he explains
that particle in one sense in the beginning, and casually in the middle of the
verse: 2 Samuel 24.1.
and the Lord's anger was kindled against Israel, (...), for he moved, etc. but
if this will not do, he attempts to prove, That (...) in this very Chapter,
has the signification of taking away, v. 4. For he has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, which is applied by St. Matthew. 8.17. to bodily diseases,
which our Savior did not bear, but took away, as it is said in the foregoing
Verse; he healed all that were sick, on which those words come in, That it
might be fulfilled which was spoken by Isaias, etc. To which I answer: 1. It is
granted by our Adversaries, that St. Matthew in those words, does not give the
full sense of the Prophet, but only applies that by way of accommodation, to
bodily diseases, which was chiefly intended for the sins of men. And in a way
of accommodation it is not unusual to strain words beyond their genuine and
natural signification, or what was intended primarily by the person who spoke
them. Would it be reasonable for any to say that (...) signifies to give,
because that place, Psalm. 68.18. where the word by all is acknowledged to
signify to receive, is rendered to give, Ephesians. 4.8. so that admitting another
sense of the word here, as applied to the cure of bodily diseases, it does not
from thence follow, that this should be the meaning of the word in the primary
sense intended by the Prophet. 2. The word as used by St. Matthew, is very
capable of the primary and natural sense; for St. Matthew retains words of the
same signification, with that which we contend for, (...) and (...), neither of
which does signify taking away, by causing a thing not to be. So that all that
is implied hereby, is the pains and trouble which our Savior took in the
healing of the sick. For to that end, as Grotius well observes upon that place,
the circumstances are mentioned, That it was at even, and multitudes were
brought to him in St. Matthew, Mat. 8.16.
that after Sun set all that were diseased were brought, and all the City was
gathered together at the door, in St. Mark; Mat. 1.32, 33.
That he departed not till it was day, in St. Luke; Luke 4.42.
that we might the better understand how our Savior did bear our griefs,
because the pains he took in healing them were so great. And here I cannot but
observe, that Grotius in his Notes on that place, continued still in the same
mind he was in, when he writ against Socinus; for he says, Those words may
either refer to the diseases of the body, and so they note the pains he took in
the cure of them; or to our sins, and so they were fulfilled when Christ by
suffering upon the Cross, did obtain remission of sins for us, as St. Peter
says, 1 Pet. 2.24. But upon what reason the Annotations on that place come to
be so different from his sense expressed here, long after Crellius his answer,
I do not understand. But we are sure he declared his mind, as to the main of
that Controversy, to be the same, that it was when he writ his Book which
Crellius answered; as appears by two Letters of his to Vossius, not long since
published; Epist. Eccl. p. 747, 748. Discuss. p. 16, 17.
and he utterly disowns the charge of Socinianism, as a calumny in his
discussion, the last Book he ever writ.

VIII. But we are no further obliged to vindicate Grotius, than he did the
truth; which we are sure he did in the vindication of the 53 of Isaiah, Isa.
53.5, 6, 7. vindicated.
from Socinus his interpretations, notwithstanding what Crellius has objected
against him. We therefore proceed to other Verses in the same Chapter insisted
on by Grotius, to prove, that Christ did bear the punishments of our sins, v.
6, 7. The Lord has laid on him the iniquities of us all: It is required, and
he was afflicted, as Grotius renders those words. De Servat. l. 2. c. 5.
Socinus makes a twofold sense of the former clause; the first is, That God by
or with Christ did meet with our iniquities; the latter, That God did make our
iniquities to meet with Christ. The words says Grotius, will not bear the
former interpretation; for the verb (...) being in Hiphil, must import a double
action, and so it must not be, That God by him did meet with our sins, but that
God did make our sins to meet upon him. To which Crellius replies, Crell. c. 1.
sect. 52.
That words in Hiphil are sometimes used intransitively; but can he produce any
instance in Scripture, where this word joined with (...) and (...) is so taken?
for in the last verse of the Chapter, the construction is different: And what
an uncertain way of interpreting Scripture will this be, if every Anomalous
signification, and rare use of a word, shall be made use of to take away such a
sense as is most agreeable to the design of the place. For that sense we
contend for, is not only enforced upon the most natural importance of these
words, but upon the agreeableness of them with so many other expressions of
this Chapter, that Christ did bear our iniquities, and was wounded for our
transgressions, and that his soul was made an offering for sin: to which it is
very suitable, that as the iniquities of the people were (as it were) laid upon
the head of the Sacrifice; so it should be said of Christ, who was to offer up
himself for the sins of the world. And the Jews themselves by this phrase do
understand the punishment either for the sins of the people, which Josias
underwent, or which the people themselves suffered, by those who interpret this
prophecy of them. To which purpose, Aben Ezra observes, that iniquity is here
put for the punishment of it, as 1 Samuel 28.10. and Lam. 4.6. But Socinus
mistrusting the incongruity of this Interpretation, flies to another; viz. That
God did make our iniquities to meet with Christ: And this we are willing to
admit of, if by that they mean, That Christ underwent the punishment of them;
as that phrase must naturally import, for what otherwise can our iniquities
meeting with him signify? For the word (...) taken properly (as Socinus
acknowledges it ought to be, when he rejects Pagnin's Interpretation of making
Christ to interceed for our iniquities) signifies, either to meet with one by
chance, or out of kindness, or else for an encounter, with an intention to
destroy that which it meets with. So Judge. 8.21. Rise thou (...), LXX. irrue in
nos, fall upon us; i e. run upon us with thy sword, and kill us. Judge. 15.12.
Swear unto me, that ye will not fall upon me your selves; where the same word
is used, and they explain the meaning of it in the next words, v. 13. We will
not kill thee, Amos 5.19. as if a man did flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him,
(...), i. e. with a design to kill him. Now I suppose they will not say that
our sins met with Christ by Chance, since it is said, that God laid on him,
etc. not out of kindness; it must be therefore out of enmity, and with a design
to destroy him; and so our sins cannot be understood as Socinus and Crellius
would have them, as the mere occasions of Christ's death: but as the proper
impulsive cause of it. Whether the following word (...) be taken with a respect
to sin, and so it properly signifies It is required, or with a respect to the
person, and so it may signify he was oppressed, is not a matter of that
consequence, which we ought to contend about; if it be proved that Christ's
oppression had only a respect to sin, as the punishment of it. Which will yet
further appear from another expression in the same Chapter, v. 5. The
chastisement of our peace was upon him, and by his stripes we are healed. In
which Grotius says the word (...) does not signify any kind of affliction,
but such as has the nature of punishment, either for example or instruction;
but since the latter cannot be intended in Christ, the former must. Crell. c.
1. sect. 57.
Crellius thinks to escape from this, by acknowledging, that the sufferings of
Christ have some respect to sin; but if it be such a respect to sin, which
makes what Christ underwent a punishment (which is only proper in this case) it
is as much as we contend for. This therefore he is loath to abide by; and says
that chastisement imports no more than bare affliction without any respect to
sin, which he thinks to prove from St. Paul's words, 2 Cor. 6.9. We are
chastised, but not given over to death; but how far this is from proving his
purpose will easily appear, 1. Because those by whom they were said to be
chastened, did not think they did it without any respect to a fault; but they
supposed them to be justly punished; and this is that we plead for, that the
chastisement considered with a respect to him that inflicts it, does suppose
some fault as the reason of inflicting it. 2. This is far from the present
purpose, for the chastisement there mentioned is opposed to death, as
chastened, but not killed; whereas Grotius expressly speaks of such
chastisements as include death, that these cannot be supposed to be merely
designed for instruction, and therefore must be conceived under the notion of
punishment. The other place, Psalm. 73.14. is yet more remote from the business;
for though the Psalmist accounts himself innocent in respect of the great
enormities of others; yet he could not account himself so innocent with a
respect to God, as not to deserve chastisement from him.

IX. But Crellius offers further to prove that Christ's death must be
considered as a bare affliction, Whether Christ's death be a proper (...), and
whether that does imply that it was a punishment of sin.
and not as a (...), or exemplary punishment, because in such a punishment the
guilty themselves are to be punished, and the benefit comes to those who were
not guilty, but in Christ's sufferings it was quite contrary, for the innocent
was punished, and the guilty have the benefit of it: and yet ( he says) if we
should grant that Christ's sufferings were a (...), that will not prove that
his death was a proper punishment. To which I answer, That whatever answers to
the ends of an exemplary punishment, may properly be called so: but supposing
that Christ suffered the punishment of our sins, those sufferings will answer
to all the ends of an exemplary punishment. For the ends of such a punishment
assigned by Crellius himself, are, That others observing such a punishment, may
abstain from those sins which have brought it upon the person who suffers. Now
the question is, whether supposing Christ did suffer on the account of our
sins, these sufferings of his may deterr us from the practice of sin or no? And
therefore in opposition to Crellius, I shall prove these two things: 1. That
supposing Christ suffered for our sins, there was a sufficient argument to
deterr us from the practice of sin. 2. Supposing that his sufferings had no
respect to our sins, they could not have that force to deterr men from the
practice of it: for he after asserts, That Christ's sufferings might be a (...)
to us, though they were no punishment of sin. 1. That the death of Christ
considered as a punishment of sin, is a proper (...), or has a great force to
deterr men from the practice of sin: and that because the same reason of
punishment is supposed in Christ and in our selves, and because the example is
much more considerable, than if we had suffered our selves. 1. The same reason
of punishment is supposed. For why are men deterred from sin, by seeing others
punished; but because they look upon the sin as the reason of the punishment;
and therefore where the same reason holds, the same ends may be as properly
obtained. If we said that Christ suffered death merely as an innocent person
out of God's dominion over his life; what imaginable force could this have to
deterr men from sin, which is asserted to have no relation to it as the cause
of it? But when we say, that God laid our iniquities upon him, that he suffered
not upon his own account but ours, that the sins we commit against God were the
cause of all those bitter Agonies which the Son of, God underwent, what
argument can be more proper to deterr men from sin than this is? For hereby
they see the great abhorrency of sin which is in God, that he will not pardon
the sins of men without a compensation made to his Honor, and a demonstration
to the world of his hatred of it. Hereby they see what a value God has for his
Laws, which he will not relax as to the punishment of offenders, without so
valuable a consideration as the blood of his own Son. Hereby they see, that the
punishment of sin is no mere arbitrary thing depending barely upon the will of
God; but that there is such a connection between sin and punishment as to the
ends of Government, that unless the Honor and Majesty of God, as to his Laws
and Government man be preserved, the violation of his Laws must expect a just
recompense of reward* Hereby they see what those are to expect who neglect or
despise these sufferings of the Son of God for them; for nothing can then
remain, but a certain fearful looking for of judgment and fiery indignation
which shall devour the Adversaries. So that, here all the weighty arguments
concur which may be most apt to prevail upon men to deterr them from their
sins. For if God did thus by the green tree, what will he do by the dry? If he
who was so innocent in himself, so perfectly holy, suffered so much on the
account of our sins; what then may those expect to suffer, who have no
innocence at all to plead, and add wilfulness and impenitency to their sins?
But if it be replied by Crellius, that it is otherwise among men: I answer,
that we do not pretend in all things to parallel the sufferings of Christ for
us, with any sufferings of men for one another. But yet we add, that even among
men the punishments inflicted on those who were themselves innocent as to the
cause of them, may be as exemplary as any other. And the greater appearance of
severity there is in them, the greater terror they strike into all offenders.
As Children's losing their estates and honors, or being banished for their
Parents treasons in which they had no part themselves. Which is a proper
punishment on them of their Father's faults, whether they be guilty or no? and
if this may be just in men* why not in God? If any say, that the Parents are
only punished in the Children, he speaks that which is contradictory to the
common sense of mankind; for punishment does suppose sense or feeling of it;
and in this case the Parents are said to be punished, who are supposed to be
dead and past feeling of it, and the Children who undergo the smart of it must
not be said to be punished; though all things are so like it, that no person
can imagine himself in that condition, but would think himself punished, and
severely too. If it be said, that these are calamities indeed, but they are no
proper punishments, it may easily be showed that distinction will not hold
here. Because these punishments were within the design of the Law, and were
intended for all the ends of punishments, and therefore must have the nature of
them. For therefore the Children are involved in the Father's punishment on
purpose to deterr others from the like actions. There are some things indeed
that Children may fall into by occasion of their Father's guilt, which may be
only calamities to them, because they are ne^essary consequents in the nature
of the thing, and not purposely designed as a punishment to them. Thus, being
deprived of the comfort and assistance of their Parents, when the Law has
taken them off by the hand of justice: this was designed by the Law as a
punishment to the Parents, and as to the Children it is only a necessary
consequent of their punishment. For otherwise the Parents would have been
punished for the Childrens faults, and not the Children only involved in that
which unavoidably follows upon the Parents punishment. So that Crellius is very
much mistaken either in the present case of our Savior's punishment, or in the
general reason of exemplary punishments, as among men. But the case of our
Savior is more exemplary, when we consider the excellency of his person,
though appearing in our nature, when no meaner sufferings would satisfy, than
of so transcendent a nature as he underwent, though he were the Eternal Son of
God, this must make the punishment much more exemplary, than if he were
considered only as our Adversaries do, as a mere man. So that the dignity of
his person under all his sufferings may justly add a greater consideration to
deterr us from the practice of sin, which was so severely punished in him, when
he was pleased to be a Sacrifice for our sins. From whence we see that the ends
of a (...) are very agreeable with the sufferings of Christ considered as a
punishment of sin.

X. We now consider whether as Crellius asserts, God's hatred of sin could not
be seen in the sufferings of Christ, if they were no punishment of sin. Crell.
c. 1. p. 69.
supposing Christ's death were no punishment, it could have these effects upon
men's minds or no? Yes, he says, it might, because by his sufferings we might
see how severely God would punish wicked and obstinate persons. Which being a
strange riddle at the first hearing it, viz. that by the sufferings of an
innocent person without any respect to sin as the cause of them: we should
discern God's severity against those who are obstinate in sin; we ought the
more diligently to attend to what is said for the clearing of it. First, says
he, If God spared not his own most innocent and holy and only Son, than whom
nothing was more dear to him in Heaven or Earth, but exposed him to so cruel
and ignominious a death; how great and severe sufferings may we think God will
inflict on wicked men, who are at open defiance with him? I confess my self not
subtle enough to apprehend the force of this argument, viz. If God dealt so
severely with him who had no sin either of his own or others to answer for;
therefore he will deal much more severely with those that have. For God's
severity considered without any respect to sin, gives rather encouragement to
sinners, than any argument to deterr them from it. For the natural consequence
of it is, that God does act arbitrarily, without any regard to the good or evil
of men's actions; and therefore it is to no purpose to be sollicitous about
them. For upon the same account that the most innocent person suffers most
severely from him, for all that we know, the more we strive to be innocent, the
more severely we may be dealt with, and let men sin, they can be but dealt
severely with; all the difference then is, one shall be called punishments, and
the other calamities, but the severity may be the same in both. And who would
leave off his sins merely to change the name of punishments into that of
calamities? And from hence it will follow, that the differences of good and
evil, and the respects of them to punishment and reward, are but airy and empty
things; but that God really in the dispensation of things to men, has no
regard to what men are or do, but acts therein according to his own Dominion,
whereby he may dispose of men how or which way he pleases. If a Prince had many
of his Subjects in open rebellion against him, and he should at that time make
his most obedient and beloved Son to be publicly exposed to all manner of
indignities, and be dishonored and put to death by the hands of those rebels;
could any one imagine that this was designed as an exemplary punishment to all
rebels, to let them see the danger of rebellion? No, but would it not rather
make them think him a cruel Prince, one that would punish innocence as much as
rebellion; and that it was rather better to stand at defiance, and become
desperate, for it was more dangerous to be beloved than hated by him, to be his
Son than his declared Enemy? so that insisting on the death of Christ as it is
considered as a (...), (for of that we speak now) there is no comparison
between our Adversaries hypothesis and ours; but, says Crellius, the
consequence is not good on our side, if Christ suffered the punishment of our
sins, therefore they shall suffer much more who continue in sin, for Christ
suffered for the sins of the whole world; but they suffer only for their own,
and what they have deserved themselves. To which I answer, that the argument is
of very good force upon our hypothesis, though it would not be upon theirs. For
if we suppose him to be a mere man that suffered, then there could be no
argument drawn from his sufferings to ours, but according to the exact
proportion of sins and punishments: but supposing that he had a divine as well
as humane nature, there may not be so great a proportion of the sins of the
world to the sufferings of Christ, as of the sins of a particular person to his
own sufferings; and therefore the argument from one to the other does still
hold. For the measure of punishments must be taken with a proportion to the
dignity of the person who suffers them. And Crellius himself confesses
elsewhere, Crell. c. 8. sect. 43.
that the dignity of the person is to be considered in exemplary punishment,
and that a lesser punishment of one that is very great, may do much more to
deterr men from sin, than a greater punishment of one much less. But he yet
further urges, Crell. c. 1. sect. 57, 70.
that the severity of God against sinners may be discovered in the sufferings
of Christ, because God's hatred against sin is discovered therein. But if we
ask how God's hatred against sin is seen in the sufferings of one perfectly
innocent and free from sin, and not rather his hatred of innocence, if no
respect to sin were had therein: he answers, That God's hatred against sin was
manifested, in that he would not spare his only Son to draw men off from sin.
For answer to which, we are to consider the sufferings of Christ as an innocent
person, designed as an exemplary cause to draw men off from sin; and let any
one tell me, what hatred of sin can possibly be discovered, in proposing the
sufferings of a most innocent person to them without any consideration of sin
as the cause of those sufferings? If it be said, That the Doctrine of Christ
was designed to draw men off from sin; and that God suffered his Son to die to
confirm this Doctrine, and thereby showed his hatred to sin. I answer, 1. This
is carrying the dispute off from the present business, for we are not now
arguing about the design of Christ's Doctrine, nor the death of Christ as a
means to confirm that, but as a (...), and what power that has without respect
to our sins as the cause of them, to draw us from sin, by discovering God's
hatred to it. 2. The Doctrine of Christ according to their hypothesis,
discovers much less of God's hatred to sin than ours does. For if God may
pardon sin without any compensation made to his Laws or Honor, if repentance
be in its own nature a sufficient satisfaction for all the sins past of our
Lives; if there be no such a Justice in God which requires punishment of sin
commi^ted; if the punishment of sin depend barely upon God's will; and the most
innocent person may suffer as much from God without respect to sin as the cause
of suffering, as the most guilty; let any rational man judge whether this
Doctrine discovers as much God's abhorrency of sin, as asserting the necessity
of vindicating God's honor to the World, upon the breach of his Laws, if not
by the suffering of the offenders themselves, yet of the Son of God as a
sacrifice for the expiation of sin, by undergoing the punishment of our
iniquities, so as upon consideration of his sufferings, he is pleased to accept
of repentance and sincere obedience, as the conditions upon which he will grant
remission of sins, and eternal life. So that if the discovery of God's hatred
to sin be the means to reclaim men from it, we assert upon the former reasons,
that much more is done upon our Doctrine concerning the sufferings of Christ,
than can be upon theirs. So much shall suffice to manifest in what sense
Christ's death may be a (...), and that this does imply, that his sufferings
are to be considered as a punishment of sin.

XI. The next Series of places which makes Christ's sufferings to be a
punishment for sin, Grotius his arguments from Christ's being made sin and a
curse for us defended against Crellius.
are those which assert Christ to be made sin and a curse for us, which we now
design to make clear, ought to be understood in no other sense, for as Grotius
says, As the Jews sometimes use sin, for the punishment of sin; as appears,
besides other places, by Zach. 14.^9. Genesis 4.13. so they call him that suffers
the punishment of sin, by the name of sin; as the Latins use the word Piaculum,
both for the fault, and for him that suffers for it. Thence under the Law, an
expiatory Sacrifice for sin, was called sin, Lev. 4.3.29 -- 5, 6. Psalm. 40.7.
Which way of speaking Esaias followed, speaking of Christ, Isai. 53.10. (...)
he made his soul sin, i. e. liable to the punishment of it. To the same purpose
St. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.21. He made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. To which Crellius replies, That
as there is no necessity, Crell. c. 1. sect. 60.
that by the name of sin, when applied to sufferings, any more should be
implied, than that those sufferings were occasioned by sin, no more is there
when it is applied to the person; nay, much less, for he says, No more is
required to this, but that he should be handled as sinners use to be, and
undergo the matter of punishment, without any respect to sin, either as the
cause or occasion of it. So he says, The name Sinner is used, 1 King. 1.21.
and in St. Paul, the name of sin in the first clause is to be understood, as of
righteousness in the latter; and as we are said to be righteousness in him,
when God deals with us as with righteous persons, so Christ was said to be sin
for us, when he was dealt with as a sinner. And the Sacrifices for sin under
the Law were so called, not with a respect to the punishment of sin, but
because they were offered upon the account of sin, and were used for taking
away the guilt of it, or because men were bound to offer them, so that they
sinned if they neglected it. So that all that is meant by Esaias and St. Paul
is, That Christ was made an expiatory Sacrifice, or that he exposed himself for
those afflictions which sinners only by right undergo. But let Crellius or any
others of them tell me, if the Scripture had intended to express, that the
sufferings of Christ were a punishment of our sins, how was it possible to do
it more emphatically than it is done by these Expressions (the custom of the
Hebrew Language being considered) not only by saying, that Christ did bear our
sins, but, that himself was made sin for us? those phrases being so commonly
used for the punishment of sin. Let them produce any one instance in Scripture,
where those expressions are applied to any without the consideration of sin:
that place, 1 King. 1.21. is very far from it; for in all probability, the
design of Bathsheba in making Solomon King was already discovered, which was
the reason that Adonijah his elder Brother declaring himself King, invited not
him with the rest of the King's sons: All that she had for Solomon's
succession, was a secret promise and oath of David; and therefore she urges
him now to declare the succession, v. 20. Otherwise, she says, when David
should die, I and my son Solomon shall be accounted offenders; i. e. says
Crellius, we shall be handled as offenders, we shall be destroyed: But surely
not without the supposition of a fault; by them which should inflict that
punishment upon them: The plain meaning is, they should be accused of Treason,
and then punished accordingly. But we are to consider, that still with a
respect to them, who were the inflicters, a fault or sin is supposed as the
reason of their punishment, either of their own or others. But of our Savior
it is not said, That he should be counted as an offender by the Jews; for
although that does not take away his innocence, yet it supposes an accusation
of something, which in it self deserves punishment. But in Esai. 53.10. it is
said, He made his soul sin; and 2 Cor. 5.21. That God made him sin for us,
which must therefore imply, not being dealt with by men only as a sinner, but
that with a respect to him who inflicted the punishment, there was a
consideration of sin as the reason of it. We do not deny but God's suffering
him to be dealt with as a sinner by men, is implied in it, for that was the
method of his punishment designed; but we say further, that the reason of that
permission in God, does suppose some antecedent cause of it: For God would
never have suffered his only Son, to be so dealt with by the hands of cruel
men, unless he had made himself an offering for sin; being willing to undergo
those sufferings, that he might be an expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the
world. And although Socinus will not yield, Soc. l. 1. c. 8.
That by being made sin for us should be understood Christ's being an expiatory
Sacrifice for sin; yet Crellius is contented it should be so taken in both
places: Which if he will grant, so as by virtue of that Sacrifice, the guilt of
sin is expiated, we shall not contend with him about the reasons, why those
Sacrifices were called sins, although the most proper and genuine must needs be
that, which is assigned by the Law, that the sins of the people were supposed
to be laid upon them, and therefore they were intended for the expiation of
them: But it is very unreasonable to say, That expiatory Sacrifices were called
sins, because it would have been a sin to neglect them: For on the same
account, all the other Sacrifices must have been called so too; for it was a
sin to neglect any where God required them, and so there had been no difference
between Sacrifices for sin and others. To that reason of Crellius, from our
being made righteous, because dealt with as such, to Christ's being made sin
only, because dealt with as a sinner, we need no more than what this parallel
will afford us; For as Crellius would never say, that any are dealt with as
righteous persons, who are not antecedently supposed to be so by his own
Argument, Christ being dealt with as a sinner, must suppose guilt antecedent to
it; and since the Apostle declares it was not his own, in those words, Who knew
no sin, it follows that it must be the consideration of ours, which must make
him be dealt with as a sinner by him, who made him to be sin for us. But to
suppose that Christ should be said to be made sin, without any respect to sin,
is as much as if the Latins should call any one Scelus, and mean thereby a very
honest man; or a Piaculum, without any supposition of his own or others guilt.
But we are to consider, that the sufferings of Christ, seeming at first so
inconsistent with that relation to God as his only Son, which the Apostles
assert concerning him, they were obliged to vindicate his innocence, as to men,
and yet withal to show, that with a respect to God, there was sufficient reason
for his permission of his undergoing these sufferings. That he knew no sin, was
enough to clear his innocence as to men; but then the question will be asked,
If he were so innocent, why did God suffer all those things to come upon him?
Did not Abraham plead of old with God, Genesis 18.25.
That he would not slay the righteous with the wicked, because it was repugnant
to the righteousness of his nature to do so; That be far from thee to do after
this manner, to slay the righteteous with the wicked, and that the righteous
should be as the wicked, that be far from thee; shall not the Judge of all the
Earth do right? How then comes God to suffer the most perfect innocence to be
dealt with so, as the greatest sins could not have deserved worse from men? Was
not his righteousness the same still? And Abraham did not think the distinction
of calamities and punishments, enough to vindicate God's proceedings, if the
righteous should have been dealt withal as the wicked* And if that would hold
for such a measure of righteousness as might be supposed in such who were not
guilty of the great abominations of those places, that it should be enough, not
only to deliver themselves, but the wicked too; how comes it that the most
perfect obedience of the Son of God, is not sufficient to excuse him from the
greatest sufferings of Malefactors? But if his sufferings had been merely from
men, God had been accountable only for the bare permission; but it is said,
that he foreordained and determined these things to be, that Christ himself
complained, that God had forsaken him; and here, that he made him sin for us:
and can we imagine all this to be without any respect to the guilt of sin, as
the cause of it? Why should such an expression be used of being made sin? might
not many others have served sufficiently to declare the indignities and
sufferings he underwent, without such a phrase as seems to reflect upon
Christ's innocence? If there had been no more in these expressions than our
Adversaries imagine, the Apostles were so careful of Christ's honor, they
would have avoided such ill-sounding expressions as these were; and not have
affected Hebraisms, and uncouth forms of speech, to the disparagement of their
Religion. But this is all which our Adversaries have to say, where words are
used by them out of their proper sense, That the Prophets and Apostles affected
tricks of wit, playing with words, using them sometimes in one sense, and
presently quite in another. Crell. cap. 1. Sect. 57.
So Crellius says of Isaiah, That he affects little elegancies of words and
verbal allusions, which makes him use words sometimes out of their proper and
natural sense; thence he tells us, The sufferings of Christ are called
chastisements, though they have nothing of the nature of chastisements in them:
And from this liberty of interpreting, they make words (without any other
reason, than that they serve for their purpose) be taken in several senses in
the same verse: For Socinus in one verse of St. John's Gospel, makes the World
to be taken in three several senses: Socin. explicat. 1. cap. Job. v. 10.
He was in the World, there it is taken, says he, for the men of the World in
general: The world was made by him, there it must be understood only of the
reformation of things by the Gospel: and, the world knew him not, there it must
be taken in neither of the former senses, but for the wicked of the world: What
may not one make of the Scripture, by such a way of interpreting it? But by
this we have the less reason to wonder, that Socinus should put such an
Interpretation upon Gal. 3.13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the
Law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is every one that
hangs on a tree: In which he does acknowledge by the curse, in the first
clause to be meant, the punishment of sin, but not in the second: And the
reason he gives for it is, amavit enim Paulus in execrationis verbo argutus
esse. Socin. de Christo servat. l. 2. c. 1.
St. Paul affected playing with the word curse, understanding it first in a
proper, and then a Metaphorical sense. But it is plain that the design of S.
Paul and Socinus are very different in these words: Socinus thinks he speaks
only Metaphorically, when he says, that Christ was made a curse for us; i. e.
by a bare allusion of the name, without a correspondency in the thing it self;
and so that the death of Christ might be called a curse, but was not so: But
St. Paul speaks of this not by way of extenuation, but to set forth the
greatness and weight of the punishment he underwent for us. He therefore tells
us, what it was which Christ did redeem us from, The curse of the Law; and how
he did it, by being not only made a curse, but a curse for us; i. e. not by
being hateful to God, or undergoing the very same curse, which we should have
done; which are the two things objected by Crellius against our sense; but that
the death of Christ was to be considered, not as a bare separation of soul and
body, but as properly poenal, being such a kind of death, which none but
Malefactors by the Law were to suffer; by the undergoing of which punishment in
our stead, he redeemed us from that curse which we were liable to by the
violation of the Law of God. And there can be no reason to appropriate this
only to the Jews, unless the death of Christ did extend only to the deliverance
of them from the punishment of their sins; or because the curse of the Law did
make that death poenal, therefore the intention of the punishment, could reach
no further than the Law did; but the Apostle in the very next words speaks of
the farther extension of the great blessing promised to Abraham, That it should
come upon the Gentiles also; and withal those whom the Apostle speaks to, were
not Jews, but such as thought they ought to join the Law and Gospel together:
C^^ll An^^. in loc.
that St Paul does not mean as Crellius would have it, that Christ by his death
did confirm the New Covenant, and so take away the obligation of the Law; (for
to what end was the curse mentioned for that? What did the accursedness of his
death add to the confirmation of the truth of his Doctrine? and when was ever
the curse taken for the continuance of the Law of Moses?) but that Christ by
the efficacy of his death as a punishment for sin has redeemed all that
believe and obey him from the curse deserved by their sins, whether enforced by
the Law of Moses, or the Law written in their hearts, which tells the
consciences of sinners, that such who violate the Laws of God are worthy of
death, and therefore under the curse of the Law.

XII. We come now to the force of the particles which being joined with our
sins as referring to the death of Christ, The particles (...) being joined to
sins, and relating to sufferings, do imply those sufferings to be the
punishment of sin.
do imply that his death is to be considered as a punishment of sin. Not that
we insist on the force of those particles (...) and (...), as though of
themselves they did imply this (for we know they are of various significations
according to the nature of the matter they are joined with) but that these
being joined with sins and suffering together, do signify that those
sufferings are the punishment of those sins. Thus it is said of Christ, that he
dyed, (...), Romans 4.25. 1 Cor. 15.3. 1 Pet. 3.18. Heb. 10.12.
for our sins, (...), that he suffered once (...), that he gave himself (...),
that he offered a Sacrifice (...). Crell. cap. 1. sect. 6.
To which Crellius replies, That if the force of these particles not being
joined with sufferings, may be taken for the final and not for the impulsive
cause, they may retain the same sense when joined with sufferings, if those
sufferings may be designed in order to an end; but if it should be granted,
Sect. 14. p. 17.
that those phrases being joined with sufferings, do always imply a meritorious
cause, yet it does not follow, it should be here so understood because the
matter will not bear it. To this a short answer will at present serve: for, It
is not possible a meritorious cause can be expressed more emphatically than by
these words being joined to sufferings: so that we have as clear a testimony
from these expressions as words can give; and by the same arts by which these
may be avoided any other might; so that it had not been possible for our
Doctrine to have been expressed in such a manner, but such kind of answers
might have been given as our Adversaries now give. If it had been said in the
plainest terms, that Christ's death was a punishment for our sins, they would
as easily have avoided the force of them as they do of these; they would have
told us the Apostles delighted in an Antanaclasis, and had expressed things
different from the natural use of the words by them; and though punishment were
sometimes used properly, yet here it must be used only metaphorically because
the matter would bear no other sense. And therefore I commend the ingenuity of
Socinus after all the pains he had taken to enervate the force of those places
which are brought against his Doctrine; Socin. de Servat. l. 3. c. 6.
he tells us plainly, That if our Doctrine were not only once, but frequently
mentioned in Scripture? yet he would not therefore believe the thing to be so
as we suppose. For, says he, seeing the thing it self cannot be, I take the
least inconvenient interpretation of the words; and draw forth such a sense
from them, as is most consistent with itself and the tenor of the Scripture.
But for all his talking of the tenor of the Scripture; by the same reason he
interprets one place upon these terms, he will do many, and so the tenor of the
Scripture shall be never against him: and by this we find, that the main
strength of our Adversaries is not pretended to lie in the Scriptures; all the
care they have of them is only to reconcile them if possible with their
hypothesis; for they do not deny but that the natural force of the words does
imply what we contend for; but because they say the Doctrine we assert is
inconsistent with reason, therefore all their design is to find out any other
possible meaning which they therefore assert to be true, because more agreeable
to the common reason of mankind. This therefore is enough for our present
purpose, that if it had been the design of Scripture to have expressed our
sense, it could not have done it in plainer expressions than it has done, that
no expressions could have been used, but the same arts of our Adversaries might
have been used to take off their force, which they have used to those we now
urge against them, and that setting aside the possibility of the thing, the
Scripture does very fairly deliver the Doctrine we contend for; or, supposing
in point of reason there may be arguments enough to make it appear possible,
there are Scriptures enough to make it appear true.

CHAP. III.
I. The words of Scripture being at last acknowledged by our Adversaries to
make for us, the only pretense remaining is, that our Doctrine is repugnant to
reason. The debate managed upon point of reason. The grand difficulty enquired
into, and manifested by our Adversaries concessions, not to lie in the
greatness of Christ's sufferings, or that our sins were the impulsive cause of
them, or that it is impossible that one should be punished for another faults:
or in all cases unjust. II. The cases wherein Crellius allows it, instanced.
From whence it is proved that he yields the main cause. III. The arguments
propounded whereby he attempts to prove it unjust for Christ to be punished for
our sins. Crellius his principles of the justice of punishments examined. Of
the relation between desert and punishment. IV. That a person by his own
consent may be punished beyond the desert of his own actions. V. An answer to
Crellius his Objections. What it is to suffer undeservedly. Crellius his
mistake in the state of the question. VI. The instances of Scripture
considered. In what sense Children are punished for their Parents sins. VII.
Ezekiel. 18.20. explained at large. VIII. Whether the guilty being freed from the
sufferings of an innocent person makes that punishment unjust or no? Crellius
his shifts and evasions in this matter discovered. Why among men the offenders
are not freed in criminal matters though the sureties be punished. The release
of the party depends on the terms of the sureties suffering, therefore
deliverance not ipso facto. No necessity of such a translation in criminal, as
is in pecuniary matters.

I. HAving gained so considerable concessions from our Adversaries concerning
the places of Scripture, The matter debated in point of reason.
we come now to debate the matter in point of reason. And if there appear to be
nothing repugnant in the nature of the thing, or to the justice of God, then
all their loud clamours will come to nothing; for on that they fix, when they
talk the most of our Doctrine being contrary to reason. This therefore we now
come more closely to examine, in order to which we must carefully enquire what
it is they lay the charge of injustice in God upon, according to our belief of
Christ's sufferings being a punishment for our sins.

1. It is not, That the offenders themselves do not undergo the full punishment
of their sins. For they assert, that there is no necessity at all that the
offenders should be punished from any punitive justice in God: for they eagerly
contend that God may freely pardon the sins of men: if so, then it can be no
injustice in God not to punish the offenders according to the full desert of
their sins.

2. It is not, That God upon the sufferings of Christ does pardon the sins of
men: for they yield that God may do this without any charge of injustice, and
with the greatest demonstration of his kindness. For they acknowledge, that the
sufferings of Christ are not to be considered as a bare antecedent condition to
pardon, but that they were a moving cause as far as the obedience of Christ in
suffering was very acceptable to God.

3. It is not, in the greatness or matter of the sufferings of Christ. For they
assert the same which we do. C^rtum est Christum innocentissimum a
Deogravissim^s cruciatibus, ipsaque morte fuisse affectum; cum non in materia
poenae absolute and per se considerata, adeoque etiam in e^ afflictione a qua
poenae forma abest, injuria residere a nobis dicatur. Crel. c. 4. Sect. 3.
Potuit autem id Deus fa^ere, atque adeo fecit, jure dominii, quod in Christi
vitam a^ corpus habebat; accedente praesertim ipsius Christi consensu. Id.
(...) Sect 4.
And therefore I cannot but wonder to meet sometimes with those strange
out-crys of our making God cruel in the punishing of his Son for us: for what
do we assert that Christ suffered, which they do not assert too? Nay, does it
not look much more like cruelty in God to lay those sufferings upon him without
any consideration of sin? as upon their hypothesis he does; than to do it
supposing he bears the punishment of our iniquities, which is the thing we
plead for. They assert all those sufferings to be lawful on the account of
God^s dominion, which according to them must cease to be so on the supposition
of a meritorious cause. But however from this it appears, that it was not
unjust that Christ should suffer those things which he did for us: the question
then is, whether it were unjust that he should suffer the same things, which he
might lawfully do on the account of dominion with a respect to our sins as the
cause of them.

4. As to this, they acknowledge, that it is not, that the sufferings of Christ
were occasioned by our sins, or that our sins were the bare impulsive cause of
those sufferings. For they both confess in general, that one man's sins may be
the occasion of another punishment, so far that he might have escaped
punishment, if the others sins had not been the impulsive cause of it. And
therefore Crellius in the general state of this question, Quod si ex thesi
speciale facere velis generalem, ea haec erit, injustum esse punire innocentem,
quacunque tandem de causa id fiat; non vero simpliciter, punire quempiam ob
aliena delicta; id enim concedi potest non semper esse injustum. Crel. c. 4.
Sect. 3.
would not have it, whether it be unjust to punish one for another sins; for
that he acknowledges it is not, but whether, for any cause whatsoever it be
just to punish an innocent person? And likewise in particular of Christ, they
confess, that our sins were the impulsive cause, and the occasion of his
sufferings.

5. It is not, that there is so necessary a relation between guilt and
punishment, that it cannot be called a punishment which is inflicted on an
innocent person. For Crellius, after a long discourse of the difference of
afflictions and punishments, does acknowledge, That it is not of the nature of
punishment, Cum ne illud quidem ad naturam poenae requiratur, ut is ipse, qui
puniendus est poenam revera fuerit commeritus, Id. Sect 5.
that the person who is to be punished, should really deserve the punishment;
and afterward when Grotius urges, that though it be essential to punishment,
that it be inflicted for sin, yet it is not, that it be inflicted upon him who
has himself sinned, which he shows, by the similitude of rewards, which though
necessary to be given in consideration of service, may yet be given to others
besides the person himself upon his account. All this Crellius acknowledges;
who says, They do not make it necessary to the nature, but to the justice of
punishment, that it be inflicted upon none but the person who has offended. So
by his own Confession, it is not against the nature of punishment, Poenae
quidem simpliciter in innocentem cadit, justa non cadit, Crell. c. 4. Sect. 28.
that no one man suffer for another faults. From whence it follows, that all
Socinus his arguments signify nothing, which are drawn from the impossibility
of the thing, that one man should be punished for another faults; for Crellius
grants the thing to be possible, but denies it to be just; yet not absolutely
neither, but with some restrictions and limitations. For,

II. 6. It is not, In what cases Crellius grants some may be lawfully punished
for the sins of others.
but that there may be sufficient causes assigned in some particular cases;
wherein it may be just for God to punish some for the sins of others. For
Crellius himself has assigned diverse. When there is such a near conjunction
between them, that one may be said to be punished in the punishment of another:
Quia Deus hunc puniendo illum quoque alterum ob cujus peccati eum dicitur
punire, simul punire possit, ob arctiorem quae inter illos intercedat
conjunctionem. Crell. ib. Sect. 5. Crell. p. 242.
as Parents in their Children and Posterity, Kings in their Subjects, or the
body of a State in its Members, either in the most, or the most principal,
though the fewest: but we are to consider how far he does extend this way of
punishment of some in others. 1. At the greatest distance of time, if they have
been of the same Nation; for he extends it to the utmost degree of God's
patience toward a people; For, says he, God does not presently punish as soon
as they have sinned; but spares for a great while, and forbears, in expectation
of their repentance, in the mean while a great many guilty persons die, and
seem to have escaped punishment. But at last the time of God^s patience being
past, he punishes their Posterity by exacting the full punishment of their
sins upon them, and by this means punishes their Ancestors too, and punishes
their sins in their punishment; for, says he, all that people are reckoned for
one man of several Ages, and that punishment which is taken of the last, may be
for the sins of the first, for the conjunction and succession of them: of which
we have an example, says he, in the destruction of Jerusalem. By which we see
a very remote conjunction, and a mere similitude in comparing a succession of
Ages in a people with those in a man, may (when occasion serves) be made use of
to justify God's punishing one Generation of men for the sins of others that
have been long before. 2. When sins are more secret or less remarkable which
God might not punish, unless an occasion were given from others sins impelling
him to it; but because God would punish one very near them, he therefore
punishes them, that in their punishment he might punish the other. Or in case
sins spread through a Family or a people, or they are committed by diverse
persons at sundry times, which God does not severely punish, but sometimes
then, when the Head of a People or Family has done something which remarkably
deserves punishment, whom he will punish in those he is related to, and
therefore generally punishes the whole Family or People. 3. That which may be
a mere exercise of dominion as to some, may be a proper punishment to others;
as in the case of Infants, being taken away for their Parents sins; For God, as
to the Children, he says, uses only an act of dominion, but the punishment
only redounds to the Parents, who lose them; and though this be done for the
very end of punishment, yet he denies, that it has the nature of Punishment in
any but the Parents. Crell. ib. sect. 11. sect. 19.
4. That punishment may be intended for those who can have no sense at all of
it; as Crellius asserts in the case of Readiness sons, 2 Samuel 21.8, 14. that the
punishment was mainly intended for Saul, who was already dead. From these
concessions of Crellius in this case, we may take notice, 1. That a remote
conjunction may be sufficient for a translation of penalty, viz. from one
Generation to another. 2. That sins may be truly said to be punished in others,
when the offenders themselves may escape punishment, thus the sins of Parents
in their Children, and Princes in their Subjects. 3. That an act of dominion in
some may be designed as a proper punishment to others. 4. That the nature of
punishment is not to be measured by the sense of it. Now upon these
concessions, though our Adversaries will not grant, that Christ was properly
punished for our sins, yet they cannot deny but that we may very properly be
said to be punished for our sins in Christ, and if they will yield us this, the
other may be a strife about words. For surely there may be easily imagined as
great a conjunction between Christ and us, as between the several Generations
of the Jews, and that last which was punished in the destruction of Jerusalem:
and though we escape that punishment which Christ did undergo, yet we might
have our sins punished in him, as well as Princes theirs in their Subjects,
when they escape themselves; or rather as Subjects in an innocent Prince, who
may suffer for the faults of his people; if it be said, that these are acts of
mere dominion as to such a one, that nothing hinders but granting it, yet our
sins may be said to be punished in him; as well as Parents sins are punished
properly in mere acts of dominion upon their Children; if it be said, that can
be no punishment where there is no sense at all of it, that is fully taken off
by Crellius; for surely we have as great a sense of the sufferings of Christ,
as the first Generation of the Jews had of the sufferings of the last, before
the fatal destruction of the City, or as Saul had of the punishment of his Sons
after his death. So that from Crellius his own concessions, we have proved,
that our sins may very properly be said to be punished in Christ, although he
will not say, that Christ could be properly punished for our sins; nay he and
the rest of our Adversaries not only deny it, but earnestly contend, that it is
very unjust to suppose it, and repugnant to the rectitude of God's nature to do
it.

III. And so we come to consider the mighty arguments that are insisted on for
the proof of this, Crellius his arguments propounded.
which may be reduced to these three; viz. 1. That there can be no punishment
but what is deserved, but no man can deserve that another should be punished.
2. That punishment flows from revenge, but there can be no revenge where there
has been no fault. 3. That the punishment of one, cannot any ways be made the
punishment of another; and in case it be supposed possible, then those in whose
stead the other is punished, must be actually delivered upon the payment of
that Debt which was owing to God.

1. That one man cannot deserve another punishment, and therefore one cannot
be punished for another; for there is no just punishment, but what is deserved.
This being the main Argument insisted on by Crellius, must be more carefully
considered; but before an answer be made to it, it is necessary that a clear
account be given in what sense it is he understands it, which will be best
done, by laying down his principles, as to the justice of punishments, in a
more distinct method than himself has done; which are these following: 1. That
no person can be justly punished, either for his own or another faults, but he
that has deserved to be punished by some sin of his own: For he still asserts,
Crell. c. 4. sect. 3. p. 239, 240.
That the justice of punishment arises from a man's own fault, though the
actual punishment may be from another: But he that is punished without respect
to his own guilt, is punished undeservedly; and he that is punished
undeservedly, is punished unjustly. 2. That personal guilt being supposed one
man's sin may be the impulsive cause of another's punishment, but they cannot
be the meritorious. The difference between them he thus explains, The cause is
that which makes a thing to be; the impulsive, that which moves one to do a
thing, without any consideration of right that one has to do it: Merit, is
that which makes a man worthy of a thing, either good or bad, and so gives a
right to it; if it be good, to himself; if bad, to him at whose hands he has
deserved it. Now he tells us, that it is impossible. That one man's sins should
make any other deserve punishment, but the person who committed them; but they
may impell one to punish another, and that justly, if the person has otherwise
deserved to be punished, unjustly if he has not. The reason he gives of it is,
That the vitiosity of the act, which is the proper cause of punishment, cannot
go beyond the person of the offender; and therefore can oblige none to
punishment, but him that has committed the fault. And therefore he asserts,
That no man can be justly punished beyond the desert of his own sins, but there
may sometimes be a double impulsive cause of that punishment; viz. His own and
other men's, Crell. ib. sect. 18.
whereof one made that they might be justly punished, the other that they
should be actually: but the latter, he says, always supposes the former, as
the foundation of just punishment; so that no part of punishment could be
executed upon him, wherein his own sins were not supposed as the meritorious
cause of it. These are his two main principles which we must now thoroughly
examine, the main force of his Book lying in them. But if we can prove that it
has been generally received by the consent of mankind, that a person may be
punished beyond the desert of his own actions; if God has justly punished some
for the sins of others, and there be no injustice in one man's suffering by his
own consent for another, then these principles of Crellius will be found not so
firm as he imagines them.

IV. 1. That it has been generally received by the consent of mankind, That a
person by his own consent may be punished beyond the desert of his own actions.
Grot. de Satisf. c. 4.
that a person may be justly punished beyond the desert of his own actions. For
which purpose Grotius objected against Socinus (who appealed to the consent of
Nations, about one being punished for another fault) That the Heathens did
agree, that Children might be punished for their Parents faults, and People for
their Princes, and that corporal punishment might be born by one for another,
did appear by the Persians punishing the whole family for the fault of one. The
Macedonians the near kindred in the case of Treason; some Cities of Greece,
destroying the Children of Tyrants together with them; in all which, the mere
conjunction was supposed a sufficient reason without consent; but in case of
consent, he says, They all agreed in the Justice of some being punished for
the faults of others. Thence the right of killing hostages among the most
civilized nations; and of sureties being punished in capital matters, if the
guilty appear not, who were thence called (...), who were bound to answer body
for body. In which cases, the punishment did extend beyond the desert of the
person who suffered it; for no other reason is assigned of these sufferings,
besides the conjunction of the person, or his consent; but no antecedent guilt
is supposed as necessary, to make the punishment just. We are now to consider
what Crellius does answer to this: 1. As to their acknowledgments of God's
punishing Children for their Parents faults, he gives the same answer which he
does to the examples recorded in Scripture to that purpose, That either they
were punished for the sins of others, but their own sins deserved the
punishment; or that the Parents were punished in the Children, but the Children
were not properly punished. 2. As to punishments among men, he answers two
things; Crell c 4. sect. 5. p. 244.
1. That such persons were truly punished, but not justly: for he acknowledges,
That in such a case it is a proper punishment, and that it is enough in order
to that, that any fault be charged upon a person, whether his own or another,
whether true or false, on the account of which he is supposed worthy to be
punished: And that such a conjunction is sufficient for cruel, angry, or
imprudent men: for wherever there is a place, says he, for anger, there is
likewise for punishment. So that he confesses, there may be a true punishment,
and that which answers all the reason and ends of punishment assigned by him
where there is no desert at all of it in the person who undergoes it. But then
he adds, that this is an unjust punishment, to which I reply, That then the
reason of punishment assigned by Crellius before is insufficient; for if this
answers all the ends of punishments assigned by him, and yet be unjust, then it
necessarily follows, that those ends of punishment are consistent with the
greatest injustice. For he before made punishment to have a natural respect to
anger, and makes the ordinary end of punishment to be a satisfaction of the
desire of revenge in men, yet now grants, that these may be in an unjust
punishment. Neither can it be said, that he considered punishment only
naturally, and not morally; for he tells us, that this is the nature of divine
punishments, which are therefore just, because designed for these ends; but in
case there be no supposal of a fault at all, then he denies that it is a
punishment, but only an affliction, and an exercise of dominion. So that
according to him, wherever there is a proper punishment, it must be just,
when ever God does punish men: and the only difference between God and man
supposable in this case is, that we have assurance God will never use his
dominion unjustly; but that men do so when they make one to suffer for another
fault, notwithstanding a consent and conjunction between the man that committed
the fault, and the person that suffers for him. But this is begging the thing
in question, for we are debating, whether it be an unlawful exercise of power
or no? for we have this presumption, that it is not unlawful, because it may
answer all the ends of punishments, and what way can we better judge, whether a
punishment be just or no, than by that?

Objections answered.
V. But we are to consider, that we do not here take the person we speak of,
abstractly as an innocent person, for then there is no question, but anger and
punishment of one as such is unjust; but of an innocent person as supposed
under an obligation by his own consent to suffer for another. And in this case
we assert, since according to Crellius the natural and proper ends of
punishments may be obtained, and the consent of the person takes away the wrong
done to him in the matter of his sufferings, so far as he has power over
himself, that such a punishment is not unjust. For if it be, it must suppose
some injury to be done; but in this case let them assign where the injury lies;
it cannot be to the public, if the ends of punishments may be obtained by such
a suffering of one for another by a valid consent of the suffering party, it
cannot be to the person in whose room the other suffers, for what injury is
that to escape punishment by another suffering; it cannot be to the suffering
person, supposing that to be true, which the Heathens still supposed, Immerito
quenquam punire est injuste punire. Crell. p. 240.
viz. that every man had a power over his own life. If it be said still, that
the injustice lies in this; that such a one suffers undeservedly, and therefore
unjustly. I answer; if be meant by undeservedly without sufficient cause or
reason of punishment, then we deny that such a one does suffer undeservedly.
Immerito in the Greek Glosses is rendered by (...), and Merito by (...) and
(...), and in Cicero, jure and merito are most commonly joined together. So
that where there is a right to punish, and sufficient reason for it, such a one
does not suffer immerito, i. e. undeservedly. If it be said, that such a one is
not dignus poena, that implies no more than the other, for dignus, or as the
Ancients writ it dicnus, comes from the Greek (...) jus, as Vossius tells us,
ut dignus sit cui tribui aliquid aequum est: so that where there is an equity
in the thing, there is a dignity in the person, or he may be said to be worthy
to undergo it. But does not this lay open the greatest innocence to as great a
desert of sufferings, as the highest guilt? By no means. For we make a
lyableness to punishment, the natural consequent of guilt: and he that has
committed a fault, cannot but deserve to be punished, so that no sufferings of
others can take away the natural consequence of a bad action, which is a desert
of punishment; So that as we say, a wicked action cannot but deserve to be
punished, i. e. there is an agreeableness in reason and nature, that he who
has done ill, should suffer ill; so we say likewise there is necessity in
nature and reason, that he that has thus deserved it, must unavoidably suffer
it. And on the other side, we say, no man by his innocence can deserve to be
punished, i. e. no man's innocence makes him by virtue of that obnoxious to
punishment; but yet we add, that notwithstanding his innocence, the
circumstances may be such that he may be justly punished, and in that sense
deservedly. So that the Question is strangely mistaken, when it is thus put,
Whether an innocent person considered as such, may be justly punished; for no
one asserts that, or is bound to do it; but the true question is, whether a
person notwithstanding his innocence may not by some act of his own will oblige
himself to undergo that punishment which otherwise he did not deserve? which
punishment, in that case is just and agreeable to reason. And this is that
which we assert and plead for. So that innocence here is not considered any
other ways, than whether that alone makes it an unlawful punishment, which
otherwise would be lawful, i. e. whether the Magistrate in such cases, where
substitution is admittable by the Laws of Nations (as in the cases we are now
upon) be bound to regard any more than that the obligation to punishment now
lies upon the person who by his own act has substituted himself in the others
room; and if he proceeds upon this, his action is justifiable and agreeable to
reason. If it be said, that the substitution is unjust, unless the substituted
person has beforehand deserved to be punished; it is easily answered, that
this makes not the matter at all clearer; for either the person is punished for
the former fault, and then there is no substitution; or if he be punished by
way of substitution; then there is no regard at all had to his former fault,
and so it is all one as if he were perfectly innocent.

The instances of Scripture considered.
VI. And by this Crellius his answer to the instances both in Scripture and
elsewhere concerning Childrens being punished for their Parents faults, will
appear to be insufficient, viz. That God does never punish them for their
Parents faults beyond the desert of their own sins, and therefore no argument
can be drawn from thence, that God may punish an innocent person for the sins
of others, because he has punished some for what they were innocent: For the
force of the argument does not lie in the supposition of their innocence, as to
the ground of punishment in general, for we do not deny, but that they may
deserve to be punished for their own faults: but the argument lies in this,
whether their own guilt were then considered as the reason of punishment, when
God did punish them for their fathers faults? And whether they by their own
sins did deserve to be punished not only with the punishment due to their own
miscarriages, but with the punishment due to their fathers too? If not, then
some persons are justly punished, who have not deserved that punishment they
undergo; if they did deserve it, then one person may deserve to be punished for
another sins. If it be said, as it is by Crellius, that his own sins make him
capable of punishment, and God by occasion of others sins does execute that
punishment, which he might not have done for his own. I answer, we are not
enquiring into the bare capacity of punishing, but into the reason of it: was
the reason of punishment his own or his fathers sins? If his own, then he was
punished only for his own sins? if his fathers, then the punishment may be just
which is inflicted without consideration of proper desert of it; for no man
(say they) can deserve to be punished, but for his own sins. But it is said,
that the sins of Fathers are only an impulsive cause for God to punish the
Children according to the desert of their own sins which he might otherwise
have forborne to punish. Then, the sins of the Fathers are no reason why the
Children should be punished; but their own sins are the reason, and their
Fathers the bare occasion of being punished for them. But in Scripture, the
reason of punishment is drawn from the Fathers sins, and not from the
Childrens: For then the words would have run thus, if the Children sin, and
deserve punishment by their own iniquities, then I will take occasion from
their Fathers sins, to visit their own iniquities upon them: Whereas the words
referr to the Fathers sins as the reason of the Childrens punishment. So in the
words of the Law, wherein the reason of punishment ought to be most expressly
assigned, it is not, I will certainly punish the Children, if they continue in
the Idolatry of their Fathers; but, I will visit the sins of the Fathers upon
the Children, Exodus 20.3.
unto the third and fourth Generation of them that hate me. If it were only
because of imitation of the Fathers sins by the Children, there could be no
reason for the limitation to the third and fourth Generation; for then the
reason of punishment would be as long as the imitation continued, whether to
the fourth or tenth Generation: And as Alphonsus a Castro observes, Alph a
Castro de justa haeret. punit. l. 2. c. 10.
If the reason of punishment were the imitation of their Fathers sins, then the
Children were not punished for their Fathers sins, but for their own; for that
imitation was a sin of their own, and not of their Fathers. Besides, if the
proper reason of punishment were the sins of the Children, and the Fathers sins
only the occasion of it, then where it is mentioned that Children are punished
for their Parents sins, the Childrens sins should have been particularly
expressed, as the proper cause of the punishment: But no other reason is
assigned in the Law, but the sins of the Fathers, no other cause mentioned of
Canaan's punishment, but his Father's sin; Gen 9 25.
nor of the punishment of the people in David's time, but his own sin; Lo, 2 Samuel 24.17.
I have sinned, and I have done wickedly, but these sheep, what have they done?
Which is no hyperbolical expression, but the assigning the proper cause of that
judgment to have been his own sin, as the whole Chapter declares: Nor, 2 Samuel
21.5.
of the hanging up of Readiness sons by the Gibeonites, but, that Saul their
Father had plotted their destruction. And in an instance more remarkable than
any of those which Crellius answers; viz. the punishment of the people of
Judah, for the sins of Manasses in the time of Josias; when a through
Reformation was designed among them, the Prince being very good, and all the
places of Idolatry destroyed, such a Passover kept as had not been kept before
in the time of any King in Israel, yet it then follows, Notwithstanding the
Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath, 2 Kin. 23. v. 4 to v.
21.
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
wherewith Manasses had provoked him withal. Who can say here, that the sins of
Manasseh were only the occasion of God punishing the people in the time of
Josias for their own sins, Verse. 22.
Verse. 26.
when their sins were much less in the time of Josias, than in any time
mentioned before, after their lapse into Idolatry? Nay, it is expressly said, 2 Chronicles. ^4.33.
That Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the countries that
pertained to the Children of Israel, and made all that were present in Israel
to serve, even to serve the Lord their God. And all his days they departed not
from following the Lord God of their Fathers: To say, that th^s was done in
hypocrisy, and bare outward compliance, is to speak without book; and if the
reason of so severe punishments had been their hypocrisy, that ought to have
been mentioned; but not only here, but afterward it is said, that the reason
of God's destroying Judah, was for the sins of Manasseh; viz. his Idolatries
and Murder, 2 Samuel 24.3, 4.
which it is said, the Lord will not pardon. And if he would not pardon, then
he did punish for those sins, not barely as the occasion, but as the
meritorious cause of that punishment. What shall we say then? Did the people in
Iosiah's time, deserve to be punished for the sins of Manasseh, Grandfather to
Josiah? Or was God so highly provoked with those sins, that although he did not
punish Manasseh himself upon his repentance, yet he would let the world see how
much he abh^rred them, by punishing those sins upon the people afterward;
although according to the usual proportion of sins and punishments, the sins of
the people in that age did not exceed the sins of other ages, as much as the
punishments they suffered, did exceed the punishments of other ages: which is
necessary according to Crellius his Doctrine; for if God never punishes by
occasion of their Fathers sins, the Children beyond the desert of their own
sins; then it is necessary, that where judgments are remarkably greater, the
sins must be so too; the contrary to which is plain in this instance. By which
we see, that it is not contrary to the Justice of God in punishing, to make the
punishment of some on the account of others sins, to exceed the desert of their
own; measuring that desert, not in a way common to all sin, but when the
desert, of some sins is compared with the desert of others: For it is of this
latter we speak of, and of the method which God uses in punishing sin here,
for the demonstration of his hatred of it, according to which the greatest
punishments must suppose the greatest sins, either of their own, or others
which they suffer for.

Ezekiel. 18.20. explained. Ezekiel. 18.4.20.
VII. But has not God declared, That he will never punish the Children for the
Fathers sins? for the soul that sins it shall die; the son shall not bear
the iniquity of the Father, etc. To which I answer, These words are to be
considered, as an answer to a complaint made by the Jews, soon after their
going into Captivity, which they imputed to God's severity in punishing them
for their Fathers sins. Now the complaint was either true or false; if it were
true, then though this was looked upon as great severity in God, yet it was no
injustice in him; for though God may act severely, he cannot act unjustly: If
it was false, then the answer had been an absolute denial of it, as a thing
repugnant to the Justice of God. Which we do not find here, but that God says
unto them, v. 3. Ye shall not have occasion any more to use this Proverb in
Israel: if the thing had been plainly unjust, which they complained of, he
would have told them, they never had occasion to use it. But we find the
Prophets telling them beforehand, that they should suffer for their Fathers
sins, Ier. 15.3, 4. where he threatens them with destruction and banishment,
because of the sins of Manasseh in Jerusalem; and in the beginning of the
captivity they complain of this, Lam. 5.7. Our Fathers have sinned, and are
not, and we have born their iniquities. And Ier. 31.28. God says by the
Prophet, that he had watched over them to pluck up, and to pull down, and to
destroy, and to afflict: but that he would watch over them to build, and to
plant, Jer. 31.29, 30.
and in those days they shall say no more, the Fathers have eaten sour grapes
and the Childrens teeth are set on edge; but every one shall die for his own
iniquity. Which place is exactly parallel with this in Ezekiel, and gives us a
clear account of it, which is, that now indeed God had dealt very severely with
them, by making them suffer beyond what in the ordinary course of his
providence their sins had deserved; but he punished them not only for their own
sins, but the sins of their Fathers: But lest they should think, they should be
utterly consumed for their iniquities, and be no longer a people enjoying the
Land which God had promised them, he tells them by the Prophets, though they
had smarted so much, by reason of their Fathers sins, this severity should not
always continue upon them; but that God would visit them with his kindness
again, and would plant them in their own Land, then they should see no reason
to continue this Proverb among them, for they would then find, Though their
Fathers had eaten sour grapes, their teeth should not be always set on edge
with it. And if we observe it, the occasion of the Proverb, was concerning the
Land of Israel, (...) supra terra Israel, as the Chaldee Paraphrast renders it
more agreeable to the Hebrew, Ezekiel. 18.2.
than the other Versions do. So that the Land of Israel was the occasion of the
Proverb, by their being banished out of it for their Fathers sins. Now God
tells them, they should have no more occasion to use this Proverb concerning
the Land of Israel; for they, notwithstanding their Fathers sins, should return
into their own Land. And even during the continuance of their captivity, they
should not undergo such great severities for the future, but they should find
their condition much more tolerable than they imagined; only, if any were
guilty of greater sins than others, they should themselves suffer for their own
faults, but he would not punish the whole Nation for them or their own
Posterity. This I take to be the genuine meaning of this place; and I the
rather embrace it, because I find such insuperable difficulties in other
interpretations that are given of it: For to say as our Adversaries do, That
what God says, should not be for the future, was repugnant to his nature and
justice ever to do, is to charge God plainly with injustice in what he had
done: For the Prophets told them they should suffer for the sins of their
Fathers: Which sufferings were the ground of their complaint now, and the
answer here given must relate to the occasion of the complaint; for God says,
They should not have occasion to use that Proverb: Wherein is employed, they
should not have the same reason to complain which they had then. I demand then,
Do not these words imply, That God would not do for the future with them, what
he had done before; if not, the proper answer had been a plain denial, and not
a promise for the future he would not; if they do, then either God properly
punished them for the sins of their Fathers, and then God must be unjust in
doing so, or it was just with God to do it, and so this place instead of
overthrowing will prove, that some may be justly punished, beyond the desert of
their own sins: or else, God did only take occasion by their Fathers sins, to
punish them according to the desert of their own iniquities: But then they had
no cause to complain, that they were punished for any more than their own
iniquities; and withal, then God does oblige himself by his promise here, never
to punish men for the future by the occasion of others sins: which is not only
contrary to their own Doctrine, but to what is plainly seen afterward in the
punishment of the Jews for their Fathers sins, mentioned by our Savior after
this: Matt. 23.35.
And if this be a certain rule of equity which God here says, that he would
never vary from, then the punishing of some on the occasion of others sins,
would be as unjust, as our Adversaries suppose the punishing any beyond the
desert of their own sins to be. But is it not employed, that Gods ways would be
unequal, Ezekiel. 18.25.
if he ever did otherwise than he there said he would do? No, it is not, if by
equal he meant just, for his ways never were, or can be so unequal; but here if
it be taken with a respect to the main dispute of the Chapter, no more is
implied in them, but that they judged amiss concerning God's actions, and that
they were just, when they thought them not to be so: or if at least they
thought his ways very severe, though just, God by remitting of this severity,
would show that he was not only just, but kind; and so they would find his ways
equal, that is, always agreeable to themselves, and ending in kindness to them,
though they hitherto were so severe toward them in their banishment and
captivity. Or if they be taken with a respect to the immediate occasion of them
both, Ezekiel. 18. -- 33. They do not relate to this dispute about Childrens
suffering for their Fathers sins; Ezekiel. 33.20.
but to another, which was concerning a righteous man's sinning and dying in his
sins, and a wicked man's repenting, and living in his righteousness; which were
directly contrary to the common opinion of the Jews to this day, which is, that
God will judge men according to the greatest number of their actions good or
bad: as appears by Maimonides and others. Now they thought it a very hard case,
for a man who had been righteous the far greatest part of his time, if he did
at last commit iniquity, that his former righteousness should signify nothing,
but he must die in his iniquity. To this therefore God answers, that it was
only the inequality of their own ways, which made them think God's ways in
doing so unequal. This then does not make it unequal, for God either to punish
men, upon the occasion, or by the desert of other men's sins, supposing such a
conjunction between them, as there is in the same body of people, to those who
went before them. And Crellius himself grants, Crell. c 4. sect. 15.
That Socinus never intended to prove, that one man's suffering for another
sins was unjust in it self, The deliverance of the guilty by the sufferings of
an innocent person by his own consent, makes not the punishment unjust.
from this place: no, not though we take it in the strictest sense, for one
suffering in the stead of another.

VIII. Having thus far declared, how far it is agreeable to God's Justice, to
punish any persons either by reason of his dominion, or the conjunction of
persons, for the sins of others, and consequently whether any punishment may be
undergone justly beyond the proper desert of their own sins, I now return to
the consent of Mankind in it, on supposition either of a near conjunction, or a
valid consent which must make up the want of dominion in men without it. And
the question still proceeds upon the supposition of those things, that there be
a proper dominion in men over that which they part with for others sakes, and
that they do it by their free consent; and then we justify it not to be
repugnant to the principles of Reason and Justice, for any to suffer beyond the
desert of their own actions. And Crellius his saying, that such a punishment is
true punishment, but not just, is no answer at all to the consent of Nations
that it is so. And therefore finding this answer insufficient; he relies upon
another, Crell. c. 4. sect. 30, 32, 34, etc.
viz. That it was never received by the consent of Nations, that one man should
suffer in the stead of another, so as the guilty should be freed by the others
suffering. For, he says, neither Socinus nor he do deny that one man may be
punished for another sins; but that which they deny is, that ever the innocent
were punished so as the guilty were freed by it; and so he answers, in the case
of Hostages and Sureties, their punishment did never excuse the offenders
themselves. And to this purpose he says, Socinus his argument does hold good,
that though one man's money may become another, yet one man's sufferings cannot
become another: For, says he, if it could, then it would be all one who
suffered, as it is who pays the money due: And then the offender must be
presently released, as the Debtor is upon payment of the debt. This is the
substance of what is said by him upon this Argument. To which I reply; 1. That
this gives up the matter in dispute at present between us; for the present
question is, Whether it be unjust for any one to suffer beyond the desert of
his own actions? Yes, says Crellius, it is, in case he suffers so, as that the
guilty be freed by his sufferings. But we are not enquiring, Whether it be just
for another person to be freed for a man's suffering for him? but whether it be
just for that man to suffer by his own consent, more than his own actions,
without that consent, deserved? The release of another person by virtue of his
sufferings, is a matter of another consideration. Does the freeing or not
freeing of another by suffering, add any thing to the desert of suffering? He
that being wholly innocent, and does suffer on the account of another fault,
does he not suffer as undeservedly, though another be not freed, as if he were?
As in the case of Hostages or Sureties, does it make them at all the more
guilty, because the persons they are concerned for, will be punished
notwithstanding, if they come under the power of those who exacted the
punishment upon them, who suffered for them? Nay, is not their desert of
punishment so much the less, in as much as the guilty are still bound to answer
for their own offenses? If we could suppose the guilty to be freed by the
others sufferings, it would be by supposing their guilt more fully translated
upon those who suffer, and consequently, a greater obligation to punishment
following that guilt. From whence it follows, that if it be just to punish,
when the person is not delivered from whom the other suffers, it is more just
when he is; for the translation of the penalty is much less in the former case,
than in the latter; and what is just upon less grounds of punishment, must be
more just upon greater. I look on this therefore but as a shift of Crellius,
hoping thereby to avoid the consent of mankind in one man's suffering for
another, without attending to the main argument he was upon; viz. The justice
of one person suffering for another. 2. It is a very unreasonable thing, to
make an action unjust for that, which of it self is acknowledged by our
Adversaries to be very just; viz. The pardoning the offenders themselves. If it
were just to suffer, if the other were not pardoned, and it were just to
pardon, whether the other were punished or no, how comes this suffering to be
unjust, merely by the others being pardoned by it: nay, is it not rather an
argument, that those sufferings are the most just, which do so fully answer all
the ends of punishments; that there is then no necessity that the offender
should suffer; but that the Supreme Governor having obtained the ends of
Government, by the suffering of one for the rest, declares himself so well
pleased with it, that he is willing to pardon the offenders themselves. 3. Many
of those persons who have had their sins punished in others, have themselves
escaped the punishment due to the desert of their sins: As is plain in the case
of Ahab, whose punishment was not so great as his sins deserved, because the
full punishment of them was reserved to his posterity. If it be said, as it is
by Crellius, That Ahab was not wholly freed, Crell. c. 4. sect. 25. 1 Kin.
21.19.
his life being taken away for his own sins: That gives no sufficient answer;
for if some part of the punishment was deferred, that part he was delivered
from; and the same reason in this case will hold for the whole as the part. As
is plain in the case of Manasseh, and several others, the guilt of whose sins
were punished on their posterity, themselves escaping it. 4 Our Adversaries
confess, that in some cases it is lawful and just for some to suffer, with a
design that others may be freed by their suffering for them. Thus they assert,
That one Christian, not only may, but ought to lay down his life for another,
if there be any danger of his denying the truth, or he judges him far more
useful and considerable than himself: so likewise a Son for his Father, one
Brother for another, or a Friend, or any, Crell cap. 6. sect. 39.
whose life he thinks more useful than his own. Now I ask, whether a man can
be bound to a thing that is in its one nature unjust? if not, as it is plain he
cannot, then such an obligation of one man to suffer for the delivery of
another cannot be unjust, and consequently the suffering it self cannot be so.
But Crellius says, The injustice in this case lies wholly upon the Magistrate
who admits it: but I ask, wherefore is it unjust in the Magistrate to admit it?
it is because the thing is in it self unjust? if so, there can be no obligation
to do it; and it would be as great a sin to undergo it, as in the Magistrate to
permit it; but if it be just in it self, we have obtained what we contend for,
viz. that it may be just for a man to suffer beyond the desert of his own
actions; for he that lays down his life for his Brethren, does not deserve by
his own actions that very punishment which he undergoes. And if the thing be in
it self just, how comes it to be unjust in him that permits it? 5. The reason
why among men the offenders themselves are punished, is because those were not
the terms, upon which the persons suffered. For if they had suffered upon these
terms that the other might be freed, and their suffering was admitted of by the
Magistrate on that consideration, then in all reason and justice the offenders
ought to be freed on the account of the others suffering for them. But among
men the chief reason of the obligation to punishment of one man for another, is
not, that the other might be freed, but that there may be security given by the
public, that the offenders shall be punished: and the reason of the Sureties
suffering is not to deliver the offender, but to satisfy the Law, by declaring
that all care is taken that the offender should be punished, when in case of
escape, the Surety suffers for him. But it is quite another thing when the
person suffers purposely that others might be freed by his suffering, for then
in case the suffering be admitted, the release of the other is not only not
unjust, but becomes due to him that suffered, on his own terms. Not as though
it followed ipso facto as Crellius fancies, but the manner of release does
depend upon the terms which he who suffered for them, shall make in order to
it. For upon this suffering of one for another upon such terms, the immediate
consequent of the suffering is not the actual discharge but the right to it
which he has purchased; and which he may dispense upon what terms he shall
judge most for his honor. 6. Although one persons sufferings cannot become
another so as one man's Money may; yet one man's sufferings may be a sufficient
consideration on which a benefit may accrue to another. For to that end a
Donation, or such a transferring right from one to another as is in Money, is
not necessary, but the acceptance which it has from him who has the power to
pardon. If he declare that he is so well pleased with the sufferings of one for
another, that in consideration of them, he will pardon those from whom he
suffered; where lies the impossibility or unreasonableness of the thing? For
Crellius g^ants, Crell. ib. sect. 28.
that rewards may be given to others than the persons who did the actions in
consideration of those actions; and why may not the sufferings of one for
others, being purposely undertaken for this end, be available for the pardon of
those whom he suffered for? For a man can no more transfer the right of his
good actions, than of his sufferings. From all which it follows, that one
person may by his own consent, and being admitted thereto by him to whom the
right of punishing belongs, suffer justly; though it be beyond the desert of his
own actions; and the guilty may be pardoned on the account of his sufferings.
Which was the first thing we designed to prove from Crellius, in order to the
overthrowing his own hypothesis. For it being confessed by him that such
sufferings have all that belongs to the nature of punishments, and since God
has justly punished some for the sins which they have not committed; since all
Nations have allowed it just for one man by his own consent to suffer for
another; since it cannot be unjust for the offender to be released by another
sufferings, if he were admitted to suffer for that end, it evidently follows,
contrary to Crellius his main Principle, that a person may be justly punished
beyond the desert of his own actions: And so that first argument of Crellius
cannot hold, that one man cannot by his own consent suffer for another, because
no man can deserve another punishment, and no punishment is just but what is
deserved. His second argument from the nature of anger and revenge has been
already answered in the first Discourse about the nature and ends of
punishments, and his third argument, that one man's punishment cannot become
another, immediately before. And so we have finished our first consideration
of the sufferings of Christ in general, as a punishment of our sins, which we
have showed to be agreeable both to Scripture and Reason.

CHAP. IV.
I. The Death of Christ considered as an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin. II. What
the expiation of sin was by the Sacrifices under the Law; twofold, Civil and
Ritual. The Promises made to the Jews under the Law of Moses, respected them as
a People, and therefore must be temporal. The typical nature of Sacrifices
asserted. III. A substitution in the Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, proved
from Lev. 17.11. and the Concession of Crellius about the signification of
(...) joined with (...). Lev. 10.17. explained. The expiation of uncertain
murder proves a substitution. IV. A substitution of Christ in our room proved
from Christ's being said to die for us; the importance of that phrase
considered. V. In what sense a Surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by
us. VI. Our Redemption by Christ proves a substitution. VII. Of the true notion
of Redemption: that explained, and proved against Socinus and Crellius. No
necessity of paying the price to him that detains captive, where the captivity
is not by force, but by sentence of Law. Christ's death a proper (...): and
therefore the (...) attributed to it, cannot be taken for mere deliverance.

WE come now to consider the death of Christ, The death of Christ considered as
an Expiatory Sacrifice for sin.
as an Expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of mankind: Which is as much denied by
our Adversaries, as that it was a punishment for our sins. For though they do
not deny, That Christ as a Priest did offer up a Sacrifice of Expiation for the
sins of men; yet they utterly deny, That this was performed on earth, or that
the Expiation of sins did respect God, but only us; or, that the death of
Christ, had any proper efficacy toward the expiation of sin, any further than
as it comprehends in it all the consequences of his death, by a strange
Catachresis. I shall now therefore prove, that all things which do belong to a
proper Expiatory Sacrifice, do agree to the death of Christ. There are three
things especially considerable in it: 1. A Substitution in the place of the
Offenders. 2. An Oblation of it to God. 3. An Expiation of sin consequent upon
it. Now these three, I shall make appear to agree fully to the death of Christ
for us.

1. A Substitution in the place of the Offenders. That we are to prove, was
designed in the expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, and that Christ in his
death for us, was substituted in our place. 1. That in the expiatory Sacrifices
under the Law, there was a Substitution of them in the place of the Offenders.
This our Adversaries are not willing to yield us, because of the correspondency
which is so plain in the Epistle to the Hebrews, between those Sacrifices, and
that which was offered up by Christ. We now speak only of those Sacrifices,
which we are sure were appointed of old for the expiation of sin, by God
himself. As to which the great rule assigned by the Apostle was, Heb. 9.22.
That without shedding of blood there was no remission. If we yield Crellius
what he so often urges, Crell. c. 10. sect. 14.
viz. That these words are to be understood, of what was done under the Law;
They will not be the less serviceable to our purpose; for thereby it will
appear, that the means of Expiation lay in the shedding of blood: Which shows,
that the very mactation of the beast to be sacrificed, was designed in order to
the Expiation of sin. To an inquisitive person, the reason of the slaying such
multitudes of beasts in the Sacrifices appointed by God himself among the Jews,
would have appeared far less evident than now it does, since the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews has given us so full an account of them. For it had
been very unreasonable to have thought, that they had been merely instituted
out of compliance with the customs of other Nations, since the whole design of
their Religion, was to separate them from them: and on such a supposition the
great design of the Epistle to the Hebrews signifies very little; which does
far more explain to us the nature and tendency of all the Sacrifices in use
among them, that had any respect to the expiation of sins, than all the customs
of the Egyptians, or the Commentaries of the later Jews. But I intend not now
to discourse at large upon this subject of Sacrifices, either as to the nature
and institution of them in general, or with a particular respect to the
Sacrifice of Christ, since a learned person of our Church, has already
undertaken Crellius upon this Argument, and we hope ever long will oblige the
world with the benefit of his pains. I shall therefore only insist on those
things which are necessary for our purpose, in order to the clearing the
Substitution of Christ in our sle^d, for the expiation of our sins by his
death; and this we say was represented in the expiatory Sacrifices, which were
instituted among the Jews. If we yield Crellius what he after Socinus contends
for; Crell. c. 10. sect. 13.
viz. That the Sacrifice of Christ was only represented in the public and
solemn expiatory Sacrifices for the people, and especially those on the day of
Atonement; We may have enough from them to vindicate all that we assert,
concerning the expiatory Sacrifice of the blood of Christ.

What the Expiation of sin was by the Sacrifices under the Law.
II. For that those were designed by way of Substitution in the place of the
offenders, will appear from the circumstances and reason of their Institution:
But before we come to that, it will be necessary to show what that Expiation
was, which the Sacrifices under the Law were designed for; the not
understanding of which, gives a greater force to our Adversaries Arguments,
than otherwise they would have. For while men assert, that the expiation was
wholly typical, and of the same nature with that expiation which is really
obtained by the death of Christ, they easily prove, That all the expiation
then, was only declarative, and did no more depend on the sacrifices offered,
than on a condition required by God, the neglect of which would be an act of
disobedience in them; and by this means it could represent, say they, no more
than such an expiation to be by Christ; viz. God's declaring that sins are
expiated by him, on the performance of such a condition required in order
thereto, as laying down his life was. But we assert another kind of expiation
of sin, by virtue of the Sacrifice being slain and offered; which was real, and
depended upon the Sacrifice: And this was twofold a Civil, and a Ritual
expiation, according to the double capacity in which the people of the Jews may
be considered, either as members of a Society, subsisting by a body of Laws,
which according to the strictest Sanction of it, makes death the penalty of
disobedience, Deuteronomy. 27.26. but by the will of the Legislator, did admit of a
relaxation in many cases, allowed by himself; in which he declares, That the
death of the beast designed for a Sacrifice should be accepted, instead of the
death of the offender; and so the offense should be fully expiated, as to the
execution of the penal Law upon him. And thus far, I freely admit what Grotius
asserts upon this subject, Grot de Satisf. c. 10.
and do yield that no other offense could be expiated in this manner, but such
which God himself did particularly declare should be so. And therefore no sin
which was to be punished by cutting off, was to be expiated by Sacrifice; as
wilful Idolatry, Murder, etc. Which it is impossible for those to give an
account of, who make the expiation wholly typical; for why then should not the
greatest sins much rather have had sacrifices of expiation appointed for them:
because the Consciences of men would be more solicitous for the pardon of
greater than lesser sins; and the blood of Christ represented by them, was
designed for the expiation of all. From whence it is evident, that it was not a
mere typical expiation; but it did relate to the civil constitution among them.
But besides this, we are to consider the people with a respect to that mode of
Divine Worship which was among them; by reason of which, the people were to be
purified from the legal impurities which they contracted, which hindered them
from joining with others in the public Worship of God, and many Sacrifices
were appointed purposely for the expiating this legal guilt, as particularly,
the ashes of the red heifer, Numb. 19.9. which is there called a purification
for sin. And the Apostle puts the blood of Bulls and of Goats, Heb. 9.12, 13.
and the ashes of a heifer sprinkling the unclean, together; and the effect of
both of them, he says, was to sanctify to the purifying of the flesh; which
implies, that there was some proper and immediate effect of these sacrifices
upon the people at that time, though infinitely short of the effect of the
blood of Christ upon the Consciences of men. By which it is plain, the Apostle
does not speak of the same kind of expiation in those sacrifices, which was in
the Sacrifice of Christ, and that the one was barely typical of the other; but
of a different kind of expiation, as far as purifying the flesh is from purging
the Conscience. But we do not deny, that the whole dispensation was typical,
and that the Law had a shadow of good things to come, and not the very image of
the things, Heb. 10.1.
i. e. a dark and obscure representation, and not the perfect resemblance of
them. There are two things which the Apostle asserts concerning the Sacrifices
of the Law: First, that they had an effect upon the Bodies of men, which he
calls purifying the flesh; the other is, that they had no power to expiate for
the sins of the soul, considered with a respect to the punishment of another
life, which he calls purging the Conscience from dead works; Heb. 9.9.10.4.
and therefore he says, that all the gifts and sacrifices under the Law, could
not make him that did the service perfect, as pertaining to the Conscience, and
that it was impossible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin.
So that the proper expiation which was made by them, was civil and ritual,
relating either to corporal punishment, or to legal uncleanness, from whence
the Apostle well proves the necessity of a higher Sacrifice to make expiation
for sins, as pertaining to the Conscience: But that expiation among the Jews
did relate to that Polity which was established among them, as they were a
people under the Government of a body of Laws distinct from the rest of the
world. And they being considered as such, it is vain to enquire, whether they
had only temporal or eternal promises; for it was impossible they should have
any other than temporal, unless we imagine, that God would own them for a
distinct people in another World as he did in this. For what Promises relate to
a People as such, must consider them as a People, and in that capacity they
must be the blessings of a Society, viz. peace, plenty, number of People,
length of days, etc. But we are far from denying that the general Principles of
Religion did remain among them, viz. that there is a God, and a rewarder of
them that seek him; and all the Promises God made to the Patriarchs, did
continue in force as to another Country, and were continually improved by the
Prophetical instructions among them. But we are now speaking of what did
respect the people in general, by virtue of that Law which was given them by
Moses, and in that respect the punishment of faults being either death or
exclusion from the public Worship, the expiation of them, was taking away the
obligation to either of these, which was the guilt of them in that
consideration.

But does not this take away the typical nature of these sacrifices? No, but it
much rather establishes it. For as Socinus argues, Socin. de servat. l. 2. c.
10. Praelect. Theolog. cap. 22.
If the expiation was only typical, there must be something ^n the type
correspondent to that which is typified by it. As the Brazen Serpent typified
Christ, and the benefit which was to come by him, because as many as looked up
to it were healed. And Noah's Ark is said to be a type of Baptism, because as
many as entered into that were saved from the deluge. So Corinth. 10. the
Apostle says, that those things happened to them in types, v. 11. because the
events which happened to them, did represent those which would fall upon
disobedient Christians. So that to make good the true notion of a Type, we must
assert an expiation that was real then, and agreeable to that dispensation,
which does represent an expiation of a far higher nature, which was to be by
the Sacrifice of the Blood of Christ.

A substitution proved from Lev. 17.11* etc.
III. Which being premised, I come to prove, that there was a substitution
designed of the Beast to be slain and sacrificed in stead of the offenders
themselves. Which will appear from Levit. 17.11. For the life of the flesh is
in the blood, and I have given it you upon the Altar, to make an Atonement for
your Souls; for it is the blood that makes an Atonement for the Soul. The
utmost that Crellius would have meant by this place is, Crell. c. 10. sect 9.
that there is a double reason assigned of the prohibition of eating blood,
viz. that the life was in the blood, and that the blood was designed for
expiation; but he makes these wholly independent upon each other. But we say,
that the proper reason assigned against the eating of the blood, is that which
is elsewhere given, when this precept is mentioned, viz. that the blood was the
life, as we may see Genesis 9.4. Lev. 17.14. but to confirm the reason given, that
the blood was the life; he adds, that God had given them that upon the Altar
for an atonement for their Souls: So the Arabic Version renders it, and
therefore have I given it you upon the Altar, viz. because the blood is the
life. And hereby a sufficient reason is given, why God did make choice of the
blood for atonement, for that is expressed in the latter clause, for it is the
blood that makes an atonement for the Soul; why should this be mentioned here,
if no more were intended but to give barely another reason why they should not
eat the blood? what force is there more in this clause to that end, than in the
foregoing? for therein God had said, that he had given it them for an
atonement. If no more had been intended, but the bare prohibition of common use
of the blood, on the account of its being consecrated to sacred use, it had
been enough to have said, that the blood was holy unto the Lord, as it is in
the other instances mentioned by Crellius, of the holy Ointment and Perfume,
Exodus 30.32, 33.
for no other reason is there given, why it should not be profaned to common
use, 37, 38.
but that it should be holy for the Lord; if therefore the blood had been
forbidden upon that account, there had been no necessity at all of adding, that
the blood was it that made atonement for the soul: which gives no peculiar
reason why they should not eat the blood, beyond that of bare consecration of
it to a sacred use; but if we consider it as respecting the first clause, viz.
For the life of the flesh is in the blood, then there is a particular reason
why the blood should be for atonement, viz. because the life was in that; and
therefore when the blood was offered, the life of the Beast was supposed to be
given instead of the life of the offender. According to that of Ovid,

Ovid. Fast. l. 6.
Hanc animam vobis pro meliore damus. This will be yet made clearer by another
instance produced by Crellius to explain this, which is the forbidding the
eating of fat; which says he, is joined with this of blood, Levit. 3.17. It
shall be a perpetual Statute for your Generations, throughout all your
dwellings, that ye eat neither fat nor blood. To the same purpose, Levit. 7.23,
25, 26. Now no other reason is given of the prohibition of the fat, but this,
Lev. 3.16.
All the fat is the Lords. Which was enough to keep them from eating it. But we
see here in the case of blood somewhat further is assigned, viz. that it was
the life; and therefore was most proper for expiation, the life of the beast
being substituted in the place of the offenders. Which was therefore called
animalis hostia among the Romans, as Grotius observes upon this place, and was
distinguished from those whose entrails were observed; for in those Sacrifices
as Servius says, Servius ad Aeneid. 4.
sola anima Deo sacratur, the main of the Sacrifice lay in shedding of the
blood, which was called the Soul; and so it is (...) in this place. From whence
it appears that such a sacrifice was properly (...), for the same word (...) is
used, both relating to the blood and the soul, that is expiated by it: and the
LXX do accordingly render it, (...), and in the last clause, (...). Eusebius.
demonst. Evang. l. 1. c. 10.
From whence Eusebius calls these Sacrifices of living Creatures, (...), and
afterward says they were (...). Crell. c. 8. sect. 23. Denotat enim vox (...)
eos quorum alter pro alpero animam ponat aut de vo^veat, and sic id malum quod
alteri subcundum erat ejus lo^o subire non detrectet.
And Crellius elsewhere grants, that where (...) is joined with (...), it does
imply, that one does undergo the punishment which another was to have
undergone, which is all we mean by substitution, it being done in the place of
another. From whence it follows, that the Sacrifices under the Law being said
to be (...), does necessarily infer a substitution of them in the place of the
offenders. And from hence may be understood, what is meant by the Goat of the
Sin offering, bearing the iniquity of the Congregation, to make atonement for
them before the Lord, Levit. 10.17. for Crellius his saying, That bearing is as
much as taking away, or declaring that they are taken away, has been already
disproved: And his other answer has as little weight in it; viz. That it is
not said, that the sacrifice did bear their iniquities, but the Priest: For, 1.
The Chaldee Paraphrast, and the Syriack Version, understand it wholly of the
sacrifice. Socin. de servat. l. 3. c. 11.
2. Socinus himself grants, That if it were said, the Priest did expiate by the
sacrifices, it were all one as if it were said, that the sacrifices themselves
did expiate; because the expiation of the Priest was by the sacrifice. Thus it
is plain in the case of uncertain murder, mentioned Deuteronomy. 21. from the first
to the tenth; If a murder were committed in the Land, and the person not known
who did it, a heifer was to have her head cut off by the Elders of the next
City; and by this means they were to put away the guilt of the innocent blood
from among them: The reason of which was, because God had said before, That
blood defiled the Land, Numb. 35.33.
and the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but by the
blood of him that shed it. From whence it appears, that upon the shedding of
blood, there was a guilt contracted upon the whole Land wherein it was shed,
and in case the Murderer was not found to expiate that guilt by his own blood,
then it was to be done by the cutting off the head of a heifer instead of him:
In which case, the death of the heifer was to do as much toward the expiating
the Land, as the death of the Murderer if he had been found: And we do not
contend, that this was designed to expiate the Murderers guilt (which is the
Objection of Crellius against this instance) but that a substitution here was
appointed by God himself, Crell. c. 10. sect. 9.
for the expiation of the people: For what Crellius adds, That the people did
not deserve punishment, and therefore needed no expiation; it is a flat
contradiction to the Text: For the prayer appointed in that case is, Deuteronomy. 21.^.
Be merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay
not innocent blood unto thy people Isreal's Charge, and the blood shall be
expiated: for the same word (...) is used here, which is in the other places
where Expiation is spoken of. So that here must be some guilt supposed, where
there was to be an expiation, and this expiation was performed by the
substitution of a sacrifice in the place of the offender. Which may be enough
at present to show, that a substitution was admitted by the Law, of a sacrifice
instead of the offender, in order to the expiation of guilt; but whether the
offender himself was to be freed by that Sacrifice; depends upon the terms on
which the sacrifice was offered; for we say still, that so much guilt was
expiated, as the sacrifice was designed to expiate; if the sacrifice was
designed to expiate the guilt of the offender, his sin was expiated by it; if
not his, in case no Sacrifice was allowed by the Law, as in that of murder,
then the guilt which lay upon the Land was expiated, although the offender
himself were never discovered.

IV. I now come to prove, A substitution of Christ in our room proved by his
dying for us.
that in correspondency to such a substitution of the sacrifices for sin under
the Law, Christ was substituted in our room for the expiation of our guilt; and
that from his being said to die for us, and his death being called a price of
Redemption for us.

1. From Christ's being said to die for us. By St. Peter, For Christ has also
once suffered for sins, 1 Pet. 3.18.
the just for the unjust; by whom he is also said, to suffer (...), for us, and
for us in the flesh: 2.21.4.1.
By St. Paul, he is said to die (...), for all, and (...), for the ungodly, 2
Cor. 5.14. Romans 5.6. 1 Timothy 2.6. Heb. 2.9.
and to give himself (...), a ransom for all, and, to taste death (...), for
every man: By Caiaphas, speaking by inspiration, Joh. 11.50.
he is said to die (...), for the people. So Christ himself instituting his
last Supper, said, Luke 22.19, 20.
This is my body which was given, and my blood which was shed (...), for you;
and before he had said, That the Son of man came to give his life (...), Matt.
20.28.
a ransom for many. We are now to consider, what arts our Adversaries have made
use of to pervert the meaning of these places, so as not to imply a
substitution of Christ in our room: 1. They say, That all these phrases do
imply no more than a final cause; viz. That Christ died for the good of
mankind; 1 John 3.16.
for the Apostle tells us, Col. 1.^4.
We are bound to lay down our lives for the Brethren, and St. Paul is said to
suffer for the Church. To which I answer; 1. This does not at all destroy that
which we now plead for, viz. That these phrases do imply a substitution of
Christ in our room: For when we are bid to lay down our lives for our brethren,
a substitution is implied therein; and supposing that dying for another, does
signify dying for some benefit to come to him, yet what does this hinder
substitution, unless it be proved, that one cannot obtain any benefit for
another, by being substituted in his room. Nay, it is observable, that although
we produce so many places of Scripture, implying such a substitution, they do
not offer to produce one that is inconsistent with Christ's suffering in our
stead; all that they say is, That (...) does not always signify so, which we
never said it did, who say, that Christ suffered (...), not instead of our
sins, but by reason of them; but we assert, that when one person is said to die
for others, as in the places mentioned, no other sense can be so proper and
agreeable, as dying in the stead of the other. Soc. de servat. l. 2. c. 8.
2. Socinus himself grants, That there is a peculiarity implied in those
phrases, when attributed to Christ, above what they have when attributed to any
other. And therefore, he says, it cannot be properly said, That one Brother
dies for another, or that Paul suffered for the Colossians, or for the Church,
as Christ may truly and properly be said to suffer and to die for us. And from
hence, says he, St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 1.13.
was Paul crucified for you? implying thereby, that there never was or could be
any, who truly and properly could be said to die for Men, but Christ alone. How
unreasonable then is it, from the use of a particle as applied to others, to
infer, that it ought to be so understood, when applied to Christ? when a
peculiarity is acknowledged in the death of Christ for us, more than ever was
or could be in one man's dying for another. 3. It is not the bare force of the
particle (...) that we insist upon; but that a substitution could not be more
properly expressed, than it is in Scripture, by this and other particles, for
not only (...) is used, but (...) too: which Socinus says, Although it may
signify something else besides in the stead of another, Socin. ^b.
yet in such places, where it is spoken of a ransom or price, it signifies the
payment of something which was owing before, as Matt. 17.27. (...), and so he
acknowledges, that where redemption is spoken of, there (...) does imply a
commutation, because the price is given, and the person received, which, he
says, holds in Christ only metaphorically: for the redemption according to him
being only metaphorical, the commutation must be supposed to be so too.

In what sense a surrogation of Christ in our room is asserted by us. Crell. c.
9. sect. 3. ib. sect. 2.
V. And this now leads us to the larger Answer of Crellius upon this argument.
Wherein we shall consider, what he yields, what he denies, and upon what
reasons. 1. He yields, and so he says does Socinus, very freely, a
commutation; but it is necessary that we should thoroughly understand what he
means by it: to that end he tells us, That they acknowledge a twofold
commutation; one of the person suffering, the kind of suffering being changed,
not actually but intentionally, because we are not actually freed by Christ
dying for us, but only Christ died for that end, that we might be freed. And
this commutation, he says, that Socinus does not deny to be implied in the
particle (...), in the places where Christ is said to die for us. Another
commutation, which he acknowledges, is, that which is between a price, and the
thing or person which is bought or redeemed by it; where the price is paid, and
the thing or person is received upon it. And this kind of commutation, he
says, is to be understood in the places where (...) is mentioned; which price,
he says, by accident may be a person; and because the person is not presently
delivered, he therefore says, Ib. sect. 6.
that the commutation is rather imperfect than metaphorical; and although, he
says, (...) does not of it self imply a commutation, yet he grants, that the
circumstances of the places do imply it. 2. He denies, that there is any proper
surrogation in Christ's dying for us, which, he says, Ib. sect. ^.
is such a commutation of persons, that the substituted person is in all
respects to be in the same place and state wherein the other was; and if it
refers to sufferings, then it is when one suffers the very same which the other
was to suffer, he being immediately delivered by the others sufferings. And
against this kind of surrogation, Crellius needed not to have produced any
reasons; for Grotius never asserted it; neither do we say, that Christ suffered
eternal death for us, or that we were immediately freed by his sufferings. But
that which Grotius asserts, that he meant by substitution was this, that unless
Christ had died for us, we must have died our selves, and because Christ has
died, we shall not die eternally. But if this be all, Ib sect. 3.
says Crellius, he meant by it, we grant the whole thing, and he complains of
it as an injury for any to think otherwise of them. If so, they cannot deny but
that there was a sufficient capacity in the death of Christ to be made an
expiatory Sacrifice for the sins of the world. But notwithstanding all these
fair words, Crellius means no more than Socinus did; and though he would allow
the words which Grotius used, yet not in the sense he understood them in; for
Crellius means no more by all this, but that the death of Christ was an
antecedent condition to the expiation of sins in Heaven, Grotius understands by
them, that Christ did expiate sins by becoming a Sacrifice for them in his
death. However, from hence it appears, that our Adversaries can have no plea
against the death of Christ's being an expiatory Sacrifice (from want of a
substitution in our room) since they pro^ess themselves so willing to own such
a substitution. But if they say, that there could be no proper substitution,
because the death of Christ was a bare condition, and no punishment, they then
express their minds more freely; and if these places be allowed to prove a
substitution, I hope the former discourse will prove that it was by way of
punishment. Neither is it necessary, that the very same kind of punishment be
undergone in order to surrogation, but that it be sufficient in order to the
accomplishing the end for which it was designed. For this kind of substitution
being in order to the delivery of another by it, whatever is sufficient for
that end, does make a proper surrogation. For no more is necessary to the
delivery of another person than the satisfying the ends of the Law and
Government, and if that may be done by an equivalent suffering, though not the
same in all respects, then it may be a proper surrogation. If David had
obtained his wish, that he had died for his Son Absalom, it had not been
necessary in order to his Son's escape, that he had hanged by the hair of his
head, as his Son did; but his death, though in other circumstances, had been
sufficient. And therefore when the Lawyers say, subrogatum, sapit naturam ejus
in cujus locum subrogatur: Covarru. 3. To. 1. p. 1. sect. 4. n. 3.
Covarruvias tells us, it is to be understood, secundum primordialem naturam
non secundum accidentalem; from whence it appears, that all circumstances, are
not necessary to be the same in surrogation; but that the nature of the
punishment remain the same. Thus Christ dying for us, to deliver us from death,
and the curse of the Law, he underwent an accursed death for that end; although
not the very same which we were to have undergone, yet sufficient to show, that
he underwent the punishment of our iniquities in order to the delivering us
from it. And if our Adversaries will yield us this, we shall not much contend
with them about the name of a proper surrogation.

Our Redemption by Christ proves a substitution.
VI. But in the matter of Redemption, or where (...) is used, Crellius will by
no means yield that there was a commutation of persons between Christ and us,
but all the commutation he will allow here is only a commutation between a
thing, or a prince, Crell. c. 9. sect. 2.
and a person. Which he therefore asserts, that so there may be no necessity of
Christ's undergoing the punishment of sin in order to redemption, because the
price that is to be paid, is not supposed to undergo the condition of the
person delivered by it. Which will evidently appear to have no force at all, in
case we can prove, that a proper redemption may be obtained by the punishment
of one in the room of another; for that punishment then comes to be the (...)
or price of redemption; and he that pays this, must be supposed to undergo
punishment for it. So that the commutation being between the punishment of one,
and the other redeemed by it, here is a proper commutation of persons implied
in the payment of the price. But hereby we may see that the great subtilty of
our Adversaries is designed on purpose to avoid the force of the places of
Scripture, which are so plain against them: For when these places where (...)
and (...) are joined together, are so clear for a substitution, that they
cannot deny it; then they say, by it is meant only a commutation of a price for
a person; but when the word (...) is urged to prove a redemption purchased by
Christ, by the payment of a price for it, then they deny that (...) does
signify a proper price, but is only taken metaphorically; and yet if it be so
taken, then there can be no force in what Crellius says, for a bare
metaphorical price may be a real punishment: Two things I shall then prove
against Crellius. 1. That the (...) as applied to Christ, is to be taken in a
proper sense. 2. That although it be taken in a proper sense, yet it does not
imply a bare commutation of a price and a person, but a substitution of one
person in the room of another.

Of the true notion of Redemption.
VII. Both these will be cleared from the right stating the notion of redemption
between our Adversaries and us. For they will not by any means have any other
proper notion of redemption but from captivity, and that by the payment of a
price to him that did hold in captivity, and therefore because Christ did not
pay the price to the Devil, there could be no proper sense either of the
redemption, or the price which was paid for it. This is the main strength of
all the arguments used by Socinus and Crellius, Socin. de servat. l. 2. c. 1,
2. Crell. c. 8. sect. 11.
to enervate the force of those places of Scripture which speak of our
redemption by Christ, and of the price which he paid in order to it. But how
weak these exceptions are, will appear upon a true examination of the proper
notion of Redemption, which in its primary importance signifies no more, than
the obtaining of one thing by another as a valuable consideration for it.
Thence redimere anciently among the Latins signified barely to purchase by a
valuable price, for the thing which they had a right to by it; and sometimes to
purchase that which a man has sold before, thence the pactum redimendi in
contracts: still in whatever sense it was used by the Lawyers or others, the
main regard was, to the consideration upon which the thing was obtained, thence
redimere delatorem pecunia, h. e. eum a delatione deducere; Ulpian l. 29. D. de
jure sisci.
so redimere litem; and redemptor litis was one that upon certain consideration
took the whole charge of a suit upon himself: and those who undertook the
farming of customs at certain rates, were called redemptores vectigalium, qui
redempturis auxissent vectigalia, says Livy. Budaeus ad Pandect. p. 189. Live.
l. 23. Festus v. red. Ulpian. l. 39. D. de rei vend.
And all those who undertook any public work at a certain price, redemptores
antiquitus dicebantur, says Festus and Vlpian. From hence it was applied to
the delivery of any person from any inconvenience that he lay under, by
something which was supposed a valuable consideration for it. And that it does
not only relate to captivity, but to any other great calamity, the freedom from
which is obtained by what another suffers; is apparent from these two
remarkable expressions of Cicero to this purpose. Cic ep fam. l. 2. ep. 16.
Quam quidem ego (says he, speaking of the sharpness of the time) a rep. meis
privatis and domesticis incommodis libentissime redemissem. Orat. pro (...).
And more expressly elsewhere, Ego vitam omnium civium, statum orbis terrae,
urbem hanc denique, etc. quinque hominum amentium ac perditorum poena redemi.
Where it is plain, that redemption is used for the delivery of some by the
punishment of others; not from mere captivity, but from a great calamity which
they might have fallen into, without such a punishment of those persons. So
vain is that assertion of Socinus, Soc. de servat. l. 2. c. 1.
Redimere, nihil aliud proprie significat, quam eum captivum e manibus illius,
qui eum detinet, pretio illi dato liberare.

No necessity of paying the price to him that detains captive.
VIII. And yet supposing we should grant that redemption as used in sacred
Authors does properly relate to captivity, there is no necessity at all of that
which our Adversaries contend so earnestly for, viz. That the price must be
paid to him that detains captive. For we may very easily conceive a double sort
of captivity, from whence a redemption may be obtained; the one by force, when
a Captive is detained purposely for advantage to be made by his redemption: and
the other in a judicial manner, when the Law condemns a person to captivity,
and the thing designed by the Law is not a mere price, but satisfaction to be
made to the Law, upon which a redemption may be obtained; now in the former
case it is necessary, that the price be paid to the person who detains, because
the reason of his detaining, was the expectation of the price to be paid; but
in the latter, the detainer is merely the instrument for execution of the Law,
and the price of redemption is not to be paid to him; but to those who are most
concerned in the honor of the Law. Crell. c. 8. sect. 11.
But Crellius objects, that the price can never be said to be paid to God,
because our redemption is attributed to God as the author of it, and because we
are said to be redeemed for his use and service, now, says he, the price can
never be paid to him for whose service the person is redeemed. But all this
depends upon the former mistake, as though we spoke all this while of such a
redemption, as that is of a Captive by force* in whom the detainer is no
further concerned, than for the advantage to be made by him; and in that case
the price must be paid to him who detains, because it would otherwise be
unsuccessful for his deliverance: but in case of captivity by Law, as the
effect of disobedience, the Magistrate who is concerned in the life of the
person, and his future obedience may himself take care that satisfaction may be
given to the Law for his redemption, in order to his future serviceableness.
From hence we see both that the (...) is proper in this case of our redemption,
and that it is not a mere commutation of a price for a person, but a
commutation of one persons suffering for others, which suffering being a
punishment in order to satisfaction is a valuable consideration, and therefore
a price for the redemption of others by it. Which price in this sense does
imply a proper substitution; which was the thing to be proved. Which was the
first thing to be made good concerning the death of Christ being a sacrifice
for sin, viz. that there was a substitution of Christ in our stead as of the
sacrifices of old under the Law; and in this sense the death of Christ was a
proper (...) or price of redemption for us. Nothing then can be more vain, than
the way of our Adversaries, to take away the force of all this, because (...)
is sometimes taken for a mere deliverance without any price, which we deny not;
but the main force of our argument is from the importance of (...), where the
(...) is mentioned; and then we say that (...) when applied to sins, signifies
expiation, (as Heb. 9.15. (...),) but when applied to persons, it signifies the
deliverance purchased by the (...), which is not to be considered as a bare
price, or thing given, but as a thing undergone in order to that deliverance:
and is therefore not only called (...), but (...) too, which Crellius
confesses does imply a commutation, and we have showed, does prove a
substitution of Christ in our place.

CHAP. V.
I. The notion of a sacrifice belongs to the death of Christ, because of the
Oblation made therein to God. Crellius his sense of Christ's Oblation proposed.
II. Against him it is proved, that the Priestly office of Christ had a primary
respect to God, and not to us. Expiatory Sacrifices did divert the wrath of
God. III. Christ not a bare Metaphorical High Priest. IV. Crellius destroys the
Priesthood of Christ by confounding it with the exercise of his Regal Power. V.
No proper expiation of sin belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crellius his
Doctrine be true. VI. Ephesians. 5.2. proves the death of Christ an Expiatory
Sacrifice, and an Oblation to God. The Phrase of a sweet smelling savor,
belongs to expiatory Sacrifices; Crellius his gross notion of it. VII. His
mistakes about the kinds of Sacrifices. Burnt-offerings were Expiatory
Sacrifices both before and under the Law. A new distribution of sacrifices
proposed. VIII. What influence the mactation of the Sacrifice had on Expiation.
The High Priest only to slay the Sin-offering on the day of Atonement; from
whence it is proved that Christ's Priesthood did not begin from his entrance
into Heaven. The mactation in Expiatory Sacrifices no bare preparation to a
Sacrifice, proved by the Jewish Laws, and the customs of other Nations. IX.
Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven, or on Earth?
Of the proper notion of Oblations under the Levitical Law. Several things
observed from thence to our purpose. X. All things necessary to a legal
Oblation, concur in the death of Christ. XI. His entrance into Heaven has no
correspondency with it; if the blood of Christ were no Sacrifice for sin. In
Sin Offerings for the People, the whole was consumed; no eating of the
Sacrifices allowed the Priests, but in those for private Persons. XII. Christ's
exercise of Power in Heaven, in no sense an Oblation to God. XIII. Crellius,
his sense repugnant to the circumstances of the places in dispute. XIV.
Objections answered.

Of the Oblation made by Christ unto God.
I. THE second thing to prove the death of Christ a Sacrifice for sin, is the
Oblation of it to God for that end. Grotius toward the conclusion of his Book,
makes a twofold oblation of Christ, parallel to that of the Sacrifices under
the Law, the first of Mactation, the second of Representation; whereof the
first was done in the Temple, the second in the Holy of Holies; so the first of
Christ was on Earth, the second in Heaven; the first is not a bare preparation
to a Sacrifice, but a Sacrifice: the latter not so much a Sacrifice, as the
commemoration of one already past. Wherefore, since appearing and interceeding
are not properly sacerdotal acts, any further than they depend on the efficacy
of a sacrifice already offered, he that takes away that Sacrifice, does not
leave to Christ any proper Priesthood, against the plain authority of the
Scripture, which assigns to Christ the office of a Priest distinct from that of
a Prophet and a King. To which Crellius replies: That the expiation of sin does
properly belong to what Christ does in Heaven; Crell. c. 10. sect. 45.
and may be applied to the death of Christ only, as the condition by which he
was to enjoy that power in Heaven, Ib. sect. 55.
whereby he does expiate sins; but the Priest was never said to expiate sins
when he killed the beast, but when the blood was sprinkled or carried into the
Holy of Holies, to which the Oblation of Christ in Heaven does answer: but
mactation, says he, Ib. sect. 47.
was not proper to the Priests, but did belong to the Levites also. And Christ
was not truly a Priest, Ib. sect. 53.
while he was on Earth, but only prepared by his sufferings to be one in
Heaven, where by the perpetual care he takes of his People, and exercising his
power for them, Ib. sect. 54. Sect. 56.
he is said to offer up himself, and intercede for them, and by that means he
discharges the Office of a High Priest for them. For his Priestly Office, he
says, is never in Scripture mentioned as distinct from his Kingly, but is
comprehended under it; and the great difference between them is, that one is of
a larger extension than the other is, the Kingly Office extending to punishing,
and the Priestly only to expiation. This is the substance of what Crellius more
at large discourses upon this subject. Wherein he asserts these things. That
the Priestly Office of Christ does not in reference to the expiation of sins
respect God but us; his Intercession and Oblation wherein he makes the
sacerdotal function of Christ to consist, being the exercise of his power for
the good of his People. 2. That Christ did offer up no Sacrifice of expiation
to God upon Earth, because the mactation had no reference to expiation, any
other than as a preparation for it; and Christ not yet being constituted a High
Priest till after his Resurrection from the dead. Against these two assertions
I shall direct my following discourse, by proving; 1. That the Priestly Office
of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not to us. 2. That Christ did
exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation of himself to God upon the Cross.

That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not us.
Crell. in Heb. 5.1.
II. 1. That the Priestly Office of Christ had a primary respect to God, and not
to us; which appears from the first Institution of a High Priest, mentioned by
the Apostle, Heb. 5.1. For every High Priest taken from among men, is ordained
for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and
sacrifices for sins: Id est, says Crellius elsewhere, ut procuret and peragat
ea quae ad colendum ac propitiandum numen pertinent; i. e. That he may perform
the things which appertain to the worshipping and propitiating God: We desire
no more, but that the propitiating God, may as immediately be said to respect
him, as the worshipping of God does; or let Crellius tell us, what sense the
propitiating God will bear; if all that the High Priest had to do, did
immediately respect the people: nay, he says not long after, That it was the
chief Office of a High Priest, to plead the cause of sinners with God, and to
take care, that they may find him kind and propitious, and not angry or
displeased. In what sense God was said to be moved by the Expiatory Sacrifices,
is not here our business to discuss; it is sufficient for our purpose, that
they were instituted with a respect to God, so as to procure his favor, and
divert his wrath. In which sense, the Priest is so often in the Levitical Law
said, by the offering up of Sacrifices, to expiate the sins of the people. But
Crellius says, Crell. c. 1^* sect. 3.
This ought not so to be understood, as though God by Expiatory Sacrifices,
were diverted from his anger, and inclined to pardon; which is a plain
contradiction, not only to the words of the Law, but to the instances that are
recorded therein; as when Aaron was bid in the time of the Plague to make an
Atonement for the people, Numb. 16.46.
for there is wrath gone out from the Lord: and he stood between the living and
the dead, Verse 48.
and the plague was stayed. Was not God's anger then diverted here, by the
making this Atonement? The like instance we read in David's time, that by the
offering burnt-offerings, etc. the Lord was entreated for the Land, 2 Samuel
24.25.
and the plague was stayed from Israel: By which nothing can be more plain,
than that the primary intention of such Sacrifices, and consequently of the
Office of the Priest who offered them, did immediately respect the Atoning God:
But yet Crellius urges, This cannot be said of all, or of the most proper
Expiatory Sacrifices; but we see it said of more than the mere Sacrifices for
sin, as appointed by the Law; viz of burnt-offerings, and peace offerings, and
incense, in the examples mentioned. So that these Levitical Sacrifices did all
respect the atoning God; although in some particular cases, different
Sacrifices were to be offered; for it is said, the burnt-offering was to make
atonement for them, Lev. 1.4.4.20.5.7.
as well as the sin and trespass-offerings (excepting those sacrifices which
were instituted in acknowledgment of God's Sovereignty over them, and presence
among them, as the daily Sacrifices, the meat and drink offerings, or such as
were merely occasional, etc.) Thus it is said, 1 Chronicles. 6.49.
that Aaron and his sons were appointed to make an Atonement for Israel: Grot.
in Heb. 5.1.
So that as Grotius observes out of Philo, The High Priest was a Mediator
between God and man, by whom men might propitiate God, and God dispense his
favors to men. But the means whereby he did procure favors to men, was by
atoning God by the Sacrifices, which he was by his Office to offer to him. We
are now to consider, how far this holds in reference to Christ, for whose sake
the Apostle brings in these words; and surely would not have mentioned this as
the primary Office of a High Priest, in order to the proving Christ to be our
High Priest, after a more excellent manner than the Aaronical was, unless he
had agreed with him in the nature of his Office, and exceeded him in the manner
of performance.

III. For the Apostle both proves, that he was a true and proper, Christ no
barely metaphorical High Priest.
and not a bare Metaphorical High Priest, and that in such a capacity, he very
far exceeded the Priests after the Order of Aaron. But how could that possibly
be, if he ^ailed in the primary Office of a High Priest; viz. In offering up
gifts and sacrifices to God? If his Office as High Priest did primarily respect
men, when the Office of the Aaronical Priest did respect God? To avoid this,
(...) c. 10. sect 3.
Crellius makes these words to be only an allusion to the Legal Priesthood, and
some kind of similitude between Christ and the Aaronical Priests; but it is
such a kind of allusion, that the Apostle designs to prove Christ to be ^n
High Priest by it; and which is of the greatest force, he proves the necessity
of Christ's having somewhat to offer from hence: Heb 8 2.
For every High Priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices; wherefore it
is of necessity, that this man have somewhat also to offer. This is that which
(...) looks at as the peculiar and distinguishing character of a High Priest;
for (...) for others, and having compassion upon them, might be done by others
besides the High Priest; but this was that, without which he could not make
good his name, what order soever he were of. I^ Christ then had no proper
sa^rifice to offer up to God, to what purpose does the Apostle so industriously
set himself to prove, that he is our High Priest? when he must needs fail in
the main thing, according to his own assertion? How easy had it been for the
Jews, to have answered all the Apostles Arguments concerning the Priesthood of
Christ, if he had been such a Priest, and made no other Oblation than Crellius
allows him? When the Apostle proves against the Jews, that there was no
necessity, that they should still retain the Mosaical Dispensation, because now
they had a more excellent High Priest than the Aaronical were; and makes use of
that character of a High Priest, that he was one taken out from among men, in
things pertaining to God to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins: Well, say the
Jews, we accept of this character, but how do you prove concerning Christ, that
he was such a one? Did he offer up a Sacrifice for sin to God upon earth, as
our Highpriests do? No, says Crellius, his sufferings were only a preparation
for his Priesthood in Heaven: But did he then offer up such a Sacrifice to God
in Heaven? Yes, says Crellius, he made an Oblation there. But is that Oblation
such a Sacrifice to God for sin, as our Highpriests offer? Yes, says
Crellius, it may be called so by way of allusion. Well then, say they, you
grant that your Jesus is only a High Priest by way of allusion, which was
against your first design to prove; viz. That he was a true High Priest, and
more excellent than ours. But suppose it be by way of allusion, does he make
any Oblation to God in Heaven or not? No, says Crellius, really and truly he
does not: for all his Office does respect us, but the benefits we enjoy coming
originally from the kindness of God, you may call it an Oblation to God if you
please. But how is it possible then, say the Jews, you can ever convince us,
that he is any High Priest, or Priest at all, much less, that he should ever
exceed the Aaronical Highpriests in their Office? for we are assured, that
they do offer Sacrifices for sin, and that God is atoned by them: but if your
High Priest make no atonement for sin, he falls far short of ours, and
therefore we will still hold to our Levitical Priesthood, and not forsake that
for one barely Metaphorical, and having nothing really answering the name of a
High Priest. Thus the force of all the Apostles Arguments is plainly taken
away, by what Crellius and his Brethren assert concerning the Priesthood of
Christ. But Crellius thinks to make it good by saying, Crell. cap. 10. sect. 3.
Id. sect. 56. p. 547.
That things that are improper and figurative, may be far more excellent than
the things that are proper, to which they are opposed; so that Christ's
Priesthood may be far more excellent than the Aaronical, although his be only
figurative, and the other proper. But the question is not, Whether Christ's
Priesthood by any other adventitious considerations, as of greater Power and
Authority than the Aaronical Priests had, may be said to be far more excellent
than theirs was; but, Whether in the notion of Priesthood, it does exceed
theirs? Which it is impossible to make good, unless he had some proper Oblation
to make unto God, which in it self did far exceed all the Sacrifices and
Offerings under the Law.

IV. But what that oblation of Christ in Heaven was, Crellius destroys the
Priesthoo^ of Christ
which had any correspondency with the Sacrifices under the Law, our
Adversaries can never assign; nay, when they go about it, they speak of it in
such a manner, as makes it very evident they could heartily have wished the
Epistle to the Hebrews had said as little of the Priesthood of Christ, as they
say, any other part of the New Testament does. Smalc c. Smiglect. Crell. cap.
^^. p. 544.
Thence Smalcius and Crellius insist so much upon the Priesthood of Christ,
being distinctly mentioned by none but the Author to the Hebrews; which, say
they, had surely been done, if Christ had been a proper Priest, or that Office
in him distinct from his Kingly. Which sufficiently discovers what they would
be at; viz. That the Testimony of the Author to the Hebrews, is but a single
Testimony in this matter; and in truth, they do (as far as is consistent with
not doing it in express words) wholly take away the Priesthood of Christ: For
what is there which they say his Priesthood implies, which he might not have
had, supposing he had never been called a Priest? His being in Heaven, does not
imply that he is a Priest, unless it be impossible for any but Priests ever to
come there: His Power and Authority over the Church, does not imply it; for
that power is by themselves confessed to be a Regal power: his readiness to use
that power, cannot imply it, which is the thing Smalcius insists on; for his
being a King of the Church, does necessarily imply his readiness to make use of
his power for the good of his Church. His receiving his power from God, does
not imply that he was a Priest, although Crellius insist on that, unless all
the Kings of the Earth are Priests by that means too, and Christ could not have
had a subordinate power as King, as well as Priest. But his death is more
implied, says Crellius, in the name of a Priest than of a King; true, if his
death be considered as a Sacrifice, but not otherwise: For what is there of a
Priest in bare dying, do not others so too? But this represents greater
tenderness and care in Christ, than the mere title of a King: What kind of King
do they imagine Christ the mean while, if his being so, did not give the
greatest encourag^ment to all his subjects? nay, it is plain, the name of a
King must yield greater comfort to his people, because that implies his power
to defend them, which the bare name of a Priest does not. So that there could
be no reason at all given, why the name of a High Priest should be at all given
to Christ, if no more were implied in it, than the exercise of his power with
respect to us, without any proper oblation to God: For here is no proper
Sacerdotal act at all attributed to him; so that upon their hypothesis, the
name of High Priest, is a mere insignificant title used by the Author to the
Hebrews, without any foundation at all for it. By no means, says Crellius, for
his expiation of sin is employed by it, which is not implied in the name of
King: True, if the expiation of sin were done by him in the way of a Priest by
an oblation to God, which they deny; but though they call it Expiation, they
mean no more than the exercise of his divine power in the delivering his
people. But what parallel was there to this in the expiation of sins by the
Levitical Priesthood? that was certainly done by a Sacrifice offered to God by
the Priest, Levit. 4.26. v. ^4, 35.
who was thereby said to expiate the sins of the people: how comes it now to be
taken quite in another sense, and yet still called by the same name?

No proper expiation of sin belongs to Christ in Heaven, if Crelleus his
doctrine be true*
V. But this being the main thing insisted on by them, I shall prove from their
own Principles, that no expiation of sin in their own sense can belong to
Christ in Heaven, by virtue of his Oblation of himself there, and consequently
that they must unavoidably overthrow the whole notion of the Priesthood of
Christ. For this we are to consider, what their notion of the expiation of sins
is, which is set down briefly by Crellius in the beginning of his discourse of
Sacrifices, There is a twofold power, says he, Crell. c. 10. sect. 2.
of the sacrifice of Christ toward the expiation of sin, one taking away the
guilt and the punishment of sin, and that partly by declaring, that God will do
it, and giving us a right to it, partly by actual deliverance from punishment;
the other is by begetting Faith in us, and so drawing us off from the practice
of sin: Now the first and last Crellius and Socinus attribute to the death of
Christ, as that was a confirmation of the Covenant God made for the remission
of sin; and as it was an argument to persuade us to believe the truth of his
Doctrine; and the other, viz. the actual deliverance from punishment, is by
themselves attributed to the second coming of Christ; for then only, they say,
the just shall be actually delivered from the punishment of sin, viz. eternal
death; and what expiation is there now left to the Oblation of Christ in
Heaven? Does Christ in Heaven declare the pardon of sin any other way than it
was declared by him upon Earth? What efficacy has his Oblation in Heaven upon
persuading men to believe? or is his second coming when he shall sit as Judge,
the main part of his Priesthood; for then the expiation of sins in our
Adversaries sense is most proper? And yet nothing can be more remote from the
notion of Christ's Priesthood, than that is; so that expiation of sins
according to them can have no respect at all to the Oblation of Christ in
Heaven, or (which is all one in their sense) his continuance in Heaven to his
second coming. Crell. c. 10. sect. 3. p. 476.
Yes, says Crellius, his continuance there, is a condition in order to the
expiation by actual deliverance, and therefore it may be said, that God is as
it were moved by it to expiate sins. The utmost then, that is attributed to
Christ's being in Heaven, in order to the expiation of sins, is that he must
continue there without doing any thing in order to it; for if he does, it must
either respect God or us: but they deny (though contrary to the importance of
the words, and the design of the places where they are used) that the terms of
Christ's interceding for us, or being an Advocate with the Father for us, Heb.
7.25. Romans 8.3. 1 John 2.1.
do note any respect to God, but only to us; if he does any thing with respect
to us in expiation of sin, it must be either declaring, persuading, or actual
deliverance; but it is none of these by their own assertions; and therefore
that which they call Christ's Oblation, or his being in Heaven, signifies
nothing as to the expiation of sin: and it is unreasonable to suppose that a
thing, which has no influence at all upon it, should be looked on as a
condition in order to it. From whence it appears, that while our Adversaries do
make the exercise of Christ's Priesthood to respect us and not God, they
destroy the very nature of it, and leave Christ only an empty name without any
thing answering to it: But if Christ be truly a High Priest, as the Apostle
asserts that he is, from thence it follows that he must have a respect to God
in offering up gifts and sacrifices for sin: which was the thing to be proved.

VI. 2. Ephesians. 5.2. Proves the death of Christ an Expiatory Sacrifice and an
oblation to God.
That Christ did exercise this Priestly Office in the Oblation of himself to
God upon the Cross. Which I shall prove by two things. 1. Because the death of
Christ is said in Scripture to be an Offering, and a Sacrifice to God. 2.
Because Christ is said to offer up himself antecedently to his entrance into
Heaven. 1. Because the death of Christ is said to be an offering and a
sacrifice to God, which is plain from the words of St. Paul, Ephesians. 5.2.
as Christ also has loved us, and given himself for us, an offering and a
sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor. Our Adversaries do not deny that
the death of Christ is here called an Oblation, but they deny, That it is meant
of an Expiatory Sacrifice, but of a Free Will offering; Crell. c. 10. sect. 47.
and the reason Crellius gives is, because that phrase of a sweet smelling
savor is generally and almost always used of sacrifices which are not
Expiatory; but if ever they be used of an Expiatory Sacrifice, they are not
applied to that which was properly expiatory in it, viz. the offering up of the
blood, for no smell, says he, went up from thence, but to the burning of the
fat, and the Kidneys, which although required to perfect the expiation, yet not
being done till the High Priest returned out of the Holy of Holies, has
nothing correspondent to the expiatory Sacrifice of Christ, where all things
are perfected before Christ the High Priest goes forth of his Sanctuary. How
inconsistent these last words are with what they assert concerning the
expiation of sin by actual deliverance at the great day, the former discourse
has already discovered. For what can be more absurd, than to say, that all
things which pertain to the expiation of sin are perfected before Christ goes
forth from his Sanctuary, and yet to make the most proper expiation of sin to
lie in that act of Christ which is consequent to his going forth of the
Sanctuary, viz. when he proceeds to judge the quick and the dead. But of that
already. We now come to a punctual and direct answer, as to which two things
must be enquired into. 1. What the importance of the phrase of a sweet smelling
savor is? 2. What the Sacrifices are to which that phrase is applied? 1. For
the importance of the phrase. The first time we read it used in Scripture was
upon the occasion of Noah's Sacrifice after the flood, of which it is said,
Genesis 8.20, 21.
that he offered burnt-offerings on the Altar, and the Lord smelled a savor of
rest, or a sweet savor. Which we are not wont to imagine in a gross corporeal
manner, as Crellius seems to understand it, when he says, the blood could not
make such a savor as the fat and the Kidneys; for surely, none ever thought
the smell of flesh burnt was a sweet smelling savor of it self, and we must
least of all imagine that of God, which Porphyry says, was the property only
of the worst of Demons to be pleased, and as it were, to grow fat, (...), with
the smell and vapors of blood, Porphyr. de abstinent. l. 2. sect. 42.
and flesh, (by which testimony, it withal appears, that the same steams in
Sacrifices were supposed to arise from the blood as the flesh:) But we are to
understand that phrase in a sense agreeable to the divine nature, which we may
easily do, if we take it in the sense the Syriack Version takes it in, when it
calls it, Odorem placabilitatis, or the savor of rest, as the word properly
signifies; for (...) is the word formed from the Verb (...) which is used for
the resting of the Ark, v. 4. of the same Chapter, and so it imports a rest
after some commotion, and in that sense is very proper to Atonement, or that
whereby God makes his anger to rest; so Aben Ezra upon that place expounds the
Savor of rest, to be such a one which makes God cease from his anger: Thence
in Hiphil (...) signifies to appease, or to make peace; in which sense it is
used by R. Solom. upon Isa. 27.5. Munster tells us the sense is, Deus nunc
quievit ab ira and placatus fuit, and to the same purpose Vatablus: which sense
is most agreeable to the design of the following words, in which God expresses
his great kindness, and the Lord said in his heart, I will not again curse the
ground any more for man's sake; which are words highly expressing, how much God
was propitiated by the Sacrifice which Noah offered, Joseph. Antiq. Iud. l. 1.
c. 4.
and therefore Josephus does well interpret this to be a proper Expiatory
Sacrifice; that God would now be atoned, and send no more such a deluge upon
the world; which he says was the substance of Noah's prayer, when he offered
this Burnt-offering, and that God would receive his Sacrifice, (...), That he
would no more receive such displeasure against the earth: So that the first
time ever this expression was used, it is taken in the proper sense of an
Expiatory Sacrifice.

VII. Crellius his mistakes about the kinds of sacrifices.
And by that the second enquiry may be easily resolved; viz. What kind of
Sacrifices it does belong to, which we see in the first place is, to Expiatory,
which Crellius denies by a great mistake of the sense of the phrase, and of the
nature of the Offerings, concerning which this expression is most used; viz.
Holocausts, as though those were not Expiatory Sacrifices: But if we can make
it appear, that the Holocausts were Expiatory Sacrifices, then it will follow,
that this phrase does most properly agree to a Sacrifice designed for
Expiation. But Crellius here speaks very confusedly concerning Sacrifices,
opposing Holocausts and Freewill-offerings to Expiatory Sacrifices; whereas the
Freewill-offerings might be Expiatory as well as Eucharistical; that
denomination not respecting the end the Sacrifices were designed for, but that
the precise time of offering them was not determined by the Law; as in the
stated and solemn Sacrifices. For the general distribution of Sacrifices, seems
proper into Propitiatory and Eucharistical; which distinction is thought by
some to hold from the first time we read of Sacrifices in Scripture; because
the Sacrifice of Cain was of the fruits of the ground, Genesis 4.3, 4.
and of Abel, of the Firstlings of his flock. Although there seems to be
nothing meant by this difference of Sacrifices, but the diversity of their
employments, either of them Sacrificing according to them; and I cannot say
what some do, that the reason of God's rejecting Cain's Sacrifice, was because
it was not designed for expiation. But the practice of after ages, wherein we
have a fuller account of the grounds of the several Sacrifices, makes it
appear, that the Expiatory Sacrifices before the Law, were all Burnt-offerings;
and of all those who were not under the particular obligation of that Law: As
is plain in the Expiatory Sacrifices of Job for h^s Sons, Job 1.5.42.8.
and for his fr^ends, which were Burnt-offerings; and among the Jews, all the
Sacrifices that were offered up before the Levitical Law, were, as the Jews
themselves tell us, only Burnt-offerings: And after the settling of their
Worship among themselves, Seldom de jure not. and gent. apud Ebrae. l. 3. c. 2.
etc. 6.
they did receive Burnt-offerings for expiation from strangers, as Mr. Seldom
at large proves from the Jewish Writers. It seems then very strange, that since
Burnt-offerings before the Law were Expiatory, and under the Law they continued
so for strangers, they should be of another nature for the Jews themselves. But
what reason is there for it in the Text? not the least that I can find, but
expressly the contrary. For in the beginning of Leviticus, where the Law for
Burnt-offerings is delivered, the words are, Levit. 1.^.
And he shall put his hand upon the head of the Burnt-offering, and it shall be
accepted for him, to make atonement for him; which is as much as is ever said
of any Expiatory Sacrifices: And in the Verse before, where we render (...) of
his own voluntary will; it is by the vulgar Latin rendered, Ad placandum sibi
Dominum; by the Syriack Version, Ad placationem sibi obtinendam a Domino; and
to the same purpose by the Chaldee Paraphrast; but no one Version considerable
that so renders it, as to make Burnt-offerings to be Free Will offerings here,
Lev. 7.16.22.18 etc. Lev. 6.7.
which are spoken of distinctly, and by themselves afterward: And the Chaldee
Paraphrast, Jonathan thus explains, This is the Law of the Burnt-offering; i.
e. Quod venit ad expiandum pro cogitationibus cordis; but although the Jews be
not fully agreed what the Burnt-offerings were designed to expiate, yet they
consent that they were of an Expiatory nature. Which might make us the more
wonder, that Crellius and others should exclude them from it, but the only
reason given by him is, Crell. c. 10. p. 530.
because they are distinguished from Sacrifices for sin, as though no
Sacrifices were of an Expiatory nature but they, and then the
Trespass-offerings must be excluded too, for they are distinguished from
Sin Offerings as well as the other. The ignorance of the Jews in the reason of
their own customs, has been an occasion of great mistakes among Christians,
concerning the nature of them; when they judge of them according to the blind
or uncertain conjectures which they make concerning them: So that the Text is
oft-times far clearer than their Commentaries are. Setting aside then the
intricate and unsatisfactory niceties of the Jewish Writers, about the several
reasons of the Burnt-offerings and Sin and Trespass-offerings, and the
differences they make between them, which are so various and incoherent, I
shall propose this conjecture concerning the different reasons of them, viz.
That some Sacrifices were assumed into the Jewish Religion, which had been long
in use in the world before, and were common to them with the Patriarchs, and
all those who in that age of the world did fear and serve God, and such were
the Burnt-offerings for expiation of sin, and the fruits of the earth by way of
gratitude to God. Other Sacrifices were instituted among them, with a
particular respect to themselves, as a people governed by the Laws of God: And
these were of several sorts; 1. Symbolical, of God's presence among them, such
was the daily Sacrifice, instituted as a testimony of God's presence, Exodus 29.
from v 38. to the end. 2. Occasional, for some great mercies vouchsa^ed to
them, as the Passover and the Solemn Festivals, etc. 3. Expiatory, for the sins
committed against their Law: And these were of three sorts; 1. Such as were
wholly consumed to the honor of God, which were the Burnt-offerings. 2. Such,
of which some part was consumed upon the Altar, and some part sell to the share
of the Priests; and these were either sins particularly enumerated by God
himself, under the (...), or else generally comprehended under the (...) as
being allowed to be expiated, because committed through inadvertency. 3. Such,
whereof a less part was consumed, as in the Peace Offerings of the
Congregation, mentioned Levit. 23.19. whereof the blood was sprinkled, only the
inwards burnt, and the flesh not eaten by the persons that offered them, as it
was in the Peace Offerings of particular persons (of which as being private
Sacrifices, I have here no occasion to speak) but only by the Priests in the
Court: and these had something of expiation in them: For thence, says
Vatablus, the Peace Offering was called by the Greeks (...), i. e. Expiatorium,
and the LXX. commonly render it, (...) (...), and several of the Jews think the
reason of the name was, That it made peace between God and him that offered it:
But the great reason I insist on, is, Because all the things which were used in
an Expiatory Sacrifice, were in this too; the slaying of the Beast, the
sprinkling of the blo^d, and the consumption of some part of it upon the Altar
as an Oblation to God, which are the three ingredients of an Expiatory
Sacrifice; for the shedding of the blood, noted the bearing the punishment of
our iniquity; and, the sprinkling of it on the Altar, and the consuming of the
part of the Sacrifice, or the whole there, that it was designed for the
expiation of sin. From whence it follows, that the phrase of a sweet smelling
savor, being applied under the Law to Expiatory Sacrifices, is very properly
used by St. Paul, concerning Christ's giving up himself for us. so that from
this phrase, nothing can be inferred contrary to the Expiatory nature of the
death of Christ, but rather it is fully agreeable to it.

VIII. What influence the mactation of the sacrifice had on expiation.
But Crellius has yet a farther Argument, to prove that Christ's death cannot
be here meant as the Expiatory Sacrifice; viz. That the notion of a sacrifice,
does consist in the oblation whereby the thing is consecrated to the honor and
service of God, Crell. c. 10 p. 533.
to which the mactation is but a bare preparation, which he proves, Because the
slaying the sacrifice might belong to others besides the Priests, Ezekiel. 44.10,
11. but the oblation only to the Priests. To this I answer, 1. The mactation
may be considered two ways, either with a respect to the bare instrument of
taking away the life, or to the design of the Offerer of that which was to be
sacrificed: As the mactation has a respect only to the instruments, so it is
no otherways to be considered than as a punishment; but as it has a respect to
him that designs it for a Sacrifice, so the shedding of the blood, has an
immediate influence on the expiation of sin. And that by this clear Argument,
The blood is said to make an Atonement for the soul; Levit. 17.11.
and the reason given is, because the life of the flesh is in the blood: So
that which was the life, is the great thing which makes the Atonement; and when
the blood was shed, the life was then given; from whence it follows, that the
great efficacy of the sacrifice for Atonement lay in the shedding of the blood
for that end. Thence the Apostle attributes remission of sins to the (...), the
shedding of the blood; Heb. 9.22.
and not to the bare Oblation of it on the Altar, or the carrying it into the
Holy of Holies, both which seem to be nothing else but a more solemn
representation of that blood before God, which was already shed for the
expiation of sins, which was therefore necessary to be performed, that the
concurrence of the Priest might be seen with the sacrifice in order to
expiation. For if no more had been necessary but the bare slaying of the
Beasts, which was the meanest part of the service, the people would never have
thought the institution of the Priesthood necessary, and least of all that of
the High Priest, unless some solemn action of his had been performed, such as
the entering into the Holy of Holies, on the day of expiation, and carrying it,
and sprinkling the blood of the sin-offering in order to the expiation of the
sins of the people. And it is observable, that although the Levitical Law be
silent in the common Sacrifices, who were to kill them whether the Priests or
the Levites; yet on that day whereon the High Priest was to appear himself for
the expiation of sin, it is expressly said, that he should not only kill the
bullock of the sin-offering, Levit. 16.11, 15.
which is for himself, but the goat of the sin offering, which is for the
people. And although the Talmudists dispute from their Traditions on both
sides, whether any one else might on the day of expiation, slay the
sin offerings besides the High Priest; yet it is no news for them to dispute
against the Text, and the Talmud it self is clear, that the High Priest did it.
From whence it appears, there was something peculiar on that day as to the
slaying o^ the sin offerings; (...) cap 4. sect. ^ cap. ^ sect. 4.
and if our Adversaries opinion hold good, that the Sacrifices on the day of
expiation did, if not alone, yet chiefly represent the Sacrifice of Christ, no
greater argument can be brought against themselves than this is, for the office
of the High Priest did not begin at h^s carrying the blood into the Holy of
Holies, but the slaying the sacrifice did belong to him too: from whence it
will unavoidably follow, that Christ did not enter into his Office of
High Priest, when he entered into Heaven, but when the Sacrifice was to be slain
which was designed for the expiation of sins. It is then to no purpose at all,
if Crellius could prove that sometimes in ordinary Sacrifices, (which he will
not say, the Sacrifice of Christ was represented by) the Levites might kill the
beasts for Sacrifice; for it appears, that in these Sacrifices, wherein
themselves contend that Christ's was represented, the office of the High Priest
did not begin with entering into the Sanctuary, but with the mactation of that
Sacrifice whose blood was to be carried in thither. Therefore if we speak of
the bare instruments of mactation in the death of Christ, those were the Jews,
and we make not them Priests in it, for they aimed at no more than taking away
his life (as the Popae among the Romans, and those whose bare Office it was to
kill the beasts for Sacrifice among the Jews did:) but if we consider it with a
respect to him that offered up his life to God, then we say, that Christ was
the High Priest in doing it; it being designed for the expiation of sin; and by
virtue of this blood shed for that end, he enters into Heaven as the Holy of
Holies, there ever living to make intercession for us. But the virtue of the
consequent acts, depends upon the efficacy of the blood shed for expiation;
otherwise the High Priest might have entered with the same effect into the Holy
of Holies with any other blood besides that which was shed on purpose as a
sin-offering, for expiation of the sins of the people; which it was unlawful
for him to do. And from hence it is, that the Apostle to the Hebrews insists so
much on the comparison between the blood of Christ, and the blood of the legal
Sacrifices, Heb. 9.13, 14.10.4, 10.
and the efficacy of the one far above the other, in its power of expiation;
which he needed not to have done, if the shedding of his blood, had been only a
preparation for his entrance on his Priesthood in Heaven. So that the proper
notion of a Sacrifice for sin, as it notes the giving the life of one for the
expiation of the sins of another, does properly lie in the mactation, though
other sacrificial acts may be consequent upon it. So it was in the animales
hostiae among the Romans, Macrob. Saturn. l. 3. c. 5.
in which, says Macrobius, Sola anima Deo sacratur: of which he tells us
Virgil properly speaks in those words, Hanc tibi Eryx meliorem animam pro morte
Daretis. And that we may the better understand what he means by the anima here,
he says elsewhere (as Macrobius and Servius observe out of his excellent Skill
and accuracy in the Pontifical rites) Sanguine placastis ventos and virgin
caesa,
Cum primum Iliacas Danai venistis ad oras:
Sanguine quaerendi reditus, animaque litandum
Argolica.
Which shows, that the expiation was supposed to lie in the blood which they
called the Soul, as the Scripture does. And the Persians, as Strabo tells us,
looked upon the bare mactation as the Sacrifice, for they did not porricere as
the Romans called it, they laid none of the parts of the Sacrifice upon the
Altar to be consumed there, Strabo, l. 15.
(...). For God regarded nothing but the Soul in the sacrifice: Eustath. in
Hom. Iliad. 1. Strabo. l. 3.
which words Eustathius likewise uses upon Homer, of the Sacrifices of the
Magi. And Strabo affirms of the ancient Lusitani, that they cut off nothing of
the Sacrifice, but consumed the entrails whole; but though such Sacrifices
which were for divination were not thought expiatory, and therefore different
from the animales hostiae, yet among the Persians, every Sacrifice had a
respect to expiation of the whole people. For Herodotus tells us, that every
one that offers Sacrifice among them, Herod. l. 1.
(...), prays for good to all Persians and the King. But thus much may serve to
prove against Crellius, that the mactation in an Expiatory Sacrifice, was not a
mere preparation to a Sacrifice, but that it was a proper Sacrificial act, and
consequently that Christ acted as High Priest, when he gave himself for us, an
offering and a Sacrifice to God for a sweet smelling savor.

Whether Christ's Oblation of himself once to God, were in Heaven or on Earth.
IX. But this will further appear from those places wherein Christ is said to
offer up himself once to God: the places to this purpose are, Heb. 7.27. Who
needs not daily as those Highpriests to offer up Sacrifice, first for his
own sins, and then for the Peoples, for this he did once, when he offered up
himself. Heb. 9.14. How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the
eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from
dead works, to serve the living God. V. 25, 26, 27, 28. Nor yet that he should
offer himself often, as the High Priest enters into the holy place every year
with the blood of others; for then must he often have suffered since the
foundation of the World: but now once in the end of the World has he appeared
to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And as it is appointed to men once
to die, but after this the Judgment: so Christ was once offered to bear the
sins of many, and unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time
without sin unto salvation. Heb. 10.10, 11, 12. By the which will we are
sanctified through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all. And
every High Priest, stands daily ministering and offering oftentimes the same
sacrifices, which can never take away sins: but this man after he had offered
one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. To these
places Crellius gives this answer, Crell. cap. 10. sect. 54.
That the name of Oblation as applied to Christ, primarily signifies Christ's
first entrance into Heaven, and appearance before the face of God, there, but
consequently the continuance of that appearance; so that when a thing is once
actually exhibited and presented, it is said to be once offered, although being
offered, it always remains in the same place, and so may be said to be a
continual Oblation. But this first appearance, says he, has a peculiar
agreement with the legal Oblation; and therefore the name of Oblation does most
properly belong to that, because Christ by this means obtained that power on
which the perfect remission of our sins depends: but although the continuance
of that appearance, seems only consequentially to have the name of Oblation
belonging to it, yet in its own nature, it has a nearer conjunction with the
effect of the Oblation, viz. the remission of sins, or deliverance from
punishment, and does of it self confer more to it than the other does. And
therefore in regard of that, Christ is said most perfectly to exercise his
Priesthood, and to offer and intercede for us, from the time he is said to sit
down at the right hand of God. Against this answer, I shall prove these two
things, 1. That it is incoherent, and repugnant to it self. 2. That it by no
means agrees to the places before mentioned. 1. That it is incoherent and
repugnant to it self in two things. 1. In making that to be the proper Oblation
in correspondency to the Oblations of the Law, which has no immediate respect
to the expiation of sins. 2. In making that to have the most immediate respect
to the expiation of sins, which can in no tolerable sense be called an
Oblation. For the first, since Crellius says, that the proper notion of
Oblation is to be taken from the Oblations in the Levitical Law, we must
consider what it was there, and whether Christ's first entrance into Heaven can
have any correspondency with it. An Oblation under the Law was in general, any
thing which was immediately dedicated to God, but in a more limited sense it
was proper to what was dedicated to him by way of Sacrifice according to the
appointments of the Levitical Law. We are not now enquiring what was properly
called an Oblation in other Sacrifices, but in those which then were for
expiation of sin; And in the Oblation was, first of the persons for whom the
Sacrifice was offered. So in the Burnt-offering, the person who brought it,
Lev. 1.3*
was to offer it at the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation: i. e. as
the Jews expound it, at the entrance of the Court of the Priests, and there he
was to lay his hands upon the head of it, V. 4*
and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him. This Offering was
made before the Beast was slain; after the killing the Beast, then the Priests
were to make an Offering of the blood, by sprinkling it round about the Altar
of Burnt-offerings; the rest of the blood, say the Jews, was poured out by the
Priests, at the South Side of the Altar upon the foundation, where the two
holes were for the passage into the Channel, which conveyed the blood into the
valley of Kidron; thus the blood being offered, the parts of the beast, were by
the Priests to be laid upon the Altar, and there they were all to be consumed
by fire; and then it was called an Offering made by fire, of a sweet savor
unto the Lord. The same rites were used in the Peace Offerings, and
Trespass-offerings, as to the laying on of hands, and the sprinkling the blood,
and consuming some part by fire: and in the sin offerings, there was to be the
same imposition of hands: but concerning the sprinkling of the blood, and the
way of consuming the remainders of the Sacrifice, there was this considerable
difference; that in the common sin offerings for particular persons, the blood
was sprinkled upon the horns of the Altar of Burnt-offerings, Lev. 4.25, 30.
but in the sin offerings for the High Priest and the Congregation, or all the
People, he was to carry the blood within the Sanctuary, V. 6.
and to sprinkle of it seven times before the Veil of the Sanctuary; and some
of the blood was to be put upon the horns of the Altar of Incense; but the
remainder of the blood, and the same things (which were offered by fire in
Peace Offerings) were to be disposed of accordingly, on the Altar of
Burnt-offerings. And withal, there was this great difference, that in other
sin offerings the Priests were to eat the remainder of the sacrifice in the
Holy place; but in these there was nothing to be eaten by them; Lev. 6.26.
for the whole Bullock was to be carried forth without the Camp, and there he
was to be burned till all were consumed. For it was an express Law, That no
sin offerings, Lev. 4.11, 12.
whereof any of the blood is brought into the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
to reconcile withal in the Holy-place, shall be eaten: Lev. 6.30.
it shall be burnt in the fire. All the difference that was on the great day of
Atonement, was this, that the High Priest himself was to slay the
Sin Offerings, and then to carry the blood of them into the Holy of Holies,
Lev. 16.14, 15.
and there was to sprinkle the blood with his finger toward the mercy-seat
seven times: after which, and the sending away the scapegoat, the ceremonies
were the same for the Atonement of the people, which were at other solemn
sin offerings, for the Priest or the people.

X. From all which being thus laid together, we shall observe several things,
which are very material to our purpose:

All things necessary to a legal oblation concur in the death of Christ.
1. That in the Oblations which were made for expiation of sins, the difference
between the mactation and the oblation, did arise from the difference between
the Priest and the Sacrifice. For the Priest's Office was to atone, but he was
to atone by the Sacrifice; on which account, although the Priest were to offer
the Sacrifice for himself, yet the oblation did not lie in the bare presenting
himself before God, but in the presenting the blood of that Sacrifice, which
was shed in order to expiation. If we could have supposed, that the High Priest
under the Law, instead of offering a Goat for a Sin-offering for the people, on
the day of Atonement, should have made an oblation of himself to God, by dying
for the expiation of their sins: In this case, his death being the Sacrifice,
and himself the Priest, the mactation, as it relates to his own act, and his
oblation had been one and the same thing. For his death had been nothing else,
but the offering up himself to God, in order to the expiation of the sins of
the people; and there can be no reason, why the oblation must be of necessity
something consequent to his death, since all things necessary to a perfect
oblation do concur in it. For where there is something solemnly devoted to God,
and in order to the expiation of sins, and by the hand of a Priest, there are
all things concurring to a legal oblation; but in this case, all these things
do concur, and therefore there can be no imaginable necessity of making the
oblation of Christ, only consequent to his Ascension, since in his death all
things concur to a proper oblation. In the Law, we grant that the oblation made
by the Priest, was consequent to the death of the beast for Sacrifice; but the
reason of that was, because the beast could not offer up it self to God, and
God had made it necessary, that the Priest should expiate sins, not by himself,
but by those Sacrifices, and therefore the oblation of the blood was after the
Sacrifice was slain; neither could this have been solved barely by the Priest's
slaying of the Sacrifices; for this being an act of violence toward the beasts
that were thus killed, could not be a proper oblation, which must suppose a
consent antecedent to it. All which showed the great imperfection of the
Levitical Law, in which so many several things were to concur, to make up a
sacrifice for sin; viz. The first offering made by the party concerned, of what
was under his dominion, viz. The beast to be sacrificed at the door of the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, but the beast not being able to offer up it
self, if was necessary for the offering up its blood, that it must be slain by
others; and for the better understanding, not only of the efficacy of the
blood, but the concurrence of the Priest for expiation, he was to take the
blood, and sprinkle some of it on the Altar, and pour out the rest at the
foundation of it. But since we assert a far more noble and excellent Sacrifice,
by the Son of God freely offering up himself, to be made a Sacrifice for the
sins of the world, why may not this be as proper an oblation made unto God, as
any was under the Law, and far more excellent, both in regard of the Priest and
the Sacrifice: why should his oblation of himself then be made only consequent
to his death and resurrection? Which latter, being by our Adversaries made not
his own act, but God's upon him, and his entrance into Heaven, being given him
(as they assert) as a reward of his sufferings, in what tolerable sense can
that be called an oblation of himself, which was conferred upon him as a reward
of his former sufferings? From whence it follows, that upon our Adversaries own
grounds, the death of Christ may far more properly be called the oblation of
himself, than his entrance into Heaven; and that there is no necessity of
making the oblation of Christ consequent to his death, there being so great a
difference between the Sacrifice of Christ, and that of the Sacrifices for sin
under the Levitical Law.

2. We observe, That the oblation as performed by the Priest, did not depend
upon his presenting himself before God, but upon the presenting the blood of a
Sacrifice, which had been already slain for the expiation of sins. If the
Priest had gone into the Holy of Holies, and there only presented himself
before the Mercy-seat, and that had been all required in order to the expiation
of sins, there had been some pretense for our Adversaries making Christ's
presenting himself in Heaven, to be the oblation of himself to God; but under
the Law, the efficacy of the High Priest's entrance into the Holy of Holies,
did depend upon the blood which he carried in thither, which was the blood of
the Sin-offering, which was already slain for the expiation of sins: And in
correspondency to this, Christ's efficacy in his entrance into Heaven, as it
respects our expiation, must have a respect to that Sacrifice which was offered
up to God antecedent to it. And I wonder our Adversar^es do so much insist on
the High Priest's entering into the most holy place once a year, as though all
the expiation had depended upon that; whereas all the promise of expiation, was
not upon his bare entrance into it, but upon the blood which he carried along
with him, and sprinkled there: In correspondency to which, our Savior is not
barely said to enter into Heaven, Heb. 9.12.
and present himself to God, but that he did this by his own blood, having
obtained eternal Redemption for us.

3. We observe, That there was something corres^ondent in the death of Christ,
to somewhat consequent to the oblation under the Law, and therefore there can
be no reason to suppose, that the oblation of Christ must be consequent to his
death: for that destroys the correspondency between them. Now this appears in
this particular, in the solemn Sacrifices for sin, after the sprinkling of the
blood, which was carried into the Holy place to reconcile withal, all the
remainder of the Sacrifice was to be burnt without the Camp, and this held on
the day of Atonement, Heb. 13.12.
as well as in other Sin Offerings for the Congregation. Now the Author to the
Hebrews tells us, That in correspondency to this, Jesus that he might sanctify
the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate: What force is there
in this, unless the blood of Christ did answer to the Sin Offerings for the
people, and his oblation was supposed to be made before; and therefore that he
might have all things agreeable to those Sin Offerings, the last part was to be
completed too; viz. That he was to suffer without the gate; which after the
peoples settlement in Jerusalem, answered to the being burnt without the Camp
in the Wilderness.

4. We observe, That the Oblation in Expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, by the
Priest, had always relation to the consumption of what was offered: Thus the
offering of the blood, in token of the destruction of the life of the beast,
whose blood was offered; for no blood was to be offered of a living creature,
nor of one killed upon any other account, but for that end to be a sacrifice
for sin, and after the sprinkling and pouring out of the blood, the inwards of
some, and all of the other, were to be consumed by fire. And it is observable,
that the greater the Sacrifice for sin was, always the more was consumed of it;
as appears plainly by the forementioned difference of the Sin Offerings for
private persons, and for the people; of the former, the Priests were allowed to
eat, but not at all of the latter. And so it was observed among the Egyptians,
in the most solemn Sacrifices for expiation, nothing was allowed to be eaten of
that part which was designed for that end. For Herodotus gives us an account
why the Egyptians never eat the head of any living Creatu^e; (...). Herodot. l.
2. c 39.
which is, That when they offer up a Sacrifice, they make a solemn execration
upon it, that if any evil were to fall upon the persons who Sacrificed, or upon
all Egypt, it might be turned upon the head of that beast: (...). Plutarch. de
Iside.
And Plutarch adds, that after this solemn execration, They cut off the head,
and of old, threw it into the River, but then gave it to strangers. From which
custom we observe, that in a solemn Sacrifice for expiation, the guilt of the
offenders, was by this rite of execration supposed to be transferred upon the
head of the Sacrifice, as it was in the Sacrifices among the Jews, by the
laying on of hands; Xenoph. Cyropaed. l. 7.8. Strab. l. 4. Plutarch Symp. l. 6.
probl. 8.
and that nothing was to be eaten of what was supposed to have that guilt
transferred upon it. From hence all Expiatory Sacrifices were at first whole
Burnt-offerings, as appears by the Patriarchal Sacrifices, and the customs of
other Nations, and among the Jews themselves, as we have already proved in all
solemn offerings for the people. And although in the sacrifices of private
persons, some parts were allowed to be eaten by the Priests; yet those which
were designed for expiation were consumed. So that the greater the offering was
to God, the more it implied the Consumption of the thing which was so offered:
How strangely improbable then is it, That the Oblation of Christ should not (as
under the Law) have respect to his death and sufferings; but to his entrance
into Heaven, wherein nothing is supposed to be consumed, but all things given
him with far greater power, as our Adversaries suppose, than ever he had
before. But we see the Apostle parallels Christ's suffering with the burning of
the Sacrifices, and his blood with the blood of them, and consequently his
offering up himself, must relate not to his entrance into Heaven, but to that
act of his whereby he suffered for sins, and offered up his blood as a
Sacrifice for the sins of the world.

Christ's entrance into Heaven could not be the Oblation of himself mentioned.
XI. From all which it appears; how far more agreeably to the Oblations under
the Law, Christ is said to offer up himself for the expiation of sins by his
death and sufferings, than by his entrance into Heaven; For it is apparent,
that the Oblations in expiatory Sacrifices under the Law, were such upon which
the expiation of sin did chiefly depend; but by our Adversaries own confession,
Christ's oblation of himself by his entrance into Heaven, has no immediate
respect at all to the expiation of sin: only as the way whereby he was to enjoy
that power by which he did expiate sins, as Crellius says; now, let us
consider, what more propriety there is in making this presenting of Christ in
Heaven to have a correspondency with the legal Oblations, than the offering up
himself upon the Cross. For, 1. on the very same reason that his entrance into
Heaven is made an Oblation, his death is so too; viz. Because it was the way
whereby he obtained the power of expiation; and far more properly so than the
other, since they make Christ's entrance and power the reward of his
sufferings, but they never make his sitting at the right hand of God, the
reward of his entrance into Heaven. 2. His offering up himself to God upon the
Cross, was his own act, but his entrance into Heaven was God's, as themselves
acknowledge, and therefore could not in any propriety of speech be called
Christ's offering up himself. 3. If it were his own act, it could not have that
respect to the expiation of sins, which his death had; for our Adversaries say,
that his death was by reason of our sins, and that he suffered to purge us from
sin; but his entrance into Heaven was upon his own account, to enjoy that power
and authority, which he was to have at the right hand of God. 4. How could
Christ's entrance into Heaven, be the way for his enjoying that power which was
necessary for the expiation of sin, when Christ before his entrance into
Heaven, says, Mat. 28.18.
that all power was given to him in Heaven and Earth: and the reason assigned
in Scripture of that power and authority which God Phil. 2.8, 9.
gave him is, because he humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even
the death of the Cross: So that the entrance of Christ into Heaven, could not
be the means of obtaining that power which was conferred before; but the death
of Christ is mentioned on that account in Scripture. 5. If the death of Christ
were no expiatory Sacrifice, the entrance of Christ into Heaven could be no
Oblation proper to a High Priest; for his entrance into the Holy of Holies, was
on the account of the blood of the sin-offering which he carried in with him.
If there were then no expiatory Sacrifice before, that was slain for the sins
of men; Christ could not be said to make any Oblation in Heaven, for the
Oblation had respect to a Sacrifice already slain; so that if men deny that
Christ's death was a proper Sacrifice for sin, he could make no Oblation at all
in Heaven, and Christ could not be said to enter thither, as the High Priest
entered into the Holy of Holies with the blood of the Sacrifice; which is the
thing which the Author to the Hebrews asserts concerning Christ. Christ's
exercise of power in Heaven in no sense an Oblation to God.


XII. 2. There is as great an inconsistency in making the exercise of Christ's
power in Heaven, an oblation in any sense, as in making Christ's entrance into
Heaven, to be the Oblation which had correspondency with the Oblations of the
Law. For what is there which has the least resemblance with an Oblation in it?
Has it any respect to God, as all the legal Oblations had? no, for his
intercession and power, Crellius says, respect us, and not God. Was there any
Sacrifice at all in it for expiation? how is it possible, that the mere
exercise of power should be called a Sacrifice? What analogy is there at all
between them? And how could he be then said most perfectly to exercise his
Priesthood, when there was no consideration at all of any Sacrifice offered up
to God? so that upon these suppositions the Author to the Hebrews must argue
upon strange similitudes, and fancy resemblances to himself, which it was
impossible for the Jews to understand him in, who were to judge of the nature
of Priesthood and Oblations in a way agreeable to the Institutions among
themselves. But was it possible for them to understand such Oblations and a
Priesthood which had no respect at all to God, but wholly to the People; and
such a entrance into the Holy of Holies without the blood of an expiatory
Sacrifice for the sins of the people? But such absurdities do men betray
themselves into, when they are forced to strain express places of Scripture to
serve an hypothesis, which they think themselves obliged to maintain.

XIII. We now come to show that this interpretation of Crellius does not agree
with the circumstances of the places before mentioned, Crellius his sense
repugnant to the circumstances of the places. Heb. 7.27.9.26.10.10.
, which will easily appear by these brief considerations. 1. That the Apostle
always speaks of the offering of Christ as a thing past and once done, so as
not to be done again; which had been very improper, if by the Oblation of
Christ, he had meant the continual appearance of Christ in Heaven for us, which
yet is, and will never cease to be till all his enemies be made his footstool.
2. That he still speaks in allusion to the Sacrifices which were in use among
the Jews, Heb 9.12, 13 10 4.5.
and therefore the Oblation of Christ must be in such a way as was agreeable to
what was used in the Levitical Sacrifices, which we have already at large
proved he could not do in our Adversaries sense. 3. That the Apostle speaks of
such a Sacrifice for sins to which the sitting at the right hand of God was
consequent; so that the Oblation antecedent to it must be properly that
Sacrifice for sins which he offered to God; and therefore the exercise of his
power for expiation of sins, which they say is meant by sitting at the right
hand of God, Heb. 10.12.
cannot be that Sacrifice for sins: Neither can his entrance into Heaven be it,
which in what sense it can be called a Sacrifice for sins, since themselves
acknowledge it had no immediate relation to the expiation of them, I cannot
understand. 4. The Apostle speaks of such an Offering of Christ once, which if
it had been repeated, does imply, that Christ's sufferings must have been
repeated too. For then must he often have suffered since the foundation of the
World: Heb. 9.26.
but the repeated exercise of Christ's power in Heaven does imply no necessity
at all of Christ's frequent suffering, nor his frequent entrance into Heaven;
which might have been done without suffering, therefore it must be meant of
such an offering up himself as was employed in his death and sufferings. 5. Heb.
10.5, 10.
He speaks of the offering up of that body which God gave him when he came into
the World; but our Adversaries deny, that he carried the same Body into Heaven,
and therefore he must speak not of an offering of Christ in Heaven, but what
was performed here on Earth. But here our Adversaries have shown us a trial of
their skill, when they tell us with much confidence that the World into which
Christ is here said to come, is not to be understood of this World, Crell cap.
10 sect 53.
but of that to come, which is not only contrary to the general acceptance of
the word when taken absolutely as it is here, but to the whole scope and design
of the place. For he speaks of that World wherein Sacrifices and
Burnt-offerings were used, and the Levitical Law was observed, although not
sufficient for perfect expiation, and so rejected for that end; and withal he
speaks of that World wherein the cheerful obedience of Christ to the will of
his Father was seen, for he says, Heb 10.7, 9.
Lo I come to do thy will, O God, which is repeated afterward; but will they
say, that this World was not the place into which Christ came to obey the Will
of his Father? and how could it be so properly said of the future World, Lo I
come to do thy will; when they make the design of his ascension to be the
receiving the reward of his doing and suffering the will of God upon Earth?

Objections answered. Heb. 7.26.8.4.7.16.
XIV. But yet they attempt to prove from the same Author to the Hebrews, that
Christ's entrance into Heaven, was necessary to his being a perfect
High Priest; for he was to be made higher than the Heavens; and if he were on
earth, he should not be a Priest; but he was a Priest after the power of an
endless life: Neither could he, say they, be a perfect High Priest, till those
words were spoken to him, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; 5.5.
which as appears by other places, was after the Resurrection: But all the
sufferings he underwent in the world, were only to qualify him for this Office
in Heaven; therefore it is said, 2.17.
That in all things it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he
might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, etc. This is the substance of
what is produced by Crellius and his Brethren, Crell. c. 10. sect. 53.
to prove that Christ did not become a perfect High Priest, till he entered into
Heaven: But it were worth the knowing, what they mean by a perfect High Priest;
Is it that Christ did then begin the Office of a High Priest, and that he made
no offering at all before? No, that they dare not assert at last, but that
there was no perfect Sacrifice offered for sin, otherwise Socinus contends,
That Christ did offer upon earth, and that for himself too: Socin. praelect. c.
ult.
So that all kind of offering is not excluded by themselves, before Christ's
(...) into Heaven* But if they mean by perfect High Priest in Heaven, that his
Office of High Priest was not consummated by what he did on earth, but that a
very considerable part of the Priesthood of Christ was still remaining to be
performed in Heaven; it is no more than we do freely acknowledge, and this is
all we say is meant by those places: For the Apostles design is to prove, the
excellency of the Priesthood of Christ above the Aaronical; which he does, not
only from the excellency of the Sacrifice which he offered, above the blood of
Bulls and Goats; but from the excellency of the Priest, who did excel the
Aaronical Priests; both in regard of his calling from God, which is all the
Apostle designs, Heb. 5.5. not at all intending to determine the time when he
was made, but by whom he was made High Priest, even by him that had said, Thou
art my Son, etc. and in regard of the excellency of the Sanctuary which he
entered into, which was not an earthly, but a heavenly Sanctuary; and in regard
of the perpetuity of his function there, Not going in once a year, as the
Highpriests under the Law did, but there ever living to make intercession for
Us; Now this being the Apostles design, we may easily understand why he says,
That he was to be a heavenly High Priest, and if he had been on earth, he could
not have been a Priest: The meaning of which is only this, that if Christ's
Office had ended in what he did on earth, he would not have had such an
excellency as he was speaking of; for then he had ceased to be at all such a
High Priest, having no Holy of Holies to go into, which should as much
transcend the earthly Sanctuary, as his Sacrifice did the blood of Bulls and
Goats: Therefore in correspondency to that Priesthood, which he did so far
excel in all the parts of it, he was not to end his Priesthood merely with the
blood which was shed for a Sacrifice, but he was to carry it into Heaven, and
present it before God, and to be a perpetual intercessor in the behalf of his
people: And so was in regard of the perpetuity of his Office, a Priest after
the Law of an endless Life: But lest the people should imagine, that so great
and excellent a High Priest, being so far exalted above them, should have no
sense or compassion upon the infirmities of his people, therefore to encourage
them to adhere to him, he tells them, That he was made like to his Brethren;
and therefore they need not doubt, but by the sense which he had of the
infirmities of humane nature, he will have pity on the weaknesses of his
people; which is all the Apostle means by those expressions. So that none of
these places do destroy the Priesthood of Christ on earth, but only assert the
excellency, and the continuance of it in Heaven: Which latter, we are as far
from denying, as our Adversaries are from granting the former. And thus much
may suffice for the second thing, to prove the death of Christ a proper
sacrifice for sin; viz. The Oblation which Christ made of himself to God by it.

CHAP. VI.
I. That the effects of proper Expiatory Sacrifices belong to the death of
Christ, which either respect the sin or the person. Of the true notion of
expiation of sin, as attributed to Sacrifices. Of the importance of (...), as
applied to them. Socinus his proper sense of it examined. II. Crellius his
Objections answered. III. The Jews notion of (...). The Sacrifices not bare
conditions of pardon, nor expiated merely as a slight part of obedience. IV.
God's expiating sin, destroys not expiation by Sacrifice. V. The importance of
(...) and (...), relating to Sacrifices. VI. Expiation attributed to the
Sacrifice of Christ, in the same sense that it was to other Sacrifices. VII.
And from thence, and the places of Scripture which mention it, proved not to be
merely declarative. If it had been so, it had more properly belonged to his
Resurrection than his death. VIII. The Death of Christ not taken Metonymically
for all the Consequents of it; because of the peculiar effects of the death of
Christ in Scripture. IX. And because Expiation is attributed to him
antecedently to his entrance into Heaven. X. No distinction in Scripture of the
effects of Christ's entrance into Heaven from his sitting at the right hand of
God. XI. The effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice, respecting the person, belong
to the death of Christ, which are Atonement and Reconciliation. Of the
signification of (...) and (...). XII. The Reconciliation by Christ's death,
does not merely respect us, but God; why the latter less used in the New
Testament. A twofold Reconciliation with God mentioned in Scripture. Crellius
his evasion answered. XIII. The Objections from God's being reconciled in the
sending his Son. XIV. And the inconsistency of the Freeness of Grace with the
Doctrine of Satisfaction answered, and the whole concluded.

Of the true notion of Expiation, as attributed to Sacrifices.
I. THE last thing to prove the death of Christ a proper Expiatory Sacrifice,
is, That the effects of a proper Sacrifice for sin are attributed to it. Which
do either respect the sins committed, and are then called Expiation and
Remission, or the persons, who were guilty of them, as they stand obnoxious to
the displeasure of God, and so the effect of them is Atonement and
Reconciliation. Now these we shall prove do most properly and immediately refer
to the death of Christ; and are attributed to it, as the procuring cause of
them; and not as a bare condition of Christ's entrance into Heaven, or as
comprehending in it the consequents of it. I b^gin with the Expiation and
Remission of sins; as to which Socinus does acknowledge, Socin. de Christo
servat. p. 2. l. 13. Crell. cap. 10* sect. 26.
That the great correspondency does lie between Christ's and the Legal
Sacrifices. We are therefore to enquire: 1. What respect the Expiation of sins
had to the Sacrifices under the Law. 2. In what sense the Expiation of sins is
attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ: For the due explication of the respect
which Expiation of sins had to the Legal Sacrifices, we are to consider in what
sense Expiation is understood, and in what respect it is attributed to them.
For this we are to enquire into the importance of the several phrases it is set
forth by, which are (...) and (...) in the Old Testament, (...) in the New; all
which are acknowledged by our Adversaries to have a peculiar respect to the
Expiation made by a Sacrifice. Crell. c. 10. s^ct. 38.
We shall begin with the former, because Crellius objects this against Grotius,
That he employed his greatest diligence in the explication of the Greek and
Latin words for Expiation of sin, and was contented only to say, that the
Hebrew words would bear the same signification: Whereas, says he, he ought to
have proved, that the Hebrew words do require that sense which he takes them
in. But by Crellius his leave, Grotius took the best course was to be taken in
words, whose signification is so obscure as those are in the Hebrew Language.
For (...) being so very rarely used in Scripture in that which Socinus and
Crellius contend to be the proper and natural signification of it; viz. To hide
or cover, and so frequently in the sense of Expiation, what better way could be
taken for determining the sense of it, as applied to Sacrifices, than by
insisting upon those words which are used in the New Testament, to the very
same purpose that (...) is used in the Old? For they cannot pretend that which
they say is the most proper sense, can be applied to this subject, viz. To
cover with pitch, or a bituminous matter, which is called (...), Genesis 6.14.
therefore it must of necessity be taken in another sense here. But Socinus
contends, That it ought to be taken in a sense most agreeable to that, which
is, says he, that the Expiation of sin be nothing else, but the covering of
it, Socin. de Servat. p. 2. c. 11.
by God's grace and benignity. Thence, says he, David says, Blessed is the
man whose iniquity is covered. Psalm. 32.1.
But how can this prove, that the proper signification of (...) as applied to
sin, is covered by God's Grace, when neither the word (...) is here used, nor
is there any respect at all mentioned of an Expiation by Sacrifice, which is
the thing we are discoursing of? And is the covering of sin such an easy and
intelligible phrase, that this should be made choice of to explain the
difficulty of (...) by? What is it that they would have us understand by the
covering sin? surely not to make it stronger and more lasting, as the Ark was
covered, with that bituminous matter for that end, and yet this would come the
nearest to the proper sense of (...). So that from their own interpretation it
appears, that (...) as applied to the expiation of sin by Sacrifices, cannot be
taken so much as in allusion to that other sense; for their sense of Expiation,
is either by the destruction of sin, or deliverance of the sinner from the
punishment of it, but what resemblance is there between the covering of a
thing, in order to its preservation, and the making it not to be, or at least
destroying all the power of it? But supposing we should grant that it has some
allusion to the sense of covering, why must it necessarily be supposed to be
done by the mere Grace of God, as excluding all antecedent causes which should
move to it? would not the propriety of the sense remain as well, supposing a
moving cause, as excluding it? What should hinder, but that God may be said as
well to cover sin upon a Sacrifice as to forgive it, and this is very
frequently used upon a Sacrifice, That the sin shall be forgiven? Lib. 4.26.
Ver. 31, ^5.
But yet themselves acknowledge, that the Sacrifices were conditions required
in order to expiation; if then (...) has an immediate respect to God's
immediate favor and benignity, how comes it to be used where a condition is
necessarily supposed in order to it? Had it not been more agreeable to this
benignity of God to have pardoned sin without requiring any sacrifice for it,
than so strictly insisting upon the offering up Sacrifice in order to it, and
then declaring that the sin is expiated, and it should be forgiven? from hence
we see that there is no necessity why (...) should be use as applied to
sacrifices in a sense most agreeable to that of covering with pitch, nor that
it is not possible it should have such a sense when applied to sins; and withal
that it is very consistent with an antecedent condition to it, and therefore
can by no means destroy satisfaction.

II. Yes, says Crellius, it does, Crellius his Objections answered.
for expiation is explained in the Law by non imputation, Deuteronomy. 21.8. Be
merciful, O Lord, unto thy people Israel whom thou have redeemed, and lay not
innocent blood unto thy people of Israel's charge; and the blood shall be
forgiven them. But not to impute, says he, Crell. c. 10. sect. 9.
and to receive true and full satisfaction overthrow each other: and so
expiation being the same with that, will overthrow it too. To this I answer, 1.
I grant that (...) is here used both as applied to God, and to the sin, and
that the sense of it is used as to the people, when the prayer is that God
would not lay it to their charge, which is the same with expiating of it. 2. We
are to consider, what the foundation of this Prayer was, viz. the slaying of
the Heifer for expiation of the uncertain murder; and when the Elders had
washed their hands over the head of the Heifer, then they were to protest their
own innocence, and to use this prayer. (...) Expiate thy people Israel, etc. i.
e. accept of this Sacrifice as an expiation for them, and so charge not on them
the innocent blood, etc. and upon doing of this it is said, (...), and the
blood shall be expiated, i. e. as the Vulgar Latin explains it, the guilt of
the blood shall be taken from them. But how then should the expiating sin upon
a Sacrifice slain in order thereto, destroy that satisfaction which we assert
by the blood of Christ being shed in order to the expiation of our sins? Nay,
it much rather shows the consistency and agreeableness of these one with
another. For we have before proved, that the Sacrifice here did expiate the sin
by a substitution, and bearing the guilt which could not have been expiated
without it. But Crellius further urges, That God himself is here said to
expiate, and therefore to expiate cannot signify to atone or satisfy; in
which sense Christ may be said to expiate too, not by atoning or satisfying,
but by not imputing sins, or taking away the punishment of them by his power.
To which we need no other answer than what Crellius himself elsewhere gives,
viz. Cum non neget, Socinus hoc verbum placandi significationem habere. Crell.
c. 20. sect. 38.
That Socinus never denies but that (...) does signify to appease or atone;
which is most evidently proved from the place mentioned by Grotius, Genesis 32.20.
(...) Expiabo faciem ejus in munere, says the interlineary Version, placabo
illum muneribus, the Vulg. Lat. (...), the LXX. and all the circumstances of
the place make it appear to be meant in the proper sense of appeasing the anger
of a person by something which may move him to show favor. And if Crellius
will yield this to be the sense of expiation as applied to the sacrifice of
Christ, he need not quarrel with the word satisfaction. But why should he
rather attribute that sense of expiation to Christ, which is alone given to
God, wherein the expiation is attributed to him that receives the Sacrifice,
rather than to him that offers the sacrifice in order to the atonement of
another? since it is acknowledged that Christ did offer a sacrifice; and
therefore there can be no reason why that sense of expiation should not belong
to him, which was most peculiar to that; which we shall now show to be of the
same kind with what is here mentioned, viz. an appeasing by a gift offered up
to God. So we find the word used to the same sense, 2 Samuel 21.3. (...), and
wherewith shall I make the atonement, i. e. wherewith shall I satisfy you for
all the wrong which Saul has done unto you? and we see afterward it was by
the death of Readiness sons. In which place it cannot be denied but that (...) not
only signifies to appease, but such a kind of satisfaction as is by the death
of some for the faults of others; and so comes home, not only to the importance
of the expiation belonging to a Sacrifice in general; but to such a kind of
expiation as is by the suffering of some in the place of others. Which though
it be more clear and distinct, where one man suffers for others, yet this was
sufficiently represented in the sacrifices under the Law, in which we have
already proved that there was a substitution of them in the place of the
offenders.

The Jews notion of (...)
III. And in this sense the Jews themselves do understand (...), viz. such an
expiation as is made by the substitution of one in the place of another.
Buxtorf Lexic Talmud. v. (...)
Of which many instances are collected by Buxtorf, wherein (...) is taken by
the Rabbinical Writers for such an expiation, whereby one was to undergo a
punishment in the place of another. So when in the title Sanhedrin the people
say to the High Priest (...) simus nos expiatio tua, let us be for an expiation
for you, the Gloss explains it thus, hoc est, in nobis fiat expiatio tua,
nosque subeamus tuo loco quicquid tibi evenire debet. And when they tell us how
Children ought to honor their Parents after their death, they say when they
recite any memorable speech of their Fathers, they are not barely to say, My
Father said so: but my Lord and Father said so, would I had been the expiation
of his death: i. e. as they explain it themselves, would I had undergone what
he did, and they give this general rule, where ever it is said, behold I am for
expiation, it is to be understood, behold I am in the place of another to bear
his iniquities. So that this signifies the same with (...) or a price of
redemption for others. Hence (...) is taken for a price of redemption of the
life of another, and rendered by (...), Exodus 21.30. -- 30.12. Numb. 35.31, 32.
where we render it satisfaction, and by (...), Psalm. 48.7. and thereby we fully
understand, what our Savior meant when he said, that he gave his Soul, Matthew.
20.28.
(...), a ransom for many, and to this day the Jews call the Cock which they
kill for Expiation on the day of Atonement, by the name of Cappara; and when
they beat the Cock against their heads thrice, they every time use words to
this purpose, Let this Cock be an exchange for me, let him be in my room, and
be made an Expiation for me: let death come to him, but to me and all Israel
life and happiness. I insist on these things, only to let us understand, that
the Jews never understood (...) in the sense our Adversaries contend for, when
applied to an Expiatory Sacri^ice, but as implying a Commutation, and a
Substitution of one in the place of another, so as by the punishment of that,
the other in whose room he suffers, may obtain deliverance. Which is the sense
we plead for. But the utmost which Socin. l 2. c. 11. D^c^t Socinus victimar^m
oblation^m obedientiam quandam D^o praestandam, quanquam levem continuisse,
quam ex promiss^ Dei le vium q^^orundam erratorum (...)*
Socinus and Crellius will allow to the Sacrifices in order to Expiation, is
barely this, That the offering of them is to be considered ^s a mere condition
(that has no other respect to the expiation of sins, than the paring a man's
nails would have had, if God had required it) upon which slight obedien^e, the
pardon of some light sins mig^t be ob^ained. But can any one imagine, that this
was all that was designed by the Sacrifices of old, who considers the antiquity
and universality of them in the world in those elder times before the Law, the
great severity by which they were required under the Law, the punctual
prescriptions that were made in all circumstances for them, the vast and almost
inestimable expense the people were at about them, but above all, the reason
that God himself assigns in the Law, That the blood was given for expiation,
because it was the life, and the correspondency so clearly expressed in the New
Testament, between the Sacrifice of Christ, and those Levitical Sacrifices? Can
any one, I say, imagine upon these considerations, that the Sacrifices had no
other respect to the expiation of sin, than as they were a slight testimony of
their obedience to God? Why were not an inward sorrow for sin, and tears and
prayers rather made the only conditions of Expiation than such a burdensome
and chargeable service imposed upon them, which at last signified nothing, but
that a command being supposed, they would have sinned if they had broken it?
But upon our supposition a reasonable account is given of all the expiatory
Sacrifices; viz. That God would have them see, how highly he esteemed his Laws,
because an expiation was not to be made for the breach of them, but by the
sacrificing of the life of some Creature which he should appoint instead of the
death of the Offender; and if the breach of those Laws which he had given them
must require such an expiation, what might they then think would the sins of
the whole world do, which must be expiated by a Sacrifice infinitely greater
than all those put together were; viz. The death and sufferings of the Son of
God for the sins of men? But if the offering Sacrifice had been a bare
condition required of the person who committed the fault, in order to
expiation; Why is it never said, That the person who offered it, did expiate
his own fault thereby? For that had been the most proper sense; for if the
expiation did depend on the offering the Sacrifice, as on the condition of it,
then the performing the condition, gave him an immediate right to the benefit
of the promise. If it be said, That his own act was not only necessary in
bringing the Sacrifice, but the Priests also in offering up the blood: This
will not make it at all the more reasonable; because the pardon of sin should
not only depend upon a man's own act, but upon the act of another, which he
could not in reason be accountable for, if he miscarried in it. If the Priest
should refuse to do his part, or be unfit to do it, or break some Law in the
doing of it, how hard would it seem that a man's sins could not be expiated,
when he had done all that lay in his own power in order to the expiation of
them, but that another person, whose actions he had no command over, neglected
the doing his duty? So that if the Sacrifice had no other influence on
expiation, but as a part of obedience, in all reason the expiation should have
depended on no other conditions but such as were under the power of him, whose
sins were to be expiated by it.

IV. But Crellius urges against our sense of Expiation, Gods expiating sin,
destroys not expiation by sacrifices. Crell. ib. sect. 39*
That if it were by Substitution, then the Expiation would be most properly
attributed to the Sacrifices themselves; whereas it is only said, that by the
Sacrifices the Expiation is obtained; but that God or the Priest do expiate and
to God it belongs properly, because he takes away the guilt and punishment of
sin; which is, says he, all meant by expiation; to the Priest only
consequently, as doing what God requires in order to it; and to the Sacrifices
only as the conditions by which it was obtained. But if the Expiation does
properly belong to God, and implies no more than bare pardon, it is hard to
conceive that it should have any necessary relation to the blood of the
Sacrifice: but the Apostle to the Hebrews tells us, that Remission had a
necessary respect to the shedding of blood, so that without that there was no
remission. H^b 9 22.
How improperly does the Apostle discourse throughout that Chapter, wherein he
speaks so much concerning the blood of the Sacrifices purifying, and in
correspondency to that, Ver 13, 14. Ver. 18, 19, 20, 21, 23.
the blood of Christ purging our Consciences; and that all things under the
Law, were purified with blood; Had all this no other signification, but that
this was a bare condition that had no other importance, but as a mere act of
obedience when God had required it? why does not the Apostle rather say,
without God^s favor there is no remission, than without the shedding of blood;
if all the expiation did properly belong to that, and only very remotely to the
blood of the Sacrifice? What imaginable necessity was there, that Christ must
shed his blood in order to the expiation of our sins, if all that blood of the
Legal Sacrifices did signify no more than a bare condition of pardon, though a
slight part of obedience in it self? Why must Christ lay down his life in
correspondency to these Levitical Sacrifices? for that was surely no slight
part of his obedience. Why might not this condition have been dispensed with in
him, since our Adversaries say, that in it self it has no proper efficacy on
the expiation of sin? And does not this speak the greatest repugnancy to the
kindness and Grace of God in the Gospel, that he would not dispense with the
ignominious death of his Son, although he knew it could have no influence of it
self on the expiation of the sins of the world? But upon this supposition, that
the blood of Sacrifices under the Law had no proper influence upon Expiation,
the Apostles discourse proceeds upon weak and insufficient grounds. For what
necessity in the thing was there, because the blood of the Sacrifices was made
a condition of pardon under the Law, therefore the blood of Christ must be so
now; although in it self it has no proper efficacy for that end? But the
Apostles words and way of Argumentation does imply, that there was a peculiar
efficacy both in the one and the other, in order to Expiation; although a far
greater in the blood of Christ, than could be in the other; as the thing
typified, ought to exceed that which was the representation of it. From hence
we see, that the Apostle attributes what Expiation there was under the Law, not
immediately to God, as belonging properly to him, but to the blood of Bulls and
Goats, and the ashes of an Heifer, sprinkling the unclean. Which he had very
great reason to do, since God expressly says to the Jews, that the blood was
given them (...) ad expiandum, to expiate for their souls, Lev. 17.11.
for the blood (...) shall expiate the soul. Than which words, nothing could
have been more plainly said to overthrow Crellius his assertion, that Expiation
is not properly or chiefly attributed to the Sacrifices, but primarily to God,
and consequentially to the Priest: who is never said to expiate, but by the
Sacrifice which he offered, so that his Office was barely Ministerial in it.
But from this we may easily understand, in what sense God is said to expiate
sins, where it has respect to a Sacrifice (which is that we are now
discoursing of, and not in any larger or more improper use of the word) for
since God himself has declared, that the blood was given for Expiation, the
Expiation which belongs to God, must imply his acceptance of it for that end,
for which it was offered. For the execution or discharge of the punishment
belonging to him, he may be said in that sense to expiate, because it is only
in his power to discharge the sinner from that obligation to punishment he lies
under by his sins. And we do not say, that where expiating is attributed to him
that accepts the Atonement, that it does imply his undergoing any punishment
which is impossible to suppose; but that where it is attributed to a Sacrifice,
as the means of Atonement, there we say it does not imply a bare condition, but
such a Substitution of one in the place of another, that on the account of
that, the fault of the offender himself is expiated thereby.

V. And to this sense the other word (...) does very well agree; The importance
of (...), and (...), relating to sacrifices.
for Socinus and Crellius cannot deny, But that Genesis 31.39. it properly
signifies Luere, or to bear punishment; although they say, it no where else
signifies so, and the reason is, because it is applied to the Altar, and such
other things, which are not capable of it; but does it hence follow, that it
should not retain that signification where the matter will bear it, as in the
case of Sacrifices. And although it be frequently rendered by (...), yet that
will be no prejudice to the sense we plead for in respect of Sacrifices,
because those words when used concerning them, do signify Expiation too.
Grotius proves^, that they do from their own nature and constant use in Greek
Authors, not only signify an antecedency of order, but a peculiar efficacy in
order to Expiation. Thence expiatory Sacrifices among the Greeks were called
(...) and (...), frequently in Homer, applied to Sacrifices, (...) in Plutarch,
and (...) used in the same sense; an Expiatory Sacrifice in Herodotus is called
(...), and to the same purpose it is used in Hermogenes, Plato and Plutarch: as
among the Latins, placare, purgare, purificare, conciliare, lustrare in the
same sense, and piare when used in Sacrifices, he proves to signify Luere per
successionem rei alterius in locum poenae debitae. Thence piaculum used for an
Expiatory Sacrifice, and expiare is to appease by such a Sacrifice, so Cereris
numen expiare is used in Cicero; filium expiare in Livy. So that all these
Sacrifices among them were supposed still to pertain to the atoning the Deity,
and obtaining a remission of sins committed by them. And from hence (because
where there was a greater equality and nearness, there might be the greater
efficacy of the Sacrifice for expiation) came the custom of sacrificing men,
which Grotius at large shows to have almost universally obtained before the
coming of Christ. We are now to consider what Crellius answers to this; the
substance of which lies in these two things. 1. He denies not but that (...)
and (...) do in their proper use in the Greek Tongue signify the purging of
guilt, Crell. c. 10. sect. 23, and 24.
and the aversion of the wrath of God and punishment, but that those and such
other words are attributed to Sacrifices, because those were supposed to be the
effects of them among the Heathen; but the attributing such effects to them,
did arise from their superstition, whereby greater things were attributed to
Sacrifices, than God would have given to them, either before or under the Law.
Itaque quod ad voces Graecas (...) and (...) attinet, quibus in hoc argumento
non semel utitur D. scriptor ad Heb. eae ad Christi Sacrificium and Sacerdoti^
functionem relatae eo etiam sensu usurpantur quem Graeca lingua receperat, h^e.
de expurgatione reatus and aversione irae numinis aut paenae. Crell. c. 10. p.
499.
2. He denies not, but that those words, (...) and (...), being used by the
Author to the Hebrews more than once with respect to the Sacrifices and
Priesthood of Christ, were taken in the same sense in which they are used in
the Greek Tongue, viz. For the purgi^g of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath
of God, and the punishment consequent upon it: But all that he contends for is,
That there is a difference in the manner of effecting it, which he acknowledges
the words themselves do not imply; and the reasons he gives for it are, That
the other were proper, but Christ's an improper Sacrifice; and that the other
Sacrifices were offered by men to God, but the Sacrifice of Christ was given by
God to men, and therefore he must be supposed to be reconciled before. From
whence he would at least have other senses of these words joined together with
the former; viz. Either for purging away the filth of sin, or for a declaration
of a deliverance from guilt and punishment, in imitation of the Idiom of the
Hebrew, in which many words are used in the New Testament. From hence it
follows, that Crellius does yield the main cause, if it appear, that Christ did
offer up an expiatory Sacrifice to God in his death, for then he grants that
(...) and (...) being applied to the Sac^^fice of Christ, are to be taken for
the purging away of guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God, and the
punishment of sin. And it is to no purpose to say, that it is not a proper
Sacrifice, for if the effects of a proper Sacrifice do belong to it, that
proves that it is so; for these words being acknowledged to be applied to the
Sacrifice of Christ by the Author to the Hebrews, what could more evince that
Christ's was a proper Sacrifice, than that those things are attributed to it,
which by the consent of all Nations, are said to belong to proper Sacrifices,
and that in the very same sense in which they are used by those who understood
them in the most proper sense. And what reason could Crellius have to say, that
it was only the superstition of the Heathens, which made them attribute such
effects to sacrifices; when himself acknowledges that the very same sense does
belong to the Sacrifice of Christ under that notion? and as to the Jews we have
already proved that the sense of expiation among them was by virtue of the Law
to be taken in as proper a sense as among the Heathens, for the purging of
guilt, and the aversion of the wrath of God. And why should Crellius deny that
effect of the Sacrifice of Christ as to the atonement of God, because God's
love was seen in giving him who was to offer the Sacrifice? since that effect
is attributed to those Sacrifices under the Law which God himself appointed to
be offered, and showed his great kindness to the people in the Institution of
such a way, whereby their sins might be expiated, and they delivered from the
punishment of them. But of the consistency of these two, I shall speak more
afterward, in the effect of the Sacrifices as relating to Persons.

Expiation attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ in the same sense that it was
to other Sacrifices.
VI. We now come to consider in what sense the expiation of sins is in Scripture
attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ, and therein I shall prove these two
things. 1. That the Expiation is attributed to the Sacrifice of Christ in the
same sense that it is attributed to other Sacrifices, and as the words in
themselves do signify. 2. That what is so attributed does belong to the
Sacrifice of Christ in his death, antecedent to his entrance into Heaven. 1.
That the expiation is to be taken in a proper sense, when it is attributed to
the Sacrifice of Christ. Crellius tells us, The controversy is not about the
thing, Crell. c. 10. sect. 24.
viz. whether expiation in the sense we take it in for purging away guilt, and
aversion of the wrath of God, does belong to the Sacrifice of Christ, for he
acknowledges it does, but all the question is about the manner of it: which in
the next Section he thus explains: There are three senses in which Christ may
be said to expiate sins; either by begetting Faith in us, whereby we are drawn
off from the practice of sin, in which sense, he says, it is a remoter
antecedent to it; or as it relates to the expiation by actual deliverance from
punishment, so he says, it is an immediate antecedent to it: or as he declares
that they are expiated, but this, he says, does not so properly relate to
Christ as a Sacrifice, but as a Priest. But never a one of these senses comes
near to that which Crellius grants to be the proper importance of (...) and
(...), as applied to a Sacrifice, viz. the purging away guilt, and the aversion
of the wrath of God, and punishment, not any way, but by the means of the
Sacrifice offered. For in the Legal Sacrifices nothing can be more plain than
that the expiation was to be by the Sacrifice offered for Atonement: supposing
then that in some other way (which could be by no means proper to those
Sacrifices) Christ may be said to expiate sins, what does this prove that there
was an expiation belonging to his Sacrifice agreeable to the Sacrifices of old?
But as I urged before in the case of Christ's being High Priest, that by their
assertions the Jews might utterly deny the force of any argument used by the
Author to the Hebrews to prove it: so I say as to the expiation by Christ's
Sacrifice, that it has no analogy or correspondency at all with any Sacrifice
that was ever offered for the expiation of sins. For by that they always
understood something which was immediately offered to God for that end, upon
which they obtained remission of sins; but here is nothing answerable to it in
their sense of Christ's Sacrifice; for here is no Oblation at all made unto God
for this end; all the efficacy of the Sacrifice of Christ, in order to
expiation does wholly and immediately respect us; so that if it be a proper
Sacrifice to any, it must be a Sacrifice to us, and not to God: for a Sacrifice
is always said to be made to him whom it does immediately respect; but Christ
in the planting Faith, in actual deliverance, in declaring to us this
deliverance, does wholly respect us, and therefore his Sacrifice must be made
to men, and not to God. Which is in it self a gross absurdity, and repugnant to
the nature and design of Sacrifices from the first institution of them; which
were always esteemed such immediate parts of divine worship, that they ought to
respect none else but God, as the object to which they were directed, though
for the benefit and advantage of mankind. As well then might Christ be said to
pray for us, and by that no more be meant but that he does teach us to
understand our duty; as be made an expiatory Sacrifice for us, and all the
effect of it only respect us and not God. And this is so far from adding to the
perfection of Christ's Sacrifice above the Legal (which is the thing pleaded by
Crellius) that it destroys the very nature of a Sacrifice, Crell. c. 10. sect.
26.
if such a way of expiation be attributed to it (which though conceived to be
more excellent in it self) yet is wholly incongruous to the end and design of a
Sacrifice for Expiation. And the excellency of the manner of expiation ought to
be in the same kind, and not quite of another nature; for, will any one say,
that a General of an Army has a more excellent conduct that all that went
before him, because he can make finer speeches; or that the Assomanaean Family
discharged the Office of Priesthood best, because they had a greater power over
the people; or that Nero was the most excellent Emperor of Rome because he
excelled the rest in Music and Poetry: by which we see that to assert an
excellency of one above another, we must not go to another kind, but show its
excellency in that wherein the comparison lies: So that this does not prove the
excellency of the Sacrifice of Christ, because he has a greater power to
persuade, deliver and govern, than any Sacrifice under the Law; for these are
things quite of another nature from the consideration of a Sacrifice: But
therein the excellency of a Sacrifice is to be demonstrated, that it excells
all other in the proper end and design of a Sacrifice, i. e. if it be more
effectual toward God for obtaining the expiation of sin; which was always
thought to be the proper end of all Sacrifices for expiation. Although then
Christ may be allowed to excel all other Sacrifices in all imaginable respects
but that which is the proper intention of a Sacrifice; it may prove far greater
excellency in Christ, but it does withal prove a greater imperfection in his
Sacrifice, if it fail in that which is the proper end of it. So that if we
should grant that the expiation attributed to Christ's Sacrifice signified no
more than reclaiming men from their sins, or their deliverance by his power, or
a declaration of God's decree to pardon, this may prove that there are better
arguments to believe the remission of our sins now under the Gospel; but they
do not in the least prove that Christ is to be considered as a Sacrifice; much
less that he does far excel in the notion of an Expiatory Sacrifice all those
which were offered up to God for that end under the Law.

VII. Expiation by Christ not merely declarative.
But we must now further consider, whether this be all attributed to Christ in
order to expiation in Scripture; i. e. Whether those words which of themselves
do imply the aversion of the wrath of God, when used concerning other
Sacrifices, when applied to the Sacrifice of Christ, do only imply the
begetting faith in us, or a declaration of pardon. The words which are used to
this purpose, are (...), which are all applied to the blood of Christ, and the
dispute is, whether they signify no more but a declaration of pardon, or a
means to beget faith in us. The first words (...) and (...) Crellius
acknowledges do frequently signify deliverance from guilt and punishment;
Crell cap. 10 sect. 28 p 506.
but, he says, they may likewise signify a declaration of that deliverance,
as decreed by God, or a purging from the sins themselves, or from the custom of
sinning. So that by Crellius his own confession, the sense we contend for is
most proper and usual, the other are more remote, and only possible; why then
should we forsake the former sense, which does most perfectly agree to the
nature of a Sacrifice, which the other senses have no such relation to, as that
has? For these being the words made use of in the New Testament, to imply the
force and efficacy of a Sacrifice, why should they not be understood in the
same sense which the Hebrew words are taken in, when they are applied to the
Sacrifices under the Law? We are not enquiring into all possible senses of
words, but into the most natural and agreeable to the scope of them that use
them: and that we shall make it appear to be the same, we plead for in the
places in dispute between us; as, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Jesus Christ his
Son, (...), purges us from all sin, Heb. 9.13, 14. If the blood of bulls, and
of goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean, (...),
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh, How much more shall the blood of
Christ purge your consciences from dead works, (...)? Heb. 1.3. (...), when he
had by himself purged our sins. So (...) and (...) are used with a respect to
the blood of Christ, Heb. 10.22. Apocalyp. 1.5. And because remission of sin
was looked on as the consequent of expiation by Sacrifice under the Law;
therefore that is likewise attributed to the blood of Christ, Matthew. 26.28.
This is the blood of the New Testament which was shed for many, (...), for the
remission of sins, Ephesians. 1.7. In whom we have redemption through his blood, the
remission of sins, and to the same purpose, Coloss. 1.14. And from hence we are
said to be justified by his blood, Romans 5.9. and Christ is said to be a
propitiation through faith in his blood, Romans 3.25. The substance of all that
Crellius replies to these places is, Crell. c. 10. sect. 28.
That those words which do properly signify the thing it self, may very
conveniently be taken only for the declaration of it, when the performance of
the thing does follow by virtue of that declaration: which then happens, when
the declaration is made of the thing decreed by another, and that in the name
and by the command of him who did decree it. And in this sense, Christ by his
blood may be said to deliver us from the punishment of our sins, by declaring
or testifying to us the will and decree of God for that purpose. But this
answer is by no means sufficient, upon these considerations; 1. Because it does
not reach the proper and natural sense of the words, as Crellius himself
confesses; and yet he assigns no reason at all, why we ought to depart from
it, unless the bare possibility of another meaning be sufficient. But how had
it been possible for the efficacy of the blood of Christ for purging away the
guilt of our sins, to have been expressed in clearer and plainer terms than
these, which are acknowledged of themselves to signify as much as we assert?
If the most proper expressions for this purpose, are not of force enough to
persuade our Adversaries, none else could ever do it: so that it had been
impossible for our Doctrine to have been delivered in such terms, but they
would have found out ways to evade the meaning of them. It seems very strange,
that so great an efficacy should not only once or twice, but so frequently be
attributed to the blood of Christ for expiation of sin, if nothing else were
meant by it, but that Christ by his death did only declare that God was willing
to pardon sin? If there were danger in understanding the words in their proper
sense, why are they so frequently used to this purpose? why are there no other
places of Scripture that might help to undeceive us, and tell us plainly, that
Christ dyed only to declare his Father's will? but what ever other words might
signify, this was the only true meaning of them. But what miserable shifts are
these, when men are forced to put off such Texts which are confessed to express
our Doctrine, only by saying that they may be otherwise understood? which
destroys all kind of certainty in words; which by reason of the various use of
them, may be interpreted to so many several senses, that if this liberty be
allowed, upon no other pretense, but that another meaning is possible, men will
never agree about the intention of any person in speaking. For upon the same
reason, if it had been said, That Christ declared by his death God's readiness
to pardon, it might have been interpreted, That the blood of Christ was
therefore the declaration of God's readiness to pardon, because it was the
consideration upon which God would do it: So that if the words had been as
express for them, as they are now against them, according to their way of
answering places, they would have been reconcilable to our opinion. 2. The
Scripture in these expressions, does attribute something peculiar to the blood
of Christ; but if all that were meant by it were no more, than the declaring
God's will to pardon, this could in no sense be said to be peculiar to it. For
this was the design of the Doctrine of Christ, and all his miracles were
wrought to confirm the truth of that part of his Doctrine, which concerned
remission of sins as well as any other: but how absurd would it have been to
say, that the miracles of Christ purge us from all sin, that through Christ
healing the sick, raising the dead, etc. we have redemption, even the
forgiveness of sins, which are attributed to the blood of Christ? but if no
other respect, than as a testimony to the truth of the Doctrine of Remission of
sins, they were equally applicable to one as to the other. Besides, if this had
been all intended in these expressions, they were the most incongruously
applied to the blood of Christ; nothing seeming more repugnant to the Doctrine
of the Remission of sins, which was declared by it, than that very thing by
which it was declared, if no more were intended by it: For how unsuitable a way
was it to declare the pardon of the guilty persons, by such severities used
toward the most Innocent! Who could believe, That God should declare his
willingness to pardon others, by the death of his own Son; unless that death of
his be considered as the meritorious cause for procuring it? And in that sense
we acknowledge, That the death of Christ was a declaration of God's will and
decree to pardon, but not merely as it gave testimony to the truth of his
Doctrine (for in that sense the blood of the Apostles and Martyrs might be said
to purge us from sin, as well as the blood of Christ) but because it was the
consideration upon which God had decreed to pardon. And so as the acceptance of
the condition required, or the price paid, may be said to declare or manifest,
the intention of a person to release or deliver a Captive: So God's acceptance
of what Christ did suffer for our sakes, may be said to declare his readiness
to pardon us upon his account. But then this declaration does not belong
properly to the act of Christ in suffering; but to the act of God in accepting:
and it can be no other ways known, than God's acceptance is known; which was
not by the Sufferings, but by the Resurrection of Christ. And therefore the
declaring Gods will and decree to pardon, does properly belong to that: and if
that had been all which the Scripture had meant, by purging of sin by the blood
of Christ, it had been very incongruously applied to that, but most properly to
his Resurrection. But these phrases being never attributed to that which most
properly might be said to declare the will of God; and being peculiarly
attributed to the death of Christ, which cannot be said properly to do it;
nothing can be more plain, than that these expressions ought to be taken in
that which is confessed to be their proper sense; viz. That Expiation of sin,
which does belong to the death of Christ, as a Sacrifice for the sins of the
world.

VIII. But yet Socinus and Crellius have another subter^uge, The death of
Christ not taken Metonymically for all the consequents of it.
(for therein lies their great art, in seeking rather by any means to escape
their enemies, than to overcome them.) For being sensible, that the main scope
and design of the Scripture is against them, they seldom, and but very weakly
assault: but show all their subtlety in avoiding by all imaginable arts, the
force of what is brought against them. And the Scripture being so plain in
attributing such great effects to the death of Christ, when no other answer
will serve turn, then they tell us, That the death of Christ is taken
Metonymically for all the consequents of his death; Crell c. 1. sect. 103.
sect. 119. c. 10. sect 45. p. 527.
viz. His Resurrection, Exaltation, and the Power and Authority which he has
at the right hand of his Father. But how is it possible to convince those, who
by death, can understand life* by sufferings, can mean glory; and by the
shedding of blood, sitting at the right hand of God? And that the Scripture is
very far from giving any countenance to these bold Interpretations, will appear
by these considerations; 1. Because the effect of Expiation of our sins, is
attributed to the death of Christ, as distinct from his Resurrection; viz. Our
reconciliation with God, Romans 5.10. For if when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of h^^ Son; much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life. To which Crellius answers, That the Apostle does not
speak of the death of Christ alone, Crell. c 1. sect. 112.
or as it is considered distinct from the consequences of it; but only that our
Reconciliation was effected by the death of Christ intervening. But nothing can
be more evident to any one, who considers the design of the Apostles discourse,
than that he speaks of what was peculiar to the death of Christ: Rom 5.6.
for therefore it is said, that Christ died for the ungodly. For scarcely for a
righteous man will one die: 7.
but God commends his love toward us, 8.
in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. 9.
Much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved through
him; upon which those words follow, 10.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son, etc. The Reconciliation here mentioned, is attributed to the death of
Christ in the same sense, that it is mentioned before; but there it is not
mentioned as a bare condition intervening in order to something farther; but as
the great instance of the love both of God and Christ; of God, in sending his
Son; of Christ, in laying down his life for sinners, in order to their being
justified by his blood. But where is it that St. Paul says, that the death of
Christ had no other influence on the expiation of our sins, but as a bare
condition intervening in order to that power and authority whereby he would
expiate sins? what makes him attribute so much to the death of Christ, if all
the benefits we enjoy depend upon the consequences of it; and no otherwise upon
that, than merely as a preparation for it? what peculiar emphasis were there in
Christ's dying for sinners, and for the ungodly; unless his death had a
particular relation to the expiation of their sins? Why are men said to be
justified by his blood, and not much rather by his glorious Resurrection, if
the blood of Christ be only considered as antecedent to the other? And that
would have been the great demonstration of the love of God which had the most
immediate influence upon our advantage: which could not have been the death in
this sense, but the life and glory of Christ. But nothing can be more absurd
than what Crellius would have to be the meaning of this place, viz. that the
Apostle does not speak of the proper force of the death of Christ distinct from
his life; but that two things are opposed to each other for the effecting of
one of which the death of Christ did intervene, but it should not intervene for
the other; viz. it did intervene for our reconciliation, but it should not for
our life. For did not the death of Christ equally intervene for our life as for
our reconciliation? was not our eternal deliverance the great thing designed by
Christ, and our reconciliation in order to that end? what opposition then can
be imagined, that it should be necessary for the death of Christ to intervene
in order to the one than in order to the other? But he means, that the death of
Christ should not intervene any more; what need that, when it is acknowledged
by themselves, that Christ died only for this end before, that he might have
power to bestow eternal life on them that obey him? But the main force of the
Apostles argument lies in the comparison between the death of Christ having
respect to us as enemies in order to reconciliation, and the life of Christ to
us considered as reconciled; so that if he had so much kindness for enemies, to
die for their reconciliation, we may much more presume that he now living in
Heaven will accomplish the end of that reconciliation, in the eternal salvation
of them that obey him. By which it is apparent that he speaks of the death of
Christ, in a notion proper to it self, having influence upon our
reconciliation; and does not consider it Metonymically as comprehending in it,
the consequents of it.

IX. 2. Expiation attributed to Christ antecedently to his entrance into heaven.
Because the expiation of sins is attributed to Christ antecedently to the
great consequents of his death, viz. his sitting at the right hand of God, Heb.
1.3. When he had by himself purged our sins, sat down on the right hand of his
Majesty on high, Heb. 9.12. But by his own blood he entered in once into the
Holy Place, having obtained eternal redemption for us. To these places Crellius
gives a double answer. 1. Crell. c. 10. sect. 50.
That indefinite particles ((...) and (...)) being joined with Verbs of the
preterperfect tense do not always require that the action expressed by them,
should precede that which is designed in the Verbs to which they are joined;
but they have sometimes the force of particles of the present or imperfect
tense; which sometimes happens in particles of the preterperfect tense, as
Matthew. 10.5. (...), so (...); and several other instances produced by him:
according to which manner of interpretation the sense he puts upon those words,
Heb. 9.12. is Christ by the shedding of his blood entered into the Holy of
Holies, and in so doing he found eternal redemption, or the expiation of sins.
But not to dispute with Crellius concerning the importance of the Aorist being
joined with a Verb of the preterperfect tense, which in all reason and common
acceptance does imply the action past by him who writes the words antecedent
to his writing of it, as is plain in the instances produced by Crellius; but
according to his sense of Christ's expiation of sin, it was yet to come after
Christ's entrance into Heaven, and so it should have been more properly (...)
than (...); not I say to insist upon that, the Apostle manifests, that he had a
respect to the death of Christ in the obtaining this eternal redemption, by his
following discourse: for v. 14. he compares the blood of Christ in point of
efficacy for expiation of sin, with the blood of the Legal Sacrifices: whereas
if the expiation meant by him had been found by Christ's Oblation of himself in
Heaven, he would have compared Christ's entrance into Heaven in order to it,
with the entrance of the High Priest into the Holy of Holies, and his argument
had run thus. For if the High Priest under the Law did expiate sins by entering
into the Holy of Holies; How much more shall the Son of God entering into Heaven
expiate the sins of Mankind? but we see the Apostle had no sooner mentioned the
redemption obtained for us; but he presently speaks of the efficacy of the
blood of Christ in order to it, and as plainly asserts the same, v. 15. And for
this cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by means of death, for
the redemption of the transgressions which were under the first Testament, they
which were called might receive the promise of eternal inheritance. Why does
the Apostle here speak of the (...), the expiation of sins by the means of
death; if he had so lately asserted before that the redemption or expiation was
found not by his death, but by his entrance into Heaven? and withal the Apostle
here does not speak of such a kind of expiation as wholly respects the future,
but of sins that were under the first Testament, not barely such as could not
be expiated by virtue of it, but such as were committed during the time of it,
although the Levitical Law allowed no expiation for them. And to confirm this
sense, the Apostle does not go on to prove the necessity of Christ's entrance
into Heaven; but of his dying, v. 16, 17, 18. But granting that he does allude
to the High Priest's entering into the Holy of Holies, yet that was but the
representation of a Sacrifice already offered, and he could not be said to find
expiation by his entrance; but that was already found by the blood of the
Sacrifice, and his entrance was only to accomplish the end for which the blood
was offered up in Sacrifice. And the benefit which came to men is attributed to
the Sacrifice, and not to the sprinkling of blood before the Mercy-seat: and
whatever effect was consequent upon his entrance into the Sanctuary, was by
virtue of the blood which he carried in with him, and was before shed at the
Altar. Neither can it with any reason be said, that if the redemption were
obtained by the blood of Christ, there could be no need of his entrance into
Heaven; since we do not make the Priesthood of Christ to expire at his death;
but that he is in Heaven a merciful High Priest in negotiating the affairs of
his People with God, and there ever lives to make intercession for them.

X. Crellius answers, That granting the Aorist being put before the Verb, No
distinction in Scripture of the effects of Christ's entrance into Heaven from
his sitting at the right hand of God.
(...) should imply such an action which was antecedent to Christ's sitting at
the right hand of God, yet it is not there said, that the expiation of sins was
made before Christ's entrance into Heaven; for those, says he, are to be
considered as two different things; for a Prince first enters into his Palace,
before he sits upon his throne. And therefore, says he, Christ may be said to
have made expiation of sins, Crell. c. 10. sect. 50. p. 537.
before he sat down at the right hand of his Father, not that it was done by
his death, but by his entrance into Heaven, and offering himself to God there,
by which means he obtained his sitting on the right hand of the Majesty on
high, and thereby the full Power of remission of sins, and giving eternal life.
To which I answer, 1. That the Scripture never makes such a distinction between
Christ's entrance into Heaven, and sitting at the right hand of God; which
latter implying no more but the glorious state of Christ in Heaven, his
entrance into Heaven does imply it: For therefore God exalted him to be a
Prince and a Savior: and the reason of the power and authority given him in
Heaven is no where attributed to his entrance into it as the means of it; but
our Savior before that tells us, Matthew. 28. 18.
that all power and authority was committed to him; and his very entrance into
Heaven was a part of his glory; and given him in consideration of his
sufferings; as the Apostle plainly asserts; Phil. 2 8, 9.
and he became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross, wherefore God
has highly exalted him, etc. There can be then no imaginable reason to make
the entrance of Christ into Heaven, and presenting himself to God there, a
condition or means of obtaining that power and authority which is employed in
his sitting at the right hand of God. 2. Supposing, we should look on these as
distinct, there is as little reason to attribute the expiation of sin to his
entrance, considered as distinct from the other: For the expiation of sins in
Heaven being by Crellius himself confessed to be by the exercise of Christ's
power, and this being only the means to that power, how could Christ expiate
sins by that power which he had not? But of this I have spoken before, and
showed that in no sense allowed by themselves the expiation of sins can be
attributed to the entrance of Christ into Heaven as distinct from his sitting
at the right hand of God. Thus much may suffice to prove, that those effects of
an Expiatory Sacrifice, which do respect the sins committed, do properly agree
to the death of Christ.

XI. Of the Atonement made by Christ's death.
I now come to that which respects the person, considered as obnoxious to the
wrath of God by reason of his sins; and so the effect of an Expiatory Sacrifice
is Atonement and Reconciliation. By the wrath of God, I mean, the reason which
God has from the holiness and justice of his nature, to punish sin in those
who commit it: by the means of Atonement and Reconciliation, I mean, that in
consideration of which, God is willing to release the sinner from the
obligation to punishment he lies under by the Law of God, and to receive him
into favor upon the terms which are declared by the Doctrine of Christ. And
that the death of Christ was such a means of Atonement and Reconciliation for
us, I shall prove by those places of Scripture which speak of it. But Crellius
would seem to acknowledge, Crell. c. 7. sect. 3.
That if Grotius seem to contend for no more, than that Christ did avert that
wrath of God which men had deserved by their sins, they would willingly yield
him all that he pleads for: but then he adds, That this deliverance from the
wrath to come, is not by the death, but by the power of Christ. So that the
question is, Whether the death of Christ were the means of Atonement and
Reconciliation between God and us? and yet Crellius would seem willing to yield
too, that the death of Christ may be said to avert the wrath of God from us, as
it was a condition in order to it; for in that sense it had no more influence
upon it than his birth had: but we have already seen, that the Scripture
attributes much more to the death and blood of Christ, in order to the
expiation of sin. We do not deny, that the death of Christ may be called a
condition, as the performance of any thing in order to an end, may be called
the condition upon which that thing is to be obtained; but we say, that it is
not a bare condition, but such a one as implies a consideration, upon which the
thing is obtained, being such as answers the end of him that grants it: by
which means it does propitiate or atone him, who had before just reason to
punish, but is now willing to forgive and be reconciled to them, who have so
highly offended him. And in this sense we assert, that Christ is said to be
(...), a propitiation for our sins, 1 John 2.2. -- 4.10. which we take in the
same sense that (...), is taken for the Sin-offering for atonement, Ezekiel.
44.27. (...), they shall offer a sin-offering; for so (...) there signifies and
in the same sense (...) is taken, Ezekiel. 45.19. and the Ram for Atonement is
called (...), Numb. 5.8. And thence the High Priest when he made an Atonement,
is said (...), 2 Maccab. 3.33. which is of the greater consequence to us,
because Crellius would not have the sense either of (...) or (...), Crell. 7.
sect. 10.
to be taken from the common use of the word in the Greek Tongue; but from that
which some call the Hellenistical use of it; viz. That which is used in the
Greek of the New Testament, out of the LXX. and the Apocryphal Greek; in both
which we have found the word (...) in a sense fully correspondent to what we
plead for. But he yet urges, and takes a great deal of pains to prove, that
(...) and (...) do not always signify to be appeased by another, but sometimes
signifies to be propitious and merciful in pardoning; and sometimes to expiate,
and then signifies the same with (...) and (...): which if it be granted,
proves nothing against us, having already proved, that those words do signify
the aversion of the wrath of God by a Sacrifice, and that there is no reason to
recede from that signification, when they are applied to the blood of Christ.
And we do not contend, that when the word (...) or (...) is applied to him that
does forgive, it does imply appeasing; but the effect of it, which is
pardoning; but that which we assert, is, that when it is applied to a third
person, or a thing made use of in order to forgiveness, then we say it
signifies the propitiating him that was justly displeased: so as by what was
done or suffered for that end, he is willing to pardon what he had just reason
to punish. So Moses is said, to make Atonement for the people by his prayers,
(...), Exodus 34.14. and we may see Verse 11. how much God was displeased
before. And Moses besought the Lord his God, and said, Why does thy wrath wax
hot against thy people? and Verse 12. Turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of
this evil against thy people, and then it is said, Verse 14. The Lord was
atoned for the evil which he thought to do unto his people. I would therefore
willingly know, why Moses might not here properly be said, (...), as it is said
(...), and therefore since it is so very often said in the Levitical Law, (...)
and (...), as (...), and the accusative case scarce ever put but in two cases;
( viz. When these words are applied to inanimate things, as the Altar, etc. or
when to God himself, implying forgiveness) what reason can we assign more
probable for this different construction, than that when (...) is used, the
verb has a respect to the offended party as the accusative understood? as
Christ is said in the places mentioned to be (...), which ought in reason to be
understood as those words after Moses his intercession, (...). But Crellius
asks, Why then do we never read once concerning the Priest, that he did (...)
or (...), but we read that he did (...) (...), and God is said, (...). To this
I answer, 1. That the reason why the person propitiated, is not expressed, is,
because it was so much taken for granted, that the whole Institution of
Sacrifices did immediately respect God, and therefore there was no danger of
mistaking, concerning the person who was to be atoned. 2. I wonder Crellius can
himself produce no instance where (...) is used with respect to the Sacrifices,
and the persons whose offenses are remitted by the Atonement; but where (...)
has a relation to that, it is still joined with a Preposition relating either
to the person or to the offenses; if no more were understood when it is so
used, than when God himself is said to do it, why is not the phrase (...), as
well said of the Priest, as it is of God? From whence Grotius his sense of Heb.
2.17. (...) for (...), is far more agreeable to the use of the phrase in the
Old Testament, than that which Crellius would put upon it. Therefore since the
(...) is attributed to Christ, we ought to take it in the sense proper to a
Propitiatory Sacrifice: so it is said by Moses, where God is left out, but is
necessarily understood, after the people had provoked God by their Idolatry; Ye
have sinned a great sin: And now I will go up unto the Lord, (...), That I may
make an Atonement for your sin: What way could Moses be said to make this
Atonement, but by propitiating God; yet his name is not there expressed, but
necessarily understood. So (...) is used in the most proper sense for appeasing
the anger of a person, Genesis 32.20. and (...), 2 Samuel 21.3. which places have
been already insisted on, in the signification of the word (...). And that
those places wherein Christ is said to be a propitiation for our sins, are
capable of no other sense, will appear from the consideration of Christ, as a
middle person between God and us; and therefore his being (...), cannot be
parallel with that phrase, where God himself is said, (...), for Christ is here
considered as interposing between God and us, as Moses and the Priests under
the Law did between God and the people, in order to the averting his wrath from
them. And when one does thus interpose in order to the Atonement of the
offended party, something is always supposed to be done or suffered by him, as
the means of that Atonement. As Jacob supposed the present he made to his
Brother would propitiate him; and David appeased the Gibeonites by the death of
Readiness Sons, both which are said (...). So the shedding of the blood of
Sacrifices before and under the Law, was the means of atoning God for the sins
they committed. What reason can there be then why so received a sense of
Atonement, both among the Jews, and all other Nations at that time when these
words were written, must be forsaken; and any other sense be embraced, which
neither agrees with the propriety of the expression, nor with so many other
places of Scripture, which make the blood of Christ to be a Sacrifice for the
Expiation of sin?

XII. Neither is it only our Atonement, Of Reconciliation by Christ's death.
but our Reconciliation is attributed to Christ too, with a respect to his
Death and Sufferings. As in the place before insisted on. Romans 5 10.
For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his
Son; and more largely in the second Epistle to the Corinthians. 2 Cor. 18, 19.21
And all things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ,
and has given to us the ministry of reconciliation: To wit, that God was in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto
them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. For he has made him
to be sin for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. And to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.16.
And that he might reconcile both unto God in one body by his Cross, having
slain the enmity thereby. To the same purpose to the Colossians, Col. 1.20, 21,
22.
And having made peace through the blood of his Cross, by him to reconcile all
things to himself, by him I say whether they be things in Heaven or in Earth;
and you that were sometimes alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works,
yet now has he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death. Two things
the substance of Crellius his answer may be reduced to concerning these places.
1. Crell. c. 7. sect. 15, 16, 17, 18, etc.
That it is no where said that God was reconciled to us, but that we are
reconciled to God, and therefore this reconciliation does not imply any
averting of the anger of God. 2. That none of these places do assert any
reconciliation with God antecedent to our conversion, and so that the
Reconciliation mentioned implies only the laying aside our enmity to God by our
sins. I begin with the first of these, concerning which we are to consider not
barely the phrases used in Scripture, but what the nature of the thing implies;
as to which a difference being supposed between God and man on the account of
sin, no reconciliation can be imagined but what is mutual. For did man only
fall out with God, and had not God just reason to be displeased with men for
their Apostasy from him? If not, what made him so severely punish the first
sin that ever was committed by man? what made him punish the old World for
their impieties by a deluge? what made him leave such Monuments of his anger
against the sins of the World in succeeding Ages? what made him add such severe
sanctions to the Laws he made to the people of the Jews? what made the most
upright among them so vehemently to deprecate his wrath and displeasure upon
the sense of their sins? Psalm. 6.1.38.1. Psalm. 5.5.7.11.11.5. Levit. 26.30.
what makes him declare not only his hatred of the sins of men, but of the
persons of those who commit them; so far as to express the greatest abhorrency
of them? Nay, what makes our Adversaries themselves to say, Crell de Deo and
Attrib. l 1. c. 30.
that impiety is in its own nature hateful to God, and stirs him up to anger
against all who commit it? what means, I say, all this, if God be not angry
with men on the account of sin? Well then; supposing God to be averse from men
by reason of their sins, shall this displeasure always continue or not? if it
always continues, men must certainly suffer the desert of their sins; if it
does not always continue, then God may be said to be reconciled in the same
sense that an offended party is capable of being reconciled to him who has
provoked him. Now there are two ways whereby a party justly offended may be
said to be reconciled to him that has offended him. First, when he is not only
willing to admit of terms of agreement, but does declare his acceptance of the
mediation of a third person, and that he is so well satisfied with what he has
done in order to it, that he appoints this to be published to the World to
assure the offender, that if the breach continues, the fault wholly lies upon
himself. The second is, when the offender does accept of the terms of agreement
offered, and submits himself to him whom he has provoked, and is upon that
received into favor. And these two we assert must necessarily be distinguished
in the reconciliation between God and us. For upon the death and sufferings of
Christ, God declares to the World he is so well satisfied with what Christ has
done and suffered in order to the reconciliation between himself and us, that
he now publishes remission of sins to the World upon those terms which the
Mediator has declared by his own doctrine, and the Apostles he sent to preach
it: But because remission of sins does not immediately follow upon the death of
Christ, without supposition of any act on our part, therefore the state of
favor does commence from the performance of the conditions which are required
from us. So that upon the death of Christ God declaring his acceptance of
Christ's mediation, and that the obstacle did not lie upon his part; therefore
those Messengers who were sent abroad into the world to persuade men to accept
of these terms of agreeement, do insist most upon that which was the remaining
obstacle, viz. the sins of Mankind, that men by laying aside them, would be now
reconciled to God, since there was nothing to hinder this reconciliation, their
obstinacy in sin excepted. Which may be a very reasonable account why we read
more frequently in the Writings of the Apostles, of men's duty in being
reconciled to God; the other being supposed by them as the foundation of their
preaching to the world, and is insisted on by them upon that account, as is
clear in that place to the Corinthians, 2 Cor. 5.19* 20.
That God was in Christ reconciling the World to himself, not imputing unto men
their trespasses, and has committed to us the word of Reconciliation; and
therefore adds, Now then we are Ambassadors for Christ, as though God did
beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled to God: And
least these words should seem dubious, he declares that the reconciliation in
Christ was distinct from that reconciliation he persuades them to; for the
reconciliation in Christ he supposes past, v. 18. All things are of God, who
has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and v. 21. he shows us how this
Reconciliation was wrought: For he has made him to be sin for us who knew no
sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Crell. c. 1. sect.
118. cap. 7. sect. 24.
Crellius here finds it necessary to acknowledge a twofold Reconciliation, but
hopes to escape the force of this place by a rare distinction of the
Reconciliation as preached by Christ, and by his Apostles; and so God's having
reconciled the world to himself by Jesus Christ is nothing else but Christ's
preaching the Gospel himself, who afterward committed that Office to his
Apostles. But if such shifts as these will serve to baffle men's understandings,
both they were made, and the Scripture were written to very little purpose; for
if this had been all the Apostle had meant, that Christ preached the same
Doctrine of Reconciliation before them, what mighty matter had this been to
have solemnly told the World, that Christ's Apostles preached no other
Doctrine, but what their Master had preached before? especially if no more were
meant by it, but that men should leave their sins, and be reconciled to God.
But besides, why is the Ministry of Reconciliation, then attributed only to the
Apostles, and not to Christ, which ought in the first place to have been given
to him, since the Apostles did only receive it from him? Why is that Ministry
of Reconciliation said to be, viz. that God was in Christ reconciling the World
to himself? was this all the subject of the Apostles preaching, to tell the
World, that Christ persuaded men to leave off their sins? how comes God to
reconcile the World to himself by the preaching of Christ, since Christ himself
says, he was not sent to preach to the world; but to the lost sheep of the
house of Israel? Was the World reconciled to God by the preaching of Christ,
before they had ever heard of him? Why is God said not to impute to men their
trespasses by the preaching of Christ, rather than his Apostles; if the not
imputing were no more than declaring God's readiness to pardon; which was
equally done by the Apostles as by Christ himself? Lastly, what force or
dependence is there in the last words, For he made him to be sin for us, who
knew no sin, etc. if all he had been speaking of before had only related to
Christ's preaching? How was he made sin more than the Apostles, if he were only
treated as a sinner upon the account of the same Doctrine which they preached
equally with him? and might not men be said to be made the righteousness of God
in the Apostles, as well as in Christ, if no more be meant, but being persuaded
to be righteous, by the Doctrine delivered to them?

In the two latter places, Ephesians. 2.16. Coloss. 1.20. etc. it is plain, that a
twofold reconciliation is likewise mentioned, the one of the Jews and Gentiles
to one another, the other of both of them to God. For nothing can be more
ridiculous than the Exposition of Socinus, who would have (...) not to be
joined with the Verb, (...), but to stand by it self, and to signify that this
reconciliation of the Jews and Gentiles did tend to the glory of God. Crell. c
7 sect. 30.
And Crellius, who stands out at nothing, hopes to bring off Socinus here too;
by saying, that it is very common, for the end to which a thing was appointed
to be expressed by a Dative case following the Verb; but he might have spared
his pains in proving a thing no one questions; the shorter answer had been to
have produced one place where (...) ever signifies any thing but to be
reconciled to God as the offended party; or wherever the Dative of the person
following the Verb importing reconciliation, did signify any thing else but
the party with whom the reconcil^ation was to be made. As for that obj^ction
concerning things in Heaven being reconciled: that phrase does not import such
a Reconciliation of the Angels as of M^n, ^u^ that Men and Angels upon the
reconciliation of Men to God, become one body under Christ, and are gathered
together in him, as the Apostle expresses it, Ephesians. 1.10.

XIII. 1. Having thus far proved, Objections answered.
that the effects of an Expiatory Sacrifice do belong to the death of Christ,
nothing now remains but an answer to be made to two Objections, which are
commonly insisted on by our Adversaries. The first is, That God was reconciled
before he sent his Son, and therefore Christ could not die to reconcile God to
us. The second is, That the Doctrine of Satisfaction asserted by us, is
inconsistent with the freeness of God's grace in the remission of sins: Both
which will admit of an easy Solution upon the principles of the foregoing
discourse. To the first I answer, That we assert nothing inconsistent with that
love of God, which was discovered in sending his Son into the world; we do not
say, That God hated mankind so much on the account of sin, that it was
impossible he should ever admit of any terms of Reconciliation with them, which
is the only thing inconsistent with the greatness of God's love, in sending
Christ into the world; but we adore and magnify the infiniteness and
unexpressible greatness of his love, that nothwithstanding all the contempt of
the former kindness and mercies of Heaven, he should be pleased to send his own
Son to die for sinners, that they might be reconciled to him. And herein was
the great love of God manifested, that while we were enemies and sinners,
Christ died for us, and that for this end, that we might be reconciled to God
by his death. And therefore surely, not in the state of favor or
Reconciliation with God then. But it were worth the while, to understand what
it is our Adversaries mean, when they say, God was reconciled when he sent his
Son, and therefore he could not die to reconcile God to us. Either they mean,
that God had decreed to be reconciled upon the sending his Son, or that he was
actually reconciled when he sent him: if he only decreed to be reconciled, that
was not at all inconsistent with Christ's dying to reconcile God and us in
pursuance of that decree: if they mean, he was actually reconciled, then there
was no need for Christ to die to reconcile God and us; but withal, actual
Reconciliation implies pardon of sin; and if sin were actually pardoned before
Christ came, there could be no need of his coming at all, and sins would have
been pardoned before committed; if they were not pardoned, notwithstanding that
love of God, then it can imply no more, but that God was willing to be
reconciled. If therefore the not-remission of sins were consistent with that
love of God, by which he sent Christ into the world, then notwithstanding that
he was yet capable of being reconciled by his death. So that our Adversaries
are bound to reconcile that love of God, with not presently pardoning the sins
of the world, as we are to reconcile it with the ends of the death of Christ,
which are asserted by us.

XIV. To the other Obejction, The freeness of Grace asserted in Scripture,
destroys not satisfaction.
Concerning the inconsistency of the Freeness of God's Grace with the Doctrine
of Satisfaction. I answer, Either God's Grace is so free as to exclude all
conditions, or not: If it be so free, as to exclude all conditions, then the
highest Antinomianism is the tru^st Doctrine; for that is the highest degree of
the Freeness of Grace, which admits of no conditions at all. If our Adversaries
say, That the Freeness of Grace is consistent with conditions required on our
part, Why shall it not admit of conditions on God's part? especially, when the
condition required, tends so highly to the end of God's governing the world, in
the manifestation of his hatred against sin, and the vindication of the honor
of his Laws by the Sufferings of the Son of God in our stead, as an Expiatory
Sacrifice for our sins. There are two things to be considered in sin, the
dishonor done to God, by the breach of his Laws, and the injury men do to
themselves by it; now remission of sins, that respects the injury which men
bring upon themselves by it; and that is Free, when the penalty is wholly
forgiven, as we assert it is by the Gospel to all penitent sinners: but shall
not God be free to vindicate his own Honor, and to declare his righteousness
to the world, while he is the Iustifier of them that believe? Shall men in case
of Defamation, be bound to vindicate themselves, though they freely forgive the
Authors of the slander, by our Adversaries own Doctrine? and must it be
repugnant to God's Grace, to admit of a Propitiatory Sacrifice, that the world
may understand, that it is no such easy thing to obtain pardon of sin
committed against God; but that as often as they consider the bitter Sufferings
of Christ, in order to the obtaining the forgiveness of our sins, that should
be the greatest Argument to dissuade them from the practice of them? But why
should it be more inconsistent with the Sacrifice of Christ, for God freely to
pardon sin, than it was ever presumed to be in all the Sacrifices of either
Jews or Gentiles? who all supposed Sacrifices necessary in order to Atonement;
and yet thought themselves obliged to the goodness of God in the Remission of
their sins? Nay we find that God himself, Genesis 20.7.
in the case of Abimelech, appointed Abraham to pray for him, in order to his
pardon; And will any one say, this was a derogation to the Grace of God in his
pardon? Job 42.7.
Or to the pardon of Job's Friends, because Job was appointed to Sacrifice for
them? Or to the pardon of the Israelites, because God out of kindness to them,
directed them by the Prophets, and appointed the means in order to it? But
although God appointed our High Priest for us, and out of his great love sent
him into the world, yet his Sacrifice was not what was given him, but what he
freely underwent himself; he gave us Christ, but Christ offered up himself a
full, perfect and sufficient Sacrifice, Oblation and Satisfaction for the sins
of the world.

Thus, Sir, I have now given you a larger account of what I then more briefly
discoursed of, concerning the true Reason of the Sufferings of Christ; and
heartily wishing you a right understanding in all things, and requesting from
you an impartial consideration of what I have written,

I am, SIR, Your, etc. E. S.
Ian. 6. 166^.
THE MYSTERIES OF The Christian Faith ASSERTED and VINDICATED: IN A SERMON
Preached at S. Laurence-Jewry in London, APRIL the 7th. 1691.

By the Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

A SERMON Preached at S. Laurence-Jury, APRIL the 7th. 1691.
1 TIMOTHY I.15. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, That
Christ Jesus came into the World to save Sinners, of whom I am chief.


IF these Words were to be understood without any Restriction or Limitation
that Christ Jesus came into the World to save sinners, they would overthrow the
great Design of the Gospel, and make its Excellent Precepts Useless and
Ineffectual. For, to what purpose should men be put upon the severe Practice of
Repentance, Mortification and a continued Course of a Holy Life, if the mere
being Sinners did sufficiently qualify them for Salvation? This indeed would
be thought a Doctrine worthy of all Acceptance by the greatest Sinners; but it
could not be a faithful saying, being not agreeable either to the Nature of
God, or Revelation of his Will by Christ Jesus. But S. Paul speaks of such
Sinners as himself had been, i. e. such as had been great Sianers, but had
truly and sincerely repented. Of whom I am chief. What then? Must we look on
him as the Standard and Measure of such Sinners whom Christ Jesus came to save?
What will then become of all those who have been Sinners of a higher Rank than
ever he was? It Is true in the Verses before the Text, he sets out his Sins, as
a humble Penitent is wont to do, with the worst Colors and deepest
Aggravations, Ver. 13.
Who was before a blasphemer and a persecutor, and injurious; but yet he adds,
that he obtained Mercy because he did it ignorantly, in unbelief. How then is
S. Paul the Chief of Sinners? Are Sins of Ignorance and Mistake the greatest of
Sins, for which Christ died? Is there no Expiation for any other by Jesus
Christ? What will become then of all such who sin against Knowledge and
Conscience, and not in Ignorance and Unbelief? Can none of these hope for Mercy
by Christ Jesus, although they do truly Repent? But the Blood of Christ is said
elsewhere to cleanse us from all Sin; not, 1 John 1.7.
while we continue in them, Chapter 2. v. 2.
but if we repent and forsake them. And Jesus Christ is said to be a
Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole
World. And therefore this Expression of S. Paul notes his great Humility and
deep Sense of his own Sins; but does not exclude others from the hopes of
Pardon whose Sins have other Aggravations than his had. For, if we leave out
the last words as peculiar to his Case, yet the other contain in them a true
Proposition and of the greatest Importance to Mankind; This is a faithful
saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners.

This, you may say, is a matter out of all doubt among all such who hope for
Salvation by Christ Jesus; for all are agreed, that one way or other we are to
be saved by him. But there is great Difficulty as to the Way of saving sinners
by Christ Jesus; whether by the Doctrine and Example of the Man Christ Jesus,
by the Power he attained through his Sufferings; Or, by the Eternal Son of
God's assuming our Nature and suffering in our stead in order to the
Reconciling God to us and making a Propitiation for our Sins. These are two
very different Hypotheses or Notions of Christ's coming to save Sinners; and
the former seems more easy to be understood and believed; and the other seems
to have Insuperable Difficulties in point of Reason; and to run our Religion
into Mysteries, which expose our Faith and make Christianity appear
Contemptible to Men of Sense and Understanding. Is it not therefore much better
to embrace such a Scheme of it, as will have the least Objection against it,
that so Men of Reason may not be tempted to Infidelity, and Men of Superstition
may not under the Color of Mysteries bring in the most Absurd and Unreasonable
Doctrines?

These are plausible Insinuations, and would be apt to prevail on considering
Men's minds, if they were to form and make a Religion that might be most
accommodated to the Genius and Humor of the Age they live in. And truly no Men
(by their own Authority) can pretend to a Right to impose on others any
Mysteries of Faith, or any such things which are above their Capacity to
understand. But that is not our case; for we all profess to believe and receive
Christianity as a Divine Revelation; and God (we say) may require from us the
belief of what we may not be able to comprehend, especially if it relates to
Himself, or such things which are Consequent upon the Union of the Divine and
Human Nature. Therefore our business is to consider, whether any such things be
contained in that Revelation which we all own; and if they be, we are bound to
believe them, although we are not able to comprehend them.

Now here are two Remarkable Characters in these Words, by which we may examine
these different Hypotheses concerning the way of Salvation by Jesus Christ.

I. It is a faithful saying, and therefore must be contained in that
Revelation which God has made concerning our Salvation by Christ.

II. It is worthy of all Acceptance; i. e. most useful and beneficial to
Mankind.

Now by these two I shall procceed in the Examination of them.

I. Which is most agreeable to the Revealed Will of God. II. Which does offer
fairest for the Benefit and Advantage of Mankind.
I. Which is most agreeable to the revealed Will of God. For that we are sure
is the most faithful saying; since Men of Wit and Reason may deceive us, but
God cannot. When the Apostles first preached this Doctrine to the World, they
were not bound to believe what they affirmed to be a faithful saying till they
gave sufficient Evidence of their Authority from God, by the wonderful
Assistance of the Holy Ghost. But now this faithful saying is contained in the
Books of the New Testament, by which we are to judge of the Truth of all
Christian Doctrines. And when two different Senses of Places of Scripture are
offered, we are to consider, which is most Reasonable to be preferred. And
herein we are allowed to Exercise our Reason as much as we please; and the more
we do so, the sooner we shall come to Satisfaction in this matter.

Now according to Reason we may judge that Sense to be preferred,

(1.) Which is most plain and easy and agreeable to the most received Sense of
Words; not that which is forced and intricate, or which puts improper and
metaphorical Senses upon Words which are commonly taken in other Senses;
especially when it is no Sacramental thing, which in its own Nature is
Figurative.

(2.) That which suits most with the Scope and Design not only of the
particular Places, but of the whole New Testament; which is, to magnify God
and to depress Man? to set forth, the Infinite Love and Condescension of God in
giving his Son to be a Propitiation for our Sins; to set up the Worship of one
true God in Opposition to Creatures; to Represent and Declare the mighty
Advantages Mankind receive by the Sufferings of Christ Jesus.

(3.) That which has been generally received in the Christian Church to be the
Sense of those places. For, we are certain, this was always looked on as a
matter of great Concernment to all Christians; and they had as great Capacity
of understanding the Sense of the Apostles: and the Primitive Church had
greater Helps for knowing it than others at so much greater Distance. And
therefore the Sense is not to be taken from modern Inventions, or Criticisms,
or pretenses to Revelation; but that which was at first delivered to the
Christian Church and has been since received and embraced by it in the several
Ages; and has been most strenuously asserted, when it has met with
Opposition, as founded on Scripture and the general Consent of the Christian
Church.

(4.) That which best agrees with the Characters of those Persons from whom we
recive the Christian Faith; and those are Christ Jesus and his holy Apostles.
For, if their Authority be lost, our Religion is gone; and their Authority
depends upon their Sincerity and Faithfulness, and Care to inform the World
aright in matters of so great Importance.

(1.) I begin with the Character which the Apostles give of Christ Jesus
himself; which is, that he was a Person of the greatest Humility and
Condescension, that he did not assume to himself that which he might justly
have done. For let the Words of S. Paul be understood either as to the Nature,
or Dignity of Christ, it is certain that they must imply thus much, that when
Christ Jesus was here on Earth, he was not of a vain assuming humor, that he
did not boast of himself, nor magnify his own Greatness, but was contented to
be looked on as other Men; although he had at that time far greater and Diviner
Excellency in him than the World would believe. Less than this, cannot be made
of those Words of the Apostle, Phil. 2.6, 7.
Who being in the form of God, he thought it not robbery to be equal with God,
but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant.

Now this being the Character given of him, let us consider what he does affirm
concerning himself. For although he was far from drawing the People after him,
by setting forth his own Perfections; yet upon just Occasions, when the Jews
contested with him, he did Assert such things, which must savor of Vanity and
Ostentation, or else must imply that he was the Eternal Son of God. For, all
Mankind are agreed that the highest degree of Ambition lies in Affecting Divine
Honor, or for a mere Man to be thought a God. How severely did God punish
Herod for being pleased with the Peoples folly in crying out, the Voice of God
and not of Man? Act. 12 22.
And therefore he could never have born with such positive Assertions and such
repeated Defenses of his being the Son of God in such a manner as implied his
being so from Eternity. This in his Disputes with the Jews he affirms several
times, that he came down from Heaven, Joh 6. 32, 33.
not in a Metaphorical but in a proper Sense, as appears by those words, What
and if ye shall see the Son of Man ascend up where he was before? 38.50.58.62
In another Conference he asserted, Joh 8.58.
that he was before Abraham. Which the Jews so literally understood, that
without a Metaphor they went about to stone him; v. 59.
little imagining that by Abraham the calling of the Gentiles was to be
understood. But above all, is that Expression which he used to the Jews at
another Conference, Joh. 10.30.
I and my Father are one; which they understood in such a manner that
immediately they took up stones to have stoned him. v. 31.
What means all this Rage of the Jews against him? What? for saying that he had
Unity of Consent with his Father? No certainly. But the Jews misunderstood him.
Let us suppose it; would not our Savior have immediately explained himself to
prevent so dangerous a Misconstruction? But he asked them, what it was they
stoned him for? They answer him directly and plainly, v. 32, 33.
because that thou being a man make thy self God. This was home to the
purpose. And here was the time for him to have denied it, if it had not been
so. But does he deny it? Does he say, it would be Blasphemy in him to own it?
No; but he goes about to defend it; and proves it to be no Blasphemy for him to
say that he was the Son of God; v. 36.
i. e. so as to be God, as the Jews understood it. Can we imagine that a mere
Man knowing himself to be such, should Assume this to himself; and yet God to
bear witness to him not only by Miracles but by a Voice from Heaven, wherein he
was called his beloved Son in whom he was well pleased? Mat. 3.17.
Could God be pleased with a mortal, finite, despicable Creature, as the Jews
thought him, that assumed to himself to be God, and maintained and defended it
among his own People, in a solemn Conference at a very Public Place, in one of
the Portico's of the Temple? And this he persisted in to the last. For, when
the High Priest adjured him by the living God to tell, Matthew. 26.63.
whether he were the Christ the Son of God, (for he, no doubt, had heard of the
Result of this Conference in Solomon's Porch) Jesus said unto him, v. 64. Mark
14.62.
Thou have said, S. Mark, more expressly, Jesus said, I am. And this was the
Blasphemy, for which they put him to death; as appears by the Evangelists. v.
64.
So that this ought to be a Dispute only between Jews and Christians; Matthew
26.66.
since it was the very point, for which they condemned him to death. And in his
last most divine Prayer just before his suffering, he owns the Glory which he
had with the Father before the World had a being. And now, O Father, Luke
22.71. Joh. 17.5.
glorify thou me with the glory which I had with thee, before the World was.
Was this nothing but the Glory which God had designed to give him? This is so
far from being peculiar to Christ, that it is common to all whom God designs to
glorify; and takes away the distinction between the Decree and the Execution
of it.

(2.) As to the Apostles, the Reason we believe their Testimony is, that they
were Men of great Sincerity and Plainness, and of great Zeal for the Honor and
Glory of God. And according to this Character, let us examine what they say
concerning Christ Jesus.

He that was most conversant with him, and beloved by him, and lived to see his
Divinity contested by some, and denied by others, is most ample in setting it
forth in his Admirable, Sublime, Joh. 1.1, 2. etc.
and Divine Introduction to his Gospel. Which all the Wit of Mankind can never
make tolerable Sense of, if they deny Christ's being the Eternal Son of God;
and it is he, that has preserved those Conferences with the Jews, wherein he
asserts his own Divinity.

S. Paul was a Stranger to him while he lived; but at the same time when he was
so zealous to persuade the Gentiles to the Worship of God and not of Creatures,
he calls him God over all, Romans 9.5.
blessed for evermore. And when he says, that the Eternal Power and Godhead
are known by the Creation of the World, Romans 1.20. Col. 1.16.
he attributes the Creation of all things to Christ, applying to him those
words of the Psalmist, Heb. 1.2* 10.
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the Earth and the
Heaven, the Work of thy hands. Which cannot be understood of any Metaphorical
Creation.

And after the strictest Examination of Copies, those will be found the best,
which have that Reading on which our Translation is grounded. And without
Controversy great is the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
God was manifest in the Flesh. So that God's being manifest in the Flesh is
made a great Part of the Mystery of Christianity.

But here arises a Difficulty, which deserves to be considered; i. e. If there
were nothing in the Christian Doctrine, but the Way of Saving sinners by the
Doctrine and Example of Christ, there would be little Objection to be made to
it; since the obtaining Eternal Life is certainly the best thing can be
proposed to Mankind, and the Precepts of Christ are Divine and Spiritual, Plain
and Easy to be Understood, and Agreeable to the Reason of Mankind; but many
other things are imposed on Men as necessary to be believed concerning Christ
Jesus, as to his Divinity, Incarnation, and the Hypostatical Union of both
Natures, which perplex and confound our Understandings; and yet these things
are not only deliver^d as Mysteries of the Christian Faith; but the Belief of
them is required as necessary to the Salvation of Sinners; whereas, if they are
Revealed they are no longer Mysteries; and if they are not Revealed, how come
they to be made Articles of Faith? The Scripture knows of no other Mysteries of
Faith but such as were hidden before the Revelation of them, but since they are
Revealed they are plain and open to all men's Capacities; and therefore it is a
great Injury to the Plainness and Simplicity of the Gospel to impose such
incomprehensible Mysteries, as Necessary Articles of Faith; and it is abusing
the Credulity of Mankind, to make such things necessary to be believed, which
are impossible to be understood. But those who have ever loved to deceive and
abuse the rest of the World, have been always fond of the Name of Mysteries;
and therefore all such things are to be suspected, which come under that Name.
For, all such Points which will not bear Examination, must be wrapped up and
Reverenced under the Name of Mysteries, that is, Discourse of the Word Mystery,
etc. p. 5.
of things to be swallowed without being understood. But the Scripture never
calls that a Mystery which is Incomprehensible in it self, though never so much
revealed.

This is the main force of the Objection, which I shall endeavor to remove by
showing, (1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of
what we cannot comprehend. (2.) That which way soever the Way of Salvation by
Christ be explained, there will be something of that Nature found in it; and
that those who reject the Mysteries of Faith run into greater Difficulties than
those who assert them. (3.) That no more is required as a Necessary Article of
Faith than what is plainly and clearly Revealed.


(1.) That God may justly require from us in general, the Belief of what we
cannot comprehend. It is to very little purpose to enquire whether the Word
Mystery in Scripture be applied to such particular Doctrines, whose Substance
is revealed, but the manner of them is incomprehensible by us; for why may not
we make use of such a Word whereby to express things truly revealed, but above
our Comprehension? We are certain the Word Mystery is used for things far less
difficult and abstruse; and why may it not then be fitly applied to such
matters, which are founded on Divine Revelation, but yet are too deep for us to
go to the bottom of them? Are there not Mysteries in Arts, Mysteries in Nature,
Mysteries in Providence? And what Absurdity is there to call those Mysteries,
which in some Measure are known, but in much greater unknown to us? Although
therefore in the Language of Scripture it be granted, that the word Mystery is
most frequently applied, to things before hidden, but now revealed, yet there
is no Incongruity in calling that a Mystery, which being revealed, has yet
something in it which our understandings cannot reach to. But it is mere
Cavilling to insist on a Word, if the Thing it self be granted. The chief thing
therefore to be done is, to show that God may require from us the belief of
such things which are incomprehensible by us. For, God may require any thing
from us, which it is reasonable for us to do; if it be then reasonable for us
to give Assent where the manner of what God has revealed is not comprehended,
then God may certainly require it from us. Has not God revealed to us, that in
six days he made Heaven and Earth and all that is therein? But is it not
reasonable for us to believe this, unless we are able to comprehend the manner
of God's production of things? Here we have something revealed and that plainly
enough, viz. that God created all things, and yet, here is a Mystery remaining
as to the manner of doing it. Has not God plainly revealed that there shall be
a Resurrection of the dead? and must we think it unreasonable to believe it,
till we are able to comprehend all the changes of the Particles of Matter from
the Creation to the General Resurrection? But it is said that there is no
Contradiction in this, but there is in the Mystery of the Trinity and
Incarnation. It is strange Boldness in Men to talk thus of Monstrous
Contradictions in things above their Reach. Observations on Dr. Wallis his four
Letters, p. 4.
The Atheists may as well say, Infinite Power is a Monstrous Contradiction; and
God^s Immensity and his other unsearchable Perfections are Monstrous Paradoxes
and Contradictions. Will Men never learn to distinguish between Numbers and the
Nature of Things? For three to be one is a Contradiction in Numbers; but
whether an Infinite Nature can communicate it self to three different
Subsistences without such a Division as is among Created Beings, must not be
determined by bare Numbers, but by the Absolute Perfections of the Divine
Nature; which must be owned to be above our Comprehension.

For let us examine some of those Perfections which are most clearly revealed
and we shall find this true. Psalm. 90.2. Revel 1.4. c. 11. v. 17.
The Scripture plainly reveals, that God is from everlasting to everlasting;
that he was and is and is to come; but shall we not believe the Truth of this
till we are able to fathom the Abyss of God's Eternity? Bister field c. Crell.
p. 50.
I am apt to think (and I have some thoughtful Men concurring with me) that
there is no greater Difficulty in the Conception of the Trinity and
Incarnation, than there is of Eternity. Not, Petav. de Trinit. l. 3. c. 9.
sect. 15.
but that there is great Reason to believe it; but from hence it appears that
our Reason may oblige us to believe some things which it is not possible for us
to comprehend. We know that either God must have been for ever, or it is
impossible he ever should be; for if he should come into Being when he was not,
he must have some Cause of his Being; and that which was the first Cause would
be God. But, if he was for ever he must be from himself; and what Notion or
Conception can we have in our Minds concerning it? And yet, Atheistical men can
take no Advantage from hence; because their own most absurd Hypothesis has the
very same Difficulty in it. For something must have been for ever. And it is
far more reasonable to suppose it of an Infinite and Eternal Mind, which has
Wisdom and Power and Goodness to give Being to other things, than of dull,
stupid and senseless Matter, which could never move it self, nor give Being to
any thing besides. Here we have therefore a thing which must be owned by all;
and yet such a thing which can be conceived by none. Which shows the narrowness
and shortness of our Understandings, and how unfit they are to be the Measures
of the Possibilities of things. Vain men would be wise; they would fain go to
the very bottom of things, when alas! they scarce understand the very Surface
of them. They will allow no Mysteries in Religion; and yet every thing is a
Mystery to them. They cry out of Cheats and Impostures under the Notion of
Mysteries; and yet there is not a Spire of Grass but is a Mystery to them; they
will bear with nothing in Religion which they cannot comprehend, and yet there
is scarce any thing in the World which they can comprehend. But above other
things the Divine Perfections, even those which are most Absolute and Necessary
are above their Reach. For let such Men try their Imaginations about God's
Eternity, not merely how he should be from himself, but how God should coexist
with all the Differences of Times, and yet there be no Succession in his own
Being. I do not say there is such Difficulty to conceive a Rock standing still
when the Waves run by it; or the Gnomon of a Dial when the Shadow passes from
one Figure to another; because these are gross unactive things; but the
Difficulty is far greater where the Being is Perfect and always Active. For,
where there is Succession there is a passing out of not being in such a
duration into being in it; which is not consistent with the Absolute Perfection
of the Divine Nature. And therefore God must be all at once what he is, without
any Respect to the Difference of Time past, present or to come. From whence
Eternity was defined by Boethius to be a perfect and complete Possession all at
once of everlasting Life. De Consol. l. 3.
But how can we from any Conception in our Minds of that being all at once,
which has such different Acts as must be measured by a long Succession of
Time? As, the Creating and Dissolving the Frame of the World; the promising and
sending the Messiah; the Declaring and Executing a general Judgment; how can
these things be consistent with a Permanent Instant, or a Continuance of being
without Succession? For, it is impossible for us in this Case, as to God's
Eternity, to form a clear and distinct Idea in our Mind, of that which both
Reason and Revelation convince us must be. The most we can make of our
Conception of it is, that God has neither Beginning of Being, nor End of Days;
but that he always was and always must be. And this is rather a necessary
Conclusion from Reason and Scripture, than any distinct Notion or Conception of
Eternity in our Minds. From whence it evidently follows, that God may reveal
something to us, which we are bound to believe, and yet after that Revelation
the Manner of it may be incomprehensible by us, and consequently a Mystery to
us.

Has not God Revealed to us in Scripture the Spirituality of his own Nature?
S. Joh. 4.24.
That he is a Spirit, and therefore will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth;
For, that is a true Reason why Spiritual Worship should be most agreeable to
him. Now, if we could have a clear, distinct, positive Notion in our minds of
God's Spiritual Nature, we might then pretend that there is nothing mysterious
in this, since it is revealed.

But let such men Examine their own thoughts about this matter; and try,
whether the utmost they can attain to, be not something Negative, viz. because
great Absurdities would follow if we attributed any thing Corporeal to God;
for, then he must be compounded of Parts, and so he may be dissolved; then he
must be confined to a certain place, and not everywhere present; he cannot
have the Power of Acting and Self-determining which a mere Body has not. For
the clearest Notion we can have of Body, is, that it is made up of some things
as parts of it, which may be separated from each other; and is confined to a
certain place, and has no Power to move or act from it self. But some of these
men who cry down Mysteries and magnify Reason, to show how slender their
pretenses to Reason are, have asserted a Corporeal God, with Shape and Figure.
It was indeed, well thought of by those who would make a Man to be God, to
bring God down as near to Man as might be. But how to Reconcile the Notion of a
Body with Infinite Perfections, is a Mystery to me, and far above my
Comprehension. But if it be no Mystery to such Men, they must either deny God's
Infinite Perfections or show how a bodily Shape can be capable of them. But
some men can confound Finite and Infinite, Body and Spirit, God and Man, and
yet are for no Mysteries; whereas these things are farther from our Reach and
Comprehension, than any o^ those Doctrines which they find fault with* But to
proceed.

If we believe Prophecy, we must believe God's foreknowledge of future events:
For, how could they be foretold if he did not foreknow them? And if he did
foreknow those which he did foretell, then it was either because those only
were revealed to him which is inconsistent with the Divine Perfections; or that
he does foreknow all other Events and only thought fitting to Reveal these:
But how can they solve the Difficulties about Divine Prescience? Is there no
Mystery in this? Nothing above their Comprehension? What then made their great
Master deny it, Socin. Prael. c. 11.
as a thing above his Comprehension? Because nothing can be fore-known but what
has a certain Cause, and therefore, if evil Actions be foretold, God must be
the Cause of them, and Men will not be free Agents in them. And yet it is most
certain, that the Sufferings of Christ by the Wickedness of Men, were
foretold. What then? Must we make God the Author of Sin? God forbid. Will the
righteous Judge of all the Earth, punish Mankind for his own Acts, which they
could not avoid? Then we must yield, that there is something in the manner of
the Divine Prescience, which is above our Comprehension. And the most Searching
and Inquisitive Men have been forced to yield it at last, as to the Connection
between the Certainty of Prescience and the Liberty of humane Actions. Is it
not then much better to sit down quietly at first, Adoring the Infiniteness of
God's incomprehensible Perfections, than after all the huffings and disputings
of Men to say, Cajetan in 1. q. 22* art. 4*
In Ignorantia sola quietem invenio, as the great Schoolman did? Surely then,
here is something plainly revealed, and yet the manner of it is still a Mystery
to us.

I shall not now insist on any more of the particular Attributes of God, but
only in general I desire to know, whether they believe them to be finite or
infinite? If to be finite, then they must have certain bounds and limits which
they cannot exceed; and that must either be from the imperfection of Nature, or
from a Superior Cause, both which are repugnant to the very Being of God. If
they believe them to be infinite, how can they comprehend them? We are
strangely puzzled in plain, ordinary, finite things; but it is madness to
pretend to comprehend what is Infinite; and yet if the Perfections of God be
not Infinite they cannot belong to Him.

I shall only add, in Consequence to this Assertion, That if nothing is to be
believed, but what may be comprehended, the very Being of God must be rejected
too. And therefore I desire all such who talk so warmly against any Mysteries
in Religion, to consider whose work it is they are doing; even theirs who under
this pretense go about to overthrow all Religion. For, say they, Religion is a
Mystery in its own Nature; not this or that, or the other Religion; but they
are all alike, all is Mystery; and that is but another Name for Fraud and
Imposture. What were the Heathen Mysteries but tricks of Priestcraft; and such
are maintained and kept up in all kinds of Religion. If therefore these men,
who talk against Mysteries understand themselves, they must in pursuance of
their Principles reject one God, as well as three Persons; For, as long as they
believe an Infinite and Incomprehensible Being, it is Nonsense to reject any
other Doctrine, which relates to an Infinite Being, because it is
Incomprehensible.

But yet these very Men, who seem to pursue the Consequence of this Principle
to the utmost, must assert something more incomprehensible than the Being of
God. For, I appeal to any man of common Understanding, whether it be not more
agreeable to Reason to suppose Works of Skill, Beauty and Order to be the
Effects of a Wise and Intelligent Being, than of Blind Chance and Unaccountable
Necessity; whether it be not more agreeable to the Sense of Mankind to suppose
an Infinite and Eternal Mind endued with all possible Perfections to be the
Maker of this visible World; than, that it should start out from it self,
without Contrivance, without Order, without Cause? Certainly such men have no
Reason to find fault with the Mysteries of Religion because they are
incomprehensible, since there is nothing so Absurd and Incomprehensible, as
their darling Hypothesis; And, there is nothing which can make it prevail, but
to suppose Mankind to be as Dull and Insensible as the first Chaos.

Thus I have shown that it is not unreasonable for God to require from us the
Belief of something which we cannot comprehend.

(2.) I now come to consider, whether those who are so afraid of
incomprehensible Mysteries in our Faith, have made it so much more easy in the
Way they have taken. And notwithstanding all the Hectoring talk against
Mysteries and things incomprehensible in Religion, I find more insuperable
Difficulties in point of Reason in their Way than in ours. As for instance.

(1.) It is a more Reasonable thing to suppose something Mysterious in the
Eternal Son of Gods being with the Father before the World was made by him; (as
S. John expresses it in the beginning of his Gospel) than in supposing that
although John the Baptist were born six Months before Jesus Christ; that yet
Christ was in Dignity before him. What a wonderful Mystery is this? Can Men
have the Face to cry down Mysteries in deep Speculations, and matters of a high
and abstruse Nature, when they make such Mysteries of plain and easy things?
and suppose the Evangelist in profound Language and lofty Expressions to prove
a thing, which was never disputed, viz. although Christ Jesus were born six
Months after John, yet he was in Dignity before him?

(2.) It is a more Reasonable thing to suppose that a Divine Person should
assume humane Nature, and so the Word to be made Flesh; than to say, that an
Attribute of God, his Wisdom or Power is made Flesh, which is a Mystery beyond
all Comprehension; There may be some Difficulties in our Conception of the
other, but this is a thing beyond all Conception or Imagination; For an
Accident to be made a Substance is as absurd, as to imagine it to subsist
without one.

(3.) It is more Reasonable to suppose that the Son of God should come down
from Heaven and take our Nature upon him, than that a man should be rapt up
into Heaven, that it might be said that he came down from thence. For in the
fo^mer Supposition we have many other places of Scripture to support it, which
speak of his being with God, and having Glory with him before the World was;
whereas there is nothing for the other, but only that it is necessary to make
some tolerable Sense of those words.

(4.) It is more Reasonable to believe that God should become Man by taking our
Nature upon him, than that Man should become God. For in the former, there is
nothing but the Difficulty of conceiving the Ma^^^r of the Union, which we all
grant to be so between Soul and Body; but in the other there is a Repugnancy in
the very Conception of a Created God, of an Eternal Son of Adam, of Omnipotent
Infirmity, of an Infinite finite Being. In the former Case, an Infinite is
united to a Finite; but in the other a Finite becomes Infinite.

(5.) It is more Reasonable to believe that Christ Jesus should suffer as he
did for our sakes than for his own. We are all agreed that the Sufferings of
Christ were far beyond any thing he deserved at God's hands; but what Account
then is to be given of them? We say that he made himself a voluntary Sacrifice
for Expiation of the Sins of Mankind; and so there was a great and noble End
designed, and no Injury done to a willing Mind; and the Scripture as plainly
expresses this, as it can do in Words. But others deny this, and make him to
suffer as one wholly Innocent; for what Cause? To make the most Innocent
Persons as apprehensive of Suffering as the most Guilty; and the most righteous
God to put no difference between them, with Respect to Suffering.

(6.) It is more Reasonable to suppose such a Condescension in the Son of God
to take upon him the Form of a Servant for our Advantage; than that a mere Man
should be Exalted to the Honor and Worship which belongs only to God. For, on
the one side, there is nothing but what is agreeable to the Divine Nature, viz.
Infinite Love and Condescension and Pity to Mankind; on the other, there is the
greatest Design of Self-Exaltation that ever was in Humane Nature, viz. for a
mere Man to have the most Essential Attributes and Incommunicable Honor which
belongs to God. And whether of these two is more agreeable to the Spirit and
Design of the New Testament, let any man of understanding judge. For as it is
evident, that the great Intention of it is to magnify the wonderful Love of
God in the sending of his Son; so it is as plain that one great End of the
Christian Doctrine was to take Mankind off from giving Divine Worship to
Creatures; and can we then suppose that at the same time it should set up the
Worship of a mere Man with all the Honor and Adoration which belongs to God?
This is to me an incomprehensible Mystery indeed, and far beyond all that is
implied in the Mysteries of the Trinity and Incarnation. For it subverts the
very Foundation of the Design of Christianity as to the Reforming Idolatry then
in being; it lays the Foundation for introducing it into the Wo^ld again; for
since the Distance between God and his Creatures is taken away, in the matter
of Worship, there is nothing left but the Declaration of his Will; which does
not exclude more Mediators of Intercession but upon this Ground, that the
Mediation of Redemption is the Foundation of that of Intercession. And it is
far more easy for us to suppose there may be some things too hard for us to
understand in the Mystery of our Redemption by Jesus Christ, than that at the
same time it should be both a Duty and a Sin to worship any but the true God
with proper Divine Worship. For if it be Idolatry to give it to a Creature,
then it is a great Sin; for so the Scripture still accounts it; but if we are
bound to give it to Christ who is but a Creature, then that which in it self is
a Sin, is now become a Necessary Duty; which overthrows the Natural Differences
of Good and Evil, and makes Idolatry to be a mere Arbitrary thing. And I take
it for granted, that in Matters of Religion, Moral Difficulties are more to be
regarded than Intellectual; because Religion was far more designed for a Rule
of our Actions, than for the Satisfaction of our Curiosity. And upon due
Examination we shall find that there is no such frightfull Appearances of
Difficulties in the Mystery of the Incarnation, as there is in giving Divine
Worship to a Creature.

And it ought to be observed, that those very Places which are supposed to
exclude Christ from being the true God; S. Joh. 17.3.
must, if they have any force, exclude him from Divine Worship. For they are
spoken of God, 1 Cor. 6.6.
as the Object of our Worship; Socin. ad Eutrop. p. 96. c Wick. c. 11. Catech.
Racov. p. 65.
but if he be not excluded from Divine Worship, then neither is he from being
the true God; which they grant he is by Office, but not by Nature.

But a God by Office who is not so by Nature is a new and incomprehensible
Mystery. A Mystery hidden from Ages and Generations as to the Church of God;
but not made known by the Gospel of his Son.

This is such a kind of Mystery as the Heathen Priests had, who had Gods many
and Lords many, 1 Cor. 8.5.
as the Apostle says, i. e. many by Office although but one by Nature. But if
the Christian Religion had owned one God by Nature and only one by Office, the
Heathens had been to blame chiefly in the Number of their Gods by Office, and
not in the Divine Worship which they gave to them. But S. Paul blames the
Heathens for doing Service to them which by Nature are no Gods; Gal. 4.8.
not for doing it without Divine Authority, nor for mistaking the Person who
was God by Office, but in giving Divine Worship to them who by Nature were no
Gods; which he would never have said, if by the Christian Doctrine, Divine
Worship were to be given to one who was not God by Nature.

But these are indeed incomprehensible Mysteries how a Man by Nature can be a
God really and truly by Office; how the Incommunicable Perfections of the
Divine Nature can be communicated to a Creature; how God should give his Glory
to another, and by his own Command require that to be given to a Creature,
which himself had absolutely forbidden to be given to any besides himself. It
is said by a famous Jesuit (I will not say how agreeably to their own Doctrines
and Practices about Divine Worship) that the Command of God cannot make him
worthy of Divine Worship, Smiglec. de Divin. Verb. Incarn. Not. p. 45.
who without such a Command is not worthy of it. And it is very absurd to say,
that he that is unworthy of it without a Command, can become worthy by it; for
it makes God to command Divine Honor to be given to one who cannot deserve it.
(For no mere Man can deserve to be made God. N^va Monstra, etc. p. 42.
) But it is more agreeable to the Divine Nature and Will not to give his Honor
to a Creature.

(3.) But after all the Invectives of these Enemies to Mysteries, we do not
make that which we say is Incomprehensible to be a Necessary Article of Faith
as it is Incomprehensible; but we do assert that what is Incomprehensible as to
the Manner, may be a Necessary Article as far as it is plainly Revealed. As in
the Instances I have already mentioned of the Creation and Resurrection of the
Dead; would they in earnest have Men turn Infidels as to these things till they
are able to comprehnd all the difficulties which relate to them? If not, why
should this suggestion be allowed as to the Mysteries which relate to our
Redemption by Jesus Christ? If it be said, the Case is not alike for those are
clearly Revealed and these are not; this brings it to the true and proper Issue
of this matter, and if we do not prove a clear Revelation, we do not assert
their being Necessary Articles of Faith; but my present business was only to
take off this Objection, That the Mysteries were Incomprehensible and therefore
not to be received by us.

II. And so I come to the second Way, by which we are to Examine the several
Senses of Christ Jesus coming to save Sinners: Which of them tends more to the
Benefit and Advantage of Mankind; or which is more worthy of all Acceptance.

And that will appear by considering these things; (1.) Which tends most to the
raising our Esteem and Love of Christ Jesus. (2.) Which tends most to the
begetting in us a greater Hatred of Sin. (3.) Which tends most to the
strengthening our Hope of Salvation by Jesus Christ.


(1.) As to the raising in us a greater Esteem and Love of Christ. We are
certain that the Infinite Love and Condescension of Christ Jesus in undertaking
such a Work as the saving of Sinners makes it most worthy of all Acceptance.
Some Men may please themselves in thinking that by taking away all Mysteries
they have made their Faith more easy, but I am certain they have extremely
lessened the Argument for our Love, viz. the Apprehensions of the wonderful
Love and Condescension of Christ in coming into the World to save Sinners. And
yet this is the great Argument of the New Testament to persuade Mankind to the
Love of God and of his Son: God so loved the World that he gave his only
begotten Son, Joh. 3.16.
etc. This is indeed a mighty Argument of Love, if by the only begotten Son be
meant the Eternal Son of God, v. 13.
who came down from Heaven, as S. John speaks just before; but if no more be
meant but only that God made a mere Man to be his Son, and after he had
preached a while here on Earth and was ill used and crucified by his own
People, he Exalted him to be God and gave him Divine Attributes and Honors;
this were an Argument of great Love to the Person of Christ, but not to the
rest of Mankind. But God's Love in Scripture is magnified with Respect to the
World in the sending of his Son. In this was manifested, 1 John 4.9.
says the Apostle, the Love of God toward us, because that God sent his only
begotten Son into the World that we should live through him. v. 10.
Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son
to be a Propitiation for our Sins. The great Love we still see is toward us,
i. e. toward Mankind; but according to the other Sense it must have been,
Herein was the Love of God manifested to his Son, that for his Sufferings he
exalted him above all Creatures. He that spared not his own Son, says S. Paul,
Romans 8.32.
but delivered him up for us all. If he were the Eternal Son of God who came to
suffer for us, there is a mighty force and Emphasis in this Expression, and
very apt to raise our Admiration and our Love; But what not sparing his own Son
is there, if nothing were meant but that he designed by Sufferings to Exalt
him? For not Sparing him supposes an Antecedent Relation of the highest
Kindness, but the other is only designing extraordinary Kindness for the sake
of his Sufferings. Therefore, the Argument for the Love of God is taken from
what his Son was, when he delivered him up for us all; he was his own Son; not
by Adoption as others are; S. John calls him, John 1.14. chapter 3. v. 16. Luke
3.22.
his only begotten Son; and God himself, his beloved Son in the Voice from
Heaven; and this before his Sufferings, immediately after his Baptism, when as
yet, there was nothing extraordinary done by him, as to the great Design of his
coming. Which shows, that there was an Antecedent Relation between him and the
Father; and that therein the Love of God and of Christ was manifested, that
being the only begotten Son of the Father, he should take our Nature upon him
and for our sakes do and (...) what he did. This is indeed an Argument great
enough to raise our Ad^^ration, to excite our Devotion, to in^^^me our
A^^ections; but how flat and low does it appear, when it comes to no more (...)
this, that there was a Man, w^om* after his Sufferings God raised from the Dead
and made him a God by Office? Does this carry any such Argument in it for our
Esteem and Love and Devotion to him as the other does upon the mo^^ serious
Consideration of it?

(2.) Which tends most to beget in (...) a greater Hatred of Sin. For that is
so contrary to the Way of our Salvation by Jesus Christ, that what tends most
to ou^ Hatred of it, must conduce most to our happiness, and therefore be most
worthy of all Acceptance. It is agreed on all hand^, that Christ did suffer
very much both in his Mind and in his Body. In his Mind, Joh. 13.21.
when it is said, that he was troubled in Spirit; Matt. 26.37, 38.
that he began to be sorrowful and very heavy; and soon after, My Soul is
exceeding sorrowful, even unto death. S. Luke says, Mark 14.33, 34. Luke
22.44.
that he was in an Agony; wherein he not only prayed more earnestly, but his
sweat was as it were great Drops of Blood falling to the Ground. What made this
Amazement, and dreadful Agony in the mind of the most innocent Person in the
World? Was it merely the Fear of the Pains of Death which he was to undergo?
That is impossible, considering the Assurance which he had of so glorious a
Reward so soon following after; when so many Martyrs endured such exquisite
Torments for his sake without any such Disturbance or Consternation. But the
Apostles give us another Account of it. S. Peter says, 1 Pet. 2.24.
he was to bear our Sins in his own body on the tree; 3.18.
that Christ suffered for Sins, the just for the unjust. S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.21.
that God made him to be Sin for us who knew no Sin, that he might be made the
righteousness of God in him. Hereby we understand how so innocent a Person came
to suffer; he stood in our stead; he was made Sin for us; and therefore was to
be treated as a Sinner; and to suffer that on our Account, which he could not
deserve on his own. If he suffered on his own Account, this were the way to
fill our Minds with perplexity concerning the Justice of Providence with
Respect to his dealings with the most innocent and holy Persons in this World;
If he suffered on our Account, then we have the Benefit of his Sufferings, and
therein we see how displeasing to God sin is, when even his own Son suffered so
much by taking the guilt of our Sins upon him. And what can tend more to the
begetting in us a due hatred of sin, than to consider what Christ himself
suffered on the Account of it? What can make us have more dreadful thoughts of
it, than that the great and merciful God, when he designed to save sinners, yet
would have his own Son to become a Propitiation for the Sins of Mankind? And
unless we allow this, we must put force upon the plainest Expressions of
Scripture; and make Christ to suffer merely to show God's Power over a most
innocent Person, and his Will and Pleasure to inflict the most severe
Punishment without any Respect to Guilt. And surely such a Notion of God,
cannot be worthy of all Acceptance.

(3.) Which tends most to strengthen our Hope of Salvation by Christ Jesus. If
we believe that he suffered for our Sins, then we have great Reason to hope for
the Forgiveness of them; although they have been many and great, if we
sincerely Repent; because the most prevailing Argument for Despair will be
removed; which is taken from the Justice of God, and his declared Hatred of Sin
and Displeasure against Sinners. If God be so much in earnest displeased with
the Sins of Mankind, and his Justice be concerned in the Punishment of Sinners,
how can they ever hope to escape, unless there be a way for his Displeasure to
be removed, and his Justice to be satisfied? And this the Scripture tells us is
done by Christ, who died that he might be a Sacrifice of Atonement to Reconcile
us to God by his Death; as S. Paul expressly affirms. Romans 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.19.
Heb. 9.15.
And by this means, we may have strong Consolation from the Hopes of
Forgiveness of our Sins. Whereas, if this be taken away, either Men must
believe that God was not in earnest displeased with the Sins of Mankind; which
must exceedingly lessen our Esteem of the Holiness and Justice of God; or if he
were so displeased, that he laid aside his Displeasure, without any Atonement
or Sacrifice of Expiation. And so, as many as look on God's Justice and
Holiness as necessary and essential Attributes of God, will be in danger of
sinking into the Depths of Despair, as often as they Reflect seriously on the
Guilt of their Sins. But on the other side, if we believe that while we were
Enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son; then we may have
Peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ; and have reason to believe that
there will be no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus by a lively
Faith and sincere Repentance; then they may with Comfort look up to God as a
Reconciled Father, through Jesus Christ our Mediator: then they may with inward
Satisfaction look beyond the Grave, and steadfastly hope for that Salvation
which Christ purchased on Earth and will at last bestow on all such as Love and
Obey him. To which God of his Infinite Mercy bring us all through Jesus Christ.
For, This is a faithful Saying and worthy of all Acceptance, that he came
into the World to save Sinners.

FINIS.
Books Written by the Right Reverend Father in God Edw. L. Bishop of Worcester,
and sold by H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion; being a
Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference,
etc. from the pretended Answer of T. G. 2d. Edit. Fol. Origines Britannica, or
the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a Preface concerning some
pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in Vindication of the Bishop of St.
Asaph. Folio. Irenicum, A Weapon-Salve for the Churches Wounds. Quarto.
Origines Sacrae, Or a Rational account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as to
the Truth and Divine Authority of the Script and the matters therein contained.
4 to. A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and
the hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it. Octavo. An Answer to several
late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled, A Discourse concerning the
Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the hazard of Salvation in the
Communion of it; Part I. Octavo. A Second Discourse in Vindication of the
Protestant Grounds of Faith, against the pretense of Infallibility in the Roman
Church, in Answer to the Guide in Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without
Principles, and Reason and Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W.
with a particular enquiry into the Miracles of the Roman Church. Octavo. An
Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching his
Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet. Octavo. A Defense of the Discourse concerning
the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, in answer to a Book entitled,
Catholics no Idolaters: Octavo. Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a
Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine of the Church of England; being a full Answer
to the late Dialogues of T. G. Octavo. A Discourse concerning Bonds of
Resignation of Benefices in point of Law and Conscience, in Octavo. A Discourse
concerning the Illegality of the Ecclesiastical Commission, in Answer to the
Vindication and Defense of it: wherein the true notion of the Legal Supremacy
is cleared; and an Account is given of the Nature, Original and Mischief of the
Dispensing Power. The Council of Trent Examined and Disproved by Catholic
Tradition, in the main Points in Controversy between Us and the Church of
Rome; with a particular Account of the Times and Occasions of Introducing them.
The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an Impartial account of the History,
Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion of the Chapter of
England. Quarto. The Grand Question concerning the Bishops Right to vote in
Parliament in Cases Capital stated and argued, from the Parliament-Rolls and
the History of former times; with an Enquiry into their Peerage, and the Tree
Estates in Parliament. Octavo. Twelve Sermons preached upon several Occasions.
Vol. I. Octavo. Ten Sermons preached upon several Occasions. Vol. II. Octavo. A
Third Volume will be shortly published. A Discourse in Vindication of the
Doctrine of the Trinity: with an Answer to the late Socinian Objections against
it, from Scripture, Antiquity and Reason. And a Preface concerning the
different Explication of the Trinity, and the Tendency of the present Socinian
Controversy. The second. Edition. Octavo. The Bishop of Worcester's Answer to
Mr. Lock's Letter concerning some Passages relating to his Essay of Humane
Understanding, mentioned in the late Discourse in Vindication of the Trinity.
With a Postscript in Answer to some Reflections made on that Treatise in a late
Socinian Treatise.

