JUS POPULI VINDICATUM, OR The Peoples Right, to (...) and their Covenanted
R(...)

Wherein the Act of (...) and Vindication, which was interprised Anno 1666. is
particularly justified: The lawfulness of private Persons defending their
Lives, Libertyes and Religion, against manifest Oppression, Tyranny and
violence, exerced by Magistrates Supreme and Inferior, contrare to Solemn
Vows, Covenants, Promises, Declarations, Professions, Subscriptions, and
Solemn. Engadgments, is de^^^strate by ^any Argum^^ts.

Being a (...) Reply to the first pa^^ of the Survey of Naph. (...) etc* By a
Friend to true Christian Liberty.

PSALM. LXXIV. Ver. 20, 21, 22, 23* (...)e unto the Covenant; For the dark
places of the earth are full of the habitations of cruelty. O let not the
oppressed return ashamed. Let the poor and needy praise thy name. Arise o God,
plead thine own cause: Remember how the foolish man reproacheth thee daily.
Forget not the voice of thine Enemies; the tumult of these that rise up against
increases continually.

HOS. I. ver. 7. But I will have mercy upon the house of Juda^, and will save
them by the Lord their God; and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by
battle, by horses, nor by horsemen.



Printed in the Year, MDCLXIX.

CHRISTIAN READER.
IT will not (I suppose) be very necessary, to make any full Relation or large
Deduction of the occasion and first rise of this debate, The same, being not
only fresh and recent to all both Friends and foes, who have been Spectators of
the great and wonderful workings of God in our Land; but the memory thereof (if
it could be so soon obliterate) is revived a fresh, by the constantly renewed
acts of Tyranny and oppression, which, from year to year, The Powers, acted by
the same Spirit of Enimity to the Cause and Interest of Christ, are exerceing,
upon the account thereof: So that the Continual rage and Constant opposition,
which the ingrained adversaries of the Glory and Kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ are daily acting and making against all who desire to keep a conscience
void of offense both toward God and Man, and to remember with some sense and
fear their solemn vows and Sacred engadgments unto the Most High, will not
suffer us to forget, how that After our Land was solemnly de^^uted unto God,
by Solemn Covenants and indissoluble (...); and the defense of the Reformed
Religion, in Do(...), Worshipe, Discipline and Government, become (...)
condition, yea the basis, of our political constitu^ion; The King not only by
his solemn and sacred oath swearing, and by his hand writeing subscribing, and
so fully owneing and approving the same; but upon these terms and conditions
accepting the Royal Crown and Scepter, in the day of his solemn inauguration.
The People also upon the same terms promiseing all subjection and obedience
in the Lord: And afterward in full Parliament confirming, ratifying, and
approving the same; and thereby giving all the security, which either Reason,
Law, or Religion could expect or require, That all the Ends of these holy
Covenants should have been, in all time comeing, really, sincerely and
constantly prosecuted by King and Nobles, and all ranks of persons within the
Land, with one heart and mind; and consequently That the evils, particularly
That accursed Hierarchy, fully and for ever abjured in these Everlasting Bonds,
should never be countenanced, owned or favored, far less re-intro-duced and
established: and after, for our owneing of these necessary things, and of the
Kings interest in subordination thereunto, we were invaded by the English, and
(the Lord, who for his his own holy Ends, saw it necessary, and does
whatsoever he will in Heaven and in Earth, so disposeing) overcome, and brought
into bondage full Ten Years; and at length, The King, who was forced to flee
out of all his Dominions, returning, in such a remarkable and signal way,
without blood, as might have engaged his heart more firmly then ever unto that
God, who had done such rare, and unexpected things for him, and made him more
then ever fixedly resolve to own Him and his holy Interests, according to his
former Vows, Oaths, Subscriptions, Covenants, and Declarations; and
rationally ascertaned his Subjects, that these necessary and good things,
should not only never be overturned and ranversed; but also with greater Zeal,
and resolution established, confirmed and prosecuted, then ever formerly: and
how, instead of this, No sooner did the report of his Majesty's return come
abroad, but all the generation of malignants, who had ever been heart enemies
to the work of God, which was carried on in the Land, did lift up their head,
insult over the People of God with all their might according to their ordinary
insolency, spew out their Venom against the work of God, and at length
obteaning power, did raze the same unto the very foundations, anull and
rescinde all Acts, all Covenants, all Resolutions and Conclusions, which had
been made and taken for settling and secureing the Reformed Religion in
Doctrine, Worshipe, Discipline, and Government; condemn all which had been
done in carrying on the Work of Reformation, as pure and manifest Rebellion;
and having re-intro-duced and established abjured Prelacy with all it is
concomitant abominations, did enact and enjoyne most tyrannically a full
conformity unto all these abominations, and press, in a most horrid and
arbitrary manner, the faithful Servants and seekers of God, to a compliance
with these accursed and ever to be abhorred, courses; and upon their simple
refusal, did violently and barbarously eject the faithful Servants of Christ,
banishing some out of all the three Dominions, incarcerating others, (after
thev had imbrewed their hands in the blood of the best of our Nobility, and
Ministry) and chaseing by their irrational and brutish acts multitudes of them
from their flocks and familiars; and then having in an antichristian manner,
thrust in upon the People a crew of the basest and naughtiest wreatches the
Earth did bear, and by their cruel and tyrannical acts, compelled and
constrained the couscientious seekers of God, to accept of, countenance, own,
and constantly hear such, as lawful Ministers, lawfully called and sent of God;
and when honest People, considering both the way of their entry to be
Antichristian, their doctrine false and erroneous, their conversation
scandalous and abominable, their qualifications rather such as suit the
public Ministers of Satan, then the called Servants of God, their whole
deportment a manifest demonstration to all onlookers, that they were never
called of God unto that work; and considering how iniquously their own
faithful Pastors and Fathers had been thrust from them, and how by their
solemn Oath they stood obliged to the constant keeping of a perfect antipathy,
unto every part and pendicle of that abjured Hierarchy, and unto what was
contrary to sound doctrine and to the power of godliness, and to the work of
Reformation and Reformed Religion in Doctrine, Worshipe, Discipline, and
Government, did forbear to yield obedience unto these antichristian and
iniquous Laws, did, by their arbitrary and barbarous executions, what by their
High commission or inquisition-court (arbitrarily and illegally erected) what
by cruel and bloody Soldiers commissionated without Law or order for that
effect, oppress, pillage, plunder, harasse, imprisone, fine and confine,
impoverish, beat, bind like beasts, the faithful and loyal Subjects of Christ,
and make their life more bitter unto them, then if they had been under the feet
of Turks or Pagans. Under which intolerable, incredible and unexpressible
bondage the godly of the Land, especially in and about Galloway, did for a long
time groan, and cried unto him who hears the cry of the oppressed, that he
would judge and plead their cause, and open some door of outgate, that they
might be delivered from under the feet of those cruel task Masters, and have
an opportunity put into their hands of vindicateing the Liberty of their
Reformed and Covenanted Religion, and of useing their lawful and vowed
endeavors to free the Land of this horrible defection and Apostasy, that the
fierce anger and wrath of God might be turned away there from, and Church and
State settled upon their former solid and Christian foundations. At length the
wonderfully wise God thought good to put them once to the trial to see what
they would hazard and venture for the recovering of the interests of Christ,
together with their own Liberty; and unexpectedly in his holy and divine
Providence seemed to them to impose a necessity upon them, both to run
together, in their own necessary defense, and to endeavor, with the
extirpation of the abjured abominations, the bringing back of the captivated
ark of God: For about the midst of November 1666. When two or three Country
Men providentially passing by, did see a poor old Man bound hand and foot like
a beast by the Soldiers, sent out for that Effect by Sr. James Turner that
bloody Atheist, being commov^ with passion did calmely and friendly desire the
Soldiers to loose him, but they accounting this such a High indignity, in
their rage and fury assault them with drawn swords, whereupon the Country Men
were necessitate to their defense, and in their defense did wound one of the
Soldiers, at which the rest cast down their arms: And being certanely
persuaded that for this necessary defense they would be persecuted to the
death, the next day with 6. or 7. more they seize upon other 10. or 12. of the
Soldiers, whereof one was killed, the rest rendering their arms: Hereby the
Country about being alarmed, and knowing that their tyrannous oppressors
would be enraged more then ever, and account this a crime scarce expiable by
the blood and ruin of the whole Country free and unfree gather together to
the number of 54 Horsemen and some few footmen and advance to Dumfries, where
they quyetly seize upon Sr James Turner and the rest of the Soldiers who were
there, without any harm except the wounding of one who obstinatly did resist.
Thereafter by divine providence they were led toward Air, and while within the
Sheri^dome of Air, where they stayed the space of seven days, several of the
Country groaning under the same oppression, and longing for an opportunity of
public appearing for the cause and interest of Christ, against the Popish
Prelatical and malignant faction, laid hold on this occasion, to join with
their Brethren to help the Lord against the mighty; so that their number was
increased, though not to such a quantity as would have been expected, partly
through the want of sufficient previous advertishment, (not vvithstanding of
what diligence had been used, from the day of their appearance at Dumfries, to
give notice to all who cordially loved the vvelfare of Zion, of their present
distress) partly throvv the dissuasion of one who had been a chief instrument
in apprehending Turner, and thereafter had deserted them, and partly through
other discouragements, seeing fevv yea very fevv landed Gentlemen or Ministers
appearing with them or for them, which had no little influence also on the
discourageing of several who came, together with the impetuous raines which
lasted night and day, which made many vvonder that they did not wholy break
and dissolve. Yet the mighty power of God on their Spirits, and the lively
sense of their duty, made the most part to hold on, and others to come unto
them (beside some who were upon their way and invincibly hindered from comeing
at them) as they marched through Clidsdale, where at Lanreck they solemnly
renewed the Covenant, and thereafter marched Eastward to Bathgate and
Colingtoun the enemy in the mean time pursueing them at the heels: While they
were there, there came two Gentlemen unto them, pretending a verbal commission
from the Enemy (the one of which Gentlemen, they thought should have come
alongs with the rest of that Country, and joined himself with them, as a
favourer of the godly,) to press their disbanding upon promise of indemnity,
and this they urged, but they saw no call of God to deserte the work so: At
length that Gentleman conveyeth the other, Early in the morning before break of
day, through their guairds toward the Enemy, who (as many think) advertised the
Enemy of the way they were to march to morrow; yet not withstanding before they
marched, they sent with that Gentlem. a letter to the General of the King's
forces, showing the occasion of their being together in that place and in that
postour, to wit, to present their grievances unto the Council (seeing there was
no other access for petitioning) and therefore desiring a blank pass to such
of their number, as they would send with their supplication unto the Council.
When the Gentleman (who had told the Honest party, that he had taken upon him,
in their name (though without their warrant) to promise unto the General that,
He engageing not to move further toward them, until he returned the next
morning, They should do the like) returns to the General with this letter, he
found him marching contrare to his promise: The honest party, having not
engadged to stay, marched as they saw opportunity Westward toward Pentland. The
enemy being advertised, very probably, as is said, cast themselves in their
way, so that they came shortly in the view of other. The honest party, at this
time were hardly 700 horse and foot, among the Horsemen scarce one hundereth
were fixed in arms, The Footmen, beside some swords, had only some broken
picks, ill appointed fire locks or muskets, many corn forks, and some had
syths: And at this time all of them, were much wearyed with long and toil some
marches, hunger (for these parts of the Country, through which they came, can
bear witness to their sobriety and moderation, refuseing even to take what was
offered, because they had not money to pay for it) and cold (by reason of the
continual and exceeding great rain;) while they are thus in the view of other,
The Enemy sends forth a party of choice men, who were met with by a troup of
the honest party, and after some disput, mostly by swords, were put to the
flight, and fled alongs the edge of the hill by sheep-rodes, so that there was
no access to pursue by horses, but a party of foot was commanded to follow the
pursuit, whereupon the Enemies horses were forced to quite their ground and
betake themselves to other ground no less inaccessable by the honest party.
After near two hours, the Enemy, perceiveing that neither party could approach
to other as they stood, because of a precipice betwixt them, came toward a
plain at the foot of the hill, and drew up in battalye. The honest party now
seeing that the Enemy was willing to offer battle, and that if they should
withdraw, the Enemy would be encouraged, and many of themselves unavoidably
discouraged, and if they should delay till tomorrow (the sun being now near
setting) feared that many should fainte and flee away in the night time, and
others should be less able to fight through hunger and cold, seeing no way how
to relieve themselves with necessaries at that exigent, resolved to embrace
that occasion, and see what the Lord of Hosts would be pleased to do; and
therefore resolved after prayer to draw off the hill toward the Enemy, keeping
still what advantage of ground they could: when thus they have approached, the
Enemy send forth a troup, which was rancountered with another of the honest
party and beat into their body, somewhat (as some think) inconsideratly upon
the part of the pursuers. Thereafter the Enemies send off another party to
relieve the former, which was met with by another of the Honest party, But with
some disadvanva^tage to the Honest party, because they were to approach near
unto the very body of the Enemy, ere they could prove a relief unto their
^ormer party: Yet through the help of the Lord, they made their made their
adversare-party flee shamefully. The enemy perceiving how they had been beaten
three times in end, in fighting by parties, and seeing how the strength of the
Honest party, stood in those troops which had not as yet rallied, nor returned
to their ground in order, advanced with their whole body of horse, in a full
breast, with a pretty gallop, upon the two troup^ as they were scattered, and
drove them back upon the body and thus, (the only wise God, who does all things
after the council of his own will, ordering it) in a short time broke them
all. And yet it is observable that more were killed by the country men in their
escapeing, then on the fields, The Enemy stayed on the fields all night and
buried their dead, who were not a few, The prisoners which were taken were
carried into Edinbrough, and though by these in power, in humanely enough used,
yet by some, (whose labor of love both toward the dead on the fields and to
the prisoners, the Lord will not forget) tenderly provided and cared for,
though in a clandestine way. Of these prisoners who were taken on the fields,
and others afterward apprehended by Countery men, there were Six and Thirty or
thereby publicly hanged at Edinbrough, Glasgow, Air and other places; and
their heads and other members of their members of their body are upon poles
unto this day, to keep the memory of this Noble exploite fresh upon the Hearts
of the Godly. I shall not further recapitulat what is said concerning this by
Naphtali: Only I would say this, That though many might have been tempted to
think, and possibly the Enemy might have imagined, That now their cause was
confirmed with a witness, and the honest patriots condemned by God the
righteous judge; yet after experience made it appear, that the honest cause
was never more confirmed then by the death and sufferings of these, whom they
cruelly murdered as traitors and rebels, The Lord so visibly owneing them to
the conviction of on lookers, that they were no more afraid of death then of a
quiet rest in their beds, being ascertaned of the Lord's accepting of them and
their weak endeavors, to restore the Kingdom, however He, who is wise in
counsel thought it not for his glory, to prospere them in their undertaking, at
that time: And this very consideration did much help to restrain the remainder
of the wrath of the adversary, who were so enraiged, that few thought they
should ever have sisted, till they had executed all who were their captives.

Yet the generation of the prelaticall and Malignant faction, (judicially
hardened by this dispensation, because as so many carnal sensualists, if they
believe at all that there is a God, they measure him and his ways by their
own yaird, and judge of his approving or disproveing of actions by outward
dispensations, to whom I shall say no more, but Careat successibus opto,
quisquis ab eventu facta not and a puter) did not cease to ^ant after the
determinations of the cruel and bloody Council, and cry out upon those Noble
and worthy patriots, (whose memory shall be in everlasting remembrance) as
Traitors and Rebels justely condemned and executed. Whereupon the author of
Naphtaly thought himself called of God, to write in justification of these
innocents. And because he saw it was the same Spirit of madness and
malignnancy, which had raged against the work of Reformation, from the very
beginning, that did act those in power against these worthies; and that there
was no material or substantial difference betwixt the way which these late
worthies took, and the way which our forefathers, in the valient maintaineing
the interests of Christ, and promoveing the work of Reformation in our land,
had followed in their generation; therefore he thought it necessary and useful
to make a clear deduction of the opposition, which that poor Church met with
at the hands of a Popish Prelatical, and Malignant faction; And of the
constancy, valor and Zeal of the Lovers of God and of his interest, in
adhereing thereto, and maintaineing the same, against all the rage and fury of
the adversary; and of the Lord's blessing their Noble endeavors with special
and remarkable success: And all alongs did clear their innocence, and
vindicate them from the aspersions that wicked Enemies could lay against them;
and their actions from such objections as wickedness it self did or could make
against them; And at length after a clear representation of the furious genius
of the Malignant Apostat generation of this age, by their public and avowed
acts and actings, and of the sad calamities, which the honest adherers to the
cause and Covenant of God has suffered, did show the rise and progress of
that loyal interprise, and did fully vindicate the actors therein, from the
crime of Sedition, or Rebellion, with which they were most unjustly charged,
and for which cruely and tyrannically executed.

But the Mensworne generation of prelatical Apostats, finding themselves nearly
concearned in that affair, thought it of their concernment to try, what could
be said in defense of this tyranny (exerced mostly for them, and at their
instigation) set some on work to write against that book. And therefore they
published to the world. The I. Part of a Survey of that book entitled
Naphtali, and of several doctrines in Lex Rex and the Apolog: (which had been
at rest for some considerable time, especially Lex Rex, after they had been
burnt into ashes, as being judged no otherwise answerable but by a fiery
faggot, till this Man began to rake in the ashes of these dead Martyrs, and
find some bones of doctrines yet unburnt, which he thinks now to honor with
a more solemn burial.) But with what evidence and demonstration of truth, he
has managed the questions handled in this first part, thou may judge by
what is here replied, in vindication of that solemn truth, which he
endeavors, according to his poor strength, to dethrone and tread under foot.

Though we have not followed the Surveyers Method, disireing to be as succinct
as might be, and to clear that maine question controverted, touching the
lawfulness of private persons defending themselves and their Covenanted
Religion, from the manifest violence, tyranny and intolerable oppression of the
Sovereign and inferior Magistrates to the edification of all; yet we have not
dealt with him, as he has done even with Naphtali, the book which mainly he
sets himself against: For he is so far from answereing that book of which he
offers a survey, that the most part of the grounds, and arguments made use of
there, to prove the thing intended, are not so much as touched by him in all
this voluminous pamphlet: But we have fully examined and answered all which he
has asserted, leaving not one material sentence, which was to the purpose, in
his whole book, untouched. The judicious Reader will find this true upon
search; And no man will think we were called to answer the same thing oftener
then once, though he was pleased to fill up many pages with mere repetitions.
The method we have followed, all who know what it is to clear controversies,
will acknowledge, to be the most solid, satisfying, succinct and perspicuous;
and such, against which no man can justly except. We suppose also That we have
been as plain and clear as the nature of this controversy would suffer us;
(and some possibly will think We have been too too plain; but they know
whom to blame, for giving us this occasion,) for we made it our design, to
bring this question, which did concern common people no less then the
learned, (seeing it was a matter of life and death unto them, no less then unto
others) home, so far as was possible, to the capacity of the meanest, that they
might know, and be distinct in the knowledge, and persuaded of the lawfulness,
of the grounds of their acting in such a vindication of their Religion and
libertyes. The truth we have confirmed by many arguments, reduceing them to
their several heads, the better to clear and confirm the matter, and to
settle the judgments of all in the apprehension of the Truth: and all of them
we have so framed, that every one of the lowest reach, may see how they
plainly and peremptorily force home the point cotroverted, with a
demonstrative perspicuity, and irrefragable strength. So that whosoever shall
undertake to draw this saw again, must not think to leave any one of all the
arguments which are here adduced (and if he reckon aright he will find more
then a hundereth, which I shall make good if put to it) un-examined; for if any
one hold, (And I am not afraid that many of them shall be found feeble) the
cause which we contend for is uncontrovertably yielded, seeing one reason,
which is unanswerable, is enough to captivate the judgment unto an assent unto
the truth: and one argument deserted of the adversary, declares his cause
desperate.

We have also dealt faithfully and ingenuously, touching on every thing, which
was offered to us, and which we thought might conduce unto the clearing of
this contraversy: and because we find some thing belonging unto this question,
said by the author of the Second part of the Survey (which is now come to
hand) in the last chapter Page 263. etc, We shall a little touch upon that
here, reserving the examination of the rest of this 2. Part until a fitter
opportunity, when, if the Lord will, we shall discover the weakness of all his
reasonings, and vindicate the truths which he sets himself against, with
as much clearness and succinctnesse, as may be.

He comes, in the place now named, to consider the defense made by the
impanelled unto what was objected, or what further defense, Naphtali (whom
after the old manner he styles the Lybeller) makes for them. And 1. He tells
us. [ They were posed, where they had learned, that under pretense of Religion,
it is lawful for Subjests, to rise in Rebellion against lawful authority.] And
then adds. [ That to this Queree, this advocate declines to give a direct
answer, where such a thing, is read or could be instructed.] Answ. Who does
not see, That this was a Queree utterly unbecomeing such as pretended to occupy
the places of lawful judges in such matters, to propose to persons Empanelled
upon their life; it being nothing but a mere caption, like unto that which is
called Multiplex interrogation, unto which, both the impanelled, and this
Advocat (as he calls him) might lawfully have declined to give a direct
answer: Because it supposed 1. That their riseing was against lawful authority
Whereas it was rather a riseing for lawful authority, while against persons
abuseing their authority, and not walking in the right line of subordination
unto the Supreme Magistrate and Governor of Heaven and Earth, but rebelling
against him in making laws contrary to his laws, and executing them contrary
to his will and command. 2. That their riseing was in rebellion while as it was
rather in loyalty to God and the Country, against such as had erected a
Standart of rebellion against the High and mighty Prince Jesus Christ our Lord
and Supreme Governor, and were destroying his interests: And in loyalty to
that Supreme law The saifty of the People, defending themselves against
manifest and intolerable tyranny. 3. That it was in pretense of Religion, when
as it was really and unquestionably for the re-establishing of our religion
reformed in doctrine, worshipe, discipline, and government, confirmed, ratifyed
and approved, by Solemn Covenants, Subscriptions, vows, oaths, engadgments,
declarations, professions, public actings, acts and Statutes, of King, Nobles,
persons of all ranks, Parliaments and judicatories Higher and Lovver: Whereas
the true Queree was this Where they had learned to rise in their own defense,
and in the defense and maintenance of the true reformed Religion, against Such
in power who were tyrannically oppressing them, and destroying the Established
Religion, contrare to Vows, Covenants, Promises, Compacts, Declarations,
Protestations, Solomne Engagements, Subscriptions, etc. And if the Queree had
been thus proposed, it might have received a direct answer, To wit, That they
had learned this from the law of God, the law of Nature, the civil law, the
law of Nations, Sound reason, and the practices of Christians, both under the
law, and under the gospel not only at home but also abroad.

When Naphtali said That it was a clear beging of the question to suppose that
the late riseing was only in pretense of Religion. This Surveyer answers
That it is a very poor quirck. And why so? He should know (says he) that in
ordinary language, a thing is said to be done under pretense of another,
whether the pretension be yet dubious or under controversy, or whether it be
falsely made or trely? Answ. Such language as this may be ordinary with him, it
may be, and his accomplices, that corrupt fraternity, with whom pretenses are
real, and real things are pretenses; but sure to all such, as understand plain
language, this queree did praesuppose that the riseing was not really but in
pretense for Religion: Did ever these in power, make it out, or offer to make
it out, that it was not really for Religion? Naphtali said more over That the
Queree it self seemed to imply and grant, That for subjects to rise in arms
really, for the defense of Religion, against the invasion of the powers, under
the pretense of lawful authority, is both lawful and laudable. This, says the
Surveyer, is as vain a quirck How so? for, (says he) let it be so, that the
objection was meaned only of riseing upon mere pretenses of Religion, will this
infer, that therefore there might be a riseing upon real intentions for
Religion, against the Magistrate? Answ. Sure to all of common sense, it says
that the proposers of the objection did yield so much, having hinted nothing to
the contrary. Did they say giving but not granting it lawful to Subjects to
rise in arms really in defense of Religion, etc. Why then might it not have
been taken for granted, that the objecters durst not condemn this, especially
seeing the maine stresse did lie upon that supposed pretense. Ay but he tells us,
That he affirms That upon neither of the two, insurrection against the
Magistrate is lawful, -- and that these people did not rise really for
Religion, but to maintain themselves in the course of atheistical contempt of
Religion and God's ordinances, to pull down all authorities in the ^and (as
their advocat pr^fesses and justifies their so d^ing) and to destroy these in
their innocence whom they had appointed to death.] Answ. His affirmations and
assertions, are but weak and beggarly proofs, though he strengthen them with
manifest and notorious lies: And whether there be a truth in what he here
affirms or not, we leave the Reader to judge, when he has read, and
considered what we have said in the following vindication.

Next Some texts of Scripture were objected, as 1. that 1 Samuel 15: ver. 25.
Rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft. To which ( says Naphtali Page 156.) One
of themselves did roundly and clearly answer, that, the sentence being spoken
by the Prophet to the King, because of his disobedience and contempt of the
command of God, and not to Subjects, would sooner conclude his accusers then
himself to be a rebel. This the Surveyer, Page 264. calls a very poor answer.
And yet so pertinent and plump that it stopped the mouth of the accusers, and
filled their faces with shame: But why was it such a poor answer? For albeit,
(says he) that high rebellion immediately againsi God be principally meaned,
yet the sovereign Magistrate being the Lord's deputy, and bearing the image of
his Soveraignity upon Earth, whom he commands to reverence and obey, and of
whom he has said, ye are Gods* Psalm. 82. the despiser of the Sovereign
Magistrate, and a rebel against him doing his duty, is a rebel against God
Answ. Those words Doing his duty were very well added: But sure when such are
rebelling against God, enacting things diametrically opposite to his law and
testimony: persecuting the Subjects because of their adherence to the laws of
God, to their vows and Covenants; and by force, and cruelty overturning the
covenanted Religion, destroying the interests of Christ, the true and lawful
liberties of the people, and the common good, they are not doing their duty,
nor carrying themselves as the deputies of God, bearing the image of his
Soveraignity, but rather as manifest and avowed Rebels to God. And therefore,
what ever can be said from this place to prove it rebellion, and as the sin of
witchcraft, for subjects to despise the Sovereign Magistrate, and to rebel
against him doing his duty, neither from this place nor any other can it be
demonstrate, that the late Risers were guilty of Rebellion. Did not the author
of Naphtali tell him. 2. That riseing up against authority it self, the
Ordinance of God, and disobeying the powers therewith vested, standing and
acting in their right line of subordination, is indeed rebellion, and as the
sin of witchcraft; but to resist and rise up against persons abuseing sacred
authority, and rebelling against God the Supreme, is rather to adhere to God as
our liege Lord, and to vindicate both our selves, and his abused ordinance,
from man's wickedness and tyranny, What meaned he then to say the same thing
which Naphtaly had said? Is this to answer his adversary? And not rather to
yield the cause? Ay, but left we should take these words doing his duty as
importing any confession. He adds. Yea suppose, we are never to follow the
Magistrate, when his commands are contrary to God (for that were to leave our
line^ of subordination to God,) yet when he swerves and goes out of his line,
to take the sword against him, is but to study to cure his sin by our own; And
because the King one way leaves his line of subordination to God, therefore to
leap out of our own line in that subordination in another way. Answ. This Man
speaks contradictions, when he makes a supposition that we are not to follow
the Magistrate, when his commands are contrary to God, and yet says if we do
follow, we leave our line of subordination to God. We see what the Man's Spirit
would have carried him to, if he durst have vented it. But how proves he that
this is our sin or a leaping out of our line of subordination, to resist
tyranny, and men abuseing their authority to the subversion of Religion,
libertyes, and the common good of the Subject? we have proved the contrary, and
answered all, which he or his colleague, the author of the former part has
said, and shall be ready to say more when any new ground is given.

The next passage of Scripture which was objected, was Mat. 26: 52. To which
(said Naphtaly) it was sufficiently answered (without any reply) by one of
these impeached (whom they accounted distracted, though without the least
appearance of impertinency, by opponeing Luke 22: 36.] What now fayeth the
Railing pamphleter? Certanely (says he) [ This libeller seems not to be far
from some measure of distraction, while he allows the distracted man's answer
as sufficient: Who of sound judgment will think that a scripture is
sufficiently answered by produceing another, which seems contradictory
thereto? This is not to solve an argument from scripture, (...) to set the
Scriptures by the ears together.] Answ. Naphtaly did not ^^ok upon that man
as, nor yet say that he was, distracted, and sure his answer being so apposite
and pertinent, as that it did confound the objecters, so as they had not what
to reply, might have more then sufficiently convinced them of their error,
seeing thereby they might have perceived, that when they little regairded the
solid and unanswerable confutations which God suggested to such, as they could
not but suppose both wise and sober, God would prompt one whom they accounted
distracted, to give such a rational, solid, and binding answer, as all their
wit and learning could not frame a reply unto; It seems if this Surveyer had
been rideing on Balaam's ass, he would have been more furious and mad after
the revvard, then was that wicked wretch, and would have thought himself
more brutish then the ass, to hearken to what the Lord did put in the mouth
of the ass to say, by way of rebuke. Thinks he that no man of sound judgment
will think a scripture sufficiently ansvvered, by produceing another; And that
this is but to set the scripture by the ears? Then it seems with him, no
man of a sound judgment must think that our Lord Jesus did sufficiently
answer that passage of Scripture which Satan abused, by adduceing another,
Mat. 4. But that Christ did nothing but set the scriptures by the ears, is
this far from blasphemy? I vvonder where was the devils wit that he had not
this reply to make unto Christ's answer, which this Surveyer here makes? It
seems our Surveyer can easily out-vvit the devil himself, and declare himself
better worthy of the chair. But enough of this here, seeing it is obviated
Chap, XVII. Obj. 15. The author of Naphtali did further give these answers. 1.
That from the place it self, and all the Evangelists, it is most evident, that
that command was given, and these words spoken by our Lord, only for to testify
his voluntare submission unto the fathers will, by laying down of his life for
fulfilling the Scripture, as is clear From Math. 26. ver. 54. and Joh. 18: 11.
Otherwise the context being considered, (that notonly in Luke. 22: 36. cited,
He, forewarning his disciples of hazard to come, advises them to provide
swords and weapons. And Mat. 26. asserts his power to have called 12 Legions of
angels to his assistance, which clearly implies the lawfulness thereof) this
Scripture objected does more confirm then impugn the lawfulness of defensive
arms.] What says our Surveyer to this? He says 1. That passage, Luke. 22:
36. is perverted by him. Why so? Because Beza, Diodat, and Iansenius
acknowledge that speech to be wholly allegorick. And then adds, that in very
dead it cannot sustain that Christ should here enjoin them to buy swords of
outward metal, seeing it was not Christ's mind that at that time they should
use such swords, no not in defense of his own person, would he have them sell
their clothes to buy swords, and then not use them? Answ. Though we have
obviated this reply, in the place cited Chap. XVII. and fully vindicated our
argument from this passage Chap. XII. Arg. 13. beginning Page 260. Yet we shall
add this, that sure Christ's Disciples took him to be speaking of weapons
and svvords of outward metal, when they said to him here are two; and as sure
it is, that Christ's reply saying it is enough, hinteth at no spiritual armor
otherwise we must say that his Disciples at this time were sufficiently
fortified against all Spiritual wars and combats; and yet after experience
proves the contrary: And no less sure is it that if Christ had here meaned
Spiritual armor, he would have been loath to have left his Disciples in such
a mistake, which was of so great concernement for all time comeing, now
especially when he was shorthly to be taken from them: And where do we
find him rectifying this mistake of the Disciples, or saying, That he meaned
no such svvords; his saying it is enough, Imports some other thing, as is
said: Again, if this speech be wholly allegorick, what way will they expone
these words, But now he that has a purse let him take it, and likewise his
Scripe? But as we see no ground for an allegroy here, so we may not expone
Scripture by allegories when we please; all know how dangerous it is to do so
without clear warrant. And as for this Surveyer's reason added, it is of no
weight to force us to accept of such an interpretation, for though it was not
our Lords mind, that they should use those swords further at that time; yet he
might have taught the lawfulness of self defense in other cases where there
was no positive command to the contrary, by thus saying unto them, He that has
no sword, let him sell his garment and buy one, Since he had not made use of
such forcible defense before, to have shown them the lawfulness thereof, as
he did of flight, which also at this time, he would not make use of; and that
they might see how voluntaryly and of his own accord he laid down his life,
in obedience to the command which he had received of his Father, who would not
make use even of that mean which he had declared lawful, by adviseing them to
provide swords. Again the Surveyer replyeth, The question is now anent the
lawfulness of private men's useing defensive arms against all Magistrates,
without any shadow of authority: And to prove this he alleges that God by his
absolute power might send 12. Legions of Angels to help Christ: God has
authority above all authorities in the World, and he may employ Angels or Men,
as ^hse pleases, and then they have a good warrant and authority: But what
makes this for any private Men's useing the sword against the Magistrate, without
authority either from God or Men? It is wonder us reasoning from Gods absolute
power, and the efficacy of Christ's prayer, -- to argue the lawfulness of
private Men's resistance of the lawful Magistrate without any warrant from God.
Answ. This is to us, no strange way of replying, seeing we have met with the
like so often before. No Man says, let be undertaketh to prove whether by
this or any other argument, that it is lawful for private persons, yea or for
Kings and all in authority, to resist whether lawful Magistrates or others,
without a warrant from God. What a non-sensical contradictory conclusion,
should this be? But this we say, That it is not in every case unlawful nor
wants it a warrant from God, even for private Subjects to defend themselves
from the Tyranny of those in power, by forcible resistance, notwithstanding
that Christ would not suffer his followers to make use thereof, in his case,
which was singular: And, among other things, his saying, that he could obtain
by prayer of the Father 12 Legions of Angels, for his succor, does confirm
it: For if he might not make use of men's help, neither might he seek the help
of Angels: So that we argue not from God's absolute power, but from Christ's
professing, he might, if he would, obtain the help of Angels, we show that in
itself abstract from a particular positive command to the contrary, it was not
unlawful, for the Disciples to defend themselves and their Master, nor for
Christ to make use of their help, as it was not in itself unlawful to make use
of the help of Angels. Which yet in that case he would not do. 3, He replyeth,
Albeit one part of our Lords design, is to testify his willing submission, to
the pleasure of his Father, yet that is not all; for any occasion of this
prohibition to Peter, he gives a general rule to all his Disciples being
private Men, and to all private Men, that they should not take the sword, God
not giving them Authority: Answ. If he mean by Authority, public
Magistratical authority, He but begs the question; and if he mean a lawful
warrant, we grant all: For though private persons have not the Magistratical
power of the sword; yet we have sufficiently proved that they have a warrant,
in cases of necessity, to make use of the sword of defense or resistance, in
their own defense: And Christ's Word speaks nothing against this. And if he
should say, That Christ's sentence being general admits of no such exception, I
would gladely know, how he will salve the lawfulness of public persons taking
the sword, for Christ speaks in general to his Disciples, He who takes the
sword shall perish by the sword: and I suppose he will not exclude Kings and
Magistrates from the roll of Christ's Disciples. If he say, he means all these
unto whom God gives no authority Magistratical. How shall he prove this? If he
say he speaks to his Disciples who were private Persons. True, but it is as
true, That he speaks to his Disciples who were Ministers. Ergo shall it
concern only Ministers? And that he speaks to his Disciples who were
Christians. Ergo it must also concern all Christians and Magistrates as well as
others. Thus we see his evasions are naught: And the true meaning is, that all
such as make use of the sword, without God's warrant (which the Disciples now
wanted, having God's mind revealed to the contrary in that particular,) shall
perish by the sword: and with this restriction we admit of it, and he cannot
reject it: And then it will make nothing against us, as is said and proved.
Naphtaly answers 3. Is it possible that men should be so far demented by
flattery, as to think that it was unlawful for Jesus Christ, the mighty God and
Lord over all, to have defended himself by the assistence of his Disciples,
against the horrid wickedness and insurrection of the vilest of his creatures,
had it not been that it was necessary that the Scriptures concerning him should
be accomplished? The surveyer says, He is insolent in saying so: Why so?
Because, albeit it be true, Christ as God, could have destroyed by himfelf or
his instruments all the vile creatures that rose up against him; yet Christ as
Man, submitting himself in our nature to fulfill all righteousness, submitted
himself to Magistracy, as the ordinance of God -- and whatever by God's Law was
unlawful for a subject to do, (as rebellion against lawful powers is) the Son
of God in the state of his humiliation submitted that the same should be
unlawful to him as Man etc. Answ. It is true Christ as Man became Subject to
the Law and to Magistracy as the ordinance of God. But to say that therefore He
might not defend himself against the vilest of his creatures, who rose up to
take his life, though abstract from that particular case wherein he had a
particular command of God to lay down his life, because that would have been
rebellion, is but to beg the question, and we have said enough to prove the
contrary. Naphtaly had a 3. answer thus. Where our Lord says in the place
objected, all they that take the sword etc. as he thereby only condemns
unjust and offensive war; So the saying itself by its later part, does tacitly
imply the lawfulness and justice of both defensive and vindicative arms, the
same being otherwise justly founded. Unto this The Surveyer replyeth 1. That
the first part is false; for then, says he; That sentence should not be
pertinently applied to Peter's fact or fault, for his useing of the sword was
defensive and objectively just on his part, to wit, in defense of his master,
whom they did invade; yet he is reproved as wanting lawful authority. Answ.
Peter's wanting a vvarrand for any further use of the svvord, made, it is true,
his war unjust yea and offensive, for all lawful war (except where God gives
a particular command to destroy a nation or people, as he commanded the
Israelites to destroy the Canaanits, and Saul to destroy the Amaelekites,) is
in a manner merely defensive, as sundry politicians aver, thinking no
ordinare war lawful, but what is defensive: And so this war being contrare to
the revealed will of God, was unlawful, and so condemned by this sentence. But
to gather hence, that every defensive war of Subjects is hereby condemned, is
to put more in the conclusion, then is in the premises. His 2 reply is That
the later is most falsely concluded, if he mean defensive and vindictive arms
against the Magistrate, for albeit defensive and vindictive arms be otherwise
justly founded, the defect of a lawful authority makes them unjust and sinful:
And it is utterly against Christ's mind, and scope of the text, to allow
defensive as well as vindictive arms against the Magisirate, for Peter was
defending himfelf and his Master, and revenging the invasion made by Malchus
the Magistrates servant upon Christ, and yet he is reproved for both. Answ. To
say that the defect of a lawful authority (as he understands it) makes a
defensive war in subjects against their Magistrates, otherwise lawful, is but to
beg the question, and is not proved by any reproof Peter got, because as we
have often told him, that was a particular case, it being necessary that the
Scriptures concerning Christ should be accomplished, which is only added by our
Lord, as the ground of his discharging Peter to proceed: Christ never tells him
that it was against the lawful Magistrates, and therefore might not lawfully
be: Yea that which made Peter's Defense in this case unlawful, would not Permit
I. C. to pray to his father for aid or deliverance: now if he will conclude
from Christ's discharge of Peter to make use of the sword, that it is simply
unlawful for persons not clothed with public Authority, in any case, to
defend themselves from the unjust violence of Magistrates, then let him
conclude also from Christ's example that it is unlawful for them to pray for
help from God when they are oppressed: for Christ gives on reason for both. We
are willing to grant him all that can be drawn from the scope of the place, to
wit, that when God has so plainly declared by his providence, that there is
not so much as place left for praying that the thing where with we are
threatened may be avoided, but that we must suffer, and that then it is our
duty to seek to be strengthened with all might, according to his glorious
power, etc. That in this case, to take the sword is unlawful, this I say we
willingly grant; but if he would wrest the words further to make them say what
he would have them he erreth not knowing the scriptures nor attending to their
scope: Yea, it may be questioned if the Chief Priests, Scribes and Elders who
sent out that band of soldiers, were lawful civil Magistrates, at this time,
having power and authority from God, to use such civil force and coaction, and
not rather usurpers. But we need press this no further, having ground
sufficient, to maintain what we assert, even yielding this unto the
adversaries.

After that Naphtali had considered these passages of Scripture which were
objected to the impaneled, He proposed two other to be examined: The first was
Ioh. 18: 36. If my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight
that I should not be delivered to the jews, Unto which Naphtaly answered
thus. As the intent and scope of our Lord's answer was to clear himself of
that calumny objected against him by the Jews, that he made himself a King in
opposition to Caesar; So the meaning of it is plain and obvious, to wit, That
our Lord's Kingdom is not of the Nature, and for the Ends, for which other
Kingdoms of this World were instituted; but wholy spiritual, for declareing
the Truth, and thereby gaining souls unto glory: Whence as our Lord would
there inferred, that he came not to conquer to himself disciples by outvvard
force, and thereby to gain followers to the spoiling of Caesar, and other
Princes; So it is without all shaddovv of connection, thence to conclude, that
a people having received the blessing of the gospel, and Kingdom of Jesus
Christ, should without resistance suffer themselves (to the manifest dishonor
of God, and the hazard of the eternal damnation of themselves and their
posterity) to be impiously and sacrilegiously spoiled and deprived thereof,
when they are in capacity to defend the same. This the Surveyer accounts
Page 268. an extravagant exposition; and why? Is not ( says he) Christ's
plain meaning, to declare the nature of his Kingdom to be spiritual, by this,
that none of his servants were engaged merely upon this account, and under
this formality, that they were his Servants, to fight violently for him? This
was security enough to Caesar, and all Magistrates for ever, that none of his
subjects should take up arms in his quarrel against them, but should only do
so when Religion came to be a Lawright, defensible under the Magistrates
protection against all foreigners; But there is not the least hint of his
saying, that he came not to conquer disciples to himself by outvvard force,
his intention being merely to give assurance, that violent resistance to our
proper Magistrates, even in his behalf, is unsuteable to his Kingdom.] Ansvv.
1. Mr Hutcheson on the palce tells us, that Christ's scope here is expressly to
answer to the accusation concerning his Kingdom, and speaks so much of it
negatively, as might satisfy Pilate, That it might well enough consist with
the saifty of the Roman State. Therefore he shows that his Kingdom was not
a wordly Kingdom; and for proof thereof, he instanceth how far he was from
aspireing to a Kingdom by force of arms, in that he would not so much as
permit his servants to fight in his defense, as they offered to do, when the
jews came to take him.]. This, in my apprehension, is not one and the same
with the Surveyer's gloss, and less discrepant from Naphtali's gloss, then
is his. 2. What though it should be granted, that none of Christ's servants
were engaged, merely upon that account, and under this formality, to fight
violently for him? Will it hence follow that Christians in a Kingdom, may not
stand to the defense of the professed Religion, received and sworn to by King
and all ranks, against manifest tyranny and oppression? I see not the
consequence, seeing they may do all this as civil Subjects, good country men,
and loyal patriots: and this is enough for us. 3. Himself dar not deny, but
even Christians, sujects of Christ, may take up arms in his quarrel, in some
cases, for he grants it may be in this case, when religion comes to be a
Law right defensible under the Magistrates protection against forraigners; But,
is there any ground for this exception alone in all Christ's answer? 2. If
there be no ground more for this then for others, why may not we put in our
exception, as well as our adversary puts in his? 3. If it become a Law
right, why may it not as well be defended by private subjects, as other Law
rights and civil libertyes, are and may be, even against Magistrates? 4. Shall
it not be defended even when it becomes a Law right, against foreigners, but
under the protection of the Magistrates? Then, if Magistrates will not
concur, private persons may not defend their Religion by force of arms,
against an army of Turks Papists or Heathens, comeing to press all to
Mahometanisme, Idolatry or Heathenisme? What height of absurdity were here? 5.
Since Christian Magistrates are Servants to Christ, as well as Christian
subjects: Why shall it be more lawful for them to engage in Christ's quarrel
under this formality, that they are his servants, then for mere subjects; seeing
Christ makes no exception here, of one or other, nor distinction among his
Servants; and seeing this seemed to be as little security for Caesar as the
other, if the scope mentioned by the surveyer be the true scope? 4. The
particular mentioned by Naphtali is more suitable to the true scope, then this
which the Surveyer mentions: For the question was not touching resistance
to our proper Magistrates in Christ's behalf. But whether Christ was a King or
not: to which Christ answered That howbeit He was a King, yet his Kingdom
was consistent with Caesar's Kingdom: And as he come not to conquer Subjects
to himself by outvvard force, so he minded not to erect a temporal Kingdom by
arms.

Naphtaly did add further. The truth whereof, together with the hypocrisy of
our adversaries, may soon be discovered, if the question be but stated in the
terms of one foreign and independent prince's invading another, merely upon
the account of the Christian faith; and whatever solution or evasion they shall
herein make, will as exactly quadrate to the case in hand, it being almost
ridiculous to conceive, that the greatest-aggravations of invasions of this
kind, to wit, that it is made by a prince upon his own subjects, (whose
profession he himself is principally bound to maintain) should import any
speciality and difference in the cases. Unto this I find no answer in
special returned by the Surveyer, unless Page 267. he mean Naphtaly when he
says, But the Apolog. very paradoxically will maintain Page 159. That there is
more reason to resist our own Magistrates -- then forraigners, because our own
being bound to maintain our profession, his invasion upon the same is
aggravate, and he is rather to be resisted by violence then others,] for I
find no such thing in that place of the Apolog. by him cited, and that which
I just now mentioned out of Naphtali is indeed in Page 159. and though he
miscite the words, and wrest them after his wonted manner, yet the Reader
may see it probable that he intends Naphtaly. Hovvever let us see what he
answers; Thinks^e (says he) That it were soundly said that if parents
should make disorder in the house, that the children, and rest of the family,
should use violence rather against them, when they miscarry or waste the goods
of the family, then against a thief or a robber breaking in into the house
Answ. To pass by the unsuteablenesse of this Reply unto Naphtali's answer, as
if Naphtaly had concluded that there was much more reason for resisting our
own Magistrates then Forraigners, while as an equality would have satisfied
him, as his words clearly import; We say this to his reply, That when he has
demonstrated to us that Children and Servants, have as great right unto the
goods of the family, and as great power and privilege in setting up their
Parents the heads of the family, and of calling them to account for their
mismanagement, as we have proved Subjects have in the common good, and in
setting up of Sovereigns, and in calling them to an account, then shall his
reply be noticed as having some parallel; but till then we dismiss it with
this answer, that the simile, as to our point, is prorsus dissimile, and can
conclude nothing: Yea, let us turn is own weapon against himself and say,
Seeing Children and Servants may lawfully, with force, with hold the heads of
the family, when they, in a fit of phrensy, are laboring to destroy all, to
burn the house above their heads, or to cast all the goods in the house into a
fire, and resist them no less then open enemies and robbers, thinks he if
soundly said, That if Kings in a fit of madness and Tyranny shall seek to
destroy the common wealth and wholly overturne all Religion, to set up idolatry
and heathenisme, the Subjects may not withstand them, and prevent their own
ruin, and the ruin of Religion, with force of arms, when no other means can
avail? What will he say to this? Will he deny this consequence? If not, have
not we enough? But he adds, The Authors error is this, that he looks merely
to the obligation of the Magistrate to us, and not at all to our obligation to
him, even when he fails abuseing his power. Answ, He looks merely to the
obligation of the Magistrate to us, when he mentions the aggravation of his
guilt of invasion upon that account; And whatever be our obligation to the
Magistrate, (which Naphtaly did not forget though he was not called expressly to
mentione it then and there,) it will not follow that it is an obligation unto
an illimited and stupide Subjection to him, in all cases; and if the Surveyer
prove not this (which I suppose he will not do) he will prove nothing
against us.

What more says he to this place of Scripture? Page 267. after he has given
us, in his way; the meaning of these words of Christ, to wit, That Christ
proves his Kingdom not to be of this world by this Medium, that if it were so,
his servants (in the quality of his Servants) should take up outward arms and
fight for him, etc. Then he concludes that this text will enforce -- that
Christ's Subjects (merely as they are in the capacity of his Subjects) are not
to use the sword against Magistrates, that are over them, in his behalf. And
then says, he allows well of Mr. Hutcheson's note upon the place -- Christ
says he by hindering his servants to fight, who were but private men, as to
any civil power, has taught that private men are not warranted to dravv the
svvord, were it even in defense of Religion, but they ought to maintain it by
suffering, when called to that extremity.] Answ. 1. We have shown already how
this man's gloss, and Mr. Hutchesons do not every way quadrate. 2. If this
text enforce that Christ's subjects, merely as they are in capacity of his
subjects, are not to use the sword in Christ's behalf; then, He must either
say that people even under the conduct of a lawful Magistrate can not defend
Religion by arms (which yet immediately thereafter he grants) of say, that
when they defend Religion so, they act not merely in the capacity of Christ's
subjects. 3. As for Mr. Hutcheson's note which he opposes to all our
rebellious fancies, we say, we wish that that worthy author who has given
great proof of his dexterity in deduceing points of doctrine from the text, had
been, after his usual manner, more acurate here, and had guarded his assertion
better, that it might have had a more clear rise, every way answering the
ground it was deduced from: for sure I am, this ground (if it be at all against
defensive arms in matters of Religion) will as much speak against a defense
used by Magistrates, upon this account, as by private Subjects; for the ground
is the same, to wit, that Christ's Kingdom is not of this world, and alike
concerning Magistrates and people, and is no more a temporal Kingdom in
regaird of Magistrates, then in regaird of private persons. And upon the ground
that Christ would not suffer his Disciples to fight for him, at that time, upon
the same ground he would not have suffered even Magistrates to fight for him,
for he behoved to drink the cup that his father gave him: And neither
Magistrates nor private persons, could have hindered that by force, or would
have been permitted to do it, by him: And if it be said that from other
passages it is clear, that Magistrates, who are noursing parents to the Church,
are allowed to use the sword. We answer That we have also proved from
scripture and reason, that people, in some cases, may use the sword of defense
for Religion. Again it if be said, that his Disciples were but private
persons, as to any civil power, and therefore it is only to be understood of
these. It is answered* That it will as well follow, That because they were
fishermen, therefore it is to be meaned only of these, and of none else; or
that because they were Church officers, therefore, only they must not use the
sword, and so all others may.

The last place which Naphtaly mentioned, was Math. 5: v. 27. to the end, where
it is said, Resist not evil but whosoever shall smite thee etc. with the
parallel places, specially, Rev. 13: v. 10. Unto which he answered, That as
these places do enjoin either patience, when the clear call and dispensation of
God do inevitably call unto suffering, without which patience were no patience
but rather stupidity of etc. -- So thence to infer that Men should give way
to all violence and sacrilege (to the subverting of Religion and
righteousness) is after the manner of Satan, to cheat and abuse men by the
holy Scriptures. The Surveyer replyeth thus, (I meddle not with his impertinent
reflections, and scurrile jibes, nor with his groundless inferences, which
we have so often met with in the former part.) The scope is, to show the
unlawfulness of private revenge, for injuries done to us, -- and the place
will condemn plainly enough violent retaliating the Magistrate, when we think
he does us wrong. Answ. The scope of the place is obvious; and does no more
condemn private persons retaliating the Magistrate, then Magistrates
retaliating private Subjects; unless Magistrates be exempted from this precept,
and consequently be not to be reckoned among Christ's followers. And as from
this place, it will not follow, that one independent King may not make war
against another, and thereby defend his rights, nor that one private person may
not defend his rights and just possessions against an invader, no more will if
follow, that Subjects may not defend themselves and their Rights, Libertyes,
and Religion, against the violent oppression and Tyranny of Magistrates. Next
says the Surveyer, Page 269. That every Man in his calling ought to withstand
violence and Sacrilege to the subverting of Religion and Righteousness, is
granted: Yea private Men may resist the unjust violence of private Persons, and
being under the conduct of the Magistrate, may resist any that offers
violence, in lesser concernments then these are: But we still maintain that
this text forbids all revenge or violent retaliation upon the Magistrate though
he abuse his power. Answ. The question is not what he will still maintain that
this text does forbid; but what he can evince that this text will prove against
us. How will he prove that this text does more forbid private persons, to
resist the unjust violence of Magistrates, then to resist the unjust violence of
private persons, or to resist the unjust violence of any, having Magistrates to
conduct them? Is there any exception in the text? Does not the text speak to
all in reference to all? To wit, that they should resist none out of a Spirit
of private revenge? Again though the text forbid all revenge or violent
retaliation upon the Magistrate, though he abuse his power; will it therefore
forbid private Subjects to defend themselves by force, in case of necessity,
from manifest and unjust violence and Tyranny? No: no more then because the
text does forbid even Magistrates to revenge or retaliate, from a Spirit of
revenge, wicked Malefactors, It does therefore forbid them to execute justice
upon them.

Naphtaly did add, that this was [grosly to exceed that signal rule mainly in
these places intended, to wit,] that we should be perfect even as our Father
which is in Heaven is perfect; [Who though he fills the Earth with his
goodness, -- yet does he love righteousness and helps and delivers the
oppressed, and commands the Zeal of his own glory (wherein he himself does
often eminently appear) by the hand of his people, to take vengeance on his
adversaries. To this the Surveyer replyeth. (What strange argueing is this,
that because God Almighty executes vengeance upon his adversaries, therefore
private persons should follow his perfection in doing the like albeit they have
not his warrant or command Answ. Naphtaly's Argument ran mainely upon [helping
and delivering the oppressed] Neither does he conclude what private persons may
do without God's warrant or command. This he supposed because he had evinced
it. Then Naphtaly closes saying, [Let us therefore in the consideration of
what is said, Rev 13: v. 10.) He that leads into captivity shall go Into
captivity. He that kills with the sword etc., [Both possess our souls in
patience under all the former sufferings, and hope and rejoice in the faith of
the succeeding delivery there subjoyned.] Upon this (says the Surveyer) he
would found the consolation, and patience of his party in all former
sufferings, and his hope and joy in the succeeding delivery.] Answ. And why
might he not? [That word ( says he) Rev. 13. touches not, nor threatens the
Magistrate in the executeion of justice; but rebels, who use the sword without
God's warrant, against the Magistrate, may read their reward in this text.]
Answ. We say not that it threatens the Magistrate executing justice. But let
such see to it, who instead of executing justice, pervert justice, and execute
the innocent people of God. And, after the manner of the Beast there spoken of,
makes war with the Saints: And so may all rebels against God who use the sword
without his warrant. But as for private subjects defending themselves by the
sword of innocent self defense, against unjust violence, and intolerable
tyranny and oppression, we have proved that they want not God's warrant, and
therefore they may look for another reward. And as for his hope and confidence
after expressed, we let it pass as not worth the mentioning; for when the hope
of the Hypocrit perishes, his is like to give up the Ghost.

Having thus answered all which this surveyer has said, whether in his first
part* or now in his second, against the truth which we have maintained, we may
saifly say that these valient worthies were basely and unworthyly murdered,
and that there was no just cause to take their lives. This man page 260. etc.
Will not have them justified, and adduceth, for the most part, such reasons, as
make me doubt whether he can be the same man, that drew up the first part of
this Survey, because they are the very same things we heard before in the first
part; and is it possible the man could have forgotten himself, or think that we
could so soon have forgotten what we heard in the first part, and had answered;
And if he be a distinct person; I wonder what the man meaned, to give us the
same thing over again: did he ever read these in the first part, or had he
forgotten that ever he saw them? Or thought he that they would have the weight
of gold coming from his Mouth, while they had not the weight of stuble being
uttered by his colleague? He begins that discourse with palpable untruthes,
saying That they suffered not upon the account of owneing the covenant. Whereas
the maine Argument of their indictment was. That all convocations and riseing
in arms, or subjects entering in leagues without or against the King's
authority are treasonable. Then he tells us. That all which they can say for
their riseing was that the Magistrate, by moderat penaliyes according to law,
was pressing them to attendance upon the ordinance of God, which is an
indispensible duty. This we heard before and is answered Chap. XVI. page 348.
etc. Neither was the penaltyes moderate, nor were they exacted according to
law, not were they thereby pressed to attend that ordinance which is an
indispensible duty; But they were pressed to a sinful compliance with abjured
prelacy, contrare to their vow and Covenant, by barbarous tyranny. Then he
says. Their lives were not sought upon any terms. See the place now
mentioned where that is spoken to also: and to all of common sense it was
notour, that their case was a case of most in exorable necessity, their misery
being so much the greater that their lives were left them to see themselves
miserable, as if the barbarous enemy had intended only to make them liveto see
it. Neither was there any flying for a whole country side, with their wives
and children, and therefore what Lex Rex says Page 327, 328. 329. confirms
the lawfulness of this. As to their not supplicating mentioned by him next, it
is spoken to also in the place cited: And however he may think now to
incrustate that tyrannical and irrational act, forbidding all joint
supplications: yet the whole land knows, that if that oppressed Country had
attempted any such thing, they had been accounted guilty of Laese Majesty. And
had gotten no other relief of all the illegal impositions which inferior
officers did lay on. Thereafter he calls it a notable contradiction to say that
their rise was indeliberate, and yet Lawful, Just, holy, exemplary, necessary:
And that the godly ancients never enrolled them among martyrs, who by their
own rashness had occasioned their own sufferings. Answ. As if an action
might not be both lawful just And necessary, though the first rise thereof
might have been unexpected, and a mere surprisal of providence: And as if every
action were sinfully rash which were not long and deliberatly before
contrived. So then by their rashness they did not occasion their sufferings;
but, by a surprisal of providence. being called to their own defense, and to a
vindication of their libertyes and Religion, while they were murdered upon
that account, they may very lawfully be enrolled among the Martyrs. Then Page
261. he says. They were the first-aggressors, and first slew one of the Kings
servants. This was told us in the first part, and is answered: And who knows
not that the first aggressor may be first killed. See what is said to this Page
350. Then he says the Novatians and Donatists were not accounted Martyrs
albeit sometimes they were drawn to death by persecuting pagans-such a foul
Stain did they see in Schism. Answ And indeed upon the same ground, if any of
this corrupt apostat facton, which has made defection from the received
Religion, reformed in doctrine worshipe discipline and Government, and sworn
unto by our whole Church, were drawn to death by pagans, under the common
notion and name of Christian, they could not be accounted Martyrs, because of
their sinful and perfidious renting of the body of Christ. They, and not the
honest party who adhere to their principles, are the schismatics, The
Novatians and Donatists who departed from the truth, and not the honest
Christians who remained constant, were the true schismatics, Nor does Naphtaly
fix them in a schism when he teaches, that they were indispensibly tied by
the Covenant, to abhor a compliance with these courses of defection, more
then the honest fathers of old did fix the honest party in a schism, by
teaching that they were not to embrace the principles and practices of the
Donatists and Novatians. The 6. And last particular which he mentions Page
262. is but a heap of groundless calumnies, to wit, that their design was
to put down all authority, to destroy all who would not accept of their sense
of the Covenant. to place themselves in the chair of authority, of which stuff
we have had enough in the former part, and shall say no more now, but that it
is plain, their cause is desperate and gone, when they must flee to lies for
refuge, but to show how perfectly they are assimulat to the spirit which drives
him, they will be both liars and murderers.

And now. Noble patriots (for to you would I speak a word ere I close) though I
have, in some weak measure, endeavored, to vindicat the lawfulness of your
noble and heroic enterprise, to raise up the Virgin of Israel, who was fallen,
and forsaken upon her land, yet you stand not in need of the help of any such
weak advocat, as I am, your witness is in Heaven, and your record on high: It
is he who justifyeth, and therefore though now you be hunted, as partridges on
the Mountain and be a People robbed and spoiled, snared in holes, hid in
prison houses, and be for a prey, and none delivers, for a spoil, and none
says restore, you need not be troubled who condemn you, This being your
rejoyceing, even the testimony of your conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but by the grace of God, you have had your
conversation in the world, and more abundantly in this particular. And
therefore may you depart from the presence of Councils (when brought before
them, upon this account) rejoyceing that you are counted worthy to suffer shame
or what else, for his name. Stumble not at the wise dispensations of God, nor
think it strange concerning the f^^rytryal which is to try you (and daily
experience tells us that this continued trial makes new discoveryes) as if
some strange thing happened unto you, what ever strangers to God and such as
judge of him, and of his holy, sublime and wise dispensations by carnal sense,
may think, but rejoice in as much as ye are partakers of christ's suffering.
That when his glory shall be revealed (if not in this world dureing our days,
yet in the world to come) you may be glad also with exceeding joy: Yea if you
be reproached for the name of christ, much more if you be put to harder
sufferings, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of God rests on you;
since it is undeniable, that on their part who are your Enemies, he is evil
spoken of, but on your part he is glorified. Though men think that you suffer
as murderers, or as thieves, or as evil doers, or as busy bodies in other men's
Matters. Yet having an undoubted ground of persuasion, that you suffer as
Christians, for owneing Christ's interest, and his Covenanted work in the land,
you need not be ashamed, but have cause to glorify God on this behalf. And
since you suffer according to the will of God, commit the keeping of your souls
to him, in well doing as unto a faithful Creator. Bewar of snares and sinful
bonds, for the same spirit of Malignancy and enmity to the interests of Christ,
acts in these, which acted in that bloody persecution: the same design is
carried on, to wit, the constant banishing of Christ and his interests out of
the land, and the establishing of these grand images of jealousy which provoke
to jealousy. O for that truly divine zeal which would more eat us up, for
the house of God which is desolate, and his precious interests which are
perfidiously sold, and wickedly trod under foot, and which would make us never
to sit down satisfied with any concessions, or favors, how specious soever,
until we saw our King restored to his own, and brought back to his throne and
Kingdom with shoutings and acclamations of joy. O dearly beloved stand fast:
And beware I say of snares; but having done all stand with your loins girt
about with truth, and your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of
peace; as you have not been frowned out of your integrity, so take head ye be
not flattered out of it, be not so simple as to beleev every word that is
spoken; for he must shut his eyes and love to be blindfolded, who does not
perceive, that while the men that lie in wait for your halting, and design to
draw you into a compliance with their course of opposition to the work of God,
speak fair, there are seven abominations in their heart. Let your eyes be in
your head: Hold fast what ye have, that no man take your crown? The devil is
changeing weapons upon you, with a design to give you a parting blovv: be
vigilant, resist him under every shape whereinto he transformeth himself, that
he may assault and overcome you; so shall he at last flee from you, and ye
shall be more then conquerours through him who has loved you: your Exit,
though upon a scaffold, will be unspeakably joyous, and full of glory, and when
ye have made it appear (if called there to) that ye love his interests so
well, that ye continue not to love your own lives unto the death; then shall
ye be associat with your blessed brethren, and fellow sufferers, who overcame
the same enemy that continues to make war with you and the remnant of the
vvomans seed, be the blood of the lamb,and the word of their testimony? Ye have
not only the advantage of all your persecuters, but of many of the professed
yea real friends of the work, a great many of whom, when called by the same
providence to appear with you, unto the help of the Lord against the mighty,
did couch under their burdens, and abode amongst the sheepfolds, to hear the
bleatings of the flocks, while like true Naphtali's ye jeoparded your lives in
the high places of the field, some of whom it may be have added grief to your
sorrow, and have condemned your riseing, to justiy their own sinful shifting,
and sitting that opportunity; against whom we know ye meditat no other revenge,
then still to love many of them as brethren, and pray that their leaving you
alone may never be laid to their charge. And of some also who pretending
respect to the cause, did a great deal worse, by associating themselves with
that enemy, who with open mouth did come upon you to eat you up, the
expectation of whose heart may be dreadful, when he comes to make inquisition
for the blood of his saints, and they may tremble at the thoughts of being led
out width these workers of iniquity, with whom they joined themselves in the
day of your distress. I wish that repentance may prevent this ruin: ye have I
say the advantages of these, and have obtained mercy of the Lord, to do and
suffer for his sake while many of your brethren have fainted and fled. keep
your ground, for ye are satan's great eye sore; he seeks you, to shake and
winnow you with the smooth and flattering insinuations of the men whose great
design is to secure and setle themselves on the ruins of the work of God,
and seem to offer some thing, if ye will give them security for your keeping
the public peace, that is, if ye will never offer to put out your hand to
strip them of the spoils of Christ's honor, whervvith they have clothed
themselves; this is to keep their public peace, to let them live in a peacable
possession of what they with wicked hands have taken from Jesus Christ, and
never to trouble that vvatch which they have set about the grave of his buried
interests, for fear of its resurrection. But I hope that he who has delivered
your soul from death, and preserved you while they hunted for your precious
life, will also deliver your feet from falling, that ye may, holding still your
integrity, walk before God in the light of the liveing.

And though the Lord think good to hide his face for a time, Let us wait on
him who hides his face from the house of Israel, and let us look for him, who
knovves but he be waiting that he may be gracious, and that he will be exalted
that he may have mercy upon us: For the Lord is a God of Judgment, blessed are
all they that wait for him. who knovveth but the vision be only for an
appointed time, and at the end it shall speak and not lie, therefore though it
tarry, let us wait for it; because it will surely come and will not tarry.
Then they who are our enemies shall see it; and shame shall cover them who
said unto us, where is the Lord your God? Our eyes shall behold them, and they
shall be trodden down as the mire of the streets, we shall no more be termed
for saken, neither shall our land be termed any more desolate, but we shall be
called Hephzibah, and our land Beulah, when our Lord shall delight in us, and
our land shall be married: Let our King come, and make haste. To him be glory
for ever and ever. AMEN.

ERRATA.
Page 3. Lin. 34. Read sincerely, p. 12. l. 18. r. there may. p. 34. l. 6. for
this r. his. p. 38. l. 21. r. from a: Ibid. l. 22. r. difference. p. 71. l. 20.
r. mightily. p. 79. l. 27. r. precedents. p. 83. l. 23. r. Aristocracy. p. 98.
l. 34. r. Kings. p. 1, l. 17. r. at. p. 151. l. penult. for is r. his. p. 188.
l. 4. r. politician. p. 224. l. 13. r. precipice. p. 237. l. 33. for only r.
chief. p. 256. l. 15. r. absurd. p. 311. l. 13. for virmilion r. nitre. p. 429.
l. 31. r. his cause. p. 437. l. 7. r. this.

READER,
IF in some Copies thou find some more such like, or some other, through the
transposition of Points or Letters, or one Letter for another; as n. for u. or
t. for r. or s. for f or the like, that will not readily mar the sense; thou
may be pleased to correct these, as thou read.

JUS POPULI VINDICATUM.
OR The Peoples right, to defend themselves and their covenanted Religion,
vindicated.
CAP. I.
The Question cleared and stated.
THE Surveyer, taking but an overlye, slight and superficial vieu to the books,
he would make the world believe, he confuteth, measures out and treads down
(as any of ordinary capacity, compareing his wordy but unworthy pamphlet, with
what, is orderly and methodically set down, and strongly and unanswerably
confirmed (as the event shall demonstrate) in these books, which he unmanlike
snarleth at, rather then answers) thinks it of his advantage (as it is the
advantage of all who desire not to be seen in their own colors, nor to have
plain truth discovered, and their pernicious errors and practices suitable
thereunto, unfolded, to cast a mist before the eyes of such as would observe
them, or raise some ignis fatuus to misguide them, and take them off the way)
to use his out-most endeavor to deceive his unwarry warry and inadvertant
reader, and lead him, (who is so simple as to believe every thing which he and
his fraternity say, though they have manifestly and undenyably forefaulted all
faith and credit, with all who know what is the fundamental bond of all
society and commerce) into the same sinful and irrational abhorrency, of an
exploite and interprise so consonant to scripture, law, equity and reason, and
to the practice of worthy Zelots abroad, and at home, from the very beginning
of the work of reformation; and for this cause, as he has foolishly and
ignorantly paralleled these worthies, (whose late practice we shall,
godwilling, abundantly vindicate, from all which this flaunting and windy
adversary, who comes forth to shake his spear, as if he were another Goliath,
has said here against it) with the irrational, furious, and brutish rabble of
Anabaptists who followed Knipperdoling and John of Leyden; So all alongs in his
discourse; he has not only snarled at, picked out, and miserably wrested some
expressions in these books he would confute, especially in the Naphtali, and
then run away with a cry veni, vidi, vici, as if he had gained the day; which
way of dealing with an adversary, is, to all men of judgment and understanding,
very un-faire, base and puerile, no way beseeming a man pretending to plead for
truth, and to discover verity, as he pretends to do; yea judicious persons
will, from such dis-ingenuous and unhandsome way of answereing, easily perceive
on whose side truth stands firm and unshaken; But (which is yet more palpable
and gross) he has either ignorantly, or fraudulently, perverted the true
state of the question, both in Thesi and in Hypothesi, which is a sufficient
proof of the disperatnesse of the cause which he would maintain, and of the
man's purpose to wrangle, when he can not answer, and to buske up an adversary
of straw to himself to fight against, when he cannot, dar not, look his real
adversary in the face; and a ground more then sufficient to make wise men
judge, that he has rather confirmed the hands of his adversaries and
strengthened their cause, then, in the least, weakened the same, for all his
hidious outcries, and dexterous heaping up of many words to little or no
purpose, unless to take with such, as think the best cause is on their side,
who have the manyest, most darring, big and plausible expressions, but are not
able to judge righteous judgment, nor discern whether or not there be true
ground for such confident exclamations, and bold assertions. I am confident that
all who have not prostituted their judgments and understandings, to a blind
and irrational belief of what, such as have un-manned themselves, and
voluntarily given away that masculine constancy and fidelity, which men, but of
ordinary spirits, would account the height of baseness; and have now adorned
themselves with a more then feminine levity, yea, and embroidered themselves
with such a dale of intolerable falsehood, unfaithfulness, impiety and perjury,
as would make Heathens, (though none of the best refined) account them unworthy
of humane society, do, with more then ordinary confidence, and bold audacity,
assert and maintain.

That I may not, after the a methodical method of this disputer, who loves to
walk in by-ways, still keep the Reader in the dark, I shall first clear the
true state of the question, confirm the truth, and vindicate it from what he
here asserteth, answers, or objecteth, that is apposite to the purpose;
forbearing once to take notice of his many scurrilous, base, unchristian, yea
and un-manly expressions, which show what spirit he is of: and afterward I
shall consider and examine his excursions which have not such a closse
connection with the present question, as he would make his Reader believe, lest
he should vaunt, as having spoken that which no man can answer.

That it may appear what is the true state of the question, we would premite
these few things as necessary to be considered.

First. That the whole body of the people of Scotland were engadged to God, by
solemn Covenants, vows, purposes and promises, frequently renewed, to own
and endeavor, really, sincerily, and constantly, through the grace of God, in
their several places and callings, with the hazard of life, lands goods, and
all what they had, the preservation of the reformed Religion in the Church of
Scotland in doctrine, worshipe, discipline and government; and without respect
of persons, the extirpation of Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schisme^
Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound doctrine,
and the power of Godliness, lest they should partake in other men's sins, and
thereby be in danger to receive of their plagues: and that they should
mutually, with the Privileges of Parliaments, preserve and defend the libertyes
of the Kingdo me: and in this common cause of religion, liberty, and peace,
assist and defend all those, who would enter into these bonds, in the
maintaining and pursueing thereof.

Secondly. Not only did the body of the commonalty subscribe, and solemnly
with hands lifted up to the Most High God, swear these Covenants and
engagements, at the command of Magistrates; But the Magistrates themselves, both
superior and inferior, did take on them, in a most solemn manner, these same
vows and engagements, and solemnel promised, as they should answer to God in
the great day, to promove this covenanted work of Reformation, and to
prosecute, in their places, stations and capacities, the Ends of the Covenant.

Thirdly. When this King (who did swear and subscribe these Covenants,
before he came to Scotland) was crowned, and solemnly inaugurated, He not
only renewed these solemn vows and engagements; But upon these terms and
conditions, was he admitted; the people declared their willingness to admit
of him, as King, the svvord was put in his hand and accepted, the People did
swear fidelity, and allegiance, according to these Covenants; the like did
the Nobles one by one, viz swear to be true and faithful to him, according
to the National, and solemn League and Covenant. And all this was
afterward, when the King attained the age of 21 years complete, in a full and
free Parliament, ratified, concluded, and enacted by King and all the Estates
of Parliament: where by as Naphtals Page 72. well observes, the same did
pass into a perpetual law, and became one of the principal fundamental laws
of the constitution of our Kingdom, vvhereupon all the rights and privileges.
either of King or People, are principally bottomed and secured. These things,
as to matter of fact, cannot be denied.

Fourthly. Whatever was done of late, by King or Parliament, or enacted, and
concluded contrary to these covenants, vows and engagements, was (as unlawful,
so) a real and formal subversion of the fundamental constitution of our
Christian and reformed Kingdom; This none will deny who knows the true
nature of these covenants, and the real interest they had, and yet have de
jure, in our constitution, before this late revolution, as was now expressed.

Fifthly. Notwithstanding of all that has been done by King and Parliament, of
late, in rescinding, abjuring, and looseing of the obligation of these National
bonds, and divine covenants, yet they remain Covenants, and National ties
perpetually obligeing, before God, the King, Nobles, and People of all ranks;
and will do, so long as Scotland is Scotland. This is abundantly made out, by
the Apologist; and is a fixed and everlastingly confirmed truth, in the hearts
of all who fear God, and look for his appearing as a swift witness against all
such as swear falsely.

Sixthly. That nothing was allaiged or allaigeable, against those persons in
Galloway, and places adjacent, as ground, or cause, or occasion of all that
extremity and rigor of iniquity, that was exercised against them, but their
simple non-obedience to the act enjoining conformity and obedience to the
Ecclesiastical authority then established, which was diametrically opposite
unto their vow and promise, in their solemn and National covenants. So that
really, upon the matter, their suffering was merely because of their conscience
making, and faithful endeavoring to adhere, through the grace of their God,
unto their covenants and engagements solemnly sworn and taken.

Seventhly. It will be easily granted by all rational persons, That in all
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, a free people not redacted unto a state of base
bondage and slavery, should be ruled and governed civilly, according to the
civil and municipal laws of the land, and not by military force and cruelty.
Tyrants use to lay aside the wholesome and established laws of the land, and
to rule in an arbitrary manner, by the cruel and mercylesse sword, because they
neither intend, nor seek the good of their subjects; But only their own
ambition and base ends; But Magistrates who ought to seek the good of the
commonwealth and prefer it to their own particular ends, will have respect
to the laws, and accordingly rule their subjects, and not by an aribitrary
cruelty, and force of arms, which are used against enemies.

Eighthly. The very law enjoining this conformity, prescribes the way how the
same shall be put to due execution, viz. [That for this end the Council shall
call before them all such persons, as after admonition of the Minister, in
presence of two sufficient witnesses, and by himso attested, shall be given up
to the Council as transgressors of this act -- and the same after hearing of
parties, being duly found, to decerne and inflict the censures and penalties]
And although the very law itself be so iniquous and intolerable, as would
undoubtedly bring sudden ruin, to all such as would not obey the same, and
that in a very short time; yet if this legal manner of procedour, had been
followed, the execution, (though cruel, and sufficiently barbarous, the penalty
having no suitable correspondence with, nor proportion unto, the supposed
transgression; for, can any think that a persons absenting himself twice or
thrice from his own parish Church, can be a transgression of such a high
nature, as no penalty less then the fourth pairt of his Estate, can
compensate?) had not seemed so arbitrary or tyrannical; but when such a
grievous law, is more grievously executed, and that arbitrarily, and illegally,
is not this a very intolerable oppression?

Ninthly It is notourly known and unquestionably clear, and alas too too well
demonstrated by black, Tragical and inde lible characters of ruin,
extirpation, and beggary of many honest families, yea, and of landed and
sufficiently provided Gentlemen and others, so that none will, or can, (if he
has not resolved to believe neither what he sees, nor what he hears) deny
it: That Sr James Turner, and his soldiers, under pretense of executeing this
law, used such inhumane crueltyes, savage barbarities, unparallelable
exorbitancies, by illegal amercements, fineings, quarterings, plunderings,
beatings, dragging to prisones, wounding, binding men like beasts, chaseing
them to moors and mountains, laying waste their lands, houses, and
habitations, devouring what they could with horse, dogs, and men, burning
plenishing, utensils and other necessaries in houses, and thus laying whole
parishes and almost countreysides waste and desolate, and that without respect
had to conscience humane, let be Christian, to law divine, civil, or municipal
grievous or not grievous, yea without respect had to persons guilty or not
guilty; for when they had consumed the Landlord, they oppressed the Tennants
though not guilty, and when they had ruined the Tnenants, fell upon the Landlord
though a conformist, avowing and professing they came to destroy, and they
would destroy; nor having any respect to poor or rich, widows or married
persons, old or young, yea, or to such as stouped for-age, to sick, or bedrid
creples, or to one or other; yea and did sesse and quarter, till persons were
forced to pay such sums, as the civil judges, before whom the cause was
depending, had not determined to be justly addebted by them. All which is
fully, and particularly laid open by Naphtaly, and will appear to all who have
not renunced humanity, to be more then lesser injuries, as the Surveyer page 70
is pleased to account them, and to be most unjust, though he make a question
thereof, yea and such grievous and intolerable oppressions, the hundereth part
whereof (as Naphtaly said well.) would make him and his accomplices curse both
God and their King.

Tenthly. To all these forementioned cruelties and barbarities, He added this,
that he would suffer no man to complain to him of any wrong they had suffered
by the brutish and barbarous soldiery, nay nor supplicate for relief, and if
they did, their cause was helped by doubling their miseries, yea, and which
might exceed all belief (if its notoriety were not undeniable) forced them,
after all these horrid, dreadful, inhumane, and brutish outrages and
oppressions, to subscribe an acknowledgment, That he had used them civilly and
discretly; and there by necessitated them to deny what was as not our as the
sun at noonday, and their very common sense and feelings, and also to prejudge
themselves of all hope or possibility of getting redress by law.

Eleventhly Though this forementioned acknowledgement had neither been asked
nor granted, yet their condition was irremediable: for neither they, nor any in
the land, might Supplicat King or Council, either for relaxation of the
rigorousnesse of the laws, or for a more civil, moderate, yea or for a strick
and legal execution of the iniquous and grievous laws made, under the pain of
treason and lose Majesty. Though it was an old received maxim, and is to this
day, where tyranny is not avovvedly exercised, that cuivis licet supplicare
and protestari: yet the late Parliament concluded, contrary to the law of
nature and nations, That petitions were seditious and treasonable. So that
how arbitrarily soever King or Parliament yea or Council, or any deputed by
them, did rage, or should opprresse and injure the Subjects, whether in
conscience, body or goods, there was no remedy, nor hope of redress, no
petition or supplication how humble soever, might be once presented by the
grieved subjects: yea nor durst they meet together to pour out their complaint
unto the God of heaven, the hearer of prayers, and the righteous judge of
heaven and earth. What height of opprression and tyranny this is, Let all the
world judge.

Twelvethly. It is uncertain, yea much doubted, if Sr. James Turner, that
singular instrument of barbarous cruelty, had any commission form King or
Council, impovvering him to such illegal exorbitancies (whatever he might have
had, under hand, from some Members of Council who had most sold themselves to
cruelty, and to the utter extirpation of all who would not run with them, to
the same excess of riot) sure if any such thing be, the records will manifest
it; but since they cashired him and some of his associats, and made an offer of
causeing him answer for what he had done, it is very probable, he had no
formal commission for what he did; and yet since he and others are permitted
to live, after such crueltyes, barbarities, and un heard of vvickednesses, and
no reparation made to the persons injured, it is certane he is but too well
approved in all he did, and of what use this shall be, will appear afterward.

Thirteenthly. The intent and design of those poor people who rose in arms,
was not to dethrone the King, to enjure him, or to lessen his just and legal
authority; but to resist, repel, and defend themselves from, unjust violence
and oppression* and to seek reparations of the wrongs done them; and the
removal of that detestable and abjured Hierarchy, the establishing and
upholding of which, as it was, and is a great provocation of the anger of God
against the land, so it was the fountain and rise of all these horrid
oppressions which they suffered, and of the making of such grievous statutes,
and establishing iniquity into a law, and was to be a lasting cause and
occasion of violent. unjust and illegal oppressions, and intolerabel vexations
to all the faithful of the land; and withal, to have security for their lives,
lands, libertyes, consciences, and Religion, conform to the agreement made
with his Majesty, and the National Covenant, and the Solemn league and
covenant, which he solemnly swore once and again, and vowed and promised to
defend and prosecute, in all their ends: and that for this end, all such laws
made for prelacy, and against the work of God and the reformation, which
through Gods blessing we had attained to, might be repealed, annulled and
rescinded. This and nothing else could be the intent and design of these
valient though naked worthyes. That they intended no harm to the King, or to
his just and lawful government and authority, is notoure by the last speeches
and testimonies of such as were apprehended and publicly executed; and the
petition Which they sent in to the Council with William Lauwry Tutor of
Blakewood does abundantly testify that they would have had the free exerciso
of their covenanted Religion and freedom from the domeneering tyranny of
Prelates and their adherents; their renewing of the League and Covenant does
sufficiently clear that they intended no insurrection or rebellion against the
Kings just and lawful authority; for they swore to defend the Kings Majestyes
person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the True Religion, and
libertyes of the Kingdoms.

From these considerations, we shall now lay down the true state of the
question, thus.

Whether or not, when the whole body of a land, Magistrates higher and lower,
People, are engaged by solemn vows, made to the most high God, jointly and
severally, to promove a reformation, and to extirpat Prelates, and the same
covenanted work is become a chief corn stone of the constitution of the
Kingdom, and one of the mane conditions, on which the King is installed on his
throne; and when these same Magistrates Supreme and inferior, renunce their
covenant with God, and with the People, overturne the work of reformation
formerly sworn to, make laws and statutes to fortify this defection, and to
compel all their subjects to run to the same excess of perjury and
wickedness, and execute these laws upon the faithful and steadfastly loyal
subjects, not in a civil orderly manner, but most imperiously and tyrannically,
with mere force and cruelty, and the edge of the sword of soldiers, leavied of
purpose for this very end, to crush and oppress all such as made any
conscience of their vows and engagements unto God; and when these barbarous
soldiers exceed their commission, or oppress, plunder, harash, spoil, rob
and pillage the people, and lay waste the land, without law or express order
from King or Parliament, yea contraire to the express letter of the law; and
when the oppressed have not so much as liberty to supplicate or petition for
help or relief; may private persons without the conduct of a Parliament, stand
to their own defense, against unjust and illegal oppression and tyranny, and
oppose such as, without express commission, endeavor their utter ruin and
destruction, though pretending warrant from the superior Magstrats, and
allowed of them; and seek a redress of these grievous and intolerable
injuries, and liberty for the free exercise of the covenanted reformed
religion, with the extirpation of abjured Prelates, the spring and fountane of
all these miseries already come, and to be feared, while in the mean time they
intend no harm to the supreme Magistrat's person or just authority, but swear
to mantaine the same, in the defense of the true religion, and liberties of the
Kingdom? Or a if you will have it shorter.

Whether or not, when King and Parliament and Council have abjured a covenant,
and overturned a reformation, which they solemnly swore to defend, in their
places and capacities, and made their subjects do the same, and now with
illegal force, compel the subjects to the like perjury and wickedness, may
these private subjects, when there is no hope or possibility otherwise of
relief, stand to their own defense, and withstand the mercylesse cruelty of
their bloody Emissaries acting without their commission, or with their
allowance, yet contrare to express law; and seek releef, and security for
Religion, lives, lands and liberties, having no intention, to wrong the King's
person or just government?

That this is the true state of the question, is abundantly clear from the
particulars forementioned, and I think no Scottish man, who knew the then state
of affairs, and has not renunced common sense, and resolved to believe
nothing (though he should both hear it, see it, and feel it, and it were as
not our as the light when the Sun shines) which is for the vindication of
these poor people, will with any face or show of reason, be able to deny this
to be the true state of affairs, and of the present question.

Hence we see, how the Surveyer sophistically and fraudulently presents the
state (which he may well call the great Knot, as being no way loosed and laid
open by him, as it ought to have been) of the question Page 19. when he says [
Whether mere private persons, one or more, separatly of jointly, when they are,
or think themselves unjustly afflicted, and extremly injuriously handled, by
the Magistrate or Supreme power proceeding according to laws aggreed to,
betwixt himself and the body of the community? Whether or not (upon supposition
that these laws are not just and right) may private persons defend themselves,
against the violence of the Magistrate thus proceeding, even by violent
re-offending; yea, in order to their own defense, cut off the Prince of
Magistrate whatsoever, or their Ministers and officers standing in their way, or
when they are punishing them and afflicting them according to law?] and again
Page 21. he says [The true state of the question at this time is, when the
corruption of these who are in power leads them to abuse their authority,
either on making unjust laws, or punishing according to these, whether mere
private subjects should with violence oppose all Magistrates, under whom they
are, from the highest to the lowest, together with the plurality of the body
of that community where of they are members, yea and in their own defense,
destroy them all (if they be in probable capacity for such work, and if they
cannot eschew this, and preserve themselves) yea farther, after they have
subdued (providence so permitting or ordering) all the magistratical power, and
major part of the people, they may use a vindicative, avenging and punishing
power upon all? being only persons of private capacity) and to be sure he
repeats the same over again Page 24. and says Page 26. [That the way which
we clearly own is, That every private person (when and so long as they are
able, or are in probable capacity to act violently against the Magist^ate)
ought to counter act him violently, when he thinks the Magistrate wrongs him,
(for this must be referred to every man's private discretive judgment) and more
to this purpose there, and again page 27 he tells us [The question is what
duty is owed by the subject Unto the Magistrate (especially the Supreme for may
there be remedies had against the injuries of the inferior by appellation) In
case of his mal-administration, and unjust laws and sentences according to
these laws, or executions according to sentence; whether they may violate or
violent the person invested with authority, and not submit unto him, but
counter-act him by force in self defense against his violence. Or if they be
bound in conscience, or by any law of God, to submit humbly to what he
inflicts (although unjustly) if they can neither move him by their humble
petitions, nor can flee from his wrath, or go out of his dominions] and then
adds* That the author of Naphtaly and his accomplices [Maintaine, That if the
Magistrate abuse his power in making unjust laws, or punishing according to
these, any private man* or company of men, that think themselves strong enough
for the Magistrate ought never to suffer, but use forcible resistance against
the Magistrate abuseing his power: and that all the patience that is required of
Christians tovvard oppressing Magistrates, is only to bear suffering patiently,
when they are out of capicity of acting, and may not better do, and to suffer
patiently when they see they cannot repress the violence of the unjustly -
dealing Magistrate with a sufficient contrary violence.]

That it may appeare^ (though none who understands the controversy, and
reads what he allaigeth, is the state of the question, can readily be
ignorant of his deceit, but may easily perceive his subdolous sohistication)
how far he has misrepresented the business, let these fevv particulars be
pondered.

1. It is one thing, to say that private persons, may rise and take the svvord
of defense in their hand, and resist their Magistrates, upon the ground of
supposed wrongs, or when they think in their private judgments of discretion,
that the Magistrate injureth them: It is another thing to say, This way of
defense may be used when the injuries are real, and not supposed, or judged so
by their private and erring judgment or discretion only. He cannot have the
forehead to say that we maintain the former; nor can he with any color of
half a reason infer, that such a maintain this last, do consequentially
maintain the former, as men of understanding will easiely perceive, and shall
be more fully spoken to afterward in due place. yea suppose that such a
consequence could be drawn, it were not fair, but utterly disingenuous, and
un-becomeing a fair disputant, to bring a consequent which he wire-draweth
from his adversaries position or assertion, into the state of question, and
make the world believe, that his adversary does, positively, clearly and
avowedly assert, what indeed he does not affirm, nay nor grants to follow
from what he holds.

2. It is one thing, to speak of resistance made to laws iniquosly made, and
yet but tending to the hurt of some private persons in smaller matters: it is a
far other thing, to speak of resistance made to laws, whereby the established
religion, and the fundamental rights, and basis of the constitution of the
realm is overturned; and so not only only men's goods, or smaller matters, but
their liberties, religion, consciences, lives, and every thing that is dear
unto them, is in inevitable hazard: it were an impudent calumny to say that we
maintain the former.

3. It is one thing, to say that any private person alone, and severally, may
resist, and repel unjust violence offered by the Magistrates of the land: and
another thing, to say, that a considerable company, joining together, upon just
grounds, may endeavor their own faifty. Though the laws of our land will
suffer a private subject to hinder any, in the Kings name, to possess
themselves of his heritage, or of any thing he possesses, till the question be
discussed by the civil judges; yet we state not our disput concerning what a
private single person may do, in case of oppression.

4. It is one thing, to speak of unjust laws in the general: and another
thing, to speak of unjust laws made by Magistrates, preingadged by solemn
vows and Covenants never to make such laws, and who have given the people all
the security imaginable, that they should never be troubled with such iniquous
laws: This last is our case.

5. It is one thing, to speak of laws (though iniquous and grievous, yet)
executed legally, civily, by way of formal legal procedure. But it is another
thing, to speak of laws, in themselves grievous and iniquous, yet executed in
an unformal, illegal, arbitrary, tumultuous, cruel and bloody way, by armed,
mercylesse and bloody soldiers, which looks rather like the execution of a
bloody act, for massacreing, then of a law made for the good of the
Commonwealth. This last touches our case, as was shovved.

6. It is one thing, to speak of resisting and offering violence to the very
person of the Magistrate: and another thing, to speak of resisting his bloody
Emissaries.

7. So, it is one thing, to speak of resisting his bloody Emissaries clothed
with a commission to exact the penalty imposed by law: But it is a distinct
thing, to speak of resisting his bloody Emissaries, exorbitantly exacting what
they please, without any regaird had to the standing unrepeled law, though
sufficiently grevious.

8. It is one thing, to speak of what private persons may, or ought to do when
injured and oppressed, and there is some door open to get themselves eased of
these oppressions, by complaineing, or appealing to the superior Magistrates, or
by simple petition and supplications. But it is a far other thing to speak of
what a People may do, when all door of hope is closed, and when simple
supplicating would make them liable to the crime of lose Majesty, which was
their case.

9. It is one thing, to speak of what a company of private persons may do, in
their own particular case, without the concurrence of the rest of the
community, who are not concerned in their case, nor particularly engaged to
help and concur with them, in that particular: and another thing to speak of
what private persons, though the minor part of a community, may do, in a case
which concerns not themselves alone, but is common to all; though it man be,
they suffer most of the heat of persecution, upon the account of that common
cause, and in a case, wherein all the whole community is bound and obliged to
other, to stand to, and maintain one another, in the defense of that common
cause, and that by solemn bonds, vows and Covenants. Now this was their case.

10. It is one thing, to say that the minor pairt of a community may rise in
arms, against all the Magistrates, and seek to exauctorate them, and overturne
their power; and against all the rest of the body, and press them to be of
their mind: and another thing, to say they may take arms in their own self
defense, when tyrannically oppressed for adhering to that Covenant and cause,
which the whole body of the land was engadged to maintain, with lives and
fortunes, no less then they, without any intention to wrong the Magistrat's
Just power and authority, or to do the least injury to any of the community,
who would not carry in a hostile manner toward them: Now such was the case and
carriage of that poor people.

11. It is one thing, to say that private persons when injured by unjust laws,
and when able to resist and oppose the Magistrate, may never submite unto undue
penaltyes, (which he salsly fathereth on Naphtaly.) But it is a far other
thing* to say that in some cases hic and nu^c private persons may resist the
unjust and illegal force of Magistrates, or* that it is false to say that in no
case imaginable private persons may resist unjust violence offered to them by
Magistrates. Or, which is all one, that in every case whatsomever, it is the
duty of private persons, to submit unto the most iniquous, illegal, and
tyrannical impositions, penaltyes, and exactions; or unto tyrannical and unjust
laws. Now this is the true state of the question in thesi, and if this be
granted, we seek no more, as to that, being persuaded the hypothesis will
follow clearly from the thesis, and hing on it, without many knots of arguments
to fasten it.

12. It is one thing, to say that private persons may call their superior
Magistrates, when making defection, to an account, judicially process them, and
formally give out sentence against them, which he injuriously allaigeth upon
Naphtaly, as any, who will impartially consult the places by him cited, will
find. But it is a far other thing, to say that private persons in some cases
in way of defense and maintenance of the reformed Religion, may stand to its
vindication: and this is all the vindicative power which Naphtali, Page 18,
19. (the places which he cites) speaks of, as incumbent to private persons.

From these things it is apparent to any of an ordinary reach, in those
matters, how far that which he makes the knot of the question, is from the
true, plain, full and real state of the business now controverted, which
we have laid down. And what unfaire dealing we way expect, thorovv the
rest of his pamphlet, any may judge by what we here find, in the very stateing
of the controversy. But he will say, that the Author of Naphtali (whom he
ignorantly, terms the libeller, but in truth, the honest vindicator of the
innocence of the suffering people of God) has so stated it, in his book. It is
true, this Surveyer says so Page 21. But why did not he direct his reader
unto the page where such a state of the question was to be found? I appeal
to any who ever read that book, to judge, whether this man speaks truth or
not. Ay but you vvil say, He has cited Page 13, and 14. Naphtalies very
words, and has cited the pages where these are to be found, out of which
words, the State of the controversy as by him proposed, may be drawn. I Answer
It is one thing to draw conclusions or consequences from the words of an
adversary while he is prosecuting his arguments, and out of these raise a state
of a controversy; and another thing, to say that his adversary does so state
the controversy, while as he speaks no such thing: now both these are
soloecismes, the one in morality, the other in way of disputing: and of both he
is guilty, first it is an un truth, to say that Naphtali does so state the
question as he allaigeth he does; and it is no better, to say that Naphtali
does so state the question because here and there in his book, he has some
expressions that seem to look there away: Again, it is an absurd way of
disputing, and intolerable, to draw the state of a question out of a man's
expressions here and there uttered in the prosecution of his arguments; Whereas
the state of the controversy is that which all his arguments prove and
conclude. But what if al these expressions which he has raked together out of
Naphtaly, will not bottom his assertions, or the state of the question as he
proposes it? sure every one must take him for a mere wrangler, and animpudent
ignoramus in the matter of handleing a controversy, if it be so. And whether it
be so or otherwise let us now try. The words he cites first, are out of Page
8. viz. these (which I shall not curtaile as he does, but set down fully,) And
it will also appear that the necessity of convocations and combinations (though
not only without, but even against authority, yet being in order to such
necessary and just ends) did sufficiently warrant them before God and all men,
from the breach of any law or act then standing against the same, wherewith
they might have been charged.] But what can he hence infer? Will he infer
that the Author of Naphtaly, either says or thinks. That any part of the
people, (though no Magistrate be amongst them) may take arms against all
Magistrates, and violently resist them, when they think their laws either
unjust, or the punishment executed unjust, (as he says he does. Ibid. Page
13.) By what medium will he couple the antecedent and consequent together? May
not a man disallow that any part of the people, though they had all the
Magistrates with them, except the Supreme, may take up arms against the
Supreme, and violently resist him, whenever they think that the laws are
unjust, or the punishment executed unjust (as I verily think the Author of
Naphtaly will) and yet say, That when strong and inevitable necessity urges,
in order to necessary and just ends, people may have their own convocations,
even against authority, and de jure be guilty of the breach of no standing law
against the same, seeing all know that salus populi est supreme lex, and that no
law or act, when the strik observation thereof, tends to the detriment of
the Republic, (for the good of Which, all laws are made,) is of force. The
next passage he cites is out of Page 14. were Naphtaly has these words: [
That the right and privilege of self-defence, is not only founded in, but is
the very first instinct of pure nature, and spring of all motion and action. 2.
That it was competent to, and exercised by, every individual, before that
either society or government were known. 3. That it was so far from being
surrendered and supperssed by the erecting of these, that it was and is the
great end, and motive, for which all voluntary societyes and policyes were
introduced, and are continued. 4. That it is a principal (and not the principal
as he misciteth it) rule of righteousness, whereunto that great command of
love to our neighbor, by the law of God, and by the Lord himself, is resolved,
and whereby it is interpreted.] And then adds, [ So it does infallibly
follow, that the same right and privilege, is yet competent to all men whether
separatly or jointly, and needs no other pre-requisite, but that of
intolerable injury (which for a man to suffer under pretense of the good of the
Commonwealth, would be, for the delusion of an empty name, only for the lust of
other, really to deprive himself of his whole share and interest therein) and
is completed for exercise by such a probable capacity, as may encourage the
asserters thereof, to undertake it.] Thus I have set down his words, truly and
wholly, and I would feign know what is there here, that will ground the
foresaid thesis? Must a man that says thus, necessarily say, That it is
lawful for private subjects to take arms against their Magistrates (when they
are in a probable capacity to carry through their matters,) and the major part
of the people, when they think the laws are unjust, or the punishments
executed are unjust? Let him the next time, I pray, prove this consequenc. For
I, and many more, do and will deny it. His next passage is out of Page 15. the
words are these, [ The propelling by force of such injuries (that is, to be
violented in the matters of Religon) was the justest cause and quarrel, that
men in their primeve liberty, could be engaged in.] which surely is a very
innocent and harmless assertion, and such as he, nor no rational man, who
knows to prefer the interest of the soul, unto the interest of the flesh,
can contradict; and from whence, no man that knows what the exercise of
reason is, can infer his forecited thesis. The next passage he miserably
curtaileth out of Page 16 17. but though we should take it as he has set it
down) excepting that parenthesis which he has soisted in, in the same
character, to deceive the sample Reader, what could he infer from it? When
once says [ That combinations for assistance, in the same common cause of
just and necessary defense, whereunto the force of extreme necessity, through
the perversion of that mean of government, appointed for their preservation,
does ultimatly reduce them, are warranted by the principle of humanity, etc.
and Gods glory, etc. and by this, that whole Cities Kingdoms and Empires, for
the violation of this duty, in not releeving the innocents from unjust tyranny,
even of lawful powers, have been overtaken therefore by fearful judgments, to
their utter ruin and subversion.] Must he needs be thought to say and assert,
That private subjects may combine together and make insurrection against the
lawful Magistrate, when they, in their private judgment of discretion, think the
ends of government are perverted? What sharp sighted man can be able to see
where these two shall meet? He tells us next that Page 18, 19. it is said [
That not only power of self-defence, but vindicative and reforming power is in
any part of the people, against the Whole, and against all Magisirates; and if
they use it not, judgment comes on (supposeing their capacity probable to
bear them forth,) and they shall be punished for there connivance, and not
acting in way of vindication of crimes, and reforming abuses.] But who shall
read the place cited, will be forced to acknowledge a very great injury done to
Naphtaly, and that his words are miserably represented; and yet he cannot draw
out of them, even as he has minced the, and thrawne them so that they look
with another face, then their own, That, Napbtaly asserteth, That private
persons may, when they think or imagine, in their private judgment, that the
Magistrates and the rest of the land are in a defection, arise in arms against
them, vindicate Religion, judge and condemn such as are guilty; and so use
imperat acts of reformation by vindication. Sure these words in Naphtaly, [of
necessity both from the principles deduced, and from the most visible judgments
of God agreeable thereto, there must be a superior and antecedent obligation,
to that of submission, incumbent upon all, both jointly and separatly, for the
maintenance, vindication, and reformation of religion, in order to the
promoting of these great ends of the publik profession of truth, and true
worshipe, which the Lord does indispensably require] to sober, judicious,
intelligent, and impaitial readers, will have a far other import. So, what can
he infer from that which Naphtali said Page 28. viz. [That none pleads for
absolute submission in the people, and exemption in the prince, but such as
have prostrated their consciences to the Princes arbitrament, in a blind and
absolute obedience] and that [ seeing subjection is principally enjoined, for,
and in order to obedience, what soever reason or authority can be adduced to
perswad an obsolute and indispersible subjection, will far more rationally and
plausibly infer an illimited and absolute obedience] Can he, with any color
of sense or reason, infer that he maintains that passive subjection to
unjust laws and punishments, where there is power to make active violent
resistance, is a greater sin then active obedience to unlawful commands of
Magistrates? Is this a fair way of disputing, to say that one makes that the
state of the question, which he draws from the assertion of his adverry?
Naphtaly allaigeth that absolute subjection is as repugnant to reason, as
absolute obedience; does he therefore make this the state of the question, (or
give ground for it,) That absolute subjection is more sinful then absolute
obedience? Again, what can he draw out of these words of Naphtaly Page 157.
[Secondly it is answered That riseing up against authority itself, the
ordinance of God, and disobeying the powers therewith vesied, standing and
acting in their right line of subordination, is indeed rebellion, and as the
sin of witchcraft; but to resist and rise up against persons abuseing sacred
authority, and rebelling against God the Supreme, is rather to adhere to God,
as our Liege Lord, and to vindicate both curselves and his abused ordinance
form man's wi^kednnesse and tyranny] Can he hence infer that Naphtaly judges
it no rebellion, for private subjects, to disobey Powers acting in a right
subordination, when they in their judgments of discretion, judge that they
deviat from that line of subordination? Sure he must have some needle head that
can sow these two together.

These are the particulars whereupon this Surveyer thinks to bottom his
falsely-stated question, and by this we may judge ( ut ex ungue leon^m) what
faith he is worthy of, when he says immediately thereafter Page 14. [But what
needs insisting on his justifying of any number of private persons riseing up
and resisting the whole Magistrates, and Body of the people, when ever they
think they have cause? Seeing this is the maine scope of his book, and more too,
even to state them in a punitive power of all who are against them, and a power
to pull down all authorities, that are in their way.] Alas! poor soul, such
impudent untruthes, will not much strengthen his cause, in the judgment of such
as are judicious, and many will think that such way of dealing declares him to
be unworthy of his wages: for, may not all who read that book, see a clear
other scope there intended then what he here fancyeth; and know that from no
sentence in all that book, can such conclusions be drawn, as he here says is
the maine scope of it. O! but he must be audacious and affronted, to say that
the author of Naphtaly [not only makes a proclamation to all mere private
persons (not having any Nobles and Magistrates amongst them) to make
insurrections against all Magistrates from the highest to the lowest, and
against the plurality of the people (if they think themselves in probable
capacity,) and not only so, but gives to them a liberty to pull all
Magistrates out of their seats, to instal themselves, and to punish Magistrates,
who (as he says) have forfauted their right by the abuse thereof] as he does
Page 21. What will not such shameless boldness adventure to aver, with the
greatest confidence? but such as are wife will not believe every thing, that
such as have made shipwrak of faith and of a good conscience, and have
possessed themselves of a debauched conscience, have the impudency to affirm
without blushing.

CAP. II.
Three Arguments proposed, taken I. from the Concessions of Adversaryes. 2 The
resistance of Parliaments: 3. The Light and Law of Nature.
Having thus cleared the true state of the question, we shall now fall about
the confirming of the affirmative; and so take occasion to examine what this
Surveyer says, as he comes in our way: and though there should not be great
necessity to confirm our hypothesis, or the present question under debate,
unto such, as have not prostituted their soull unto a brutish belief of an
absolute and indispensible subjection, or submission in all cases whatsomever,
unto the lusts and rage of men abuseing their power and places, and overturning
that good order which God only wise estabished in his love and favor, for the
good mankind; yet because this seems to be an age, wherein the spirits of
many of sunk below that of beasts; and men of no consciences, or, at best,
debauched consciences, have willingly surrendered their privilege as men, and
assumed the slavish disposition of bondmen, that for their own base ends, a
little mase of pottage, they may gratify such as are nothing less, then what
they ought to be; it will be necessary to speak a little more to it.

Our first argument then shall be taken from the concessions of adversaries,
and from what this same surveyer, seems (if not expressly and directly to
grant, yet) not to deny or condemn altogether Barclarius contra Monarchom:
lib. 1. c. 8. grants to the people liberty to defend themselves from injury,
and to resist quando immani savitia petuntur and lib. 4. c. 16. he does fully
an plainly acknowledge [That the king falls from the right to this
Kingdoms, and that the people may not only resist him, and refuse obedience
unto him but many also remove him from the throne, if without the subjects
consent he should subjecte the Kingdom to another, or be transported with an
hostile mind against the Commonwealth. [ Doct* fern also acknowledges [That
personal defense is lawful against the sudden and illegal assaults, of the
King's messengers, yea of the Prince himself, thus far, to ward his blows,
to hold his hands; so when the assault is inevitable] and else where he grants
it lawful [ to resist the King's cutthroats.] So Arnisaeus de author: princip.
Cap. 2. n. 10. grants it lawful to private persons, to resist the King, when
he acts extrajudicially. And Crotius de jur. bell. and pac. lib. I. c. 4. n.
7. seems to say that the law of non-resistence does not oblige, in certane
and extreme danger, seeing some divine laws, though generally proposed, have
this tacit exception of extreme necessity; and gives this for a ground. That
the law of non-resistence seems to have flowed from them, who first combined
together into a society, and from whom such as did command, did derive their
power: now if it had been asked of such, Whether they would choose to die,
rather then in any case to resist the Superiors with arms, I know not (says
he) if they would have yielded thereunto, unless with this addition, if they
could not be resisted, but with the greatest perturbation of the Commonwealth,
and destruction of many innocents. And a little thereafter He has these words
[ Att^men indiscriminatim damnare, AUT SINGULOS, AUT PARTEM MINOREM, quae
ultimo necessitatis praesidio sic utatur, ut interim, and communis boni
respectum non deserat, vix ausim] It is true, in the end of that Section, he
seems to say that nothing is now left to christians, but flight, yet 10. and
11. he assenteth to Barclaius his concessions. Let us next see what our
Surveyer seems to yield Page 23. 24. [ Whatever may he said(says he) of
moral of legal felf defense, against the souveraigne, by way of petition, or
plea in court, for saifty of a man's person or Estate; and whatever may be said
of warding off, and defensively putting back, personal injurious assaults, to
the manifest and immediate peril of life; without any color of deserving, of
reason, of law, or judicial proceeding; or of a Woman's violent resisting
attempts, against the honor of her chastity (dearer to her then life) and
tending to ensnare her also in sin, againss God (whereof her non-resistence
makes her formally guilty) and whatever may be done in the case of most
habited, notoure and complete tyranny, against all appearance of law,
manifesily tending to the destruction of the body of a people, or greater part
thereof, by hostile furious actions, or in the case of violent attempts, or
destruction of all known legal libertyes, and the being of Reliagion,
according to law; or in the case of vendition, alienation of, and giving a
whole Kingdom to forraigners, or strangers, or some such like; whatever I say
in such horried cases (which for most part cannot befall a prince, in his
natural and right wits, (a case wherein provision may be made, that he hurt not
himself, nor his dominions) may be done, comes not at all within the compass
of our question; although most disingenuously, the discontented and seditious,
do strive on all occasions, to aggravate matters so, that the case concerning
them, may seem co-incident with these, or the like, that so they may justify
their violence against the powers.]

But howbeit this Surveyer think that these concessions make little for our
advantage; yet to understanding persons, it will be clear in general.

1. That He, and the rest of the Royal society of Court parasites and
slatterers, speak most inconsequentially unto themselves; They cry up in their
writtings an absolute, and indispensible subjection, unto the Supreme
Magistrate, due by all his subjects; and yet when they are sore pinched, they
must clap their wings closer, And draw in their fair sails, and grant that
in such and such cases, not only his E missaries and such as have his
commission, but Himself may be resisted not only by the Ephort, and Primores
Regni, but by very private subjects. Did we not but just now hear our Surveyer
crying out against Naphtaly, for saying That what reasons could prove an
absolute and indispensible subjection, will also prove an abosolute and
unlimited obedience, as being unwelling to hear any thing spoken against an
absolute and vast, subjection; and yet behold here, he is as willing as the
rest, to clip the wings of this inviolable soveraignity, and set forth unto us
a limited and retrenched subjection due to the Supreme Magistrate, even by
private persons.

2. That by these concessions, He and the rest cut the sinews of their own
arguments, and cause them to halt ere they assault us, and teach us away of
rejecting or answereing them; For, when they produce their arguments, whether
from reason, or authorities, they cannot but make them conclude universally,
and then they are necessitated themselves to answer these universal
arguments, or otherwise retract their concessions; and whatever way they think
to evade with their concessions, and supposed cases, we will find room
enough to escape with our case; as for exemple, when this Surveyer urges
that subjection spokento, Romans 13. He must either grant, that it must be
restricted to such and such cases, or else plead for an universal, absolute,
unlimited and indispensible subjection, and so retract his concessions; and if
he take the liberty to use his restrictions, and so interpret the place, as
that it shall not reach his cases excepted, he must grant us the same liberty,
to say that our case is not there meaned, or condemned.

3. By these concessions we have this advantage, that the distinction which
is made, in this question of resistance, betwixt the Magistrate as such, and
the person or man, who is the Magistrate, is not so absurd and ridiculous, as
the Royalists give it out to be; for here we find them forced to use the
same, so that if it be a defileing distinction they cannot be clean, more then
we: and we see that resistance may be used against the person of, or the man
who is, the Magistrate, without the least contempt, or vvrong done unto the
holy Ordinance of God, otherwise they must of necessity say, that in all the
forementioned cases, they very Ordinance of God is resisted; and how then they
shall reconcile that, with Romans 13. I see not.

4. We see also, That the Prerogative Royal, which they screvv up unto a
transcendent absoluteness and supremacy above law, is but a mere chimaera,
which themselves must abhominate as a loathsome brat.

5. We see that salus populs est suprema lex, the peoples saifty is such a
royal thing, that the King himself, and all his prerogatives, yea and municipal
laws too, must veil the cap unto it themselves being judges.

6. We see also, that they must grant a court of necessity, in which private
persons, may judge the Supreme Magistrate, in order to their resisting of him;
for, I hope, they will grant, that in these cases, the people act with
judgment, and as rational men; and if so, they must say, that the people must
first judge and condemn the Supreme Magistrate, as erring, and doing amiss,
before they can lawfully resist him.

7. We have this advantage, That the Arguments by which, They can prove it
lawful to resist the Magistrate, in the cases granted by them, will not be a
little steadable to us, in our case; and for shame they will not condemn their
own arguments, because in our mouths.

8. It will be easily granted by all, that our case, which we have truly
stated, will come nearer the cases, which adversaries do except, then the
case which he has set down; and so, Hovvever he think the cases mentioned
by him, do not come within the compass of the question which he has set
down; yet understanding persons vvil see, they are not altogether without
the compass of that which is the true question, and true state of the
controtroversy; and that he has no just cause to fay, that we (hovvever he
account us discontented and seditious) do most disingenuosly strive, on all
occasions, to aggravate matters, so that the case concerning us, may seem
co-incident with these or the like.

But next, more particularly, These concessions are much for our advantage. For,

1. If it be lawful for a private person to defend his life or estate in a
moral or legal way, by petition, or plea in court, against the Souveraigne,
(yea and by actual force, if the Sovereign, or any in his name, shall come to
poind, or take possession illegally, as our laws will allow,) why shall it
be unlawful, for a considerable part of the land, to defend their Lives, and
Estates, their Libertyes and Religion, by forcible resistance, made unto the
Magistrat's Emissaries, cruel, bloody soldiers, when that moral resistance by
petition, (which yet no rational man can account resistance, it being rather
an act of subjection) is, contrare to all law and equity, denied; and also,
the legal resistance, by plea in court, is not admitted? Does the municipal
law of the land permit the one resistance, and will not the law of nature
and nations (which no municipal law can infringe) be a sufficient vvarandice
for the other, in case of extreme necessity? If it be said, The Sovereign has
law and right upon his side, in this case, which he has not in the other, till
the law discuss it. Ans. The Law and Right which he has on his fide in this
case, is but merely pretended, as in the other case; and is lis sub judice
Neither is he, to be both judge and party in this case, more then in the other:
again, if it be said that in this case, He acts as a Sovereign, executeing
the laws, but in the other case, he acts only, as a private person. It is
answered. 1. That even in the other case He may pretend to be acting as a
Sovereign, following and executeing the laws, as well as in this. 2. The
Sovereign as Sovereign cannot oppress nor do wrong, and therefore even in
this case, when he does manifest injury unto the subjects, contrare to his
place, vow and promise, he acts but as a private person, and not as
Sovereign.

2. If it be lawful for private person to ward off, and defensively put back
personal injurious assaults, to the manifest and immediate peril of life,
without any color of deserving, of reason, of law, or judicial proceeding. Why
shall it not also be lawful for private persons to ward-off, and defensively put
back, the injurious assaults of Emissaries, to the manifest peril of Life,
Libertyes, States, Lively-hoods, Consciences and Religion, without any
rational, or real color of deserving, of reason of law, of God, or nations, or
judicial proceeding? Shall it be lawful for one private person, in the defense
of his own life, to ward off such illegal, extrajudicial and irrational
assaults of the Sovereign himself; and shall it be unlawful for a body of a
land, or a considerable part thereof, in the defense of their lively-hoods, and
so of their own lives, and of the lives of their posterity, of their
Consciences, of their Libertyes and Religion, all secured unto them by all
bonds, vows, Covenants, Statutes and Acts imaginable, to ward off the
irrational, furious, illegal, extrajudicial and mad assaults of the Sovereign's
bloody Emissaries? Sure rational men will see that whatever reason vvil
evince the law fullness of the resistance in the former case, the same will
more strongly and plausibly, conclude the lavvfulnesse of resistance in this
case.

3. If it be lavvfull for a private woman to defend her chastity, dearer to
her then life, by violent resisting the Sovereigns attempts, lest by
non-resistance, she should be guilty (and oh if all the women of the nation
were of this temper.) Shall it not also be lavvful for private persons to
defend their Lives, Liberties, Consciences and Religion, dearer to them then
their Lives; yea and defend their chastity too, by violent resisting of the
furious attempts of the Sovereigns bloody Emissaries, sent of purpose to
constrain and compel them to perjury, when their non-resistence, according to
their power and opportunity, could not but be interpreted a voluntary and base
quiteing of the cause and truth, which they were bound before God, to
maintain with their lives and fortunes?

4. If it be lavvfull to resist habited, notour and complete tyranny, against
all appearance of law, manifestly tending to the destruction of a body of a
people, or a greater part thereof, by hostile furious actions: Shall it be
utterly unlavvsul to resist notour tyranny, yea complete and habited (though
not as to re-iterated acts, yet as to the ground laid down of a most complete
and habited tyranny) against all appearance of divine law, or just and right
humane laws, which should be consonant thereunto, tending to the destruction
of the Covenanted-libertyes, privileges and Religion, of the whole body of the
people; and also unto the actual destruction of the libertyes, states, lives
and lively hoods of a great part thereof, by hostile furious actions?

5. If resistance be lavvful in the case of violent attempts, or destruction of
all known legal libertyes, and the being of religion according to law: Shall
resistance in our case be unlavvsul, when all the true libertyes of the
subjects, once established by laws, re enforced by vows, Covennants,
solemn engadgments, and all bonds imaginable; and the very being of our
Religion, as reformed in doctrine, vvorshipe, discipline and government,
ratified, approved, established, and confirmed by laws, oaths, Covenants,
vows and promises, which laws so re enforced with oaths, protestations,
attestations, declarations, solemn vows and Covenants, are, by all right
divine and humane, irrepelable, being not only in themselves good and
necessary, but also becoming hereby sacred vows to God, which must be paid,
and being also fundamental terms of the constitution of the reformed
Republic?

6. If in the case of Vendition, Alienation of, and giving the Kingdom to
strangers, violent resistance be allowed; shall it not also be allowed in our
case, when a land that was solemnly devoted, consecrated, and given away to
God by solemn vows and Covenants, and the same owned, approved, ratified
and confirmed by public acts, edicts, proclamations, declarations, laws and
statutes of plenary, and (even as to all formalities) complete Parliaments,
made up of all the Estates of the Realm, and the King also, is now
treacheroussly, and iniquosly, forced to depart from their former principles,
to abjure their former vows and Covenants, to change their God, to condemn
his work; and by most abominable, and ever to be-abhorred acts and statutes,
sold and alienated unto a popish prelatical and malignant faction and design,
under which, the faithful and true seekers of God's face, have, and can
expect, less liberty for their consciences, then if the whole Kingdom were
delivered up into the hands of the great Turk.

Thus we see these concessions help our cause, and weaken the adversaryes
not alittle: let us now proceed to speak to another particular which will
help us also.

2. The authors of Lex Rax, and of the Apologetical Relation have sufficiently
proved, that the late war carried on by the Parliament of Scotland against
the King, was lavvful, both in point of law and conscience; And if that was
lavvfull (as it was, and shall be found to be, when he and all his accomplices
have done their utmost with all their lying cavills, false calumnies,
reproaches, and what not, that Hell can hatch, to disprove and condemn the
same;) a war raised by the subjects in their own sin-lesse self defense,
without the conduct of their representative, cannot in every case be condemned;
particularly not in our case now.

The antecedent, I say, is abundantly proved in the books mentioned, which this
windy man thinks needless to run out upon (but he might rather say, he thinks
impossible to answer, and beyond his poor strength to graple with) as he
says Page. 20. we must then take some notice of what, in that Page (which
he thinks sufficient to oppose unto the many arguments produced by them) he is
pleased to present; [ what sense (says he) the people of Scotland ( when they
have come to liberty) have of these arms, their late representative have
declared, and it were to be wished, that the memory of such ways, were buried,
that the posterity might never look upon them as exemplary; Their progenitors
have so deeply drunk of the bitter fruits of the same, the result of them
having been so much sin, shame and sorrow, vastation confusion and destruction
to Princes and People.] I answer, 1. What that liberty is, which the people of
Scotland are now come to, who can see it, for the perfect slavery and bondage
they are sold unto? A freedom he talks of, when all our libertyes are sold,
and we given up as bond men and bond women unto the lust of a Man, and are
denied the very liberty, which is the privilege of all free subjects, yea and
that which is the birthright and native privilege of all men, viz. to
supplicate, petition or to pray: what liberty can he then mean, unless the
liberty (which is licentiousness) to forsake God and our Covenant, to turn
Apostats from his truth and our profession, to swear and foresweare, to drink,
debauch, whore, commit sodomy, and all sort of wickedness, without curb or
control? Is this the liberty he understands? Sure, all true christians and
such as fear the Lord account that develish slavery and bondage. 2. We know
what this late Representatives have done, but whether therein they have acted
the part of Representatives, and given the true sense of the people of
Scotland, will (it may be) be considered, when He and I both are rotten. Sure
they never had any express, yea nor tacit commission from the people of
Scotland, to give up all their necks to the stroke the axe, as treatours and
rebels, for doing nothing but standing to their own defense, against manifest
tyrranny, and oppression of both soul and body; and to condemn them and their
worthy progenitors who valiently stood for the truth, and the libertyes of
Church and State, to the loss of their lives and fortunes; and to proclaim and
declare themselves guilty before God and Men, of all the blood that was shed in
that war, though most lawful and laudable. 3. We are persuaded, let him with
what he will, the memory of these memorable ways shall never be buried, but
shall stand as exemplary monuments to succeeding generations, when God shall
think it meet to animate them with the spirit of courage, to free the land of
tyranny, and of domineering abjured prelates, withal their tail and train: and
wise men will think that his Representatives have not taken a course fit for
burying the memory of these ways; but rather a way to revive afresh the memory
of them, and to commend them more to the thoughts and hearts of all who love
and pray for the comeing of our Lord's Kingdom. 4. What bitter fruits these
are, which, he says, our progenitors have drunk so deeply of, we know not,
They lived and died, such of them as owned, and steadfastly adhered to that
cause and Covenant, in honor and peace; and their names shall be in perpetual
remembrance, when his, and the names of the rest of this perjured, Malignant
apostate faction shall rot. We needed not have feared that either sin, shame,
sorrow, vastation, confusion, or destruction, should have come to Prices or
People, if we had prosecuted the ends of our Covenants, with zeal and
faithfulness according to our manifold vows, promises, solemn oaths and
ingagments: But what ever of these have followed, should be, and will be
rightly fathered on our defection and lose of zeal: And what sin and shame, and
sorrow, and vastation, and confusion, and destruction shall now follow both to
Princes and People (if they repent not) upon this unparallelable defection and
Apostasy, whereof now they are avowedly guilty, none, who is not an utter
stranger unto God, his faithful word, and dispensations, but may, without any
extraordinary Spirit of Prophecy, foretell.

Next he tells us, That these disputes proceed upon a most untrue and malicious
misrepresentation of matters of fact, and upon two false hypotheses: Let us
hear what are those? [ As if (says he) the King had been the first invader of
the Nation, whereas it is known, his authority was first invaded, his laws
trodden upon, kis proclamations openly despised, his castles violently seized;
his arms he took were notinvasive against the Nation, but defensive of his
own authority, of his laws, and the persons of orderly walking subjects, and
for reduceing these who strayed from their duty.] Answ. Quis tulerit Gracchos
de seditione querentes? Who would suffer such a manifest notorius liar to say,
that others made misrepresentations of matters of fact? But, 1. Do not all who
then lived, and yet read the public papers, and other acts that passed then,
know that through the instigation of some false, perfidious, fugitive Prelates,
the King was stirred up to make war on Scotland, ere ever they thought of any
such thing? Was not war concluded both by sea and land? Was not free tradeing
taken away? Were not the Scottish Nobility at court made to abjure the National
Covenant, and the General Assembly at Glasgow? was there not a declaration
emitted Feb. 27. and publicly read in all the Churches of England, wherein the
faithful subjects and Covenanters in Scotland were termed Rebels? Were not
Berwik and Carlisle frontier cities strongly fortifyed and garrisoned? Was not
the Earl of Huntly made Governor of the North of Scotland, and had some four
or five thousand men in arms, for the King? Was not Aberdeen fortifying it
self, to take in the King's navy of shipes, when it should come? Was not the
Marquis of Douglas, and Lord Haris ready to rise with the Papists in the South
of Scotland? Was not the Deputy of Ireland prepareing men to land them in the
West of Scotland? Was not the Earl of Arundale made the Kings General? and was
not the King to have his rendezvous at York in Aprile, and all the English
Nobility commanded to attend him there by a letter written Ian. 26. before the
faithful People of Scotland had any army in readiness? What impudency is this
then to say, the King was not the first invader of the Nation? And as for the
second expedition, Anno Dom. 1640. managed, and carried on, by the Parliament,
it was abundantly verified by their public papers, that it was purely
defensive. And it is notour, that before the leavy was made, and appointed, the
King had violated the conditions made; had caused burn by the hand of the
Hangman a paper containeing explications of some terms used by him in the
treaty of Peace; had denied access to their commissioners, and afterward, when
he had signified his willingness to hear such as they should send, such as
were sent were committed to prisone, and one of them, viz. The Lord Lowdon
ordained secretly to be beheaded in the Towr of London; and, in the mean
while, war was concluded against the Realm of Scotland, in the King's
Council; The Earl of Northumberland was made General, a Parliament was
convocated, both in England and Irland, for raising of subsidies, to the
carrying on of this war; The Deputy of Irland with some there, had promised
much assistence. The Prelates of England had offered great sums to carry on
this Bellum Episcopale, as they named it; Scottish shipes were intercepted,
their goods taken away, and the seamen cast into prifsones and miserably
handled; The sea ports were closed up with frigots; The castle of Edinbrugh
oppressed the City with their shot, and killed many both young and old. Were
all these things no beginnings of a war, nor no acts of hostility? How can
he, or any else then, say that the King was not the first aggressor, or that
Scotlands war was not purely defensive? 2. As to these things wherein he
would make his reader believe, that the Honest people of Scotland, were the
first invaders, what a malicious fool does he manifest himself to be; for 1.
How or what way was his authority invaded? was it, because they would not
receive a mass book in English, obtruded upon them by his sole authority
without the concurrence of Church or State? 2. What laws were trodden upon?
Weknow no laws, but acts and statutes of a lawful Parliament, made for the
glory of God, and the good of the land: and what such were trod upon? 3. What
way were his proclamations despised? Is it to despise a King's proclamation,
for free subjects to vindicate them selves of what is unjustly laid to their
charge in this proclamations, by faithful and humble protestations of their
innocence? 4. What were those castles seized upon? Some be like in Vtopia; for,
before this war was begun Anno 1639. The Covenanters seized upon none of the
King's castles: When they savv the King bore a hostile mind against them and
intended no good, they watched the castle of Edinbrugh that more ammunition and
provision should not be carried into it: And this was all they did, until they
were necessitated to put themselves, into a posture of defense, and then they
seized upon some houses here and there, the lawfulness of which, is
demonstrated by Lex Rex, and the Apology. 5. What illegal courts were those
which were set up? Sure those tables, as they were called, were no courts
assumeing to themselves any judicial determination in any matter of State civil
or Ecclesiastical, nor conventions: for disturbance of the peace, or usurpation
against authority; but mere meetings (allowed by the light and law of nature)
for consultation and advice anent the matter and manner of supplications, which
they were to present to his Majesty, and his Council; and of propositions to be
presented to the lawful State and Church-judicatories. 6. Who were those
subjects walking according to the laws, who were persecuted? We know of none,
who were troubled at that time, except the Prelates, the Troublers of our
Israel, and all the persecution they met with, was that the honest Covenanters
did give in complaints against them, and offered to make good what they
allaiged, upon the highest peril, and did supplicate the Council (whereof some
of them were Members) that they might not fit there as judges, but stand as
Rei, and answer for themselves, and that the General assembly indicted by his
Majesty, after mature deliberation, and full examination, did excommunicate
them, for high and notorious crimes, to be seen in the registers of that
Assembly. But 2 will these things, to judicious persons, lay the ground of a
lawful war by the Magistrate, against his own subjects? Are these who cannot
yield obedience unto unlawful commands, who humbly protest for their own
innocence, who meet together for drawing up supplications, and ordering matters
thereanent, and who give in complaints against the Pests and Troublers of the
land, and exerce Church censures upon the scandalous, invaders of the
Sovereign's authority? And when a King upon these grounds invadeth his
subjects, with an army of armed men, can any man of common sense think that his
war is not an invasive war? Has not Magistrates other lavvfull vvayes to
defend their own authority and laws and orderly subjects, and to reduce the
disorderly, then fire and svvord? Sure, for a King to cut off his subjects, is
to diminish and annihilate his authority and laws both: And for a King to
wage war against the Body of a land, to pleasure Fourteen of a fevv of the
basest and most unvvorthy of all the subjects, would seem to be the result of
no grave and sage Council; nor would it appear to be much for the Kings
honor, to have his Sovereign authority imbarqued with a fevv abjects, so as
if they did sink to the bottom of the sea, It could not swime.

The next thing, (and that is the 2 hypothesis) he allegeth is. [ That they
represent him, in their virulent (he should say nervous) writeings, as Nerone
ipso Neronior, a great persecuter of Religion, intending the total ruin and
destrustion of the protestant profession, and the total ruin and destruction,
of the whole people of the land.] Answ. They represente him no otherways,
then his own public, owned, and avowed deeds, and declarations did
represente him to all the world. What was his secret intentions God knows,
but his deeds did declare that he minded no good to the poor Church and State
of Scotland; for, to pleasure a few abjects, that had drunken in much Popery,
and Arminianisme, and stirred him up to urge upon our Church 2 Popish public
service, book of canons, and ordination, Popish ceremonies, and such Romish
trash, he sought, by fire and sword to reduce us to ashes. We shall not now
trouble his Urne, by speaking to what this Surveyer says afterward: This we
know, That he died; but whether as a glorious Martyr for the true Religion of
God (which yet may admit several senses, so ambiguous is it, though we let it
pass in the best) and laws and liberties of the people, (as he says) many
doubt. At length he closes his digression thus. [ If there was any thing that
could not have a favorable interpretation in that unhappy book that gave
therise to the troubles, how timely was it retired, and great satisfaction and
security given for religion? If through default of Ministers of State, any
thing had creeped in, that could not abide the test of law, how willingly was
^treformed? yet all could not sist begun course of violence, till through God's
dreadful indignation against a sinful people, his fatal end might be brought
on, not because he had been a Tyrant, but because he had not been such] Answ.
That book which was unholy, as well as, unhappy in giving the rise to such
troubles, had not only somethings in it, that could not bear a favorable
interpretation, but the whole of it, was the extract and quint essence of the
Romish mass book, book of ritualls, etc. And how slowly it was retired, and
satisfaction and security given, for our religion, and how soon conditions
covenanted and condescended upon, were broken, the history of those times does
sufficiently declare; as also how unwillingly any thing was reformed that had
creeped in, whether through the default of Ministers of State or others, But
how can this base calumniator insinuat that the Kings loyal subjects in
Scotland had a hand in bringing him to his fatal end, seeing even the late
Representatives, though they would willingly have raked hell for it, could not
find a man, in all Scotland, to be charged with that crime. That he came to
his fatal end, we know; but that it was through Gods dreadful indignation
against a sinful people (if he mean the faithful and honest Covenanters) I know
none, except base ignorant sycophants, that will say it: That it was not
because he had been a Tyrant, many will doubt. And when he says, that it was
because he had not been a Tyrant. I am sure, he gives non ca^sam pro causa^:
and who can understand how God in his dreadful indignation against a sinful
people, does take away a Prince who was not a Tyrant, seeing upon that account
he gives such Tyrants sometimes.

Having thus vindicated the Antecedent from what this Surveyer had to say
against it, we shall now speak a word to the consequence of the argument. And
1. The whole Cabal of the Royalists will grant it; for, with them, both
Representatives and People are put into one and the same category, viz. of mere
subjects; so that if the Antecedent stand good, (as it shall, for all which
they have said, or all which this their new colleague or young raw disciple, can
say to the contrary) the argument is good ad hominem. 2. Such as grant it
lawful for a Land having their Representatives with them, to defend themselves
against tyranny; But deny it to private subjects, in case of necessity, when
they cannot have the conduct and concurrence of their Representatives, can
adduce no argument against this last, but such, as will weaken their assertion
in the former: As for exemple Hoenonius politic. disp. 9. these. 55. disproveth
resistance in this last case, by these arguments. 1. because, Subjects are
obliged to pay to their own Magistrates, the duty of fidelity and obedience, 2.
Because, by this means a gap would be opened to seditions and rebellions. 3.
Because the scripture commands subjects to pray for their Magistrates. 4. The
son may not wrong his father how wicked so ever he be. 5. Violence done to the
head, though sickly, tends to the ruin of the whole body. 6. It is better to
have a sickly head then none. 7. There is greater danger to Cast off a Tyrant,
then to Tolerate him. 8. A Tyrant cannot be resisted but destruction will
follow to the resisters. 9. God punished the wicked kings of the jews by
strangers. 10. Jeremias did not stir up the jews against Nebuchadnezar but
allowed them to pray. 11. Christ commanded to pay tribute unto the Prince. 12.
Paul will not have an evil Prince to be cursed with words. 13. Kings are from
God, and such like. But who sees not, that these, if of any force, (as indeed
they are of none, as shall afterward be made appear, in due time) conclude as
much against a peoples opposeing and resisting a Tyrant, even when they have
their Representatives with them, as when they are left alone: and yet this same
Hoenonius ubi supra these. 45. grants it lawful yea and necessary for the
Ephori and the Estates of a land to resist the Tyrant. 3. If our Surveyer will
grant the case different now, from what it was then, when the primores Regni
were ingadged in the opposition, (as he does Page 21.) and grant that when the
primores Regni concur, the opposition is lawful (as he must grant, in case
the Sovereign become Tyrannnical, and be the first-aggressor, because only
upon the contrary supposition he condemns the last resistance, which was made
to the King by Scotland) He must of necessity seek out other arguments then
what we see he has, to condemn this resistance of Private persons, in case of
necessity; or otherwise contradict himself; for, as may easily be seen, this
being granted, all his arguments shall be easily discussed. 4. If he grant the
case now, to be much different from what it was then, so as then, it was a
lawful resistance, but not so now (as he must grant, otherwise, we cannot see
what this is to the point, and wherein his much difference does slye) how can
he save himself a from contradiction; for he must put a diffence betwixt a
resistance made by the people with their primores, and a resistance made by the
People with their Representatives in Parliament; or else say, That whatever the
Nobles of a land do, is the same with what a Parliament does; and that wherever
they are, there is a Parliament, and the peoples Representatives: Now this he
darre not say, left he should be hissed at; and therefore he must grant it
lawful, for a people to defend themselves, when they want the conduct and
concurrence of their Representatives, acting authoritatively; or else retract,
what he has said, and planely confess That the case to be noticeed now, is
not different from what it was then. 5. I hope no man will say that a war
carried on, or a resistance made against the Sovereign, by the Representatives
of a people, Is eo ipso lawful, unless the ground of the war, or resistance,
be real and valide: And if the ground be valid, and good whereupon a People
unjustly oppressed and tyrannized over are allowed to defend themselves,
having their Representatives to go before them, why shall not the same ground
stand valid and sufficient, to warrant them to defend themselves, when they
have not the concurrence of their Representatives? I would gladly hear a
reason, making the defense in the one case lawful, and not in the other, seeing
the ground remains the same, the same necessity abides, yea, it rather
increases when the Representatives, who should be a screen unto the people,
betray their trust, and either neglect to vindicate with their authority and
conduct, the innocent oppressed people, or turn adversaries to them, and
oppressors of them, themselves. 6. Since Parliments are the peoples
Representatives, no man will say That de jure their power is privative, or
destructive; but rather cumulative and helpful; so that the peoples
Representative cannot, de jure, make them more liable to irremediable tyranny
and oppression, then they were: they being properly exnatur a rei and ex
institutione, and instituentium intention, ordained and appointed, for the
greater faifty, and good of the people. And therefore, if the Representatives
betray their trust, the People, in so far, are as if they had no
Representatives, and may no less defend themselves in extreme necessity, then
if the officers of their army, whom they had chosen and appointed to defend
them, against an invadeing enemy, should revolt to the enemy, they might
lawfully rise up in their own defense, and oppse the adversary. 7. The law
says that deterior conditio domini per procuratorem fieri non debet L.
ignorantis ff. de procuratoriburs. The procurator or advocat his knavery,
cannot prejudge the Client or wrong his cause. And why then shall the perfidy
of the peoples Representatives, or their betraying of their trust, wrong their
cause, and prejudge them of their just right? 8. All will grant, That it is as
lawful, for an oppressed people to defend themselves from the injuryes of a
Parliament, as from the injuries of a Sovereign, if not more: and if it be
lawful for a people to defend themselves against the Tyranny of a Parliament
(as is more then sufficiently proved by all such arguments as have hitherto, by
any, been made use of, to prove it lawful, to resist a Sovereign oppressing
and tyrannizing) no man of common sense, will deny it lawful to a people to
defend themselves against oppression and tyranny, when they but want the
concurrence or countenance of these Parliaments. 9. If any should allaige that
this is against the law of the constitution of the Kingdom. We know no such
law: beside, that though there were any such; yet necessity knows no law: and
in cases of necessity, such laws are not to be observed, says the law L. ut
gradatim. I. de muner: and honor. The laws of nature are irrevocable and
cannot be rescinded by municipal laws: for the law tells us that civilis
ratio jur^ nature alia corrumpere non pote st L. eas oblig. D. de cap. private.
Now the law of nature allowing self defense against unjust violence, adds
no such restriction, viz. that it be done by the conduct, and concurrence of
the Primores or Parliaments. 10. The very concessions of our adversaries
forementioned, will confirm this consequence, for in these cases, they will
grant the same liberty to a People without, as to a People with their
Representatives, to defend themselves: for the weight and ground is not laid
upon the manner, or way of conduct, or managing of the resistance and defense;
but upon the cause, and that is alvvayes the same. Yea, the necessity (as was
said) is greater (though, it may be, the difficulty is also greater) when
Representatives desert such as they do represente, and instead of helping them
with counsel and conduct, in their necessity, do either deserte them, or turn
enemies unto them.

Our 3 argument is taken from the law and light of nature which allows to
beasts, power and ability to defend them selves, against violence. An argument
made use of, not only by Lex Rex and the Apology,* but by Divines, Canonists,
Lawyers and others who write of this subject. The civil law it self tells us
That his necessary defense of life, flows from the law of nature L. ut vim.
ff. de just. and jure. But here comes out a green statist, and takes on him to
cry shame on all who ever wrote on that subject, and avovves Page 15. That it
is too gross divinity to bring such an argument from beasts. We must therefore
see whether this Man be rational in rejecting such an argument taken from
beasts; and not rather more irrational then a Brute, to deny that to a Rational
creature, which he cannot but grant to Beasts, and Creatures without life, as
we see he does Page 14. 15. We shall readily grant vvith'him, That God has
given this self defending or preserving power and propension, otherwise to
Men, then to inanimate creatures, or unto beasts, which are under no law, but
that of mere nature, and therefore, they are not to defend themselves coeco
impetu, but rationally; and ought to subordinate this natural propension to
self defense unto, and limite it, by the higher laws of reason and of God.
Does he think that such as make use of this argument, do suppose That in every
case and in every manner of way, men are to use and exercise this natural
propension to self defense, in which and after which, Beasts are to use it?
Sure he is in a great mistake, and he vvrongeth the authors of Lex Rex and of
the Apolog. etc. when he says Page 15. [That they bring arguments from
beasts, (who being under no law of reason nor grace, to limite their
propensions, may always, in all imaginable cases, defend themselves with
force) to persuade men, that they may do the like, and that their propension
for their external preservation, is no more under any restraineing rule, to
stope the exercise of it, then that of Beasts is;] For, they intend no such
thing, nor are they, in the least, necessitated, to use that argument so: They
only make use of it to disprove That irrational, and more then brutish position
and maxim of absolute, unlimited and indispensible subjection of subjects to
their Sovereign, so that in no case, they may or can resist, which all the
Cabal and royal society of Royalists, parasites, court flatterers and
cavalliers, who, because they themselves, in hopes of some crumbs of allowance,
have brutishly, without regaird had to the Law of God, or right reason, sold
and devouted themselves, not only in matters concerning their body, but in soul
matters, unto the mere lust and pleasure of a creature of clay, think all
others should play the beasts with them, do furiously and obstinately
maintain. And as to this, the argument hence deduced is most rational and
irrefragable: for it is irrational to think That God (who takes much more care
of man; then of beasts 1 Cor. 9:9. Mat. 6:30.) should allow and give unto the
inanimate creatures, and to the beasts, a power and propension to defend
themselves against violence, and should deny the same to Man; so that in no
case he should be allowed to exerce that natural propension, to defend
himfelfe, and to resist unjust violence with violence. So then we might let his
restrictions pass, as being no thing to the present purpose; for, it is but
his groundless imagination to think that we would equalize Men with Beasts,
because we will not, with him and his party, depresse them into a condition
below beasts; yet we shall shortly run over them. His first is this, when it
is seen to be to no purpose, by reason of a phisical force. But alas does he
think this restriction of the natural propension for felfe preservation is upon
men only, and not upon Beasts also? did he not say in the same Page, the Major
vis and a greater phisical force would hinder this even in Beasts? His next
restriction is this, A man justly condemned to death, both according to a just
law, and by a just process according to law, may not use violent self defense
against the Magistrate, with re-offending him. Ans. It is granted, what then?
will it therefore follow, that this principle of self preservation is so
restricted, as that a whole Land, or a considerable part thereof, being
unjustly condemned, both by an unjust law, and by an unjust process according
to, or without that unjust law, may not defend themselves against the
Magistrate's Emissaries, sent to destroy, without respect had either to law or
conscience? Then he tells us That Lex Rex is too bold and comes too near to
blaspheme God, by saying [ That it were a mighty defect in divine providence,
that men should not have as large a liberty to defend themselves violently, as
Beasts have; and that men were in a worse condition then beasts, if as Beasts
have always power to defend themselves violently, with their horns, heels,
teeth etc. So men should not have as large a liberty, in every case to use
violence upon Magistrates, putting them to vexation, or perhaps troubling them
in life states etc.] But where finds he these words in Lex Rex* The author of
Lex Rex says Page 334. [ It were a mighty defect in providence to man, if
dogs, by nature, may defend themselves against Wolves, Bulls against Lions,
doves against hawks; If a man in the absence of the lawful Magistrate, should
not defend himself against unjust violence, but one man might raise armies of
papists sick for blood, to destroy innocent men] but this is far from [ as
large a liberty, in every case] and comes no way near to blasphemy, but is a
real truth. Suppose Lex Rex had said so (which I find not) it had not been
apposite to his point now, while he is speaking of opposeing Magistrates not
putting to vexation, or perhaps troubling in life, state, etc. but rightly
executeing a just law, against a malefactor, which the worthy author of Lex Rex
would never have owned, but would have said, That the Magistrate was bound to
execute Gods Law against men-sworne Apostats, such as he and his fraternity
are, and that they were bound to submite to the stroke of justice. Thridly he
says Page, 16. may not the exercise of self defense and violent resistance, be
restrained by the grace of God, and the power of his command for submission,
abiding upon a man's spirit? as in Isaac's case, who did not resist his aged
father going to sacrifice him. Ans. Whether Isaac made any forceable resistance
or not, we know not, scripture is silent; but it tells us his father bound him,
we acknowledge God is Lord of life, but no man is; and he may restrain by his
will and working on the spirit, so as a man who lawfully might flee, and save
his life, shall not have power to do so, but abide and glorify him by giving a
faithful testimony unto his truth when questioned. But thinks he that such
instances are binding precedents* Sure, then he shall contradict his own
doctrine, Cap. 4. Or thinks he, that a Body of a people or a considerable part
thereof, shall not exercise lawfully this privilege of self defense and violent
resistance, when neither the Law of God, nor such extraordinary force or
restraint of God on the Spirit, but the vain pleadings of Court Parasites,
would have it restrained? Fourthly Page 17. He says, May not the defense of
our temporal life, in some case, cease, for the preservation of the eternal
life of our Neighbor, when it comes to that, that the defense of the one shall
be the certane loss of the other? Ans. True, and therefore He and the rest of
the perjured clergy should much more cease from the preservation, or
ratherusurpation, of their places, livings, and dignities, when so long as they
domineer, there is certane ruin to Religion, and to the souls of many
thousands. And again, if a man may lay down his natural life, for the
preservation of of the soul of his Neighbor, much more may he with others,
hazard the same in opposeing unjust violence, for the defense of the pure
Religion, whereby thousands of soulls may be eternally preserved. But does he
think that a Nation or a whole countrey-side is to give up their lives to the
sword of the Kings mercylesse Emissaries, for to preserve the vain pomp, and
to fill the bellyes of a few drons, whose God is their belly, though they
should account that their eternal life, and all their felicity? Fifthly, says
he, does not this obligation cease, for the public good and preservation of
the Commonwealth. Answer: What then* does it follow That Men should renunce
their privilege of self defense, when their doing of that shall be so far,
from promoving the public good, and preservation of the Commonwealth, that
upon the contrare, their doing so shall tend directly to the ruin of the
public good and destruction of the Commonwealth? Sure if this be true, that a
man should lay down his life for the good of the commonwealth. It is also true,
that more should hazard their lives for the good of the Commonwealth, and
violently resist violence. And doct Ames case mentioned Cas. Consc. Lib. 5. c..
31. q. 3. would suit the Prelates well, and their adherents: so that if he and
they loved the good of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, they should give up
their necks to the stroke of justice, that the wrath of God may be turned away
from the land: for till these be removed, we can not expect any thing, but
judgment upon judgment from the Lord, till we be destroyed. Neither does
Naphtaly cross D. Ames, for Naphtaly only speaks of a man's suffering
intolerable and inevitable injuries, under pretext of the good of the
Commonwealth; which indeed for a man to do, would be, for the delusion of an
empty name, only for the lust of others, really to deprive himself of his whole
share and interest therein, neither would he have ground of hope of getting a
better share, seeing it were a great question and doubt; if, in that case, he
were in the way of his duty. What he adds, Page 18. of a soldiers going to
a dangerous post, at the command of his General, is utterly impertinent;
Natures instinct vvil teach some dog to stand in the gap to keep out the Bare.
His last restriction is this That it must cease to preserve the King, the Head
of the Commonwealth, when the case is so, that the King must either lose his
life or the private man his. Ans. I grant Lex Rex says [I think that a
private man should rather suffer the King to kill him, then that he should kill
the King, because he is not to prefer the life of a private man, to the life
of a public man,] But I doubt that it is so agreed among the learned. Sure P.
Voetius de Duellis Cap. 20. Page 162. thinks otherways, and proves that
self defense is lavvful to a private person against the Magistrate, for the
law which allows to repel violence with violence, makes no distinction
betwixt a public person and a private person, and the law of Nature allows
it against every one; for it knovveth no difference: And as to that which some
would say, That his death would be hurt full to the Commonwealth. He
answers, [ That he who resists the Prince does intend no hurt to the
Republic, and it is not per se, but per accidens, that he stands in the way
of the good of the Commonwealth; and if he should suffer himself to be killed,
he should transgress against the Law of Nature.] Yea I much doubt if the
Surveyer himself, would not rather kill, in this case, as be killed, and with
Naphtaly account Self-defence a principal rule of righteousness, however now
he would disprove this assertion if he could: And would let that pass of
loving himself more ad finem suum ultimum, and suam virtutem. Finally; what he
says against this assertion of Naphtaly is to no purpose; for the Author of
Naphtaly will readyly grant that in some cases, not only a man, but a compauy
of men, may, yea ought to prefer the preservation of others, unto the
preservation of their own life, because of a divine command to defend
Religion, Libertyes, Posterity and Country, from the unjust invasion and
violence offered by wicked Emissaries. But he shall never prove, That the Body
of a land or a considerable part thereof, is to hold up their throats, to be
cut by the Kings cutthroats, when he and they are seeking to root out the
Covenanted-work of Reformation, to destroy the Libertyes of the land, and to
make all perfect slaves, both in soul and body.

CAP. III.
A fourth Argument Vindicated, taken from Scripture-instances.
Our fourth argument shall be taken from instances of opposition and
resistance, made unto the Sovereign, or his bloody Emissaries, by private
subjects, without the conduct or concurrence of their Representatives, recorded
in scripture, and which we find not condemned by the Spirit of the Lord: So
that whosoever shall condemn the late vindicators, must also condemn these
instances.

As. 1. They must condemn the Jews standing for their lives against their
Enemies armed against them, with a commission from King Ahasuerus, sealed with
his ring, which no man might reverse, in the days of Mordecai and Esther. But
some will say. That they had the King's commission, which did warrant them to
take the sword of defense against any that should assault them, under pretense
of the former decree, I Answer. If their having of the King's commismission
did in point of conscience warrant them, It had been utterly unlawful for them,
to have withstood the King's butchers, if they had not abtained that commission
and warrant: But what man of common sense will say this? This later decree did,
in point of law, warrant them to gather together with saifty and security, that
they might the more easily, not only defend themselves from their Adversaries
assaulting them; but also to destroy, to stay, and to cause to perish, all the
power of the people and province, that would assault them, both little ones and
women, and to take the spoil of them for a prey Esth 8:11. But didnot, could
not, make their selfdefence against such manifest and bloody cruelty, lawful in
point of conscience, if, otherwise it had been unlawful. Though every instance
will not in all points quadrate ( for nullum simile est idem) yet we have here
in this instance these things for our purpose, 1. private subjects without
their Ephori or Representatives, arming themselves for defense: and that 2.
against bloody Emissaryes of the King: and 3. bloody Emissaries armed by a
formal commission, decree and vvarrand from the King. 4. A commission formally
never reversed, but standing in force, as the decrees of the Medes and Persians
that might not be altered. 5. and this defense, as lavvful in it self in point
of conscience, (for if it had not not been so, the King's vvarrand had never
made it so) so declared lavvful in point of law, by a decree from the King,
after better thoughts. In imitation of which, It had been a commendable
practice in the King and Council, if they had been so far from condemning
these innocent self-defenders, (since, as they thought, in point of honor and
credit, they would not retract or reverse their decrees and commissions once
granted) that they would have authorized them, and absolved them in point of
law, since in point of conscience, no man could condemn them, for standing to
the defense of their Estates, Lands, Libertyes, Lives and Consciences, unjustly
oppressed by mercylesse Emissaries.

2. They must condemn the people their rescueing of Jonathan from the sentence
of death, unjustly given out against him, by King Saul 1 Samuel 14: 44. In
answer to this instance, our Surveyer says Page 65. [ That the people used
no violence against Saul when he went about to put to Death innocent Jonathan,
but in the heat of soldiery boldness, do effectually interpose with Saul, and
mediate for the life of Jonathan, moving Saul to Wave respect to his rash oath,
and to regaird what was just and right. Answ. 1. The matter came not the length
of violence; but had the King pertinaciously adhered to his rash and sinful
resolution, and, by force, had offered to draw the innocent Man to death, that
which they did, spoke clearly, they would have resisted him; for, whether the
King would or not, yea contrare to his oath, they swear in the face of the
King, that Jonathan should not die, 2. It is but gratis dictum, that only in
the heat of a soldiery boldness, they did mediate; beside, that there seems
to be a material contradiction here, for soldiers mediating and interposing
especially in the heat of souldiery-boldnesse, uses not to be with humble
supplications and entreaties, but with violence or with what will usher in
violence. 3. We hear of no arguments they use to move bloody Saul to change
his purpose, but this, as the Lord lives there shall not one hair of his head
fall to the ground. He says Page 66. That [ the people did not oppose an oath
to Readiness oath, for Junius exposition may pass well; that they spoke not by
way of swearing, but by way of reasoning, abhorring the destruction of such a
person, absit, ut vivit Jehovah, an cadere debet.] Ans. The word which they use
is no other way translated here, by Iunius, then elsewhere; and elsewhere it
has clearly the import of an oath, as may be seen Judge. 8. 19. 1 Samuel 19: 16.
and 20. 3, 21, 25, 26. and in many other places. 2. The People spoke these
words, as Saul spoke them, ver. 45. and therefore they are directly an oath of
the people opposed to Readiness oath. 3. Iunius himself says, that they opposed
a just oath to Readiness hypocritical oath. Sanctius in locum, says, [the people
opposed to the Kings oath, a public oath, and swore that they would not suffer
that any evil should be done unto him.] The dutch Annotat call it an abrupt
kind of oath in use among the Hebrevvs. But (says he)[It is a vvonder to see
understanding men argue from this place, for violence and forcible resistance
to Kings, especially when acting according to laws, consented to by private
persones] Ans. This place proves clearly that princes may be resisted, and
resisted when they use violence and oppression, and that by private persons,
even when the oppression, or iniquity is acted according to a pretended law,
or something equivalent to a law. Let us see where the difference lies. Here
(says he) the King is not acting according to law, but prosecuting the
execution of a foolish and rash oath] Answ: 1. Neither did our King's bloody
Emissaries act according to law, but were prosecuting the execution of a
develish and rash resolution, to root out and destroy a whole Country side,
2. If Royalists speak truth, Saul's word, let be his oath, was as good as a
law: and Sanctius says it was Decretum decreed. And whatever it was
formally, it was materially a law, unto which they had all tacitly assented,
v. 24. and which they durst not transgress v. 26. [ Here (says he) the
opposition made to the King is by way of intercession and earnest reasoning
that he ought to regaird what was right more then his rash oath.) Answ. No
reasoning we hear but a peremptour telling of the King, to his face, that he
should not get his will, not one hair of Ionathan's head should fall to the
ground, if he should attempt any thing, against Jonathan, it should be over
their bellyes: Their words look like club-agruments. [ Here (says he) their
opposition was acceptable and welcome, acquiesced in and yielded to] Answ. It
is like it was condescension by force and constraint, for whether he would
or not, he savv he could not get his will, and therefore passed from what he
intended, 2. His acquiescence says the resistance was more forcible then mere
intercession would be; for, he was another sort of bloody Tyrant, then to
yield to petitions, when he thought his honor stood upon it [ Here (says he)
the opposition is made by the Princes of the land, Captains of Thousands etc.]
Answ. The text says The people rescued Jonathan. Who ever they were and
whatever they were, they acted not here as the Supreme Sanhedrin, nor as a
court of judicatour having power of government, but as private persons,
according to their power and capacities. And so all this makes much for a
party of private persons (for here was not all the land) their resisting of
the King's bloody emissaries executing cruelty, not so much as according to an
iniquous law, but contrare to all law, right and reason [ Let (says he)
Peter martyr be looked upon this place, and he speaks not ably well, his own
words will discover how notourly he is falsified by L. R. p 349.] Answ. Lex
Rex. dealt ingenuously with his reader concerning him, telling him, in the
margin that with adoubt he said, si ista seditiose fecerunt nullo modo
excusari possunt. And that he said they might Suffragiis. with their suffrages
free him. Why did not the Surveyer set down his words? did Lex Rex falsify
also Chrysostom homil. 14. ad Pop. Antioch. Iunius: Corn, a lapide: Sanctius:
Lyra: Hugo Cardin. Josephus L. 6. antiq. c. 7. and Althus. Polit. c. 38. n. 109.

3. They must condemn David, for his resisting of King Saul, with armed men,
which yet the spirit of God does not condemn, but rather approve, in
commending such as helped him I Chron. 12: 1. 2. 8. etc. and inspireing Amazia
who was chief of the captains to say Thine are we David, and on thy side,
peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy helpers, for thy God helps
thee. So did he intend to keep out the city Keila against the King, and
consulted God thereanent, and had his answer, that the city would betray him.
Now if it had been unlawful for him to have defended himself by such forcible
resistance, we cannot think that he would have gotten such answers as he
got. Grotius himself approves this deed of David's. All which this Surveyer
says against this Page 67. is, That David's unction did so distinguish him
from private persons, as that it made it lawful for him to resist violence with
violence: But, the law of nature restricteth not this lawful self-defence to
anointed persons. 2. If his anointing made him no private person, what did it
make him? it could not make Him King, otherwise he might not only have
resisted Saul, but have taken his life as a traitor; or else we must say,
there were two Kings at once in Israel. 3. David never pleads this as the
ground of his resistance, nor is there any hint of this in the text.

4. They must condemn the city Abel 2. Sam. 20. which resisted Ioab, David's
General, and his forces, when they besieged it, till the matter came to a
capitulation, Ioab should have offered terms unto the city, before he had
threatened to destroy it; and should have communed with the Magistrates,
concerning the delivering up of the Taitour, before he had resolved to destroy
the whole city, for one Traitors cause: and therefore justly did they defend
themselves against his unjust invasion notwithstanding he was armed with a
commission from the King: and remarkable it is, that after the capitulation,
they were never challenged for traitors in resisting, with closed gates, and
fensed walls, the King's General and army. So that here is a private city
standing out for a time, against the King's soldiers, unjustly seeking to
destroy them, because of one Traitor among them.

5. They must condemn the Prophet Elias for resisting Ahaziah's bloody
Emissaries sent by him, in an angry mood, to apprehend him and to compel him,
in a spite full manner, and to take him prisoner, as say the Dutch Annot. on
the place, For speaking such things as he did, unto the messengers of the King,
who were sent to Baal zebub the God of Ekron, to enquire if he should recover
of his desease; and to bring him to the King by violence, if he would not come
willingly, as Josephus says antiq. Lib. 9. C. 2. 2 King. 1. Now he resisted
such as were sent, and killed two Captanes and their fifties, with fire from
heaven, which instance does sufficiently declare that it is lavvful for private
subjects, in some cases, to resist the unjust violence of the King's
Emissaries, though armed with his commission. It is true, the manner of his
resistance, and of killing these, was extraordinary, by way of a miracle; yet
the resistance it self, was not extraordinare, as we have seen by other
instances, and shall see cleared by more.

6. They must condemn the prophet Elisha who resisted both the King and his
Emissaries in his own defense 2 Kings 6:32. saying to the Elders who sat
with him see ye how this Sone of a murderer has sent to take away my head?
look where the Messenger comes, shut the door, and hold him fast at the door,
is not the sound of his Masters feet behind him? Here was unjust violence
offered to the innocent Prophet, an Emissary sent to kill him without cause:
and the Prophet resists his violence, causes hold him at the door, and
violently press him, or press him betwixt the door and the wall, which
speaks violent resistance: keep him (say the Dutch Annot.) by force at the
door: yea Josephus thinks that the King follovved quickly after, left the
Prophet should have killed his servant. This clearly says that it is lawful
for private persons (for the Prophet was no other but a private subject) to
resist unjust violence offered them by the King or his Emissaries, and with
violente resistance, to defend themselves.

7. Much more will they condemn other instances of greater opposition, made to
the rage and tyranny of Princes, which we find recorded in scripture, and not
condemned.

As. 1. That opposition made by the Ten tribes to Rehoboam, when they revolted
from him, after they had a rough and tyrannical answer unto their just and
lawful demands 1 King. 12: 1. etc. 2 Cbron. 10: and 11. They desired nothing,
upon the matter, but that He would engadge to Rule over them according to the
law of God, and He gave a most harsh and tyrannical answer, and avowed that he
would tyrannize over them, and oppress them more then any of his
predecessors, and that his little finger should be heavier then their loins;
whereupon they fell away from him, and erected themselves into a new
Commonwealth, and choosed a new King: And we find nothing in all the text
condemning this; for, it was done of the Lord, the cause was from the Lord,
that he might perform his saying which he spoke by Ahijah; and when Rehoboam
raised an army to reduce them again under his power and command, the word of
God came unto Shemaiah saying speak unto Rehoboam etc. and say thus says the
Lord, ye shall not go up, nor fight against your brethren, the children of
Israel, return every man to his house, for this thing is from me. It was done
by the will of God says Josephus Antiq. Lib. 8. c. 11. And there is not one
word, in the text importing that this was condemned by the Spirit of the Lord;
for, as for that word 1 King. 12. 19. So Israel rebelled against the house of
David. It may be as well rendered, as it is in the margin, they fell away; and
so does the dutch render it, and lunius defecerunt, they fell away, or made
defection, and the original word is of a larger signification then (...)
which properly signifies to rebel, yea though the word (...) had been here
used, it would not have imported a sinful rebellion and defection, more then
2 King. 18. 7. where Hezekiah is said to have rebelled against the King of
Assyria, and this was a fruit and effect of the Lords being with him, and
prospering him, whithersoever he went forth. The Surveyer Page 66. can say
nothing but [ That no sound man will think the sudden and furious rebellion
of the ten Tribes from David's house, upon the furious and rash answer of a
young King, was justifiable.] But whatever he say or think, it does not weigh
much with us; had he showed us out of the Text, that this was condemned by the
Spirit of the Lord, as sinful upon the matter, we should heartily have
acquiesced, but since we see more hinting at an approbation thereof, we must
rest there, till we see stronger reasons, then his naked assertions. But says
he [ It would be considered that these who made the secession were the major
part of the body of the people, but what is all this to justify the
insurrections of any lesser party of private people against the Magistrate, and
all Magistrates supreme and subordinate.] Ans. By what right, this Major part
of the Body did make secession, by that same right, might the equal half, or
the lesser part have made secession; for the ground of the lawfulness of this
secession, is not founded upon their being the major part, but upon the
reasonableness of their demand, and the tyrannicalnesse of the King's reply.
2. This says much for us; for, if it be lawful for a part of the people, to
shake off the King, refuse subjection unto him, and set up a new King of their
own, when he resolves to play the Tyrant, and not to rule them according to
the law of the Lord, but after his own tyrannical will; then it cannot be
unlawful for a part of the people to resist his unjust violence, and defend
themselves against his illegal tyranny, and oppression. The consequence cannot
be denied, seeing they who may lawfully do the more, may do the less also: So
that seeing this people might lawfully refuse subjection and homage unto
Rehoboam and all his subordinat Magistrates, They might also lawfully have
defended themselves against his tyranny, and the tyranny of all under him: and
if They might lawfully have done so, so may we.

2. They should far more condemn the revolt of the city of Libnah 2 Chronicles. 21.
10. This wicked King Iehoram when he was risen up to the Kingdom of his father,
strengthened himself, and slew all his brethren with the sword, and diverse
also of the Princes of Israel v. 4. and walked in the ways of the Kings of
Israel, like as did the house of Ahab, for he had the Daughter of Ahab to wife,
and he wrought that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord v. 6. and he made
him high places in the mountains of Judah and caused the inhabitants of
Jerusalem to commit fornication, and compelled Judah there to v. 11. 13. and
because he had thus forsaken the Lord God of his fathers, did the city Libnah
revolt from under his hand. Commentators clear this to have been the reason as
Cornel. a. lap. in loc. propter impietatem Regis defecit ab eo Libna. Sancitus
on 2 King 8. 22. Lobnah recessit ne esset sub manus illius, dereliquer at enim
dominum patruum suorum. and Pet. Martyr on 2 King. 8. v. 22. [Causa in Paralip.
describitur, ob Regis impietatem qui suos nitebatur cogere ad idololatriam,
quod ipsi Libnen ses pati noluerunt, and merito: principibus enim parendum est,
verum usque ad aras, and cum illam terram inhabitandam a deo, eo foedere,
habuissent, ubi illum juxta ejus verbum colerent, jure ejus idololatriam
admittere, non debuerunt,] Thus he approves of their revolt in this case. What
says our Surveyer to this [ This (says he) imports not the impulsive cause of
the revolt, or motive which they had before their eyes (for, in that same verse
and period, it is said the Edomites also revolted from him, because he had
forsaken the Lord God of his Fathers, and the Edomites loved not the true
Religion) but the meritorious cause on Jehorams part is poynted at.] Answ. The
text it self and Commentators, to whom we may add Iackson on 2 King 8. and
the Dutch Annot. Ibid. give this as the impulsive cause, and only motive which
they had before their eyes. 2. Any who read the text will see his reason very
unsound; for v. 8. it is said, that in his days the Edomites revolted from
under the dominion of Judah, and made themselves a King; and no word of this,
as the impulsive cause there of; and v. 10. mention again is made of their
revolt upon occasion of Iehorams seeking by force, to reduce them under his
dominion; and then in a new period, mention is made of Libnah's revolt, with
the cause and only motive thereof; Because he had forsaken the Lord God of his
Fathers. Then he asks if his adversary [ thinks that the laying aside of the
presbyterian frame, is the forsaken of the Lord God of our Fathers, and a
sufficient cause for any one Town in the Kingdom, to revolt from the King,
(though he do not persecute them, nor force them to his way, as there is no
evidence that Libnah was so used) shall a Kings swerving in that one point, or
if there be greater infidelity, be sufficient ground of defection from him?]
Ans. I nothing doubt, but all such as have embraced this present course of
apostasy are guilty of a grievous revolt, having impudently and avowedly
departed form a sworn Covenant, from a covenanted and sworn Religion,
reformed in Doctrine, Worshipe, Discipline, and Government; and have in a great
part forsaken the God of our Fathers, that covenanted God whom our Fathers, and
we both owned, and embraced as our God; and is sufficient cause for any City,
or Company of men, so far to revolt from the King, as to refuse to concur
with him, in this horrible defection and course of perjury, and resist his
unjust violence pressing and compelling them to a sinful compliance. 2. As it
is more then probable, that Libnah was no better used, then were the people of
Judah, by this Tyrannous King, and is asserted by the Dutch Annot. on 2 Chronicles.
21:10. So whatever this liar suggesteth, it is notour that the King has
persecuted and does persecute and force honest people, to follow his way, and
apostatize with him, contrare to their consciences and sworn allegiance unto
God, and if he add this clause as an exception, then (seeing the truth of the
thing is notour) he fully accords, that there is sufficient cause given, for
any Town in the Kingdom to revolt, which is more then we desire. At length he
tells us. That their revolt was sinful. But when not only thi^ revolt is
recorded as done, but such and impulsive cause and motive is added by the
Spirit of the Lord, without the least hint of any expression condemning the
same, we dar not be so bold, as is this Surveyer; Nor are we so foolish as to
receive his word, contraire to the testimony of so many expositors.

Hence we have a strong argument: For* if it be lawful for a part of the
people, to revolt from a tyrannous Prince, making defection from the true and
received Religion, and forceing his subjects to a sinful defection and
compliance with him in his apostasy: It must also be lawful for a part of the
people to defend themselves by force against the Emissaries of a King departing
from his faith and foresaking the Religion, which He has sworn to own and
maintain, sent forth by him, or any under him, to force, by cruel oppression
and violence, them to a compliance with his sinful way. And the antecedent is
clear in this place.

3. They must much more condemn Azariah, and the fourscore Priests who being
commended as me of courage and valor, resisted Vziah the King, 2 Chronicles. 26:
17. etc. they expelled him with force, stood against him; the lxx. say they
resisted him; deturbarunt eum ex eo loco, says Vatablus: they forced him
forth, and compelled him to go out; they caused him make haste, says Ar.
Mont. festinate expulerunt eum, says Hieron. When he went in the temple to
burn incense, upon the altaar of incense, on some solemn day (as Josephus
thinks.) So that there is more then a resistance of him by words, as some
Royalists say; even resistance by force and violence. Hence we argue; if
private subjects may by force resist, withstand, and with violence hinder the
King from transgressing the Law of God; Then may they much more lawfully resist
him, and his bloody Emissaryes, when He seeks to oppress unjustly and to
draw people off from the ways of the Lord. If any say with doct Fern, that
because of an express Law of God, being a leper, he was put out of the
congregation: Then we see, that the Prince is subject to Church-censure, and so
Subjects may judge him and punish him; we see also that Princes were subject to
ceremonial laws, as well as any of the subjects; and why not also to the moral
Laws; and if because of a ceremonial Law, the King was to be ceremonially
punished, why also, for the breach of moral Law, may he not be punished
morally? Hence will it undoubtedly follow, That a Prince rageing and
tyrannizeing contrare to all equity and reason, may be resisted and his
violence repelled with violence, even by private subjects. Worthy Mr Knox, in
his debate with Lithengtoun, does form this instance gather; That subjects not
only may, but also ought to withstand and resist their Princes whenever they
do any thing that expressly repugnes to God, his Law, or holy Ordinance.
Lithingtoun objected That [ they were not private subjects, but the priests of
the Lord and figures of Christ, and such have we none this day, to withstand
Kings if they do any thing wrong.] He answered that though the High Priest was
a figure of Christ, yet he was a subject. [ For (said he) I am assured that he,
in his Priesthood, had no prerogative above these that passed before him; now
so it is, that Aaron was subject to Moses, and called him Lord: Samuel being
both prophet, and Priest, subjected himself unto Saul, after he was inaugurated
of the people; Sadoc bowed before David, etc. And whereas you say, we have no
such Priests this day, I might answer, that neither have we such Kings this
day, as then were anointed by Gods commandment, and sat upon the seat of
David, and were no less the figures of Christ Jesus, in their just
administration, then were the Priests, in their appointed office; and such
Kings (I am assured) we have not now, no more then we have such Priests, for
Christ Jesus being anointed in our nature, of God his Father, both King Priest,
and Prophet, has put an end to all external unction: and yet I think you will
not say, that God has now diminished his graces from these whom he appoynts
Ambassadors betwixt him and his people, then he does, from Kings and Princes,
and therefore, why the Servants of Jesus Christ may not also justly withstand
Kings and Princes who this day no less offend Gods Majesty, then Uzziah did, I
see not; unless that ye will say, That we in the bringhtnesse of the Evangel,
are not so straightly bound to regaird Gods glory, nor his commandments, as were
the Fathers who lived under the dark shadows of the Law.] And when
Lithingtoun said, That they only spoke unto him without further violence
intended. He answered, [That they with stood him, the text assures me, but that
they did nothing, but speak, I cannot understand, for the plame text afformes
the contrary, viz. That they caused him hastily to depart from the sanctuary,
yea and that he was compelled to depart; which manner of speaking (I am
assurred) in the Hebrew tongue imports more then exhorting, or commanding by
word.] And when Lethingtoun lastly objected that they did that after he was
espied to be leprous. He answered, [They withstood him before, but yet their
last fact confirms my proposition, so evidently, that such as will oppose
themselves unto it, must needs oppose themselves unto God; for my assertion is,
That Kings have no privilege, more then has the people, to offend Gods
Majesty, and if so they do, they are no more exempted from the punishment of
the law, then is any other subject; yea, and that subjects may not only
lawfully oppose themselves to their Kings, whenever they do any thing that
expressly oppugnes God's Commandment, But also that they may execute judgment
upon them, according to God's Law; so that if the King be a murderer, an
adulterer, or an Idolater, he should suffer, according to God's Law, not as a
King, but as an offender: and that the People may put God's Law in execution,
this History clearly proves; for so soon as the leprosy appeared in his
forehead, He was not only compelled, to depart out of the Sanctuary; but also
he was removed from all public society, and administration of the Kingdom,
and was compelled to dwell in a house apart, even as the law commanded, and
got no greater privilege in that case, then any other of the people should
have got: And this was executed by the People -- and therefore yet again I
say that People ought to execute God's Law, even against their Princes, when
their open crimes by God's Law deserves punishment, but especially when they
are such as may insect the rest of the multitude.] Thus that worthy Servant of
God, and hence any may see, how this passage does more then confirm what we
are now about to prove.

4. They must much more condemn such as arose against Amaziah when he turned
away from following the Lord, and pursued him to Lachish and flew him there, 2 Chronicles. 25: 21. Concerning which I shall only set down what famous and worthy
Mr Knox said in that forementioned debate, which he had with Lithington, [ The
whole people (says he) conspired against Amaziah, King of Judah, after that he
had turned away from the Lord, and followed him to Lachish, and slew him, and
took UzZiah and anointed him King instead of his father. The people had not
altogether forgotten the League and Covenant, which was made betwixt their
Kings and them, at the inauguration of Ioas his Father, to wit, that the King
and the People should, be the People of the Lord, and then should they be his
Faithful subjects, from which Covenant, when first the Father and afterward
the Son had declined, they were both punished with death, Ioas by his own
Servants, and Amaziah by the whole People, when Lithingtoun (said) he doubted
whether they did well or not. He ansvv. [It shall be free for you to doubt as
you please, but where I find execution according to God's law, and God himself
not to accuse the doers, I dar not doubt of the equity of their cause. And
further it appears to me; that God gave sufficient approbation, and allowance
of their fact, for he blessed them with victory, peace and prosperity, the
space of fifty two years after] and when Lithingt: replied That prosperity does
not always prove that God approves the facts of Men. He answered ( Yes, when
the facts of Men agree with the law of God, and are rewarded according to his
own promise expressed in his law, I say that the prosperity succeding the
fact, is a most infallible assurance, that God has approved that fact: Now so
it is, that God has pronounced in his law, That when the people shall
exterminate and destroy such as decline from him, that he will bless them, and
multiply them, as he has promised unto their fathers. But so it is, that
Amasia turned from God, for so the text does witness, and plain it is, that
the People slew their King, and like plain it is, that God blessed them.
Therefore yet again I conclude that God himself approved their fact: and so
far as it was done according to his commandment, it was blessed according to
his promise.) And when Lithingtoun replied again That he thought not the
ground so sure as he durst build his conscience thereupon. He answered [I pray
God that your conscience have no worse ground then this is, when soever you
shall begin the like work, which God in your own eyes has already blessed.]
And if so (as is very probable) and learned Althus. pol. C. 38. n 106. is of
the same judgment with Mr Knox, we need not trouble the reader with forming an
argument thence to our purpose, the same being so obvious and clear, that he
who runs may read it.

CAP. IV.
Our Argument from other approved instances, and authorities, both abroad, and
at home.
THis practice, hovvever it be now condemned by a generation of perfidious
Prelates, and Malignants, enemies to the glorious work of Reformation, from
the beginning, and a company of base Sycophants and Court flatterers, as an
unparallelable act of rebellion and sedition; yet, as it as abundantly
confirmed by precedents in scripture, as we have seen, so is it by the
practice of others; whom none, but men of the same stamp, vvil condemn; and
by authorities of Divines abroad and at home, as we shall now show. And,

1. The history of the Maccabees, mentioned in that story, is a clear example
of private persons resisting and defending themselves frm the iniquous assaults
of the Sovereign, or his Emissaries; for when Antiochus Epiphanes was
compelling them to forsake God, and tyrannizing over them, Matthias a priest,
and his sons made open resistance; and afterward Mattathias and those with
him, hearing how Matthias, out of an overnice superstition, would not fight in
their own defense, on the Sabbath day, resolving upon all occasions to defend
themselves, their Lives, and Laws, and to take all advantages of the Enemy,
did accordingly assault them, and recovered their Cities Laws and Libertyes,
fighting many battles with good success. And Osiander Enchirid. controv. c. 9.
de mag. pol. testifies that this was done by the encouragement and assistance
of the Spirit of God. And if any should reject this instance as impertinent,
because they suppose Antiochus was not their lawful Supreme Magistrate, but
only a Tyrant without title, let them hear what Grotius de jure belli and
pacis lib. 1. c. 4. n. 7. says to this? Like unto this appears that deed of
the Maccabees; for whereas some think to defend these arms, upon this gronnd,
that Antiochus was not King but an invader, it seems foolish to me, seeing in
all the history of the Maccabees, and of such as took their part, they never
name Antiochus any thing else, but their King, and that not without ground; for
long before this, the Jews had acknowledged the authority of the Macedonians,
unto whose power and place Antiochus did succeed. and as to that that the law
forbids that any stranger should be set over them, that is to be understood
of a voluntary election and not of what the people might through necessity be
forced to do. And, whereas others say that the Maccabees used only the right of
the people cui (...) deberetur. Neither is that solid, for the jews being at
first overcome by Nebuchadnezar, and subjected to him, by the law of war, by
the same law they did obey the Medes and Persians, who succeeded unto the
Caldeans, and all this Impire came at length into the hands of the Macedonians:
hence it is, that Tacitus reckons the jews amongst basest of such as served
these Assyrians, Medes and Persians: Nor did they require any thing by
stipulation from Alexander and his successors, but without any condition gave
themselves up unto their power, as formerly they had been under the command of
Darius. And if at any time the jews were permitted to use their own rites,
and laws, that was but a begged right, which they had through the indulgence
of the Kings, but not through any imperial law. So that there is nothing that
can defend the Maccabees but most imminent and certane danger] thus he.

2. The constant practice of the Waldensian protestants in Piedmont, does show
that this late practice is not so strange and uncouth, as adversaryes would
give it out to be; for, they never had a Representative to be a screen betwixt
them, and the tyranny of their princes, and yet how oftintimes have they
valiently with stood such, as came to oppress them, in goods and lives, though
clothed with commission from the princes? In the year 1580. being persecuted
by the Lord of Trinity, and their popish Sovereigns, they assembled solemnly
together, to consult how to prevent the imminent dangers, and after prayer and
calling upon God for his grace, and spirit of counsel and direction, they
resolved to enter into a solemn mutual Covenant, and to join in a League
together, for defense of Themselves and their Religion and so accordingly did
assist one another, in their defense, which they did with good success; And
that always since whenever they were assaulted by the bloody Emissaries of the
Duk of Savoy, as any may see fully in their history. So that whosoever will
condemn the late defense, must also condemn these poor oppressed protestants,
who have no other mean to keen them from utter extirpation, but this innocent
mean of felf defense, and of repelling unjust violence with violence; for
Bonds, Promises and Covenants bind their Prince, as such obligations use to
bind some others viz. no longer then they see it for their advantage. Neither
have they any Representative, Prince, or Noble man, among them, to head their
matters; but mere necessity puts them to use the best expendient they can, and
forcibly to resist their oppressing Superiors, when they send to spoil them
of their goods, lives and libertyes.

3. Some particular cities in Germany did defend themselves against the
Emperor unjustly invadeing their libertyes, and assaulting them, as may be
seen in the history of Germany, particularly the Cities of Madenburgh and Breme.

4, So in France, the Cities of Montobane and Rochel and the Isle of Ree with
stood the King, when he was seeking to oppress them. And no man will condemn
these for acts of rebellion and sedition, unless they will also condemn our
Kings, who, at least undertook, and offered to help and assist them.

5. It was this opposition and resistance of private persons when tyrannized
over, by Superiors, that has brought the Cantons of Helvetia unto that state
of freedom and liberty, which they have enjoyed for many years, and do enjoy
this day; being now a free Republic, as Simlerus shows in his history of
that Republic.

6. But that we may come home, we find some remarkable instances of this
nature, which no man in reason, who shall condemn this late defense, shall be
able to defend: and to begin with what may be most recent in our memories. In
the year 1648. There are two signal Instances. The one was that violent
resistance used against the Parliaments forces at Mauchlin moor. Here was not
only a resistance, in defense of the truth and cause of God, then sought to be
borne down and oppressed, by a prevalent Malignant faction in Parliament,
without the concurrence of conduct of the Representatives of the land, but
directly against them: Here was a defense used by way of resistance, by mere
private persons without the company or concurrence of one Noble man; And yet a
resistance that never was condemned by any, to this day, expect ingrained
Malignants; but was approved and commended highly, by the Parliament anno 1649.
the best Parliaments Scotland did see for many years. Again thereafter in that
same year 1648, The forces of the west Country arose in defense of the Cause
and Covenant of God; and that not only without the conduct of a Parliament, but
against their resolutions. It is true, there were some Nobles and
Parliament Men among them, and countenancers of them; but these acted not, nor
could act, by virtue of any Parliamentary power; but only as private subjects,
having, by reason of their greater interest in the land, a greater obligation
to lay out themselves, and to improve their authority and influence in the
country, for the good thereof, and for the cause of God. They had it is true,
by their places and stations, greater influence upon the Country, and a
greater backing, and so being leading men, were in a greater capacity to defend
the oppressed truth; but all this gave them no public Magistratical power, nor
put them in the capacity of a real and formal Representative: and yet all this
was afterward approved, ratified and confirmed by Parliament, as good and
necessary service to the country, and to the cause of God, A third notable
instance is that Anno 1639. There was then no public civil judicatory
carrying on that defense, but Nobles and others, each in their capacity, and
according to their power, concurred, for the promoveing of that necessary work
of defense. They did not act under the notion of any such judicature, nor did
they assume to themselves any such power and authority. It is true, there were
then a great number of Noble Patriots, and renowned Nobles, who laid the work
of reformation to heart, and laid out themselves to the utmost of their power
for the same, and because of their concurrence, the work was the more
feazible and easy to be carried on; but I think the stresse of the lawfulness
of that defensive war, did not lie wholly upon their shoulders; so that if
they had with drawn, all the rest of the body of the land, had been bound in
conscience, to have deserted the same also. It is true, it was of great
advantage unto the cause, that God stirred up the spirit of the Nobles to own
the same (and is so always) upon many accounts, and their concurrence had its
own auxiliary force, to justify the interprise, for abundans cautela non
nocet: But I remember not that the lavvfulnesse of that defensive war, was
stated only or mainely on that particular. It is true, They are Primores Regni
be virtue of their particular places and stations, and be virtue of their
eminency over others, and power by reason of their eminency; and so are engaged
beyond others, to see to the good of the Land, and of Religion, for the good of
the souls of such as are under them, and on whom they have or may have
influence; And, be reason of this, may authoritatively even as such, do many
things, when there is no other constitution of a Supreme Representative: But
when a constitution of a Supreme Public Representative is condescended upon
and settled, it is certane, they cannot separatly, yea nor jointly act in the
power and capacity of a formal Supreme Representative, but when they are, with
others, constituent members of that Representative; and out of that
Representative (unless by power and commission from it) they cannot act
judicially, or authoritatively, nor in any other capacity formally, then as
private persons, though as persons of greater interest, and share in the
Commonwealth, and so under greater obligations, both by the Law of God and of
nature, to bestirre themselves more effectually for the good of the same; and
as persons of greater influence and conduct; yet still under the notion of
private persons, private persons I mean, as opposite to persons clothed with
public authority and Parliamentary power. I grant they are borne-Heads and
Magistrates of the Country, as being in eminency above others, and as being by
birth, conform to our constitution, borne-Members of Parliament, and so in
potentia proxima, and in a nearer capacity then others are, to vote and act in
Parliament: but still I say, considered out of Parliament, or when there is no
Parliament, they cannot exerce any Parliamentary power, conclude or determine
any thing of that nature, more then others: It is a truth also, that they have,
by reason of our law and constitution, a Magistratical power, limited to such
and such causes over such and such particular places; but that is only and
inferior, and subordinat civil power, and cannot extend beyond that limited
bounds, more then the power of Magistrates in Broughs, or Sheriffs in Shires,
or Baylies in Baylieryes, or the like, and is no part of that Magistratical
power which is commonly called the power of war. I grant, that they and all
other inferior Magistrates, are to seek to promove the good of the whole
land, and to concur, according to their power, for the same, even because of
their interest and share of that subordinat power: But they cannot act under
that notion, nor do any thing be virtue of that particular power, nor exerce
any acts thereof, out of the bounds of their several jurisdictions; But all
they do, is by virtue of that fundamental power belonging to all the members of
the Commonwealth, according to their several places and relations. Hence
therefore it it clear, that our vvorthyes then acted not, as a public
judicatory, or as public persons clothed with public authority. So that
whosoever shall condemn this late act of defense, upon the account, that it
was managed by mere private presons, must also, in reason, condemn that which
these worthies did; and so conspire with the Malicious Malignants, ingrained in
wickedness, and enmity to the way and work of God. A fourth and last instance,
is that of our first reformers in the days of Mr. Knox: for, at the beginning
of the reformation, there were but very few Nobles, who concured, as Mr. Knox
testified in his sermon Nov. 7. 1559. in these words [when we were a few in
number, in comparison of our Enemies, when we had neither Earl nor Lord (a few
excepted) to comfort us, we called upon God, and took him for our protector,
defense and only refuge.] And, in the following words, he shows that it fared
rather better with them, then worse, when they wanted the concurrence of
Nobles: For, says he, [ amongst us was heard no bragging of Multitude, nor of
our strength and policy, we did only sob to God, to have respect to the equity
of our cause, and to the cruel pursuit of the tyrannical enemy; but since that
our number has been thus multiplied, and chiefly since the Duke with his
friends has been joined with us, there was nothing heard, but this Lord will
bring these many hundred spears, This man can persuade this country, if this
Earl be ours, no man in such bounds will trouble us: And thus the best of us
all, that before felt God's potent hand to our defense, has of late days put
flesh to be our arme] And as Mr. Knox said, so it was, much of their business
was carried on without the concurrence of many Nobles. We hear of no nobles
with the gentlemen of the west, when they came from the border to the Queen,
and when James Chalmers of Gaitgirth said to her (when they had heard. that she
had caused summon the protestant preachers) ( Madam, we know that this is the
Malice of the jewels, and of that bastard(meaning the Bishop of S. Andrews)
that stands by you, but we shall make a day of it. They oppress ^s, and our
tennants, for feeding of their idle bellyes, they trouble our preachers, and
would murder them and us, Shall we suffer this any longer; No Madam, it shall
not be. Nor was there any of the Nobles present, when that abomination of
carrying an idol on S. Giles day, was opposed. There were buy four Nobles that
subscribed the first bond at Edinburgh December 3. 1557, Where the whole
congregation resolved, by the grace of God, to apply themselves, their whole
power, substance, and lives, to maintain, set forward, and establish the most
blessed word of God, and his congregation etc. So four of five only subscribed
the second bond at Perth may last 1559. We find not many Nobles with them,
when they petitioned the parliament. And there protested [ that they would
worshipe God, according to the right manner: That none of them therefore should
incur any danger. That if upon this account any tumult should arise no crime
might be imputed unto them, but unto such as refused their just Demands.] And
when they wrote that letter May 22. 1559. Wherein they said [ That except the
cruelty were stayed, they would be compelled to take the sword of just defense
against all that should pursue them, for the matter of Religion, and that the
cruel, unjust, and most tyrannical murder intended against Towns and
Multitudes was and is the only cause of their r^v^le from their accustomed
obedience.] And when they wrote that other unto the Nobility, where in they
said [ By your fainting and extracting of your support, the Enemies are
encouraged, thinking that they shall find no resistance: in which point, God
willing, they shall be deceived, for if they were Ten thousand, and we but One
thousand, they shall not Murder the least of our brethren.] From all which,
and from the whole story of these times, it is undenyably apparent, that they
acted for the defense of the truth, and of their oppressed brethren, and for
the carrying on of the work of reformation, for some considerable time, without
the concurrence and conduct of a Parliamentary Representative. From all which
Instances of our predecessors, I would have these thing observed.

1. It is remarkable That when God was to begin any word of reformation in
our Land, whether from Popery or Prelacy, the powers then in being, were
standing in a stated opposition thereunto. This is notoure both in the days of
Mr Knox, and in the year 1639. King, or Queen, and Counciles were stated
against it, and opposeing the same, what they could.

2. The only wise God, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working,
thought fit, not to begin with the Spirits of the Powers in being, to cause
them first appear for the work; but thought it more to his honor and glory,
to make use of foolish things to confound the wise; and of weak things, to
confound the things that are mighty; and base things, and things which are
despised, and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are. It
seemed good in his eyes, who does all things after the counsel of his own
will, to employ the least of the flock in that business according to that word
Ier. 49. 20. and 50. 45. and to raise up mean, and contemptible instruments,
that the work might more conspicuously appear to be his, and the glory thereof
redound to himself alone.

3. As they would have been glade, (had it so seemed good in the Lords eyes) if
the standing Representatives, would have not only concurred and countenanced
that work, but would have, according to their places, led on the vaune, and
showed themselves powers appointed for God and his glory, by exerceing the
power which God had put into their hands, for God and his interest; So the want
of their encouragement and conduct, did not, in the least, brangle their
confidence of the lawfulness of their interprize, of so discourage them, as to
give over their work, as desperate and hoplesse.

4. Nor did they ever assume to themselves any authoritative and Magistratical
power, to legitimate their actions; as if they had thought, that without that
formality, their resolutions and motions had been condemned as unlawful in the
Court of God, and Nature: but walked upon the ground of that fundamental right,
granted to all both higher and lower, to maintain the Truth of God, upon all
hazards, and to stand to the defense thereof, and of themselves, when unjustly
persecuted, because of their adherence thereunto, according to their power, and
as God in his providence called them thereunto.

5. Nor did their adversaries objecting, that their actions were treasonable
and seditious, as being contrare to authority and established laws, scar them
from their purposes, in the least, having the testimony of a good conscience
with in them, that they had not the least purpose or project, to cast off
lawful authority, or to diminish it is just right and power; and knowing that
the Powers out of whatever principle, and upon whatsoever motives,
relinquishing their duty, and opposeing that truth and way, which by their
places and callings, they were obliged, before God, to maintain, preserve, and
promove, did not loose their obligation, and exeem them form that duty, which
God and nature had laid upon them; but rather did press them to prosecute
their business more vigurously, as seeing the necessity much more urgent, and
the difficulty so much the greater: And knowing that whatever laws are made,
in a Christian Common wealth, should be for the glory of God, and the good of
the souls of the subjects mainly, and for their external welbeing only in
subordination unto these great Ends; and when the observation of the strick
letter of the law, did cross the maine good, which principally de jure they
aimed at, they were eo ipso, in so far, null and void before God; because it
always holds good. that it is better to obey God, then Man, and men's
commands or laws, unto which obedience cannot be yielded, without contempt of,
and treason committed against the Highest of all, who is King of Kings, are as
no commands before God, and disobedience unto these, is no disobedience unto
the lawful authority, but faithful allaigance unto the most Supreme.

6. These poor weak beginnings, how base and contemptible so ever they
appeared, yet God was pleased, when the time to favor Zion was come, so to
own, countenance and prospere, that the same work at length came to be owned,
by Public Representatives, and Parliaments, yea and the Kings themselves were
brought to a public owneing and approving of the same. And who knows, but,
if God had thought good to bless this late act with success, it might have
been followed with the like consequent? But his time was not come.

7. It is also observable, That whatever disaster, or disappoyntment they did
meet with, in prosecution of the Reformation, and in the preservation and
defense of themselves, in the owneing of the truth of God; though it put them
to mourn for their iniquities before God, and to acknowledge, among other
sins, their too much relying upon the arm of flesh, and not resting with a
pure faith on his power and protection; yet it never made them question their
call, or suspect the lawfulness of their work and business, as to its
substance, and end: for they knew well, that the work was the Lord's and that
their call was divine, though for his own holy ends, that they might be more
humbled, and taught do depend with a single heart, on his word and promise, and
to purge out such evils as provoked the eyes of God's jealousy; he suffered
them to fall.

8. When the work came at length to be owned by Parliaments and Higher Powers,
what was formerly done by persons not in that capacity, was not condemned
either as unlawful or illegal, nor did the valient actors stand in need of any
indemnity, as if they had been transgressors; but all was either virtually or
expressly approved: and the worthy actors praised and highly commended, as
indeed they did deserve.

9. None ever condemned these actions as treasonable and rebellious, but such
as were known to be real and heart-enemies to the work it felf; no tongues
were ever loosed against them, except the imbittered tongues of sworn
adversaries, ingrained Malignants, Enemies to God and godliness, and haters of
the power of it. These and none but these who are of their father the devil,
durst condemn the same. And many hollow hearted professors (among whom this
Surveyer deserves to be rekoned) were forced against their hearts, to approve
of the same and join in with the favorers and maintainers of that noble
cause, so forceable was the light, and the power of that Sprit that acted the
worthies in these days, who now have turned open Apostates from that truth and
cause, and have adjoined themselves unto that ever accursed, Popish,
Prelatical, and Malignant faction. Yea remarkable it is that God did so
overpower the pen of that Arch-Enemy Spotswood, that though he would have said
all which Hell it self could have prompted him unto; yet durst say no more of
these first courses and practices, but that they were Violent and disorderly.
And this Rabshaketh the Surveyer, who, in the end of his book (having reserved
the dregs of what he had to exscreate against the work of God and his worthyes,
until then Page 118. etc. would out-stripe his predecessors, and spevv out his
venom, like another adder of the same spavvne; yet the overruleing providence
of God, has so curbed him, that he got not liberty to run the full length he
would, and therefore he says [ We cannot justify all courses that were used
then for carrying on the work of reformation] and again [ if some instruments
thereof were guilty of sedition, or sacrilege, or self seeking] and again [ if
sinful courses were then used by men] and again Page 119. [ Let us not stand
superstitiously upon the justifying of all their deeds] Who sees not this
wicked man's Mouth bridled, by the restraineing power of God, so that he cannot,
he dar not, plainly and expressly call these courses seditious or rebellious;
but comes on with his Ifs and if some instruments, and all their courses
cannot be justified: as if, in the most laudable work, to which men might have
a most clear call, some accidental or circumstantial actions, might not abide
the test: and as if among a company, some might not have by-ends, while a good
work was laudably and lawfully, as to the maine, carried on. Ay, but this good
man, you will say, is mighly in love with the work of reformation, and blesses
God for it Page 118. 119. True, we find him say so in words, but God knows
his heart: But is it not strange, that fince, he says, he approves the work,
he will be more blind then was that poor man in the gospel whom he mentions,
who had his eyes opened Ioh. 9. for that blind man, did see a divine power in
the work wrought and said v. 33. If this man were not of God he could do
nothing, and will not only, not see the mighty hand of God in the instruments,
but tells us, he is not much concerned to enquire. But what needs him much
doubt of a divine call, considering the work it self, it is end and the direct
tendency of the means unto this end, and the real and christian intentions of
the instruments, which he will not see in the instances he brings viz. of the
wicked hands crucifying Christ, of profane and unfaithful Ministers preaching,
of a leprous hand soweing seed, of acts of fornication and adultery? Why then
does he adduce such Instances so impertinent? Will he proclaim himself a fool of
the first magnitude in so doing? Ay, but he would have us following the
practices of the primitive christians, who never used any undutyful resistance
to, or violence upon the Magistrates, rather then the precedents in these dregs
of time. But why will he not follow their practices himself? Was it their
practice to abjure a lawful Covenant sworn for the maintenance of the Truth?
Was it their practice to renunce their former profession, and turn Apostates
from the truth, which once they avowed? Was it their practice to turn their
back on Christ and his interest, for the will of creatures, and for a mease of
pottage? Was it their practice to change their Religion with the court?
Concerning the practice of the primitive christians, in this point, and how
imitable we shall speak afterward. If these were the dregs of time, wherein
there was so much faithfulness, Zeal, constancy, piety, singleness of heart,
contempt of the world, what dregs of dregs of time are we now fallen in,
wherein there is so much infidelity, atheism, perjury, falsehood,
lukwarmnesse, inconstancy, imbraceing of this present world, and all sort of
wickedness and prophanity? [ But (says he, Page 119.) let it be so that much
of the way of these, who were at first isntrumental in the reformation in this
Land, were justifiable upon the account of purging the Church, from the horrid
grossnesse of idolatry, corruption of doctrine, tyranny and usurpation over
poor soulls wherewith the man of sin, had for many ages defiled and burdened
the poor Church; and upon the account of the open hostility to the truth,
wherein Magistrates then stood, together with the inbringing of foreign
furious forces upon us, even to the heart of our Land; How unlike was the case
then, to what it is now? and how unable is the case now to bear the burden of
a conclusion for such practices as then were used?] Answ. But truly wise
judicious Men will not see the case then, so far different from what it is now,
as that the case now shall not be so able to bear the burden of a conclusion
for the same practices; Seeing there is, this day, as much horrid grossnesse of
idolatry in the Land, as has been at any time, these hundereth years: And, as
for corruption of doctrine, alas! Who does not hear it, and see it, that
hears these locust-curates preach down all piety and godliness, and harden
people in defection and apostasy from God? It is as great a corruption in
doctrine, as needs to be, to pervert therein the right ways of the Lord, and
to lead people into the broad way which leads unto destruction: again, what
greater tyranny and usurpation over poor souls would he have, then is now
exercised, since the perjured Prelates the kindly brood of the Man of sin,
have defiled and burdened our poor Church. The Apology and Naphtaly have
abundantly manifested and daily experience confirms it, That the tyranny and
usurpation is insupportable, and as grievous, as it was them. Moreover, is not
the open hostility to the truth as manifest in the Magistrates, this day, and as
legible by such as run, on all their acts and actings, as it was then? who
sees not this, but he who can not see the wood for trees? And as for the
inbringing of foreign furious forces, into the heart of our Land, It were
needless, seeing we had raised up in our own bosom, as cruel, bloody
mercylesse, furious and mad forces, as any forraigners could be, or these were:
wherein lies the difference then? O (says he) [ We can avow it, in the
presence of God, that we contend for that same Faith and Religion, that our
predecessors stood for, against the Powers of that time: and will maintain
the same, against all Novators, who upon account of a piece of Church order
(allowed by our Reformers) now re-established, instigate any private persons,
who have power enough, to destroy all Magistracy and order in the Land, because
of the owning thereof.] It is not much matter what such men, say, they can avow
in the presence of God, who have openly and avowedly broken their vows, and
renunced that Covenant, which they swore oftiner then once, with hands lifted
up to the Most High God. No wise Man will think that such will stoutely contend
for the Faith and Religion, who have renunced all faith and Religon, and
abjured these Covenants, which were strong bulwarks, to guaird and defend that
Faith and Religion. Ay, but he will maintain it against Novators, as he
calls them. That is indeed a new way of maintaining truth, to maintain it
against such as stand for the defense thereof, and all the bulwarks thereof
against him and his fraternity, who are dismantling the walls, undermining them
opening the gates to adversaries and intertaining them kindly in their bosom.
He speaks an untruth, when he says, that the Reformers owned such a Church
order (rather Church-bane, and Church-confusion) as these worthyes are now
contending against, and is now re-established. So when he says, that these
Novators, and that Naphtaly do instigate any private persons, who have power
enough, to destroy all Magistracy and order in the Land, and to occupy their
Rooms. We hope there shall be a Magistracy and good order, in the Land, when
that abjured Hierarchy, the bane of that Church and State, shall be utterly
abolished, with all it is adherents, I must not let that pass which he has
Page 119. [ Some (says he) have said, Religion would never have been reformed,
if violence had not been used upon Magistrates: But why should men take on them
to limite God? Has he not showed his power in several parts of the world in
working on the hearts of the Supreme Magistrates, and causing them to go
before others in reformation of abuses?) Answ. We know no violence^ was used
then upon Magistrates, only with violence the godly withstood the unjust
violence of Magistrates, so as they got not their furious purposes executed:
we shall be far from limiting the Holy Oe of Israel, and therefore dar not say,
but he has more ways then one, of bringing about his holy purposes: And, as at
the first spreading of the Gospel, it was not his way, to work on the hearts of
the Supreme Magistrates, and cause them to go before others, in the
reformation; so a way may be his way, which is different from that way,
whereunto he would limite the Lord. We do not deny but God may, when he thinks
good, stir up Magistrates to go before others in that work; but it has not
been his way of recovering us from Popery, and we have not found the Supreme
Magistrates ever since so cordial, as we could have wished, for the work of
Reformation; And yet God has carried on his own work, whether they would
or not: And he who wrought then is the same God yet, as mighty and powerful
as ever. I vvish he would take the follovving words to himself, and his
party, for they quadrate well, [Men are too apt, to be bold in anteverting
Gods way, and to follovv their own carnal prudence and affections, in that
which they are set upon, and thereupon (when they prosper) to fancy a divine
approbation of their way: So self-loving are men Ordinarily.

From these particulars mentioned, and from what we have replied unto this
Surveyer, It is put beyond contradiction, That whosoever shall condemn this
late act of defense, in maintenance of Religion and Libertyes, must of
necessity also condemn what was done Anno 1648. and Anno 1638, 1639. Yea and
what was done at the beginning of the Reformation in the days of Mr Knox, and
strick in with all the rabble of the sworn Enemies of our Church and
Reformation, and speak the language of the Ashdodites, ingrained Malignants,
our inveterate adversaries; and speak down right, what this bitter apostate,
the Surveyer, dar not in plain terms express; And so condemn all those
worthies who valiently ventured, and hazarded all for the truth, as Traitors
and Rebels; and say, that such of them as lost their lives in that cause, died
as fools die, in rebellion, and under the crime of treason; and that all the
blood of those who valiently died in the bed of honor, in the maintenance of
their Religion and Christian Privileges, or who jeoparded their lives in the
high places of the fields, in defense and prosecution of that cause, is to be
required at the hands of Mr Knox, and other noble reformers, who actively
bestirred themselves in this matter, then, and of late: Yea they shall condemn
all the Prayers, Tears, Sighs, Groans, Fastings, Supplictions, and other such
like means, as were used in these exigences: Which guilt, wise Men will
well advise, ere they take unto themselves.

The next thing is to adduce some authorities Pareus on the Romans Cap. 13. dub.
4. Has this fourth proposition [It is lavvful for private subjects, if the
Tyrant set upon them as a robber, or ravisher, and they can neither obtain
help of the ordinary powers, nor shun the danger, in that present exigent, to
defend themselves and theirs, against the Tyrant, as against a private Robber.
1. Because, against whomsoever a defense is lavvfull by the help of
Magistrates, against the same, private defense, in case of necessity, is also
lavvful, when the defense by Magistrates cannot be had: because in such cases,
Kings themselves do arm private persons. But in the case of necessity, defense
by the inferior Magistrate against the Superior, is lawful. Therefore also
private defense is lawful 2, Because if we take away both publik and private
defense, against the cruel rage of Tyrants, the boundless licentiousness of
Tyrants should be strengthenned, and hereby the civil society should be openly
destroyed, yea and chiefly the Church; bacause the most wicked part should
destroy the better. But without doubt, the Law of God does not so establish the
licentiousness of Tyrants, as that thereby, humane society, should be
destroyed. Therefore, God does not forbid, in all cases, resistance to Tyrants
oppressing people in their lives, and saifty, to satisfy their lusts.] Thus He.
But it may, be, Out Surveyer will reckon him in amongst his Pseudomartyres,
because his book was confuted by a Hangman and a fiery faggot, at the command of
King James: Yet, both the book, and the Author are in great esteem with the
reformed, and his praise is in all the Churches, and whatever come of the book
his reasons stand firm and valide. In the History of our Reformation, Page
397, 398. (edit. in 4 to Edinb.) we find that John Knox had the Apology of
Magdeburgh subscribed by the Ministers there, declareing the defense of the
town against the Emperor, to be most just and lawful, and offered it to
Secretary Lithingtoun, who then was disputeing against him, to read.

And having now made Mention of Mr. Knox, what was his judgment in this point,
that history does abundantly demonstrate. His words to the Queen are remarkable
(see history of Reformation, Page 317.) When she asked him if he thought, That
subjects having power might resist their princes: He answered If princes do
exceed their bounds, and do against that, wherefore they should be obeyed,
there is no doubt, but they may be resisted, even by power; for there is
Neither greater honor; nor greater obedience to be given to Kings and Princes,
then God has commanded to be given to Father and Mother. But so it is That the
father may be stricken with a phrenzie, in the which he would stay his own
children: Now if the children arise, join themselves together, apprehend the
father, take the sword or other weapon from him, and finally, bind his hands,
and keep him in prisone, till that his phrenzie be over-past, think ye Madame
(said he) that the children do any wrong, or will God be offended with them
that have stayed their father from committing wickedness? It is even so with
princes that would murder the people of God, that are subject unto them: their
blind zeal is nothing but a very mad phrenzie, and therefore to take the
svvord from them, to bind their hands, and to cast them into prisone till that
they be brought to a more sober mind, is no disobedience against princes, but
just obedience, because it agrees with the word of God) thus he, who knevv
not what is was to fear the face of any breathing, in the defense of his
Master's cause and interest: and was an eminent divine, a holy Man of God,
living in near communion with God, and was far above the reproaches and
calumnies of his adversaryes. And it is considerable, that this was a
particular which he had frequent occasion to be thinking upon, and no doubt,
this holy Man would be often reflecting upon the matter, and upon his own
judgment; and consulting God and his word there anent, that he might know
whether his grounds were such, as he would not have cause to be ashamed of,
when he was to appear before his judge, being often called to show his
judgment concerning that matter: And his constant practice being consonant
thereunto: And yet we never find that his heart reproached him, for
maintaineing any such opinion, while living, or while dying, nor did he ever
change his judgment thereof; yea, not when the maintaineing thereof might have
been a sufficient ground of an accusation: and doubtless he would before hand
examine, if he would lay down his life upon such a ground, yet constant was
he in that, cost him what it would, or could; he was no changeling, nor had
he so drunken in truth. Yea in the end of that conference with Lithingtoun he
told them that he was not only fully resolved inn conscience, but also had
heard the judgments of the most godly and learned that he knevv in Europe in
that particular, and in all other things that he had affirmed [ I came
not(says he) into this realm, without their resolution, and for my assurance
I have the hand-writeing of many*] Neither was this his judgment alone, but
also of Mr Georg Hay whom the Earl of Mortoun would have had disputing
against Mr Knox. But (said he) I will not oppose my self unto you, as one
willing to impugn or confute that head of Doctrine, which not only ye, but
many others; yea and my self have affirmed; far be it from me, for so should
I be found contrarious to my self.] And of Mr Craig, Mr Knox's colleague, who
told what a conclusion he heard defended at Bonnonia, Anno 1554. by Thomas de
Finola Rector of the University, and approved by Vincentius de Placentia, as
agreeable both to the law of God and man viz. [ That all Rulers be they
Supreme or inferior, may and ought to be reformed, or bridled, by them, by
whom they are chosen or admitted to their office, so often as they break that
promise made by oath to their subjects; because that the prince is no less
bound by oath to the Subjects, then the Subjects to the Princes, and therefore
ought it to be kept and reformed equally according to law, and condition of
the oath that is made of either party] and when some said that Bonnonia was a
Republic. He answered [ My judgment is that every Kingdom is, or at least
should be a Commonwealth, albeit that Every Commonwealth be not a Kingdom: and
therefore I think that in a Kingdom, no less diligence ought to be taken,
that laws be not violated, then in a Commonwealth; because that the tyranny of
Princes who continue in a Kingdom is more hurtful to the subjects, then is the
misgovernment of those that from year to year are changed, in free
Commonwealths; but to assure you and all others, that head was disputed to the
utter-most; and then in the end, was concluded, That they spoke not of such
things as were done in diverse Kingdoms and Nations, by Tyranny and negligence
of people, but what ought to be done in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths,
according to the law of God, and unto the just laws of Man: and if by the
negligence of the People, by the Tyranny of Princes, contrary laws have been
made, yet may that Same people, or their posterity justly crave all things to
be reformed according to the original institution of Kings and Commonwealths;
and such as will not do so, deserve to eat the fruit of their own
foolisnesse, thus he: see, Hist. of Reform. Page 399. 400. (Edit. in 4. Yea
this was the judgment of all the reformed preachers at that time, as we see
witnessed by the Congregation, vindicating the doctrine of their preachers,
concerning obedience to be given to Magistrates, in these words (see Hist of
reform Page 184.) [ In open audience they declare the authority of Princes and
Magistrates to be of God, and therefore they affirm, that they ought to be
honored feared and obeyed, even for conscience sake, provided that they
command, nor require nothing expressly repugning to God's commandment, and
plain will revealed in his word. Moreover they affirm. That if wicked
persons abuseing the authority established by God, move Princes to command
things manifestly wicked, That such as can and do bridle the inordinate
appetites of misled Princes, cannot be accused as resisters of the authority
which is God's good ordinance. To bridle the rage and fury of misled Princes,
in free Kingdoms and Realms, they affirm it appertains to the Nobility
sworn and borne Counselors of the same; And also (NB) to the Barons and
People: whose votes and consents are to be required in all great and weighty
matters of the Commonwealth, which if they do not, they declare themselves
criminal with their misled Princes, and so subject to the same vengeance of God
which they deserve, for that they pollute the seat of justice, and do, as it
were, make God author of iniquity.]

Thus we see this late practice is not without laudable and approved
procedents, nor wants it the approbation of the valient vvorthyes of our
land, who if they were living this day, would set to their seal to this
truth, and be ready to seal it with their blood; and the testimony of one Mr.
Knox, is more to be valued, then the contrare assertions, of all the perfidious
Prelates in Britane, and of all their underlings, yea then of all the
time-serving, and men-pleasing court parasites, who first have debauched their
consciences into a stupide silence, and their judgment into the atheists belief
that there is no God, and then devouted soul, body, religion and all, unto the
lust os a sinful creature.

CAP. V.
Of the Peoples power, in erecting Governors: and several Arguments thence
deduced.
WE shall willingly grant, with the Surveyer Page 1. That God has made man a
Rational creature, and fit for society: And that God has appointed, besides
oeconomical societyes, the coalition of people into greater bodies, consisting
of many familyes under one kind of government, and political head, for their
mutual good in their necessities, and for protection of the whole body, and
every Member thereof: That Magistracy is God's ordinance, he having appointed
Superior Heads and Governors, to rule these bodies that they might be
preserved from ruin and destruction: And that the has put this instinct and
dictate of reason into all; so that even barbarous people are led together into
such politic associations, under their Governors, for their subsistence in
general, for the mutual help one of another, and for the protection of the
weaker against the injuries of the stronger: And therefore we willingly say
with worthy Calvin Lib 4. Inst, c. 20,. 4. That [ Nulli jam dubium esse debet,
quin civilis potestas, vocatio sit non modo coram Deo sancta and legitima, sed
sacerrima etiam, and in tota mortalium vita, long omnium honestissima.

Yet as to the right understanding of the peoples interest in the constitution
and erection of civil Government, and of civil Governors, unto whom they
subject themselves, we would have those Particulars considered.

1. It will be readily granted, that there was a time when such people, as are
now imbodyed in a politic state, were not so imbodyed; but were either living
separatly in a wandering condition, or by providence cast together in one
place, and cohabiteing together, and throw process of time, increaseing in
number, and filling that place of ground with their posterity and issue; in
which condition living without any established civil order common to all, every
one saw to his own matters the best he could, and governed these, according to
his best advantage having no other law to square his actions by, then the moral
law, or law of nature.

2, Among this multitude or company, while in this condition, there was none,
who by birth, or any other lawful clame, could challenge to himself any civil
dominion, power or authority over the rest, or could exercise any Magistratical
power, whether by making civil laws, or by executing the same. I speak here
of a civil power for I deny not, but in that condition, parents had power over
their children, husbands over their wives, masters over their servants; and, in
some respect, the Elder might have had some power over the younger, the more
strong and power full over the more weak, the wiser over the more foolish and
ignorant, and upon that account, a sort of natural pre-eminence: but this
neither did, nor could intit^e them unto a civil superiority, an civil
Magistracy over these, far less over all the rest. I grant that even in that
state of affairs. Some being endued of God with gifts and qualifications
beyond others, and so more fitted for Government, then others who wanted those
advantages, might look liker the persons whom they ought to pitch upon and call
for that work; but notwithstanding of these enduements and abilityes, They
could not upon that sole ground, lay clame unto Soveraignity, and assume unto
themselves a civil power and jurisdiction over the rest: so that as to any
actual, and formal right unto Magistracy, and supreme government, all are by
nature alike, though not alike qualified thereunto, and so, not in alike near
capacity for reception thereof. This, I suppose, will not need proof, since I
am here speaking of the first, and most undoubtedly lawful, and ordinary
constitutions of Commonwealthes, and abstracting from that question, What
Magistratical power he may have, and assume to himself, who transporteth and
erecteth colonies; as also, from that question, what title or right to
government, pure conquest by arms, or a lawful conquest upon a lawful war,
may give, as being of no affinity with our case, though this Surveyor be
pleased now to account us little better then a conquest, of which afterward.

3. When a multitude in this condition, do associat together, and considering,
through the instinct of nature, how necessary it is, that some way be
condescended upon, for the common saifty and preservation of the whole body
from foreign adversaries, and intestine divisions, and for the saifty and
preservation of every one in particular, from mutual injuries, and acts of
injustice, do think of establishing some civil government and governors, we
cannot rationally suppose, that they go about such a business of moment,
rashly, brutishly, inconsiderately and irrationally; If reason teach them that
a government must be erected, for their well being, and move them to think of
falling about it, we cannot rationally suppose them to act in this matter
irrationally, They being rational creatures, and not a company of brutes, and
through the instinct of reason taught that this was a business both necessary
and of great concernment, cannot but be supposed to act rationally in this
matter.

4. It will not need much disput to prove, that by this constitution of a
Policy, and of Politic Governors, they should not be redacted unto a worse
condition, then that was, into which they were, before the constitution was
condescended upon; far less can it be supposed, that by this change they
enjoy no more the common privilege of rational creatures, but degenerate into
beasts, or are depressed into a condition, equal unto, if not worse then that
of beasts. Sure it must be granted that they remain Rational creatures, and
that Rational Creatures would never rationally yield unto such a change as
should deteriorate their condition, let be brutify them, or make them rather
choose to be beasts. And that such a change into a civil state, if accompanied
with such consequents, could never be the instinct of pure nature; nor can we
suppose, that such a thing can be the ordinance of God, appointed for the good
of mankind. Therefore this must stand, as a firm truth, that the condition of
a people modelled into a civil state, is not worse then it was before, but
rather better.

5. It will be no less readyly yielded, That such, one or more, as are chosen
by the Community, to act the part of Magistrates, notwithstanding of that
change made in their condition, abide men of the like passions and infirmities
with the rest (yea and subject to more temptations and so in greater hazard to
miscarry, then formerly) This change does not Transform them into Angels, or
put them beyond the reach of injuries (as all will grant) nor beyond a capacity
of doing injury, even to these over whom they are set. No humane power can set
any above God's Law, or loose him from the binding power thereof: and till this
be; or They out of a capacity or transgressing God's Law (which no humane act
can do) He Or They are still obnoxious to the sin of injuring their neighbor,
and transgressing the law of righteousness, no less then others;

6. It is Left to the People, in this case, to condescend upon what form of
government they think most expedient, and most suitable to their temper, and to
the condition providence has cast them into, whether it be Monarchy or
Arosticracy or Democracy, or a mixed kind: for though God and Nature has
instituted Government, yet not having determined any one form, to be the only
lawful form; People are it liberty to walk here upon rational grounds, and to
consult their own advantage, next the glory of God; and to make choice of
that, which, all things considered, promises most probable felicity unto them,
and of the several forms or Kinds of government, (all lawful in themselves)
to pitch upon what Kind they think most expedient and conduceing to their
ends. This is assented unto by all Politians: and so it follows, That it is
merely from the People, that this form and not another is made choice of.

7. As neither God nor Nature has determined the particular form of
government under which Men must live, but has left it, as was said, to their
free choice; so it is not determined how large or how little, every politic
society should be; nor whether a people living at some considerable distance
from other, or more contiguously, should join together in one, and make up one
body politic; or whether they should erect more, distinct, and independent
Commonwealthes though possibly of the same extract, and language. Nature says
not that all in one Island, of one extract, or of one language, should become
one Politic Body under one politic head. We have heard of the time when there
have been many Kings, distinct and independent, in one England: And how many
Kings there was at one and the same time, in the land of Canaan, no vast
territory, scripture tells us. Nor has Nature determined that distinct bodies
of people, living in distinct and far separated places, yea having distinct
customs, and languages, may not when they see it for their advantage,
associate for setting up one Supreme Sovereign over all. So that this also is
left to the free choice and determination of the People.

8. When a free People have rationally and deliberatly condescended upon the
form, it is in their power to condescend upon the time, how long that form
shall endure, and either prefix a certain time, at which it shall evanish, if
they see it not expedient to continue it: or reserve to themselves a liberty to
alter it when they will. Each of the sormes being in themselves lavvful,
People may choose which they think best; and though one Kind of government
will agree to some People, better then another, yet Bodies of people, being
liable to causal changes, and these requireing forms suitable, A people at the
beginning guyded with reason, may rationally foresee such changes, and
accordingly determine the first form condescended on to continue, longer or
shorter time, definite, or indefinite. It is not to my present purpose to
determine, what a people may do as to this, after their predecessors have
once embraced a form, and engaged themselves by oath never to change it. Or
whether it be lavvful to swear unto any one form.

9. It is from the People, that such persons, and no other persons, are made
choice of to Govern according to that form, which they have condescended
upon: before this deed of the People, no man can pretend to it, all being
equal, and none over another by nature, in any political capacity no man coming
out of the womb into this world, with a crown on his head, and a scepter in
his hand: and God (as we here suppose) immediately and particularly designeing
none, nor without the least concurrence of the People instaleing any into that
place of jurisdiction: and therefore the People must do something in order to
this, and upon their deed it follows, that such as before were no lawful
Magistrates, nor had any formal political power, are now Magistrates and
Governors, having lawful power and authority to exerce the function of a
Magistrate: for though the People do not institute the office of Magistracy,
and though the proper essential Magistratical power, be from God and not from
the People; and though the parts and qualifications wherewith the Magistrate
ought to be, and the person which the people do pitch upon, is actually endued,
be from God; yet till the People do some thing, all these do not formally
cloth a man with Magistratical power, nor make him a lawful Magistrate, nor
authorize him, to assume that place and charge: for, the present condition and
temper of a people may call for a Monarchy, as most fit, and there may be among
the Community, now associated and combined into one body, more persons then
one, alike well qualifyed for the charge; yet no man will say, that these,
because of their qualifications, become eo ipso Monarchs, nor can one create
himself; for what right and power has he more than his neighbor as well
qualified as he? Therefore it must be granted that the People create the
Magistrate, and make this man King and not that man: Hence we often read in
scriptures of the Peoples making Kings Judge. 9: 6, I Sam. 11: v. 15. 2 King.
10: 5. 1 Chronicles. 12: 38. Judge. 11: 8, 11. 2 King. 14: 21. 1 Samuel 12: 1. 2 Chronicles.
23: 3. The Surveyer seems to yield this, Page 102. See Gerhard. de
Magistratu,. 49, and 89. Page 718, 719. Althus. Politic. Cap. 19. numer. 103,
etc.

10. It is from the People that this way of election, and not another is
pitched upon: There being several ways, how in constituted Republiks, or
Kingdoms, the Supreme Magistrates do succeed to other: Some, at the death of
the former, succeed by way of free election, and he is chosen who possibly has
no relation to his predecessor; Some are chosen, who are of the same family,
but not as nearest in line, but at most fit to exerce the office of the
Sovereign, as it was for a considerable time in Scotland; In some places the
nearest in line, are chosen, if they be Males, as in France, where, by the old
Salicque Law, a Woman must not command in chief; in other places the nearest
in line succeed whether Male of Female, as in ^r^anne now a days. Now whence
flows this diversity of ways of instaling the succeeding Magistrate, or of
filling the place when vacant? Does it not flow alone from the People? Might
they not have pitched upon a way of conveyance of the Kingdom, by lineal
succession, when they made choice of continual election; or when they pitched
on that, might they not have made choice of this? And who will say that a
Supreme Magistrate of Magistrates, chosen by election are not as essentially
Soveraigens, as these who came to the place by lineal succession seeing by all
politicians, Election is made one of the ordinary ways of constituteing of
Magistrates, and by many, preferred to Succession? And seeing the first of that
Race had it by free election, he must be as essentially and lawfully the
Supreme Magistrate, as any of his Successors.

11. Even where the way of lineal succession is condescended upon and
established, the new Sovereign, though he seem to be full and complete heir,
haeres ex ass, unto his Father or Predecessor; Yet originally, and radically
he is constitute, and chosen by the People. For, whence comes it but from the
Peoples free choice that such a family, or line is chosen, and not another;
and that the Eldest, or nearest in the line is made choice of as Successor,
and not he, of that line, who is mostly qualified for that place and function?
So that in this case the Son has not his Kingdom from his Father; for he does
not succeed Iure haereditario, sed vi legis per quam primogenitus, vel alius
preximus succedere jube^ur, as says, Boxhornius de Majestrate Regum, Page 11,
and 12. Now the Authors of this Law and constitution, are only the people. See
Althus. Polit. Cap. 19. n. 90.

12. In all this, the People must be supposed to have some certane good End
before their eyes: for a Rational People must act rationally, and rationally
they cannot act, unless they have before their eyes some certain good End; Now
this end which they Intend as men, must be their outward Peace and
Tranquillity, freedom from oppression from strangers or one from another, and
the like; and as Christians, the glory of God, the good of Religion, and of
their souls. Therefore the People sets Magistrates over themselves, to
promove the glory of God, the good of Religion, and their temporal felicity:
And if they saw that this mean had not a tendency unto these Ends, they would
never have condescended upon it; far less if they had seen that it had a
tendency to destroy these Ends: and therefore, in so far as that mean is
preverted, and actually abused to the destruction of those high and noble Ends,
they must be interpreted as Non-consenters, and eatenus de Iure, in no worse
condition, then they would have been into if they had not erected such a
constitution, or set such over themselves.

It is like the Surveyer, will from some or all of these, draw scuh Conclusions
as he has done from some innocent expressions of Naphtaly ill understood by
him, and as ill applied; and say that we drive at nothing else, but to have all
the parishes of the land cantonized into so many free Republics, or little
Kingdoms of Ivetot. But is he an able, or if able, a faithful maintainer of
the Union and integrity of his Majesty's, dominions, who vvresteth expressions,
far contrary to the intent of the Author and starteth questions in Hypothesi,
according to his fancy, and that he may confute the Hypothesis, falls foul
upon the Thesis which he supposes (without ground) was the intent and design
of the Author of Naphtali, and which will be granted by all Politicians and
Lawyers. Sure, as in this he has showed himself vveak in his Politiks, so he
has bewrayed himself as weak in his prudentials: and wise Statesmen will
think, that (to use his own expressions else where, or the like,) since he
raised the Devil, he should have laid him better then he has done, both in his
first and in his third Chapter: and some will think, that since he had no
clear call to meddle with those questions, policy should have taught him either
to have forborne, or to have confuted them better; And that for his very cause,
he should be punished as an ignorant Traitor, and his pamphlet condemned to a
fire, whereof it is much more worthy, then severals that have got that
measure. But of his foolish and unfaire dealing in those particulars, we shall
speak more afterward* and shall now go on and draw some arguments for our
purpose, from what has been said.

And 1. If People at the first erection of Government and Governors, acted
rationally, it can never be supposed that they resigned and gave their
birth-privilege, and power of self-defence away, so as they might not lavvfully
stand to their own defense, in cases of necessity, when that Government of
these Governors, should either come short of giving the assistence expected in
such cases, or prove lets and impediments in their way, far less in case they
should prove their avovved and open enemies: for is it imaginable that national
men would erect such a Government, of set up such Governors, if it were told
them that such Would prove their bane, and that by appointing of them, and
proceeding in that business, they should denude themselves of that power of
self defense, which now they were in possession of, See Althus. Polit. Cap.
38. number. 32.

2. If by this constitution, they were not brutified, they cannot after the
constitution, be supposed to be in a case worse then Brutes. Therefore Since
Brutes may defend themselves against injuries, this liberty and privilege of
self defense, against manifest injuries, cannot be taken away from Rational
Creatures, by the erection of a Government. Again, if by the erection, and new
constitution, the case of the people cannot be supposed to be made worse, if it
was, lawful unto them before, to defend themselves against injuries, and to
repel violence with violence, it cannot become unlawful afterward: it is true,
it is the part of the Magistrate to defend them from injuries, and for this
end, was he set up by them, that they might be the more secure and saife, but
it he neglect his duty, they are not to forget themselves, or to think that
their hands are bound up; much less, if he himself turn an enemy unto them.

3. If the Erected Magistrates remain men, and sinful men, and men that can do
wrong and violence and injustice, can oppress innocents, destroy, pillage,
plunder, kill and persecute unjustly: Then the innocents may no less defend
themselves against their violence, injuries, oppressions, murders, etc. then
against the violence, oppressions, and injuries of others: for the wrongs and
injuries they do, are as real wrongs and injuries (and in some respect
greater) as the wrongs and injuries committed by others. Therefore the People
are still allowed to use their privilege of self defense even against them, and
their unjust violence, in cases of necessity, as well as against others

4. If it was of the People that this form of Government, and not another was
pitched upon and made choice of, no man in reason can think, that their
condition should be worse under that form, then under any other, since they
acting rationally, made choice of that, as the best and most convenient and
conduceable to their ends; But that that form should be every was as much for
their peace, saifty, welfare, and security, as any other, ought no more to
bind up their hands from necessary self defense, when urged thereunto by
inevitable necessity, then if they were free from under that form.

5. If it was of the Peoples own accord, that they associated with such of
such, without any previous determination of Nature, necessitating them
thereunto. Then it is rational to infer that their association with such,
should not be to their detriment and manifest hurt, nor should it incapacitate
them for doing that in their own defense, which, before that association and
combination, they were allowed to do. So that if the equal half, major or minor
part, should lie by, and refuse to concur with the rest in their necessary
defense, Those who desire to stand to their own defense, and repel violence
with violence, are not, in point of conscience, justly restrained or bound up.
If the equal half, or major or minor part of an army, betray the cause, or
revolt to the Enemy, the honest party will be allowed in point of Law and
Conscience and Valor, to stand to the cause, and defend themselves and their
Country to the last man, yea even though the General himself should become a
Head unto that revolting party.

6. If it was in the Peoples power to limite the time definitely or
indefinitly, how long such a form should continue, and therefore had power (as
Politicians will readily grant) to change that form, when the necessity of
their condition did require it: Sure it cannot be repugnant to Reason to say,
That the People have still a power to defend themselves from the manifest
injuries, and intolerable oppression of that form, or of these who are
exerceing in that form. If a people may lawfully change a form of Government,
when it becomes intolerably grievous, and not only not conduceing to the good
of the Commonwealth, but clearly and sensibly tending to its destruction, they
may be less (if not more) lawfully defend themselves against the manifest and
intolerable injuries thereof. Yea even in case they had by vows or engagements
so bound up their hands that they could not alter the form; it were not
rational to think that their case should therefore be irremediably the worse,
but that rather God and Nature would allow them in that case, so much the more
to make use of their primaeve privilege of self defense, because they could not
use their power of altering the form, for their security and saifty, as
otherwise they might have done.

7. If the People make Magistrates, and set them over themselves, then, though
it were yielded (which yet lawyers and politicians not a few will not grant,
see Althus. pol. cap. 38.) n. 35. where he proves it by l. nemo qui 37. de
reg. jur. l 6. solent de offic. procons. l. 3. de re. jud. novel 15. de. of.
civ. c. 1. 1.) that they had no power to depose them again in case of
maladministration, and abuseing the power to the destruction of the
Commonwealth; yet) it will undenyably follow, that the people may defend
themselves against their manifest iyranny and oppression: for, it will be
granted that a People have more power, in creating a Magistate then in making a
Minister; and it will be granted likwayes, that if the Minister; turn
heretical, and preach atheism, Mahumetanisme, or the like, the People, though
they could not formally depose him, or, through the corruption of the times,
could not get him deposed by these who had power, yet they might lawfully guard
themselves from his unsound doctirne, and defend their souls from his haeresie
by withdrawing: and if he should use violence to force them to hear him, and
acknowledge him as an orthodox teacher, they might repel violence with violence,
and peremptorily maintain the Truth.

8. If it was from the People, That such a way of conveyance of the
Magistratical power, was condescended on, so that when they pitched on this,
they might have chosen any other; Then (as Lawyers will grant) they have still
power to alter the same as necessity requires, much more then have they power
to defend themselves, against the Tyranny thereof: and if either at the first
constitution or afterward something interveened which laid such a restraint
upon them, that they could not change that manner of conveyance, then so much
the more are they allowed to defend themselves from the tyranny thereof, by
recurring, in cases of necessity, unto their primaeve privilege, and this
inward wall and bulwark ought to be the more fortified, that they want their
outter fortifications.

9. If even where the conveyance runeth in a line, the Successor cannot
pretend to more dominion over the subjects, then his Predecessors had, and the
People cannot rationally be supposed to be in a worse condition under the
Successor, then they were under his Predecessor, seeing he holds the place,
not jure haereditario; but jure legali or jure constitutionis: and therefore if
they might lawfully resist the unjust violence of his Predecessor, or of the
First in the Line; no man, in reason can deny it lawful for them to resist his
tyranny, who comes to that place by virtue of the fundamental constitution:
and no otherwise.

10. If upon pregnant considerations, and for good, laudable and necessary
ends, the People erected a civil state, and such a form of Government, and
such Governors to succeed to other in such a manner of way, as the apparent
and probable mean, for the sure, saife, speedy and most effectual way of
attaineing these ends. It were irrational to think that being disappoynted of
their expectations and frustrated of their hopes, of attaineing the desired
ends by such means, They were in an irremediable case, and had no mean left
them of attaineing these necessary ends, no not so much, as that pure product
of Nature, self-preservation, and power to repel force with force. No man will
say, but that a People are loosed from their obligation to use such means
which they formerly pitched upon for these necessary and important Ends, when i
they not only prove not useful, as means for attaineing of these ends, but
prove destructive, and stand in contra-opposition there unto; and in this case,
must be supposed, to have the same liberty to use such means as they were
allowed to use in their primeve state, that is, to join together and
associate, the best way they can, for repelling of what destroys these noble
and important Ends, and defend their Religion, Lives and Libertyes.

But it may be the Surveyer, or some for him will say. That all this is nothing
to the purpose; because, The state of our government and constitution is of a
distinct and far different nature.

Ans. As to this, (reserving what is further to be spoken on that subject unto
the next chapter, where we shall speak of the obligation of the Sovereign unto
the People) these things seem clear and undeniable. 1. That before Fergus the
first, was chosen by the People, to be their King and Chiftane, there were a
people living in Scotland, manageing their own matters, the best way they
could. 2. While they were in this condition, we hear on none among them,
however possibly excelling others in wealth, power, wisdom and such like
enduements, that took upon them the Soveraignity, otherwise Fergus had not
been the first King. 3. When they thought of sending for Fergus, and of making
him King, they were not acted as beasts, but went rationally to work,
considering their present hazard from their adversaries, and the advantage they
would have by setting such over themselves, and erecting a stablished policy.
4. After the constitution and erection of the Kingdom, they remained rational
creatures, sensible of injuries done unto them, whether by their Kings or
others, as after experience manifested. 5. Nor did their Kings, after their
election, become Angels, or Creatures above their reach, but for
maladministration, oppression or tyranny, were made to know they were Men, as
subject to erring and doing wrong, so to examination, trial, and condign
punishment for their injuries done to the Commonwealth. 6. When they
condescended upon Monarchy, though, as matters then stood, they saw it most for
their advantage to have a King; yet none will say, but they might,
notvvithstanding of that exigent, have chosen an Aristocracy for a standing
form of government. 7. When they compacted themselves into a distinct body,
and separated both from the Picts and from the Britones, they might, had they
seen it for their advantage, either joined with the Picts or Britones, and
made one firm Commonwealth with them; or have divided themselves into two
or more distinct Bodies, and distinct Republiks, as they had seen it convenient:
No previous necessity, save that they savv if for their only advantage to do as
they did, constraining them to the one more then to the other. 8. When they
made choice of a King, they might, if they had seen it good, prescribed the
time how long that Government should have endured, whether until the death of
Fergus, or how long there after. 9. When they made choice of Fergus, who then
was in Irland, and sent for him, they might (without any injury done to any
man) have chosen any other, they had thought most for their advantage; and
before they made choice of him, He could challenge no power or authority, over
them, nor could He be accounted their King; and when they made choice of him
and made him their King, then, and not till then, was he their King. 10. It was
in their power to have named* ergus without his successors by line, and so
have reserved power to themselves, to choose of new another after his death:
and though they did include his successors by line; yet their after practice
declared, that they had liberty to choose the fittest of the family, when the
nearest in the line, was not judged fit for government, which custom continued
above a Thousand years, till the days of Kenneth the third: 11. And, when it
afterward came to a lineal constant succession, The sone had no right but by
the constitution condescended on, in the days of this Kenneth. 12. That in all
these resolutions and constitutions they levelled at nothing, but their own
good and saifty is body and soul, is beyond contradiction. And finally, their
after practices did declare that they looked not upon themselves, as rendered
incapable by all those forementioned resolutions, to defend themselves against
manifest and unjust violence, even of the King and his followers; though this
Surveyer Page 78. accounts these nothing but the i^ surrection of Nobles
against the Kings, and violent oppressions of such of them, as have been
flagitious and tyrannous. Yet they were clear instances of the peoples
reserving power to themselves, notwithstanding of the constitution, to defend
their libertyes and lives, from oppression and tyranny of flagitious and
tyrannous Kings, abusing their power and subverting the ends of governments,
and destroying what they were bound to maintain and defend.

CAP. VI.
Of the Covenant betwixt King and People. Our Arguments hence deduced.
IT is no great wonder to see this Surveyer laboring, to free the King from
any covenant-obligation unto his Subjects; when he and his party have
proclaimed him exempted from his Covenant-obligation unto God: and since the
have put both consciences and wit upon the rack, to find out some plausible
grounds of evasion, that the King may be free from the Covenant, which he swore
with hands lifted up to the Most High God oftener then once; with which,
however they may satisfy such as love licentiousness, and to live above God's
Law, as well as man's; yet God will not be so deceived, let men dream what they
will; it should be no matter of astonishment to us, to see them useing shifts
whereby to bring the King from under any Covenant tie unto his Subjects: But it
might seem strange to us (if we knew not the Men) that when lawyers and
politicians tell us, that the King, is absolutely bound unto his Subjects, and
the People, obliged unto the King condionally, see Hoenonius, disp. polit. 2.
and Iunius Brutus vindiciae contra Tyrannos quaest. 3. and Althus. pol. c. 20.
n. 3. 21. and cap. 38. n. 30. They on the contrary should aver, that the
people were absolutely bound unto the King, and the King not only not tied
conditionally, but not at all, unto the People.

But, from what was said in the preceding chapter, it will clearly follow, That
when a people do institute a Government, and do commit the Supreme Managment
of affairs unto one or more, They do it upon certane terms and conditions,
which conditions, politicians ordinarily call fundamental laws, others think
that name not proper enough, but whether we call them so, or call them terms
and conditions of the constitution of compact, it is all one thing. That there
are certane terms and conditions on which the Sovereign is chosen, is clear
from these grounds. 1. The man who is made Sovereign by the People, can
pretend no right to the Soveraignity, (as was showed before) until he be named
and chosen by the People. And this constituting of him Sovereign, must be by
compact and contract betwixt him and them; for such mutual relations, as are
betwixt Prince and People, can arise from no other act then a compact, unless
they say, it arises from a free donation; but then they must grant that the
whole power comes from the People, and was theirs before and might be given
out by them, or not, as they thought fit; for no law can constrain a man to
give a gift: and further, if it was from them by free gift, the very nature and
end of that Donation puts it beyond debate that it was upon some valueable
consideration, of which when frustrated, they might recall their donation; and
so still it will be, a virtual compact. But now it being by a real comapct and
formal, either explicit or implicit, that this man and not that man is made
Sovereign, There must be some conditions on which this mutual compact
stands: for a compact cannot be without conditions. 2. We show that in this
Act of constituting a Government ad Governors, the People acted rationally;
and carried themselves in this business, not as irrational brutes, but as
rational men; and if so, how is it imaginable that they would set any over
them with an illi mited power, without any terms and conditions to be
condescended unto by him? Would rational men, acting deliberatly about a matter
of such moment and consequence, not to themselves alone, but to their posterity
in after ages, set a Sovereign over them, without any limitations,
conditions, or restrictions, so as they might rob, spoil, plunder murder,
deflore, do acts of injustice and oppression, and act tyranny as they pleased?
3. We show that in this matter; the People had certane* real, good and
necessary Ends before them: now, can it enter into the heart of any man to
think, that Rational men acting rationally, and laying down ways for
attaineing good and necessary Ends, would set a Prince over themselves, without
any conditions or restrictions; since otherwise they could not rationally
expect, that the mean which they had condescended upon, could ever attain the
End? For every one of them might saifly have judged of the Prince by
themselves, and seeing they might have found in themselves, an inclination to
domineer, to oppress and tyrannize over others, they might rationally have
concluded that the Prince was, and would be but a Man of the same passions and
infirmities with themselves, and so as ready, if not more, to deborde and to do
wrong: and therefore unless they had made him Sovereign upon terms and
conditions, they could not have expected that their chooseing of him, could
have been a mean fitted and accommodated for attaining the Ends proposed: A
Sovereign left at liberty to tyrannyze, to oppress and to destroy the
Subject, is no fit mean to procure their welfare, either in soul or body, or
to set forward the glory of God. 4. We show that their condition after the
constitution, was not to be worse then it was before the constitution. But if
they had set up a Sovereign without any conditions, their condition could not
but be worse; and rational men could not but for see that their condition
would, of necessity, be worse; for, to set up a Sovereign without conditions,
is to set up a Tyrant since if they do not limite him to terms and conditions,
they give him leave to Rule as he lists, and his will must be to them for a
law; and what is that but to set up a Tyrant; and if a Tyrant be set up over a
People, shall not their condition in that case, be worse then when they were at
liberty to manage, their own matters, as they could best?

Moreover this may be cleared from other reasons, as 1. In all other relations,
which arise from mutual consent, and compact, there are always, terms and
conditions on which the contract or compact is concluded: as in the contract
betwixt Man and Wife, Master and Servant, Tutor and Pupil, Master and Scholar,
and the like, Here always are presupposed terms and conditions, on which the
compact, the only fundation of these relations, is founded: for, no Man
marryeth a wife, but upon condition, she carry as a dutyfull wife, and no woman
maryeth a Husband but upon the like terms. So a Master indenteth with his
Servant, and his Servant binds himself to him, upon terms. The Tutor, is
under obligations to his Pupil, and if he break such or such conditions, he
loses his benefit, and moreover is answerable as law will. So is the Master
obliged to perform such and such conditions unto his Scholar, So are there
conditions betwixt the Lord and his Vassals, and betwixt Pastor and People. 2.
This will be clear from the Nature of that power and authority, which the
Sovereign has over the Subjects, of which afterward. 3. It is against Nature,
to set up any Tyrant, or one who is free from all conditions; for, that were,
upon the matter, to set up a Waster, an Enemy to the Commonwealth, a bloody
Tiger or Lion, to destroy all: see Althus. Pol c. 19. n, 33. 35. 36. 37. 4. To
imagine a King free of conditions unto his Subjects is to put them in among
bona fortunae: and to say, they are as the King's gold, his sheep, his oxen,
his lands and revenues, unto which, he stands no way obliged. 5. If a People
should set a Sovereign over them, without conditions, they should sin against
the Law of God, which will have such and such duties performed by them, who
are Sovereigns; and they, by setting up Sovereigns without these
limitations, should say* such and such shall be our Sovereigns, contrare to
the limitations of God's Law. 6. This is confirmed by the practice of all
Nations, where a free People set up Sovereigns: It is always upon terms and
conditions. They Persians (as Xenophon lib. 8. Cyri Paed. tell us) did thus
Covenante with Cyrus, that he should send aid to them, out of his own
Country, if any should war against them, or violate their laws; and they
again did promise, that they should help him, if any would not obey him,
defending his Country; and therefore Xenophon calls this contract or compact
(...). So the Spartan King (as the same Xenophon tells us, de Rep. Laced:) did
every Month Renew their oath unto the Ephori, and promised to govern them
according to the laws of the land, and the Ephori upon the other hand,
promised to Establish the Kingdom in their hands. We read of a compact betwixt
Romulus, and the people of Rome Dionis. Halicarn. Lib. 1. betwixt the Senate
and the Caesar's Idem Lib. 2. It is notoure enough that the Emperor when he is
chosen, agrieth unto terms and conditions; and also the King of Poland: and
historyes tells us, what conditions are made betwixt King and People, at the
coronation of Kings in England, France, Boheme, Spain, Portugal, Sweden
Denmark, etc. 7. The practice of our own Kingdom, does sufficiently confirm
this, of which more, when we consider what this Surveyer says to the
contrary. 8. Lawyers, Politicians and Divines tell us, that there are such
conditions condescended on in all free Republics. Hoenonius Disp. Pol. 2.
These. 4. tells us that the Subjects do stipulate from the Magistrates, whether
they will rule so as they may lead a peacable and quiet life under them, and
These. 5. that the Magistrates do absolutely promise; and the Subjects upon
condition promise what is their duty. So Althusius cap. 38. Polit. n. 31. and
cap. 19. n. 15. 23. 29. and Timplerus Polit. Lib. 2. Cap. 1. Quest. 5. proves
that there is a mutual obligation betwixt Magistrates and Subjects. See
likewise Gerhard de Magistratu, These. 94. Page 726. Where he proves that it is
no new thing, That Magistrates and Subjects do Covenante with each other.

Finally, This is cleared, from some Scripture instances, as first The
Covenant, which David made with the Tribes of Israel, 2 Samuel 5. 3. 1 Chronicles. 11.
3. So all the elders of Israel came to the King to Hebron, and King David made
a league with them in Hebron before the Lord, and they anointed David King over
Israel. Sanches on the place thinks, He promised to rule them according to
the law Deuteronomy. 17 15. and that some other things were contained in that
Covenant, which did relate to the present state of a affairs, as concerning
the war with their near and insolent enemies, concerning an act of oblivion,
and other things, which they could think upon, in that troublesome state of
affairs: and upon the other hand the People promised fidelity and obedience,
and what else is required in well constituted Commonwealths; and that this
Covenant was sealed by oath of both parties] Cornel a Lap: calls it a mutual
promise, wherein David Covenanted to govern the Kingdom faithfully, according
to the law of God Leut. 17. 16. etc. and. Israel, on the other hand, promised
to be obedient and faithful to him: The Surveyer tries many shifts to make
this, no mutual Covenant, or conditional Covenant Page 94. 95. He cannot deny
but there was a Covenant here agreed upon, betwixt David and these Tribes of
Israel. But he says [the Quaestion is, what was the nature, the matter and
import of that Covenant, The Scripture says not it was such a Covenant (as
these men would have it) I shall rule you rightly, if you obey medutifully,
otherwise not (upon the King's part) and (upon the peoples part) we shall obey
you and be subject to you, if ye rule us rightly, otherwise we will not, but
use our coactive power upon you, to dethrone, and destroy you, and punish you.]
Ans. If it be granted that here was a mutual contract, wherein the King
accepted of conditions and obliged himself thereunto, it is enough for our
present purpose, (and the Dutch Annotators on 2 Samuel 5. 3. say hereby they were
bound on both sides by oath, to perform their duties to other) for we are not
yet speaking of the nature and import of such Covenants, and what right or
power the party keeping, has over the party failing. 2. The Text does not tell
us what was the particular matter of this Covenant, but from the Text, we may
clearly see, that this was a conditional Covenant, a Covenant wherein the King
promised such and such things, as satisfied them, and induced them to accept of
him as King, and anoint him: so that if the terms had not pleased them, they
would not have accepted of him as King, If the King had said, I will be an
Absolute Prince to account you still mine Enemies, and kill such of you, as I
will, and keep a live such of you as I will, and so play the Tyrant, be like he
had got the answer that Rehoboam got To your tents ^ Israel: What portion
have we in David? 3. How can he prove, That they did not mind to offer
themselves to David upon such terms, [ They (says he Page 95) recognose, his
right of reigning over them is of the Lord, and that he was not subjecte to be
removed by them, for they say The Lord said to thee, thou shall feed my people
Israel, and thou shall be Ruler over them, and it is added Therefore they came,
etc.] Ans: 1. All this will not prove that this Covenant was not conditional,
or that David did not oblige himself to such and such conditions; for if these
reasons have any force, they will as well say, that they should not have made a
Covenant with him it all, but submitted without Covenant: and they knew his
right by promise to the throne, before this, and yet for all that, they refused
to come till now, and now when they come, David must make a Covenant with them.
2. The same Tribes of Israel did recognosce Rehoboam's right to reign; for
they came to Shechem to make him King* 1 King. 12. 1. 2. Chron. 10. v. 1. and
yet when Reh^boam would not agree unto the terms proposed, They refused to
acknowledge him King. 3. That 1 Chronicles. 11. 3. Therefore came is but the same
with So came, 2 Samuel 5. 3. and it may be as well rendered, also or and came,
for in the Original it is in both places (...) and it is there told, that also
the Elders of Israel came, who were not mentioned before. 4. Gods promise to
David, gave him no power to play the Tyrant, nor was it to be fulfilled but
such a way, God's purposes concerning the End includes the Means with the
End, and his purpose or promise was not that David should obtain the throne
without the Peoples consent, or that the People was obliged to submit unto him
notwithstanding he should refuse to Covenant with them, or promise to Rule them
in righteousness, and not to play the Tyrant over them: and hence it appears
that it is not false that the People gave the Kingdom to David conditionally
(as he says Page 101.) for, if He say these promises or purposes of God, did
lay obligations of the People to accept Such upon any terms, he cannot
condemn the Ten Trybes for accepting of Jeroboam, as he does elsewhere! 5. As
for their coactive superiority over him, we speak not of it now, it not being
our present business, but sure his reasons will not validely conclude the
contrair: for if such a promise or purpose of God, gave David such a right, as
that in no case, suppose he had turned the greatest Tyrant imaginable, and had
sold the Land of Canaan unto the Uncircumcised, or done some such thing; the
Elders of Israel had had no coercive power to have with-stood him, and
dethroned him, then they might not now have refused to have submitted unto him:
And by the same reason, The elders of Israel might not have refused to have
submitted to Iero^oam who also had a promise, which I know he will not grant.
But it is enough to our present purpose, if it be granted that David agreed
with them upon terms. This he cannot get well denied, but says. [ All the
Covenant that can be supposed here, is upon the peoples part, an engagement to
humble subjection and homage; and upon the Kings part, a Covenant of indemnity
for former oppositions to him, wherein they had need to be comfortably
secured.] Ans. If it was such a Covenant, then it secured all the People of
Israel, and their Elders with them, and David was bound to have kept it, and
did keep it. He did not then execute thereafter some of them upon scafsolds,
and set up their heads upon poles, as Traitors. 2. We find nothing in the
Text, of their acknowledging a crime done, so as they needed an act of
indemnity: it is like David in a piece of holy policy, meet for that time, to
gather together the scattered people of God, (to use the Surveyer's words, Page
94.) Would have been content to have passed an act of oblivion, as less
irritateing, then an act of indemnity. 3. If they were now coming to be his
Subjects who were not so before, but were under another King (as he says
himself Page 94.) what necessity was there, either for an act of indemnity or
yet an act of oblivion? Ay [ but it was fit (says he ibid to give them
security, touching his good mind toward them, they having so long stood it
out, in arms against him.] Ans. But was there no more requisite to secure them
touching his good mind toward them, and his willingness to accept of them as
subjects, who before were enemies, except this act of indemnity? Since they
were in open hostility one against another, and if upon this ground, the
Covenant on David's part was of indemnity, why should it not be also a
Covenant of indemnity on their part; seeing, as he confessed, they were not his
subjects before, but under another King? But now, when they come to be
subjects who were not so before, and engage to humble subjection, and homage,
must not David in this Covenant engadge to something corresponding to this? we
shall not repugne ( says he) if it be called a Covenant both of protection
and right ruleing them.] Answ. That is all I am seeking, to have David here
obliged by Covenant, unto his Subjects, to such and such terms, as to Protect
and Rule them a right. Ay but he adds [ Yet so, as not subjecting himself to
their censures, or co-action, or that they should be his subjects only upon
that condition, being otherwise free to fall upon him.] Answ. This is not to
our present business. But yet how can he prove this? Is it enough to say so?
Will his adversary take that for an answer? Is there not here a mutual
Convenant, wherein each party is bound to other? Are not the terms
condescended upon? And is it not granted by all, that in mutual Covenants the
observer has a jus against the breakers? But says he [ a Covenant may be to
mutual duties, and yet on neither side conditional, but absolute, eath party
obligeing themselves to their own duty absolutely, but not on condition that
the other party do their duty.] Ans. Then it seems Israel was bound to David,
whether he would be a King to them or not; Yea even though he would sell them
to morrow to the Philistines for slaves and bond men for ever, and David was
bound to Protect and Rule them a right, whether they would be Subjects or not.
2. How can he prove that this was such a Covenant? 3. Yea, how can he prove
that there is any such Covenant among men; or how can he explain such a
Covenant? [As if ( says he) a man bind himself by oath, to give me one
hundereth pounds, and I bind my self again by oath to him, to give him one
hundereth pounds, without conditional provision that he pay me the money he
promised me; albeit he should fail in his oath, and not pay me; yet must not I
fail in mine but must pay him: because my oath is separate from his and
independent upon it, and has a separate obligation absolute, which no faileing
of the other party to me, can loose] Answ. It is true manus manum fricat, and
if this Surveyer give to one a hundereth pounds. He will know it is for an
hundereth pounds again, or something better: and I wish he should think
himself as well bound by his oath, to pay the thing, he promised to God
absolutely, as he thinks he is bound to pay to man what he had promised
absolutely. But to our business, what sort of mutual Covenants can those be,
which he here speaks of? We hear to Pactions or Covenants where there are
promises without a stipulation, but of a Covenant or Paction betwixt two,
concerning mutual duties to be performed by each to other, wherein there is no
stipulation, or which is no conditional Covenant, I have not yet heard. 2.
Where hear we that such a transaction (if it can have that name) wherein one
person promises absolutely to another to give him such or such a sum of
money; and that other person again promises absolutely to give to the first
another sum, is called a Covenant? 3. Lawyers tell us that even Promissiones,
promises, if complete and not mere Policitations, will give a jus a right unto
the person, to whom they are made to call for the performance, and sue the
promiser at Law: And if this be granted (as it cannot be denied) he will lose
his cause: For when the question comes betwixt the Magistrate and the
Subjects, it is the same case, as when the question comes betwixt two distinct
Nations: For as there is not a Superior Judge over both Nations to determine
the controversy; so nor is there a Superior ordinary Judge to decide the
question that falls out betwixt King and Subjects: And therefore, as the
sword must determine it, in the one case, so in the other. 4. But how shall he
evince that the Covenant, betwixt King and People is not a reciprocal contract
of things to be done by each to other upon conditions? It is true, he tells us
that subjection is not promised to Kings conditionally, but absolutely; but in
so saying, he does only beg the question. A better Politician then he,
Althusius Polit. c. 19. number. 6, 7. calls it a mutual compact betwixt Prince
and People upon certain conditions, and calls it Contractum mandati, and he
tells us, that in this contract the Prince is a Mandataruis, and his obligation
preceedeth as the obligation of the Mandatarius and promiser, uses to do, and
then follows the obligation of the People secundum naturam mandati, whereby
they promise obedience and fidelity to him governing the Commonwealth according
to the conditions prescribed.

Another Scripture instance is 2 King. 11: v. 17. 2 Chronicles. 23: v. 3. 16. where
Iehojadah made a Covenant betwixt the King and the People, which (as the
English Annotators and the Dutch also on the place say) was a civil Covenant
betwixt them, viz. That the King should govern then well, They should obey him
in the Lord. Peter Martyr, also says that [not only King and People
covenanted with God; but the King also with the People; and the People with the
King] and thereafter that [the King was bound to rule the People according to
the Laws, and equity, Secundum Iura and Leges, and the People promised to obey
him.] [ Zanches more fully tells us, there was a Covenant betwixt the King and
the People, as uses to be betwixt the Prince and Commonwealths: The Prince
undertaketh to defend the Kingdom, Laws, Equity, and to be a keeper and
defender of the Country, and of Religion: And upon the other hand, People
promise obedience, and fidelity and such expenses, as are necessary for keeping
up the Majesty of the Prince, etc.] Now what says our Surveyer to this? He
tells us Page 96. That it was also made upon an extraordinary occasion; and
extraordinaryes cannot sound ordinary rules] Answ. How does he prove that it
was merely upon the extraordinarynesse of the occasion that this Covenant was
made? he might as well say that the crowning of him, and giving him the
testimony, and making him King, and making a Covenant betwixt the Lord and the
King, were extraordinary, and so could not found ordinary rules: yea and that
it was extraordinary for the People to swear allegiance unto him. But he has
two things remarkable to his purpose as [ 1. That he is crowned and made King
before the Covenant is made, which crosses the antimonarchists, who assert,
the King cannot be made King, until he make the Covenant with the People, and
that he gets the crown and royal authority covenant wise, and conditionally]
Answ. Antimonarchists properly so called, are against all Monarchs limited or
absolute, or does he account them all antimonarchists who say that the King is
a limited Magistrate? then we know what to think of the Monarchists and
Royalists, of him and his party. 2. He knows himself that the series or order
of the relation of a complex business, is not always just according to the
series of the things done; but be it so, this makes for us in the former
instance of David's Covenanting with Israel, Which is mentioned, before their
making of him King. 3. But suppose the King had refused to enter into Covenant
with the Lord, or with the People (for mention is made of both Covenants after
his Coronation) might they not for all their solemnities in crowning of him,
have refused to have ownned him, as King? 4. But to put the matter beyond all
debate, we find, compareing the two places together, That beside the Covenant
betwixt Iehojadah, and the Rulers of Hundereds etc. mentioned 2. King. 11. 4,
and 2 Chronicles. 23. 1. which was rather a Covenant betwixt themselves, to depose
Athalia, and to set up joash; to put down Idolatry, and to set up the true
worshipe of God, (as the English annotations and the Dutch say) then a Covenant
of fidelity or allegiance to the King, as he would have it, we find 2 Chronicles.
23. 3. a Covenant made betwixt the Congregation and the King, and this was,
before he was crowned or made King, which Covenant (as the English annotators
say) [was a mutual stipulation, betwixt the King, and Them, That the King
should maintain the true worshipe of God, the peace of the Kingdom, and
privilege of the subjects; and that the People should maintain the King, and
yield unto him his due.] The next thing he says is [That it is not told us
what the tenor of this covenant is, Dioda^ seems to say that Iehojadah made
them swear allegiance and fidelity to the King but how shall it be cleared
that it was conditional, and with a reserve of coactive, and punitive power
over him?] Answ. Of this coactive power over Kings, we are not now speaking,
and he but plays the fool to start such questions without ground. 2. That it
was a conditional Covenant, the scope of the place clears: for, if they had
not expected tha^ their condition had been better under his reign then under
Athaliah, be like they had never resolved to have ventured their lives, and
estates for him: and if the Covenant had not been conditional, they could have
had no rational expectation of the bettering of their condition from the young
King, Again, if it was not a conditional Covenant. The King could with no more
certainty have expected their dutyful obedience, then They his faithful
government. 3. It is true, the matter and tenor of the Covenant is not
expressed; but the nature of the act, does abundantly clear what it was, and
that it was such as the English annotators have expressed. 4. If Diodat say it
was nothing else, but the Peoples swearing allegiance, he speaks without
ground, for it was a mutual Covenant, a Covenant betwixt King and People, But
says he, suppose [ all the Kings of Judah made such covenants with the People,
yet will any judicious man force the Particular customs of that Nation on all
Nations? that might be best for that Nation, that was not simply best; their
customs without a law of God bearing a standing reason, cannot be obligatory
on others, lest we judaize too much] Answ. 1. We are not now pressing their
practice as our only warrant; but by their practice, we prove the lawfulness
of the King's being brought under conditions, and obligations to the people;
which Politicians Lawyers, and Divines use to do. 2. He must show why such a
practice was best to them, and not also to other nations. 3. We Judaize not
more in this, then in crowning and making of Kings (though I grant they do, who
use the ceremony of anointing with oil.) 4. We have the Law of Nature, which
is the law of God, bearing a standing reason of this* as was showed above. 5.
Yea that law of God mentioned Deuteronomy. 17. 15. etc. Limiting the Prince, shovveth
that it was the Peoples duty (unto whom that is spoken) when they were to set a
King over themselves, to provide for these conditions: so that as they might
not de jure set a stranger over them, neither might they set any over them, who
would not engage to keep the conditions which they were to required of him v.
16. 17. 18. 19. and these Conditions of the King being held forth unto them,
says that they were empowered to stipulate such of the King, whom they were to
create: and that points forth a Covenant to be made betwixt them and their
King, and power also in them to restrain the King from transgessing these
conditions as Josephus tells Ant. Lib. 4. cap. 14. Si autem fuerit alias, etc.
^. e. [ But if otherwise a desire of a King shall adhere unto you, let him be
of your stock, let him make much of Justice and other virtues, and let him know
that there is most wisdom in the laws and in God: let him do nothing without
the advice of the High priest, and Elders: neither let him assume to himself
many wives, nor seek after abundance of riches nor horses with the pleanty of
which things, he may wax proud and despise the laws; but lest he have an
earnest study to be more mighty then is convenient for your profit,
Prohibeatur(says the copy at Paris) obstandum est (says another) ne
potentior fiat quam rebus vestris expedit. ^. e. he is to be incapicat or
resisted in case he should do so. But then he tells us that the constant
practice of the prophets and people of God speaks clearly that they never had
such thoughts etc.] Ans. Though (as I said) it does not concern us to
vindicate such a liberty in the People, as by virtue of this Covenant, to fall
with violence on their Kings; our purpose being only to vindicate a liberty in
the People to defend themselves against unjust violence; yet he does but
vveakly maintain the King's head by this; for he said himself just now, that
none with Reason could force the particular customs of that Nation on other
Nations; and with more reason it may be said, that none can force the
Omissions or non-practices of that Nation, as binding to others. But 2. We
know the Ten tribes rejected Rehoboam and we find no Prophets ever
condemning them in this, they never suggested that their obligation to
subjection unto their Supreme Magistrate or King, was absolute: had this been
such a sin as he allegeth, no doubt (to use his own words) God's Prophets
would plainly and dovvnright have told them of it, without circumlocutions;
but this they never did. Either that was no sin, or the Prophets were not
faithful in reproving it. Now let him answer his own argument if he can,
and this he must do, or else confess he is an advocate for the King, vvorth no
wages. 3. We find that the Prophets were sent of God, to stir up Subjects
against their wicked and tyrannous Kings: as a Prophet was sent to anoint
Iehu to go against his Master, 2 King. 9. [When at first ( says he) that
people sought a King from Samuel, they resolved not to take him conditionally,
si been regnaverit, but with all the faults that might follovv him, etc.] Ans.
It is very like that their importunity made them neglect their duty, in making
any express Covenant, or in condescending upon express conditions; but he
shall never prove that they did right in this; far less shall he make this
example binding unto others; and least of all shall he hence conclude that
there was not a tacit and virtual compact, and that Saul was under no terms.
2. Notwithstanding of what he says, we find that the People did actually
resist and oppose him, in rescueing Jonathan, and that David defended himself
with armed men against him, and his fury, and unjust violence, and this is
enoughe to our purpose.

As for these words Eccles. 8. 2. I Counsel thee to keep the Kings
commandment, and that in regaird of the oath of God, because they are
variously rendered, and by some otherwise then by us, as by Iunius (to which
the dutch come near) praestitutum Regis observa, sed pro ratione juramenti Dei.
i. e. Obey the Kings command, but according as your oath to God will permit,
Mercerus rendereth them thus. It is my pairt to observe the Kings command and
to have respect unto the oath of God, meum est observare praeceptum Regis, and
rationem habere juramenti Dei. We shall not much labor to press this Covenant
out of them: But if the Surveyer, will hold closse to our translation, and fish
out from thence the oath of allegaince, we must then say that they will also,
clearly suppose on oath of the King unto the People, by which he is bound to
them as well as they are bound to him. He grants that ordinarily among the
people, there were not oaths of fidelity and obedience given to their Kings,
and where ever we find that the people swore an oath or Covenant to the King,
there we find that the king swore and Covenanted to them: and so the Covenant
being mutual, he was bound unto conditions as well as they were, and They no
more then He. And if Their chooseing and setting up of a King, did virtually
include their engagement to him; so did His accepting of the place virtually
lay bonds on him, to acquiesce unto the necessare conditions, and make him
obliged to perform these necessary and indispensable conditions, which is all
desire now.

We see some thing more explicit for this, Judge. 11. ver. 2, 7, 8, 11, 12, 13.
Where there passed conditions betwixt Iephthah and the People: See Althus.
Polit. Cap. 19. number. 20.

Thus we have cleared. 1. That lawful Magistrates are admitted to their Thrones
conditionally, upon such and such terms. And from what we have said, it is
also clear, 2. That the Prince accepting of the Crown does either explicitly
or implicitly promise to fulfill these conditions; because the People have made
choice of him as a fit mean to procure those Ends which they did design: But
if he should not be engaged to prosecute, so far as lies in his power, those
Ends, why did they make choice of him? Or how could they expect that he should
prove a fit mean for these Ends? Or how can we think that People acting
rationally, would be so far dementat as to choice a mean, which they had no
more rational ground to expect, would prove a mean for attaining these
necessary Ends: then the very bane of these good and necessary Ends which they
proposed unto themselves. The Covenants, which we have now spoken of do clear
this also. 3. It is clear likewise from what has been said, That the
Sovereign, in these Compacts and Covenants with his People, is not only bound
unto God, to perform what he has promised, but also unto his Subjects: For 1.
As was said, He still remains a sociable creature, and under the Laws of God
and Nature, and therefore is not above what transactions or compacts he makes
with any, whether equals or inferiors. 2. If by virtue of these Compacts he
were not obliged unto his Subjects, neither should they be obliged unto him by
these compacts, seeing in erecting the constitution, and condescending upon
these terms, He and They are equal, according to that, Contractus non ^netur
nisi inter aequales. 3. The People in setting up a King should not act
rationally, if the King as King were not bound to stand to his conditions, and
really obliged unto them. Could we imagine that Men in their wits, would
Covenant with a Man, to make him King, on such and such terms, it after he
were made King, he were no more obliged unto them, then if there had been no
compact with him? 4. How could they think of attaineing those Ends, which they
proposed, if he were not bound unto them, to perform these conditions, which
they though necessary to limite him unto for the better and more sure,
attaineing these Ends? 5. This compact or Covenant being mutual, concerning
conditions to be mutually performed, sure, each party must be formally obliged
to other. 6. If this be denied, it must be asserted, that a Sovereign can do
no wrong or injury unto his Subjects, can borrow no money from them, can not
be engaged by Covenant, Promise, of Bond unto them, which were most ridiculous,
and a doctrine as much tending to the real destruction of Monarchs and
Sovereigns, as any else: for if this hold good, Subjects might never think
themselves secure: And moreover that ordinance, could never be an ordinance of
God, seeing thereby People could never expect the least rational ground of
security for their lives, and what they have.

But we need not stand on this, seeing our Surveyer perceiving well enough, what
a groundless and irrational assertion this of the Royalists is, thinks best
to strick in with Lex Rex and grant Page 100. [That where a Covenant is made
between a King and a People, the Covenant on the Kings part, binds him, not
only to God, in relation to the People, as the object of this duty, but does
bind him to the People formally.] 4. It is also clear and undeniable, that in
Kingdoms which are commonly called haereditary, the Son is obliged to perform
the same conditions which his father was obliged to perfome) for as the law
says. Conditionalis obligatio transit ad haeredes L. si quis D. de Verborum
obligatione. Rational People, condescending rationally upon the constitution,
did certanely pitch upon that way of conveyance of the Soveraignity, that might
best secure them, as to their Ends, and if none had been obliged unto the
conditions agreed upon, but the first in the line, they had not rationally
secured these Ends. 5. It is no less clear, That when the Sovereign does not
perform the Principal, maine, and most Necessary Conditions condescended and
agreed upon, de jure he falls from his Soveraignity. This all will grant, as
flowing natively from the nature of a compact: for, qui non praestat officium
promissum, cadit beneficio hac lege dato. He who does not preforme the
conditions agreed upon, has no right to the benefit granted upon condition of
performance of these conditions. I do not here say that every breach, or
violation does degrade him de jure; but that a violation of all, or of the
maine, most necessary, and principally intended conditions, does. 6. Lawyers
grant that every conditional promise gives a right to the party to whom the
promise is made, to pursue for the performance: and this is the nature of all
Mutual compacts. And therefore by virtue of this mutual compact, the Subjects,
have jus against the King, a Right in law to pursue him for performance. The
worthy author of Lex Rex told us Page 97. [ That even the Covenant between God
and Man is so mutual I will be your God, and ye shall be my people, that if
the people break the Covenant, God is loosed from his part of the Covenant,
Zach. 11. 10. and 2 The Covenant gives to the believer a sort of action of
law, and jus quoddam to plead with God in regard of his fidelity to stand to
that Covenant, that binds him by reason of his fidelity, Esa. 43. 26. and 63.
16. Dan 9. 4. 5,] and hence inferred [ That far more a Covenant gives ground
of a civil action or claim to a People, and the free Estates, against a King]
But says the Surveyer Page 101. [It had been better said, That upon this
ground they might humbly plead with him, supplicate and reason with him, as
God's deputy bearing the impresse of his Soveraignity and Majesty on earth: But
as God cannot otherwise be pleaded with, upon account of his promise (wherein
he is bound not so much to us as to his own fidelity, to evidence it, reddit
ille debita nulli debens) and cannot be pleaded with by force or violence: So
his deputyes on earth, on whom under himself, he has stamped inviolable
Majesty, whatever they be, are not to be pleaded with by strong hand and
force.] Answ. If he had showed. 1. That Migistrates could not miscarry. 2. That
Subjects had no hand in making these conditions in the Covenant betwixt Them
and the King. 3. Nor any hand in setting up the King and conferring that
benefit upon him, on such and such conditions, then his inference had had some
color: but now has it none. 2. Inferior Magistrates are God's deputyes as
well as the Superior, and yet we find no impresse of Majesty or Soveraignity
on them, but they may be opposed when doing injury. 3. This is a large
assertion, which I much doubt if any Royalist will defend That the Supreme
Magistrates whatever they be, can in no case be pleaded with by strong hand
and force. Sure we heard Cap. 2. some concessions smelling otherwise. 4.
Himself will grant that notvvithstanding of all his Majesty and Soveraignity,
a foreign Prince may resist him by force, and plead his right with a strong
hand, how does he then save his Majesty inviolable? [ But (says he Page: 102.)
who will judge it more reason, that these who are plaintifes, shall be judges
of the party they compleane of, more then the party or Prince, judge to them?
Is not this a perversion of all judgment, that in one and the same body
politic, the accuser and judge shall be co incident, in the same person or
persons.] Ans. This makes as much against the king, as against us; for by this
reason the King has no jus over the People, more then they over him, and can
no more plead his cause, then they can: for himself cannot be judge and
plaintiff both: and if this be the perversion of all judgment, we have seen
enough of it, where the King has been both judge and party pursuer by his
advocate. But let him answer this himself, and he will help us to answer
also. Again he says in that same Page? [Though it be true, that all
Covenants and contracts amongst men, embodyed in a society, brings each of the
contracters under a law claim, in case of failing (coram judice proprio)
before his own and competent judge: yet it is not true, That any contract,
betwixt man and man, in one and the same society, gives the party keeping
contract, co-active power over the party breaking.] Answ. He is but a raw
lawyer that says so, for if one Man set a piece of land to another, for so
many years, for so much yearly, and the other be bound at the expireing of
these years, to remove without process of law, The party setter has by
contract a coactive power, and may use Major vis and thrust him out with the
broad svvord, without further action of law. But (says he Page 103.) [There
is no judge over all Magistrates, nor the Supreme Magistrate, before whom a
complaineing people can plead wrong done to them. This complainte lies before
God only to take order with it.] Answ. When Arnisaeus objected that, The worthy
and Learned author of Lex Rex answered, [That the consequence was not
necessary, no more then when the King of Judah and the King of Israel make a
covenant to perform mutual duties one to another, it is necessary, there
should be a King and superior Ruler above both who should compel each one to
do a duty to his fellow: King and People are each of them above and below
others, in diverse respects.] But in comes this Surveyer Page 100. and tells
us, there is a great difference [God having allowed lawful wars, allows seeking
of reparation, or repelling of wrongs done by one Nation to another, by force
of the sword, when no rational means can bring the doers of the wrong to do
right, and there being no other remedy, he himself, the Lord of hosts, and God
of armies, sits judge and moderator in that great business, and in the use of
war, is appealed to as judge, there being no common judge on earth to sit on
the causes of these independent Nations. But God having set and established in
one Particular Nation and Political society, his own ordinance of Magistracy,
to which every soul must be subject, and all subject to the Supreme. etc.] Ans.
This says well when the difference or disput is between two subjects, both
under one Magistrate; but is says nothing to our case, where the difference is
betwixt the Magistrate and the Subjects: for in the other case there is a judge
over both established, unto whom both are subjects, but in our case there is no
judge on earth Common to both, or who can sit and judge in such causes: for the
King must here be no more both judge and party then the People, and so the case
is irremediable unless there be an allowance of repelling force with force:
for in our case there are no rational means which can be used to bring the
Prince to do right unto the injured Subjects: and therefore it God allow war,
in the use of which, he is appealed to as judge, betwixt two Nations, he will
allow also a necessary defensive war in Subjects against their Sovereign
when there is no other remedy, or rational means of redress. This Man
dictats but what proves he? [The Magistrates are by their official power,
above the whole Nation, and as absurd it is to say they are above the powers,
which God has set over them (as L. R. page 460. says thrasonically he has
proved unanswereably) as to say that every parish is above the Minister, in an
ecclesiaslical way, though he has official power over them all, or that every
Lord in Scotland has their Tennants and vassals above them, a thing which the
nobles of Scotland had need to look to; for certainly the principles which
lead to subject Kings to People, lead clearly and by undoubted consequence, to
Subject them to their vassalls, and to all under them, yea and all Masters to
servants, and parents to children, and to confound and invert the order of all
humane societies.] Ans. 1. The law will tell us That in mutual compacts the
party observer is Eatenus in so far, superior unto the party who fails. 2.
The author of Lex Rex says truly and not Thrasonically (as this Thraso, and
windy man, allaigeth, who would make the world believe that his one word is
enough to confute all which that learned author has solidly proved with such
reasons that he thought (with the little wit he has) it was more wisdom to
forbear once to name then to offer to answer) that he has proved
unanswereably (if not, let this windy Thraso try his hand in confuteing his
reasons) the Peoples power above the King. 3. This man's reasons are as weak as
water. For 1. the Paroche is so above the Minister, that, in case he teach
haeresy, and there be no ecclesiastic or civil power to put him away, they may
save their own soulls, thrust him out, and choose another more Orthodox. 2.
All know that the Lord is bound to the Vassalls, as well as they are to him,
and that the Lord may not oppress them, or if he transgress the bounds and
limits prescribed him, they will get action of law yea in some cases be free
to renunce him as their Supreme, and choose another. Let the nobles take heed
they drink not in this Man's doctrine: for if they arrogate to themselves a
power to oppress, pillage, plunder, murder, Massacre, their vassals, (as this
man pleads for such power to the King, without control) I fear their vassals
let them know they are not slaves. 3. What a poor Politician is this? He speaks
this, to move them so much the more to own the King's cause, but who sees
not, that he is either a false or a foolish advocate for the King in this
matter, for if the King get no more on his side but the Superior Lords, and if
all the Vassalls and Tennants be against him, he will have the weaker party by
far, on his side. 4. I would desire Nobles and all to take notice of this,
that he would here seem to give to the king, as much power over them and all
the lands, as Masters have over their Tennants, who have their lands only from
them upon certain conditions, and may be removed when these conditions are
broken. 5. What a fool is he to put Tennants and Vassals together? does he not
know that Lords have more power over their Proper Tennants, then over their
Vassals? 6. Does he think that Servants may not in some cases be above their
Masters; a noble man's son may be an apprentice to a very mean man; But thinks
he that Servants will get no action of law against their Masters, or if there
be no law or judge, over him and his Master, he may not defend himself, against
his Master's unjust violence? 7. As for the subjection of parents to Children
it is impertinent in this case, as shall be showed in due time, and yet we know
that the father has been a subject, and the son a King over him, and we know
also that, in case of necessity, the children may defend themselves against
their father taken with a mad phrenzy. Then he adds [ This truth we must cleave
to, that in one and the same civil society, where God has appointed Rulers and
Ruled, Subjects cannot without sacrilegious intrusion and contempt of God,
snatch the sword out of the Magistrates hands to punish him with it (though in
some partilars he abuse it) neither can a war intended for this end by mere,
private persons, be lawful against their head or heads.] Answ. We may let him
cleave to this truth, and this truth cleave to him, and be no losers: for we
speak not of Subjects taking the sword of justice to punish the King; we speak
of no war raised by the subjects for this end: we plead only for a power in
private Subjects to defend themselves, in cases of necessity, against their
head or heads, (and he, nor none of his party, have the forehead to deny this
to be lawful in some cases) especially if the Magistrate abuse his power, not
in some particulars only, but in many, and in many maine particulars, if not in
all.

Having thus cleared and vindicated the 6. thing. The 7. And last is this,
which follows also from the former: viz. That when the Prince does violate
his compact, as to all its conditions, or as to it is cheef, maine, and most
necessary condition, the Subjects are de Iure free from subjection to him, and
at liberty to make choice of another. The very nature of a compact does clear
this: For it is absurd to say, that in a mutual conditional compact, one party
shall still be bound to perform his conditions, though the other performs
none of his conditions, or performs not the maine and principal one. It is
absurd to say, that when one has given a benefit upon a certain condition,
that he is still bound to bestow that benefit, though the condition on which
he promised it, be no way performed. Were it the rational act of rational
creatures to set up Sovereigns upon these terms? or to say, we choose thee,
to be our Sovereign upon condition thou rule us according to justice and
equity, and not tyrannize over us, and yet we shall always hold thee for our
Prince and lawful Sovereign, Though thou should transgress all laws of
equity, humanity, and reason; and deal with us as so many sheep, kill whom thou
will, for thy sport and lust, etc. will any body think that rational men would
do so? The law tells us L. si fund. c. de pactis, etc. That cessante causa,
propter quam res est data, pignus debet reddi.

Before we come to draw our arguments from what is said, we shall first roll
out of our way what this Surveyer speaks further against these Covenants, Page
88, 89, 90, 91, 92, and 93. He has five particulars which he touches on.

The first is this, [ It is easily conceded (says he) that there is a mutual
obligation betwixt Magistrates and Subjects, to mutual duties, which is indeed
essential to the constitution of the politic body; but his obligation arises
not from any tacit or express Covenant betwixt them, but from the ordinance
and will of God, enjoining them these duties in these relations, in that
society, wherein they are combined.] Answ. 1. Subordinata non pugnant. This
mutual obligation may arise both from the Law of God, and from the Covenant,
without any repugnancy. 2. If this obligation arise only from the Law of God,
neither parties shall be formally obliged unto other, but both obliged only
unto God; and yet we heard himself say Page 100. that [Where a Covenant is made
betwixt a King and a People, that the Covenant on the King's part, binds him
not only unto God, in relation to the People as the object of the duty, but
does bind him to the People formally.] Now, whence arises this formal
obligation, if not from the Covenant? 3. By this means the obligations of
fidelity in the subjects unto their Princes, have no rise from their oath of
allegiance, which he elsewhere calls Foedus unilaterum. 4. To what purpose
then are Covenants and compacts made, If by virtue of these, each party be not
formally obliged unto other? For if David's Covenant with the People of Israel
laid no obligation upon him, he could not be said to have made a Covenant with
them, more then with the Phalistimes, and yet the Scripture tells us, he made a
Covenant with Israel: And King Ioash made a Covenant with the People. 5. I do
not well understand, how an obligation to future duties can be called essential
to a constitution, which neither flows from the constitution, nor gives a
being to the constitution. 6. Again, if there be no obligation unto these
mutual duties, until there be a constitution by compact, and if then the
obligation be essential, how is it imaginable that the obligation shall have no
subordinat rise from the constitution; or compact whereupon the constitution is
founded?

The 2. thing he says, is, That though this obligation be mutual, yet is it
not conditional, and how proves he this? [There is (says he a mutual
obligation to mutual duties betwixt Parents and Children, but it is not
conditional, that if Parents be undutiful, Children shall be loosed from their
duty, or on the contrary.] So is it (says he) betwixt King and People, and the
cites Calvin. Inst. Lib. 4. Cap. 20.. 29. But it is easily answered. That
there is a vast disparity betwixt the rise of that relation, which is betwixt
King and People, and that which is betwixt Father and Son: And this being once
discovered the parity disappeareth: And 1. Subjects come not out of the loins
of their King, as Children do out of the loins of their Fathers. 2. The Son
creates not the Father as the Subjects create the King. 3. Yea Children do not
so much as give their consent that such an one shall be their Father, before
the relation have being, yet Royalists will grant this much, unto the People,
in relation to their King. 4. The relation betwixt Father and Son has no
dependence less or more upon any act of will in the Son, or upon any Covenants,
Agriements or Compact, express or tacit, betwixt the Father and the Son, it
is not so as to the relation betwixt King and People; for before this mutual
relation arise, there must be a constitution, and this constitution includes,
at least, some act of the will in subjects, some previous consent. 5. This
relation can never cease, so long as both are in life, but the other may, by a
Subject's chooseing to live under another Sovereign. 6. Let the Father do what
he will, the relation betwixt him and his Son shall never be loosed or weakened.
But the greatest Royalists will grant, that in some cases, the King may be made
no King, and his relation either wholly taken away, or much diminished. So then
the consequence is null, that because Children are not bound to their Parents
conditionally; therefore Subjects are bound conditionally to there Prince: For
Children have no hand in making up that relation, betwixt Parents and them;
their consent is not so much as required; but in making up the relation betwixt
King and Subjects, there is a previous compact, required, in which compact, the
People have their great share: Children give not paternity unto their Parents;
but Subjects give the Kingship, at least instrumentally, under God; and they
set up Kings, when they might set up Nobles, and set up his Man, when they
might have set up Another, can Children do so? How then shall the case be
alike, And the one be no more conditional then the other? Next, as for Calvin
we willingly with him grant, that Subjects are to obey evil Magistrates, and
to do their duty to them, though the Magistrates should come short of theirs,
as Wives, and Children are bound to love and be Subject unto undutiful Husbands
and Fathers. But Calvin will not say, that in no case a Wife is loosed from
Subjection to her Husband: adultery and wilful desertion will give ground for a
divorce, and that says that the Wives subjection is not absolute, but
conditional; though we say not, that every breach of some of the conditions,
loses the obligation. Neither will Calvin. say' That in no case, the
Sovereign may be opposed or resisted: or, that in no case the obligation can
be loosed; for ibid.. 31. He grants liberty to the Estates of a Land (whom
yet our Surveyer puts in one category with private Subjects,) to stand for
the libertyes of the People against the rage and Tyranny of Princes, Yea he
says they are bound to do so, as they would not presidiously, betray their
trust.

The 3. thing is, that [the fancy of a tacit virtual natural Covenant betwixt
King and People, overthrows the distinction that all sound protestant Divines
and Politicians make, betwixt a limited or pactional Prince and an absolute
Prince, or one who is integrae Majestatis.] And then he cites Rivet. in Psalm
68. Gerhard de Magistratu, Page 13 11. mihi (or 935.) And therein, he says,
they agree with Calvin in the place cited. Answ. That there are absolute
Princes de facto, who come to the Soveraignity by false and corrupt means, or
by conquest, we deny not, but we are speaking of Princes, de Iure, and of
Princes set up by the People, which is only to our purpose. It is true, Rivet
(a very short sum of all the sound Protestant Divines, though he join Gerhard
with him too, who is but Lutherian Protestant, and for his Politicians we see
none) make use of such a distinction, but assert not positively that such an
absolute Prince is lawful. Calvin makes use of no such distinction, and if
they agree with him, they say no more then he says, and what he said, we have
heard. But says our Surveyer it is [ False to say that an absolute Prince is
contrary to the Word of God: for as our Laws allows our Kings to be ahsolute,
in express terms Jam. 1. ( he should say Jam. 6.) Parl. 18. Anno 1606.] Answ
Our Laws and especially of that Parliament, and the like, are evil proofs of
what is Iure Divino, or not contrary thereunto. But of that Supermacy granted
to the King, by that act and others, the Apology has spoken enough. Further he
adds, [ So the Scripture is not against an absolute Prince, as our Laws and
we understand him?] But how is that? May he Rule as he lifts? No, for [ He is
subordinate (says he) unto God and his Laws, and he ought also to walk
according to the particular good Laws he has made with consent of his
People.] This is more then other Royalists would grant to us, for he
acknowledges him not only not above the Law of God, but also not above the
municipal Laws, and consequently not above the fundamental conditions of the
constitution: And we are sure in this, This King has fowlely broken, whatever
he doubt of. But how is he absolute? [ He is absolute (says he) that if he
deviate he is not under coactive power of Subjects, that they should have
Law-claime against him, and in their courts of nature and necessity, pronounce
judgment upon him, to destroy him, far less that by virtue of this supposed
tacit Convenant, any minor private party of the People, may pull King and all
Magistrates out of their seat, punish them, and possess themselves in their
rooms, as Naphtaly sayes] Answ. What he lays to Naphtali's charge shall be
considered afterward. 2. To say that Subjects have no law claim against a
King, who breaks the maine and principal condition, or all the conditions of
the Covenant made betwixt Him and the People, is to destroy the nature of the
mutual compact, made between Him and the People as we have showed. 3. By this
it seems all the absoluteness that he says is due to the King, is, that he
is from under the co-active power of Subjects, but though this were granted to
him, (which yet we cannot, because of what we have said already) we should
suffer no loss, as to our intendment: for if this be all his absoluteness,
then he may be withstood, and resisted (though not brought to the bar) even by
private subjects, when he contraveeneth his principal conditions, and breaks
Covenant unto his people: and this is all we contend for.

The sum of what he says in the 4 place, is this [Where there is freedom of
Election (as in Germany and Poland, where there is but personated and painted
Kings) there may possibly be express limiteing conditions allowing some to
coerce deviating soveraignity. But in all proper Monarchies, there is neither
tacit nor express Covenants impowering any to be judges over the King. Some
Kingdoms are attained by a conquest in a just war (which is a sufficient
title) and this power being hereditarily transmitted, the successors receive
power from the Parents and not from the People, nor is there any shadow of
tacit or express Covenant in this matter.] Answ. 1. If he be not well pleased
with what Lex Rex has said, concerning conquest giving a sufficient title to
crowns, he should have considered and answered the arguments there made use
of, and not jejunely have told us he is of another judgment; for they are
either fools, or mad who will believe his bare word, better then the worthy
author of Lex Rex his assertions baked and confirmed with many solid and
unanswereable arguments, 2. This though true, speaks nothing to our purpose:
for we supposed always that our Kingdom was not founded upon a conquest, and
we never heard any say it was, till this unnatural abject arose to speak non
sense, of which more presently: We never heard a King challenge it upon that
account, nay, nor say that our Kingdom was ever conquered by any of their
predecessors, except King James, who in his basilicon doron, allaiged that
Fergus the first, was a conqueror, contrare to the testimony, of all approven
historio-graphers: what means the large long roll of the King's
predecessors, that is read over at the coronation; does any of our laws speak
such a thing? or do they found his absolute power upon such a dream? It would
seem the cause is desperate and gone, when he can get no other bottom to his
absoluteness, but a fiction of his distempered brain, which may deservedly
make him odious to all true scottish men, and may (and possibly will) make his
cause odious also, to all who are acquanted with the true, genuine and ancient
constitution of the Kingdom. 3. This raw. Statist exscreats his raw notions,
as he pleases, but they must be rude and unskilful in this matter, that will
think to digest them. He tell's us that the Emperor of Germany and the King of
Poland are but painted Kings, and Monarchs, and to confirm this, tells us that,
there are no Monarchs, or proper princes, but such as are absolute: What will
then become of the Distinction, of all sound protestant divines and
politicians, which he mentioned in the preceding page? Do they think that all
the limited and pactional princes, are but ciphers, or as painted men are men,
so are they but painted princes? Sure none of the divines he named take such
princes for no true princes. 4. If in proper Monarchies, there be such
Covenants and compacts tacit or express, which will gave a law claim unto
the Subjects against the King, and a Ius against him, as a formal transgressour
of his Covenant made with them, and liberate them from subjection to him, we
could have enough for our business, though it should be granted, that there is
no Covenant impowering others to be his judges. Though it should be granted
(which some politicians Doubt of) that in Kingdoms purchased by conquest, the
power haereditarily transmitted, should be received from the parent, and not
from the people; yet in kingdoms founded upon a lawful and free constitution,
the successor, (as we showed above) has his power not from his predecessor,
but from the constitution, or the people condescending upon the constitution,

But he thinks to obviate all this by what he says in the 5. place viz. That
our Kingdom is not founded on any such Covenant, but rather on a conquest, of
which he gives five remarkable instances. The first is, That Fergus the first,
was not admitted upon conditions, but the Subjects, by their oath confirmed the
Kingdom to him, and his posterity: and that the black book of pasley says,
Fergus made himself King. Answ. 1. What that black book of pasley (which
neither he nor I ever saw) says, is not worth the inquiry to search, Seeing
all other historians, such as John Fordon, John Major, Boethius, Hollanshade,
beside Buchanan, say, that he was freely chosen by the People. And the story
tells us, that he was then in Irland, when the Scots sent for him, how could he
then make him self King? 2. If he had been a conqueror, he might have
transmitted the Kingdom unto his sone, without the consent of the People, and
yet we see this was not done; yea we find that the People would suffer none of
his sons to enjoy the place after him, because unfit for government, but made
choice of a third person: and when his eldest son did afterward challenge the
Kingdom as his own, he was made to understand himself better. 3. It is true
Buchanan mentions no oath of the King, but that will not say, that there was
no compact betwixt Him and the People, There might be conditions communed and
condescended upon, though the King was not put to swear them. But however,
that there was an implicit and tacit Covenant, at least, betwixt them, Is
clear from the oath of the People confirming the Kingdom unto him; for it
says that all the right he had unto the Kingdom, was from the People, and
that he could not be secured in it but by them, and seeing they gave him the
Kingdom, and did secure him in it, Nature and Reason will say, that it was
upon good terms, particularly, that he and his should not tyrannize over
them, but should rule them aright: and though there be no written contract
concerning this, extant, yet their constant after-practice does abundantly
clear it; for, though they confirmed the Kingdom by oath to him, and his
posterity yet their chooseing of Feritharis his brother, passing by both his
sons, says, that this condition was tacitly understood, viz. provideing that
they, should be able for government and to discharge the place, and accordingly
they did then establish it, in a standing law for time to come: and after this
manner, and according to these terms did choose their Kings until Kennethus
the third, by force or fraud, obtained a change. So their taking course with
such of their Kings, as did tyrannize, says, that this was an other condition
of the compact, viz. That they should not tyrannize, but govern righteously:
Thus we see these after practices are clear standing commentaryes,
sufficiently explaineing the nature and maine conditions of that compact.

His 2 instances: is of Fergus the second, the 40 King. [ Who by his valor,
under the conduct of divine providence, and by the help of Danes and others,
with some small remainder of Scots, recovered the Kingdom and was not beholden
to the People for it, nor had it by paction with them.] Answ. Buchanan tells
us, that he was called home ad regnum avitum suscipiendum, to take upon him the
Kingdom which belonged to him, according to the ancient constitution, as being
of the family of Fergus, and then giving proof of his provvesse, and ability
for government, and accordingly being then in Scandia or Norway took the offer,
and came home, accompanied with the banished Scots, and some Danes: and after
he came home, after the wonted custom, more patrio, he was created King by a
Parliament; for, comitiis peractis, the Parliament being ended, he falls
about his work, and at length freeth the Kingdom of its adversaryes: Now, how
can he be accounted a conqueror, obtaineing his right to the crown by
conquest, who had it by a fair, free, and full call of the People, who might
have chosen any other of that race, that had been remaineing, and qualified for
their purpose? This is strange doctrine, to say, that every Prince who comes
to his Kingdom, by the free consent of his People, in a troublesome time,
because that through their help and concurrence, he freeth the land of Enemies,
and restores peace to the inhabitants, is a conqueror, and has no right to
the Crown, but by his sword. He will not say that every conquest will give a
just title, but a lawful conquest, now what right had Fergus to conquer these
adversaries? What title or claim could he lay to that crown from whence he
and his forebears were banished or constrained to flee, if not by the ancient
grant made by the People unto Fergus the first and to his race? So then, his
right was not obtained by the sword, but only the peaceable possession thereof,
and the practice of the people afterward when his son Constantinus came to
reign, and turned vicious, declared whether they looked upon this Fergus the
second, as a Conqueror, and upon what terms he and his successors had the
crown: for because of his vitiousnesse, and refuseing to amend his manners,
when admonished by the Nobles, they were almost at waging war against him and
of revolting from him, had not Dougall of Galloway dissuaded them.

His 3 instance is Kenneth the first the 50 King (He should have said Kenneth
the 2 the 69 King, for Kenneth the first died within a year after he was made
King.) [ Who destroyed the picts, and enlairged his Kingdom by the accession of
theirs, purchaseing more and better lands, then he had before, which he
distributed to his Subjects, he held not his purchased Kingdom of them by
contract or paction] Ans. What right a Prince has unto lands, which he
purchases by conquest or war, is not the matter of our disput, but what right
Kenneth had to the crown. Now, sure it is that before this conquest made, he
was crowned, upon the same ground, that his predecessors were: his future
conquest, then uncertain, could not alter the ground of his receiving of the
crown, when his father Alpin died 2. What ever superiority, he might challenge
over these Subjects unto whom he gave these new conquest lands, it had no
influence upon his holding of the crown: and that his very next successor and
brother Donald knew, who being given to his pleasures, lost a noble victory
which they had obtained over the Englishes, and after he returned from
captivity, following his old life, was cast in prison by his own Subjects. And
his Son knew it also, for he was put by the crown conform to the old law,
until this Donald died. So that notwithstanding of all this new purchase, the
people knew that the conveyance of the crown did still run in the old channel,
and was held of them after the old tenor.

His 4. Instance is of Robert Bruce, whom our Laws of Regiam Majestatem call
Conquestor Magnus, [He re-conquered the Kingdom after the Nobility of Scotland
had first at Berwick, then at S, Andrews, in plain Parliament, sworn homage
to the King of England, who will assert there were pactions betwixt him and the
People?] Answ. We know out of History, what a miserable condition the Land was
brought unto, through occasion of that division and sad disput that was in it,
concerning the nearest in the line: and this was the bitter fruit, that
Scotland reaped of the change of that laudable custom established near the
beginning of he constitution; whereas had not that been changed in the days of
Kenneth the third, the fitest person to govern might have been chosen, and
that had prevented all this confusion and misery, which the Land was brought
unto. 2. Though Bruce at length recovered the Kingdom, yet he received not his
crown upon that account, but before he attempted it is recovery, out of the
hands of the Englishes, he was crowned King at Scone, in Aprile 1036. and there
received the Kingdom from the Scots, upon the old account, and according to the
old tenor. 3. Though he be termed a great conqueror, as having recovered the
Land, out of the hands of the Englishes, as if it had been a conquest, when as
it was really, but a recovering of what, he was bound by his place and power,
to recover; yet we never find that he claimed a right to the Land, upon that
ground of conquest, but stood upon the old basis.

His fifth and last instance is of this King, [It is known (says he) our Nation
was totally subdued by the English, and continued so, for the space of then
years, The Representatives of Shires, and Cities, and Towns combined into a
Commonwealth government, and sent their commissioners to the meeting thereof at
London, where the King's interest was disclaimed; yet in a wonderful way God
brought him in again, and finding us at his coming, a fully conquered and
subdued nation, restored us to our freedom, from the bondage of forraigners.]
Answ. 1. Through too great haste, he has forgotten a maine particular of this
Instance. Before we were totally subdued by the Englishes, the King was crowned
at Scone in as solemn a manner, as ever any of his Predecessors, except that
he was not anointed with holy Oil, nor got the Pop's benediction; and while
crowned, was solemnly engaged to the People by Covenants, vows and oaths, to
defend Religion according to the National Covenant, and Solemn League and
Covenant, and to prosecute the ends of these Covenants, and upon these
conditions took his Crown and Scepter: Were we a conquest then? 2. Ay but we
were conquered afterward, and our Representatives disclaimed the King's
interest. But how many were there of these Representatives? And had these
Representatives power and commission from the Land, to renunce his Interest? Or
were these all accounted Enemies to the King? How is it then, that so many of
them are now accounted his most loyal Subjects, and more loyal then such as
suffered much, because they would not take that Tender, disclaming his
interest? how comes it, that that Arch-knave Sharp (sufficiently now known by
that name and notion both to King, Court and Country) who was the only
Minister (so far as I know) in all Scotland, that took that tender, is advanced
unto (in stead of a gallows) an arch-prelacy, and primacy? But 3 when the King
returned, did he make a re-conquest of us? what meaned then that compact
betwixt Monck and the Nobles and others of Scotland, whom he sent for, unto the
borders, and to the end he might more closely carry his business, made them
all to abjure Charles Stewart and his interest (a sad presage of what would be
our Epidemick distemper, when our change or turn begane with manifest perjury)
did he not a acquante them with his design? and had he not their concurrence?
and if he had wanted this, and had thought that Scotland would have been an
adversary unto his design, would he or dursl he have attempted it? 4. What way
did the King restore us seeing (if he would speak the matter as it was, it was
Monck that restored him and us both, as to any restoration we got: were not
we and he restored together? What did he for our restoration? was He not as
passive as we were and some what more? 5. Hence then it is false that he found
us at his coming a fully conquered and subdued nation. He rather left us so, as
found us so, for we were restored, to what we got pari passu, with himself.
6. It is true at his coming (though not by him) we were freed from the
bondage of forraigners, but as for the freedom we were restored unto, we are
yet ignorant of it, and see and feel heavier bondage both as to Church and
State, then we did under strangers of forraigners. But he adds. [ If any
will say, That it was upon his account the Nation was brought to the suffering
of that bondage; and that there did lie bands upon him, as our sworn King to
free ws, when he should be in capacity to do it. It may be answered. 1. It is
known that when the fa^al stroke that sunk us into bondage was given, there
was an express disowneing of his right, by public judicatories of the land,
in the quarrel with the English Sectaryes, before Dumbar.] Answ. He should
first have removed this objection. It was upon the Kings account that the
English army did invade us: had we forborne to have sent commissioners to have
called Him home, The Englishes would never have invaded us: for that was their
only quarrel; Because we had taken the Head of the Malignant faction Into our
besome: and so, had we for-borne to have owned his quarrel, we had neither been
invaded, nor subdued by them, and there had not been so much of our blood shed,
as there was. And is this all the thanks that now we get for our vast expense
of blood, oppression, and Ten years bondage, that we must be declared a
conquest and a subdued Nation? 2. It is a manifest lie* to say that his
interest was expressly disowned by the public judicatories of the land, before
Dumbar fight: for that act of the West Kirk (to which I know he looks) was
not an express disovvning of his interest, as may be seen by the act it self,
which was as follows, [ Westkirk the 13 day of August. 1650. The commission
of the General Assembly considering, that there may be just ground of
stumbling from the King's Majesty's refuseing to subscribe and emit the
declaration offered unto him by the commmitee of Estates, and commissioners of
the General Assembly, concerning his former carriage, and resolution for the
future, in reference to the cause of God, and Enemies and Friends thereof; does
therefore declare that this Kirk and Kingdom, do not own nor espouse any
Malignant party or quarrel, or interest; but that they fight merely upon their
former grounds and principles, and in defense of the cause of God, and of the
Kingdom, as they have done these twelve years past, and therefore as they do
disclame all the sin and guilt of the King, and of his house; so they will
not own Him, nor his interest, otherwise then with a subordination to God, and
so far as he ownes and prosecutes the cause of God; and disclaimes his and his
father's opposition to the work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all
the Enemies thereof; and that they will with convenient speed take in
consideration the papers lately sent unto them from Oliver Cromwell, and
vindicate themselves from all the falsehoods contained therein, especially in
these things, wherein the quarrel betwixt us and that party is mis-stated, as
if we owned the late King's proceeding's and were resolved to prosecute and
maintain his present Majesty's interest, before and without acknowledgment of
the sins of his house, and former ways, and satisfaction to God's People in
both Kingdomes] Which when the committee of Estates had seen and considered,
they did approve the same, and heartily concurred therein: and what could this
honest and most seasonable declaration import, but only that if the King would
not by a declaration, acknowledge his sorrow, for his, and his father's
carrying on a course destructive of the work of God, and his renunceing of the
Malignant interest, and all who would own the same, and his purpose to adhere
unto the Covenants, they would not espouse a Milignant quarrel, but fight upon
the same grounds and principles, that they had done for twelve years before,
and only own him with a subordination to God, and in so far as he did own the
cause of God, and renunce Malignancy and Milignants, and that they would take
into consideration Oliver Cromwell's papers, for their own vindication, and
clearing of the true state of the quarrel, Which was necessary, before they
did engage in fight? And would this Malignant Gnatho have had the Land and the
public judicatories thereof, contrare to their Covenants, and many Purposes,
Resolutions, Vows and Engagements, postponing Christ's interests unto man's
and hazard Religion, Libertyes and all, for one, who would not declare himself
a friend to Christ, and his interest; but would persist in a stated opposition
to Christ and his cause? 3. But let him make of this, what he will, sure his
interest was owned, when he, upon second thoughts emited that declaration at
Dumfermline upon his refusal of which, this act made at the Westkirk passed,
and this was before Dumbar fight. So was his interest sufficiently owned, with
the subordination requisite, when he was crowned, which was not very long after
that stroke a Dumbar, and after which we got blows enew, and were redacted
at length to bondage. What says he next to this? [2. What ever engagements
were upon him for the good of the Nation; yet if these men's principles were to
be followed they could have had no force on him, to move him to labor our
vindication into liberty, for do not they teach that in the mutual contract and
Covenant betwixt King and People, the People are loosed from their duty, if the
King fail in his, frangenti fidem fides frangatur eidem; and why then in not
the King loosed, if the people fail on their part? It is known that (although
the Nobles and body of the people were well enough affected to the King, and
cordially loved him, when they were over powered and could do nothing) yet by
their Representatives, he was disowned (which in law would be rekoned their
own deed: and if a sworn people deserte and disclaim their King by their
Representatives, may not the King also have the benefit of the conditional
Covenant, and leave them as he found them in bondage to forraigners. But such
was his Majesty's graciousness and wisdom as well as conscience of duty, that
although the Nation had failed much to him, he would not walk after the counsel
of these men? And we may (all things considered) assert that the people of
Scotland do rather owe their liberty to him, then he does owe his authority to
them, or by virtue of any Covenant with them.] Answ. 1. By what he has been
formerly saying, and by the instances which he has brought, we see what is
the scope he drives at, viz. To have us now a formal conquest, that so the
King may tyrannize over us, and deal with us, as he sees good, jure
conquestus, as being now free from all bonds and obligations, which ever
passed betwixt Him and the People. For the fifth particular which he undertook
to clear by these five instances, was, that the constitution of this Kingdom
neither was, not is, founded on a Covenant betwixt King and People: and yet we
see the poor man so straightened that he knows not what to say: He would saine
loose the King from all Bonds and Covenants, and former obligations, and yet he
dar not positively and clearly assert it, but only says if the King would
follow our principles, he would account himself loosed from all: but unless,
he assert it, clearly and positively, that the King, is really loosed from all
his former obligations, he speaks nothing to he point, but must grant, that at
least as to this King, the constitution is founded upon a conditional Covenant;
and though we should yield all therest, if he grant this to us, we need desire
no more, for all our Ends. But 2. in good earnest, let him tell us, Whether the
former engagements which were upon the King at his coronation, be loosed or
not? If they be loosed and made null, because of what these supposed
Representatives did: Then 1. we have a new ground of dissolving the sacred
obligations of the Oaths and Covenants, which the King made with God, and with
his People, which was not thought upon till this needle-headed man did invent
it. The King himself at his return, gave no such ground. 2. If he think that
these Representatives (having no express commission to renunce Charles Stewart
and his interest, from the land* did break their allaigance, why did not the
King execute the law against them as traitors (as he did against some under
that pretext, but really for their faithfulness to the Covenant, as is made
out by the Apologist) why did he seem to approve what they did, by
Countenanceing them so much, as he has done since his return? 3. Does not
himself say that the Nobles and Body of the Land were well enough affected to
the King, and cordially loved him, when they were overpowered and could do
nothing? Sure then the land did not break, whatsoever some men did. Ay but,
says he, in law this would be reckoned their deed. Very hardly, since they
gave no commission for such a deed. If he say that they virtually gave such a
commission, in that they sent their commissioners unto the commonvvealths
Parliament. It may be answered, that not only that was a constrained and
extorted act, but, that as matters then stood, no lawyer, no politician, nor
divine would condemn such a deed as sinful or unlawful, or as prejudicial to
the Kings interest, to send commissioners to a meeting, at command of the
Conqueror, to labor for a mitigation of their bondage, and for proposeing
some things for the good of the land, when their own King was banished from
them, without all hope of a return, and they, for his sake, without any
treachery or perfidy in them, reduced to a state of bondage. 3. But since the
King at his return laid claim to no new right, but stood upon the old
ground, and upon this account was crowned in England where he had not been
crowned before, and was not crowned in Scotland, because he had been
crowned there formerly, all these quircks are to no prupose: for the King
returning upon the old claim, acknowledged the former constitution, and
reassumed his ancient Kingdom upon the same terms he did before, which is
also further confirmed by the act of indemnity, which he passed; and other acts
and deeds, which weer needless now to mention. 4. We shall easily grant, that
when a sworn People desert and disclaim their King by their Representatives:
The King also may take the benefit of the conditional Covenant and leave them.
and so might King Charles have done, and never owned us more: and if he had
done so, and gone to some other part of the world, to have spent his days, as
some would not have been grieved, so, I think both lawyers and divines would
have thought him loosed from his obligation to the people, though not wholly
from his obligation to God: But now since he did not so, but took the first
occasion that was feisible, and returned to his old station and relation, all
the old bonds and engagements, which he took in these relations, recurred with
their former force and vigor, and he became no less bound then ever, yea,
before the Lord, rather more: because the goodness of God in restoreing him
without blood, should have engaged his heart so much the more unto God, and to
his former vows and Covenants. 5. What way he labored our vindication into
liberty, I know not; and if it be his Majesty's graciousnesse and wisdom, as
well as his conscience of duty, that would not let him walk after the counsel
of these men, (as he says) many think that we are yet to see these
commendable dispositions; for the effect mentioned is not visible: for after
the counsel of whomsoever he has walked, sure we are, he has broken the
Bonds and Engagements which he took on him, both before, and on the day of his
coronation: He has rejected the Covenant, which he made with God upon his
knees, with his hands lifted up unto the Most High, and overturned that which
was the Chief of our fundamental laws, or terms of our constitution, as we
see this day: and this is known, that of these who are most injured by him
now, and presecuted, there were fewest that failed to him in that day; and
therefore his graciousnesse and wisdom and conscience of duty, should have
caused him remember these, who could not, out of conscience of their obligation
to him, by virtue of their Covenant, take that Tender, which, others, to save
themselves from a little suffering, swallovved down without much difficulty;
and not have made them the objects of his ire and indignation, as he has done,
and is doing to this day. 6. He tells us, that He may assert, that the People
of Scotland do rather owe their liberty to him, then he his authority to them.
But what this bold assertor says, is not much to be valued; who these
People of Scotland are, who owe their liberty to him, I know not, unless he
mean the abjured Prelates, and their base naughty, scandalous Underlings, the
scumme of the earth, the shame of the Church, and the disgrace of the Ministry,
who now have freedom from Church Discipline, and civil censures, and license
to corrupt the word of God, to destroy soulls, to tyrannize over consciences,
to oppress the People, to inslave the subjects, and to lead back the People
into Egypt: And the dyvour Lords and others, who because of their licentious,
luxurious, sensual and brutish lives, which they lead like so many Epicures,
having devoured their own Estates, and are now so drouned in debt, that if
the poor could have but liberty to seek their own, and if justice were
running like a stream, durst not be seen, must now have acts made in their
favors liberating them from the sentence of the law, and allowing them to
press upon their creditours, the most barren, frutelesse, and useless of
their lands, and that at twenty years purchase, after they have by manifest
iniquity, vvithheld aught years annualrent, which is near the equal half of
the principal sum; and such others acts of that nature. Is this the liberty
he talks of, That a fevv shall have liberty to drink away and with
debauchery, destroy the substance of the land, and waste it upon whores and
cups? If these owe that liberty, unto him, I am sure he will have little
reason, ere all be done, to owe his standing unto them, When the anger of God
shall beginner to kindle, and his wrath shall be revealed from heaven against
all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. But lastly, what if we should
grant him, what he dar not in plain terms require: viz. That the King
rules over us now jure conquestus? Sure he must then be Tyrannus sine titulo,
a Tyrant without a title: for his old title, being gone and expired, he had no
new title vvhereupon to ground the lavvfulnesse of his conquest, and therefore
by his scope and drift here, he proclaims a liberty to all the People of
Scotland to carry toward him, as an usurper; to seek to dethrone him, and to
cut him off: for Politicians will grant that a Tyrant without a title may be
so dealt with: And thus we fee that if he loose the old fundations, he shakes
the throne more then he is a war of; And as in many other things through
this pamphlet so in this, he does his Master no good service, notvvithstanding
of the great fee he has got for his pains.

The sum of what follows, Page 92, 93. is this [That none before King James
6. did at their installing enter into Covenant with the People, (except what
one says of Gregory the great, who swore to defend the libertyes of the
Christian Religion, etc. which then was Popery) and neither did King James
himself do it, but only Morton and Hume in his name promised somehing like it;
nay it is doubted, if King Charles the first did swear that oath, of if he
did, he was the first, and yet he was aught years our King before, and it is to
be believed on good ground, that if he had thought his taking of that oath,
should have subjected him to the coactive and punitive power of the Subjects,
in every case, wherein they or any party of them) being mere private persons)
might think him deficient, he would rather have endured any death. but it shall
be avowed, that he did never shrink from the observation of that Godly oath,
neither has his Majesty who now reigns swerved from the observation of that
oath hitherto, and we are hopeful, God's grace shall preserve him hereafter,
from any such thing.]

Answ. 1. We cannot expect that Buchanan, studying much brevity, would set
down all the formalityes that were used at the coronation of the Kings, he
only satisfying himself with a series of the succeeding Kings, and with a
relation of some of the most remarkable passages: And therefore, it is no good
argument to conclude that no such thing was; because he does not make mention
thereof. 2. other historians name some other Kings beside that Gregory, who
took an oath at their coronation, as Corbred the 21. King, who swore se
majorum consiliis acquieturum. That he should be ruled by the counsel of a
Parliament, whom he accounted his Superiors. So in Macbethus his days, it
was ordained by the Estates, that the King should swear to maintain the
community of the Realm. 3. Whether they did actually swear an oath at their
coronation or not, it is not much to the matter; for a virtual and implicit
Covenant will ground all which we desire, and that there was this much, cannot
be denied, seeing Kings, who could not reign, was laid aside; others who
corrupted government, were pursued, sentenced, punished, imprisoned, and killed
in battle, or otherwise made to promise amendment; And seeing we find bonds
laid upon Kings, as that in the days of Finnanus the 10. King. [ That Kings
thereafter should do nothing of any great concernment, without the authority of
their public Council, and should not rule the Kingdom according to the
Counsel of his Domestics; That he should manage no public business which
belonged to the King, without the advice and conduct of the Fathers, and should
neither make peace or war, enter into Leagues, or break Leagues by himself,
without the concurrence and command of the Fathers and Heads of tribes.] This
was a fundamental Law of the Kingdom, and all who accepted of the crown
thereafter must have accepted it upon these terms, though they had not been
in plain terms expressed, So Durstus his Successor did swear the same, and
therefore in Mogaldus the 23. King his days, this is called the ancient
custom, for he ad consilia Seniorum omnia ex prisco more revocavit, did all by
a Parliament according to the ancient and received custom: And because Conarus
the 24. King neglected, or refused to follow this received custom, he was cast
into prisone; So that the not observing of these conditions made them obnoxious
unto the coactive power of the People. So was Romachus censured by the
Parliament for the same crime. So we read of many others censured for their
misdemanurs as Constantine the 43. King, Ferchardus the first the 52. King,
Ferchardus the 2. the 54. King, Eugenius the 62. King, Donaldus the 70. King,
all which instances and many such like, do abundantly clear that the Kings of
old were under bonds and obligations, if not explicit, yet tacit unto the
People. 4. Whatever can be said concerning the ancient Kings; yet now it is
past doubt that all our Kings are bound to swear an oath at their coronation,
and so are under conditions and Covenant-tyes and obligations, and this is
enough for our present purpose. 5. It was thought suffificient in point of
formality and legality that the Earl of Mortoun and Hume should swear in name
of the King, at this coronation. [ That he should observe the Laws, and
according to his power should preserve the doctrine, and rites of Religion,
which were then taught, and publicly received, and oppose himself to all which
was repugnant thereunto.] And this was the very sum of that oath, which was
afterward concluded in Parliament, to be received by all Kings at their
coronation. And the reason why they did not put King James to that oath
thereafter, was because, he was but once crowned, and the oath was to be sworn
at the coronation: and when King James was crowned, It was done by others for
him, as is said. 6. Though this man make a question, whether King Charles did
swear this oath or not at his coronation, yet it is notoure that he did, and
though he beleevet^, that if the King had thought, that his taking of that
oath, should have been so far mistaken by his Subjects, as that he should have
been thought thereby, to have submitted himself to their coactive and punitive
power, in every case, wherein they or any part of them might think him
deficient, he would rather have endured any death, then so to have cast himself
away, at the pleasure of malcontented parties, amongst the People, taking
advantage against him by that oath: (all which we may give him good leave, to
believe, for we assert no such thing) yet he must suffer us to believe also,
upon as good ground, That if King Charles had absolutely or peremptoriely
refused to have taken that oath, or had said, That he would rule as he listed,
and have no regaird to the established laws; and whould bring in what Religion
he pleased, though it were Machometanisme or Popery; or that he did not
account himself obliged to the Subjects by any oath he could take, The Nobles
and others would have scrupled to have given him the Crown, and acknowledged
him King. And their after practices declared that they looked upon him, as a
King obliged by terms and conditions unto them: which when he broke, they
maintained their right against him, with their sword, when no other mean could
prevail. 7. Though it be true, that King Charles the first was acknowledged
King sometime before he was crowned, yet that was with respect to the same
conditions, unto which he was, by his taking the place, virtually obliged; and
therefore afterward, when he came to be crowned, and formally installed, he
did also formally and expressly take on the obligation. And whether he did ever
shrink from the observance of that godly oath, let this perfidious man avovv
what he will, many will assert it as certane, in some points, and too too
probable in other. 9. But though he should doubt whether any King, before King
Charles the second, did swear any oath or Covenant with the People; yet he
cannot doubt of what this King Charles the second did: It being being beyond
all denial and contradiction, That he swore both that Oath which was enjoined
in King James the si^t his days; and also the National Covenant, and the
Solemn League and Covenant: and that according to these, the Subjects did
swear obedience unto Him: Here was then a mutual conditional Covenant,
explicitly, and in plain terms, with all the solemnities imaginable, entered
into: and what needs more to clear all which we have said, and to ground all
which we would infer, to justify the late action: For as for his vain
inferences, they concern not us, and more shall be spoken of them afterward.
10. Though this Surveyer be ready to avow that this King has never swerved
from the observation of that oath enjoyed Anno 1567. yet all the World sees,
that he has not, as he ought to have done, maintained the true Religion, nor
right preaching, and administration of Sacraments; Neither has he, according
to his power, abolished and withstood all false Religions contrary to the same,
as appears by the great indulgence, and toleration, if not countenance,
granted to Popery and Papists. Neither has he ruled us, according to the will
of God, but rather persecuted us for adhereing to the Word of God: nor has he
ruled us, by the laudable Laws and constitutions of the realm, but has with
a packt Parliament, principled to his mind, overturned our laws and
libertyes, and has framed and established iniquity by a law. 11. But what
says he to the Not. Cov. and League and Cov.? Dar he avow that he has not
broken these? If he had not, we had not been troubled this day, with a Popish
Prelatical and Malignant faction, nor had we seen these abjured and foresworne
Prelates, nor had we seen the work of reformation of religion, in worship,
Doctrine. Discipline and Government, so overthrown, overturned and trod upon,
as it is this day. 12. So then, seeing he cannot deny, but the King took and
solemnly swore these Covenants, and that now he has openly, and avowedly
broken them, it is undeniable that he has broken the conditions on which he
was made King: yea, seeing these were the maine conditions, and the only
conditions considerable, and were become the fundamental law of our
constitution, he has violated the principal and only conditions covenanted,
and what we shall hence infer, we shall now show.

Having thus vindicated and cleared the premises, we shall draw out our
arguments and conclusions thence, and,

1. If People propose conditions and terms unto Princes, to be by them
acquiesced in, and submitted unto, and upon which they are to accept their
Crown and Scepter; Then, if the Prince of King violate these conditions which
he once accepted, and contrare of his promise and engagement, destroy what he
promised to build up; The People may very lawfully defend themselves, and these
good ends, which they endeavored to have secured, by proposeing these
conditions unto the Prince, when he is seeking to destroy all, even by force
when there is no other remedy. But such is our case. The King was formally
and expressly engaged by Compacts and Covenants to secure the Reformed Religion
in Doctrine, Worshipe, Discipline, and Government; to secure all these who
owned the same, and adhered to the Covenants; and to ratify and approve all
laws made for these Covenants, and for the security of such as entered into
these Covenants: and now notvvithstanding of these conditions agreed unto by
him, the Covenant and work and all is overturned, People persecuted merely
upon the account of their adhereing to these Covenants, all conditions are
violated, all Covenants, Vows, Compacts, Engagements and what could be
devised for security of the reformation and of the owners thereof, are broken.
Who then can condemn even private persons if they stand to their defense in
this case? See Althusius polit. cap. 38. n. 30.

2. If People may lavvfully and laudably defend the fundamental laws of the
Kingdom, on which the constitution of the Kingdom stands, and on which the
security of what is dear to them as men, and as Christians, relveth. Then the
late act cannot be condemned; because, in defending themselves, they stood for
that which was the maine and principal term of our constitution. But the
former is true: because the Prince violating these, destroys the
constitution, and because He cannot do this as a Prince, having already engaged
as a Prince to maintain the constitution, he must do it as a private person,
or an enemy to the constitution and whole body of the land. Therefore he may
well be resisted, even by private persons, see this fully made out by Althus.
Pol. cap. 38. n. 37. both out of Lawyers and Divines.

3. If a People, even by resistance, may defend their personal libertyes and
rights, secured unto them by Compacts with the Prince, or by the fundamental
laws of the land, which the Prince as Prince is bound to maintain. Then the
late act cannot be condemned: because by it they were but defending that, which
the King had secured unto them, by his compact, and which was secured unto them
by the fundamental law of the land. But the former is true: because a private
person is allowed by law to maintain his Lands and Rights, even though some,
in the Kings name, should come, under whatsoever pretext, to robe and
dispossess him, and shut him to the door. Therefore, this late act, though of
private persons, cannot be condemned.

4. If a Prince violating all, or he maine conditions, upon which he was made
Prince, becomes stricto jure no Prince, but falls from his benefice, not
having done the offices, in consideration of which, he got that benefice
conferred upon him [ non enim (says Althus. ubi supra) commodum debet sentire
ex contractu quem vel omittendo vel committendo quis impugnat.] Then lawfully
enough such an one may be resisted, even by Private persons; as is clear. But
the former is made clear above: and such is our case now; for the King has
broken, palpably and avowedly, the maine and principal conditions, on which he
was made King, having overturned the work of reformation, which, if he had not
promised, vowed and covenanted to maintain, he had never been crowned or
admitted to the exercise of that Government. Who then can blaime a People
standing to their own defense, when oppressed and tyrannized over by his
emissaries, who has thus violated the principal and only conditions of the
compact, and is forceing them to the same excess of wickedness and perjury? [
deficiente hac condition says Althus. Pol. c. 38. n. 40.) desinit ^bligatio,
and fidem non servanti, fidem ei quoque non servari aquum est. Nam qui non
facit quod debet, nec recipit quod oportet, nec p^tere potest, quod ei ideo ab
alio debetur: quam naturam esse conventionum in quibus utraque pars contrahens
obligatur, testatur Tiraq. de Legib. Connub. Gloss. 1. part 13. n. 42. and la^e
Mascard. Concl. 1387. per Alleg. Ibid. Rolland. a Val. Consil. 69. Vol. 4. and
Consil. 53. Vol. 1. quando ergo una pars promissa non praes;tat, facit eo
ipsout and altera liberetur. Dynus Alexander and Jason, in L. cum proponas C.
de pactis.]

5. If when a Prince violateth the maine and principal conditions, on which he
was installed, a People be siricto jure liberated from subjection unto him.
Then much more may they resist him, when he by his emissaries oppresses, and
unjustly violenteth them. But we have cleared the former to be ture. Therefore,
so is the later. The consequence cannot be denied: for if stricto jure a people
may disowne a prince, then much more may they repel his unjust violence. If
law admit the more, it will admit the less also. The application of this is
clear from the former.

6. If the Covenant or Compact, which is betwixt Prince and People give
law-clame to the People to pursue the Prince., in case of failing in the maine
and principal thing covenanted: Then, sure the People may resist unjust
violence; for they who pursue, for a broken Compact, according to their clame,
may far more defend their clame when invaded by force, contrare to the
compact. The application of this is also clear.

7. Since by this compact, it is clear as Althusius tells us Pol. Cap. 19. n.
12. that the People or Kingdom are the full Lords proprietors of all the
power, and have free liberty to dispose of it, the fruit and emolument thereof
redounding to themselves, having full power no lose then any private person to
manage dispose, and dispense in their own matters as they please. Then when
they find the person to whom the Government is committed by compacts,
administrating the same to their hurt and destruction, they may see to their
own good, and not suffer themselves to be destroyed, but resist him who
instead of a mandatarius and servant, turns a Tyrant and Enemy.

8. Since, as the same Althusius says Ibid. n. 13. by this compact it is
apparent, that the Ius the power or authority, which is given to the Supreme
Magistrate is not his own, and is less then the Ius of the People and
inferior to theirs; because it depends upon the free will and prescription
of the People, and ends with the death of the prince, who is Mandatarius; as
other contractus Mandati use to do, and recurreth to its own proper Master and
Lord. Then it cannot be unlawful for the People the commander here, to see to
their own saiftie, and provide that their own free gift destroy them not, and
so to resist the Prince abuseing that power to their destruction.

9. If it be certane (as it is to Althus. Pol. c. 19. n. 47.) that the Prince
has no more power given to him by the People, then what is contained in the
conditions upon which he undertaketh the government, and what more he assumes,
he usurpeth by tyranny from the People. Then when he usurpeth more power then
was given to him, he may be resisted: and the People are allowed to preserve
their own: and when he rules contrare to the conditions, and destroys
these, it is certane He arrogateth to himself a power which was never given to
him, yea which was virtually prohibited and discharged to him: and in that case
may lawfully be resisted, as is undeniable. The antecedent Althusius proves in
the forecited place n, 48. saying [ aequitas hujus rei naturalis demonstrari
potest ex natura mandati, quod dicitur contractus bonae fidei, obligans eum qui
alienorum negotiorum administrationem suscepit, ne limits and fines mandati
excedat, sed contineat se intraterminos praescriptos a mandante, ut latius
docent J. CC. quibus addendus Vasq. Illustr. Quaest. L. 1. c. 47. n. 13.

CAP. VII.
Of the Nature of the Kings Power over his Subjects. Our Arguments hence.
FRom what has been said in the two former chapters, we may saifly gather
these conclusions concerning the nature of the power of a Sovereign over his
Subjects, which will yield us so many arguments, confirming the point in hand.

1. The Soveraigne's power over his Subjects, is not properly a parental
power, that is, not such a power as parents have over their children: for 1.
The Soveraigne's power over the Subjects arises from a voluntary compact, and
consent of the Subjects, as was showed; but the Father's power requires no
such previous consent or compact. 2. The Soveraigne's power may be restricted
to so many degrees by the Subjects; so cannot the Father's by the Children. 3.
The Subjects obedience and subjections to the Sovereign may be conditional; as
we have proved, and our adversaries will grante it, in limited Princes: but so
cannot the subjection of Children be. 4. Whethersoever Children go, they keep
always the same relation to the same Parents: but Subjects may change their
Sovereigns, by changing the places of their habitation. 5. Children can in no
case break that relation, which is betwixt their Fathers and them; but in many
cases, Royalists themselves will grant, Subjects may shake off the King. 6.
Children cannot change their Fathers: but Subjects may change their
Sovereigns; for Royalists will grant that such as are under an Aristocracy may
make choice of a Monarch. 7, Children hold their natural being of their
Parents, but Sovereigns are designed only for the political or civil welbeing
of the Subjects. 8. Subjects may choose what Sovereigns they will, whether
Monarchical or Aristocratical, and what persons in this, or that form:
Children can not choose what Parents they shall have. 9. Subjects can
condescend upon the time how long such an one shall be their Sovereign, ad
vitam or culpam: but Children can not set bounds unto their Parents power. 10.
Sovereigns have not begotten all their Subjects, nor does their relation or
power flow form such an act: but Paternal power does. 11. If the Soveraigne's
power were paternal only, then he should not have power of life and death,
because parents as such have not that power over their Children* 12. The
Surveyer himself grants this Page 29. in these words. [ Kings are not fathers
of our flesh, or by generation, nor can they be truly called so, political and
parental power are different things.] So then the Soveraigne's power is
paternal only in a metaphorical sense: because They should have a Fatherly care
and inspection over their Kingdoms, and should nourish, cherish, love and
govern them tenderly and carefully; and as Parents in some respects, love
their children better then themselves, so should they prefer the good of the
commonwealth unto their own: and upon this account are styled Fathers Genesis 20.
2. Judge. 5. 7. 1 Sum. 24. 12. Isa. 49. 23. as also Pastors are.

2. The Soveraigne's power is not properly Marital, or such as Husbands have
over their Wives, for. 1. Wives cannot limite their Husband's power, as
Subjects may limite their Soveraigne's. 2. Wives cannot prescribe the time how
long such an one shall be their Husband, as Subjects may do with their
Sovereigns. 3. Wives cannot change their Husbands, as Subjects may change an
Aristocracy into a Monarchy. 4. Wives are appointed for an help to the
Husband, but the Sovereign is rather for the Commonwealth, then the
Commonwealth for him. 5. If the Soveraigne's power were such, then he could
not have power of life and death; for a Husband as such has not that power
over his Wife. 6. Though the Husband and the Wife be in distinct Kingdoms, the
relation stands, and is not broken upon that account, but if a subject go
out of one Kingdom, to live into another, he changes his Sovereign, and has
a relation to a new Sovereign.

3. So he is but metaphorically, and not properly called the Head of the
Commonwealth: for 1. the head is not made Head by the free choice of the
Members: but the Sovereign is chosen by the People. 2. The Members have not so
much as a consent in setting up the Head: but Subjects, at least, have this
much, in setting up of Princes 3. the Members can never change the Head, but
Subjects may change their Sovereigns. 4. The Members can make no compact with
the Head, as Subjects may do with their Princes. 5. The Members cannot limite
the power of the Head, as Subjects can limite the power of their Princes. 6.
The Members cannot destroy the Head and live themselves, but Subjects can
destroy the Monarch and choose another. 7. The Head communicates life, sense
and motion to the rest of the members; so does not the Prince unto his
Subjects. 8. The same individual life is in Head and Members; but not in King
and Subjects. 9. Head and Body die and live together, but there is no such
connection betwixt King and Subjects. So then he is but a metaphorical Head, so
called, because of his supereminency, He is over the civil body to rule and
guide it aright.

4. The Sovereign has no Lordly, dominative, or masterly power over the
Bodies of his Subjects. For 1. this government is founded upon the law and
light of pure nature, but this masterly dominion is a fruit of sin. 2. Slavery
being against nature, and a bondage, which all would willingly shun, we cannot
suppose that rational people would choose that life, if they could help it: but
they willingly, and not out of constraint, choose government and governors 3.
The people in setting up a Soveratigne propose their own good and have their
own ends, but if the Soveraigne's power were properly a masterly power, they
should propose rather his good then their own in setting him up. 4. If his
power were a masterly power, their condition after the government were
established should be worse, then it was before: for their state of liberty was
preferable to their state of bondage. 5. They had not acted rationally, if to
be free of oppression of others, they had willingly given up themselves unto an
oppressor, endued with masterly dominion and power. 6. Masters might sell
their servants for gain Genesis 9. 25. and 20. 14. and 26. 14. 1 King. 2. 32. 2.
King. 4. 1. Neh. 5. 8. Eccles. 2. 7. Job. 1. 3, 15. But the prince cannot sell
his Kingdom. 7. Sovereigns have not such a power as this, from God, but only
a power to feed, to rule, to defend, and to watch over the people for their
good, 1 Timothy 2. 2. Ps. 78. 71. 2 Samuel 5. 2. 1 Chronicles. 11. 2. and 17. 6. Neither
have they it from the People; for they cannot give such a power, whereby to
make themselves slaves. 8. If it were so, Princes should not be a blessing
unto a People, but rather a curse contrare to 1 King. 10. 9. Esa. 1. 26. Ier.
17. 25. Hos. 1. 11. 9. It is a blessing to be free of slavery Exodus 21. 2, 26,
27. Deuteronomy. 15. 12. Ier. 34. 9. Ioh. 8. 33. 1 Cor. 9. 19. But it is not a
blessing to be free of government, but a curse and judgment rather, Judge. 19.
1, 2. Esa. 3. 1, 6, 7. Hos. 3. 4. 10. Subjects are the King's brethren, Deuteronomy.
17. 20. and so not his slaves. The Surveyer Page 30. 31. grants that there is
a great difference betwixt Magistratical power and Masterly, and gives three
maine differences. 1. That the Master of slaves had his own profit mainly
before his eyes, and the profit of the Slaves only secondarily: But the
Magistrates power is premarily ordinated to the Public good of the Community
it self, and only secondarily and consequentially to the good of Himself. 2.
That Masters had a greater power over the bodies and goods of these, who were
their Slaves, then a Magistrate can clame over Subjects. 3. The Master had the
slaves in subjection to him, more out of fear and constraint, then love or
delight: But a King has his Subjects under him, in a civil, free, liberal,
voluntary, and loving subjection. Thus we see this point is clear and
undeniable by him, though other Royalists will not grant so much: but sure if
they were his slaves, they behoved to be taken in war or bought with money.

5. Neither has he a despotick and masterly power over the go^ds of his
Subjects, what ever use may be allowed to make of them, in case of necessity
(when, in some respect, all things are common) for the Common good, and good
not only of the owners, but also of all the Community. Yet the Subjects are
righteous proprietors of their own goods. For 1. the People make choice of
him, for this very end to preserve them in their rights, to keep their rights
inviolated, to keep them from oppression and injuries of others; so that it
cannot be imagined that rational People would make choice of one great robber,
to preserve them from lesser robbers. 2. Their case should be rather worse as
better, by the erecting of a civil government, if the Sovereign were the only
proprietor of all their goods for before the erection they had a just right and
title unto their own goods. 3. Sovereigns should not be a blessing unto a
People, but a curse: Which is false. 4. Then they could wrong no man take what
they would from him, contrare to Zeph. 3: 3. Esai 3: 14, 15. and 58: 4, 6.
Mich. 3: 3. see Timpl. pol. lib. 5. cap. 1. quaest. 3. 5. The law, Deuteronomy. 17.
contradicts this masterly power over the Subjects goods. 6. Ahab was blaimed
for taking Naboths Vineyaird. 7. This is the very character of a Tyrant, 1 Samuel
8. 8. The Kings of Egypt had not his propriety, Genesis 45. 9. No man might then
defend his own right by law against the Sovereign, but he might take what he
pleased, from whom he pleased, and give to whom he pleased. 10. Then the King
could not properly buy or sell with his Subjects. 11. Nor could Subjects make
any barganes amongst themselves without his consent. 12. Nor could they exerce
any acts of charity; because charity must be of Men's own, Esa 58: 7. Ecc. 11:
1. 13. Yea, Subjects could neither perform a duty, nor fail in a duty, in the
matter of goods, if all were his. 14. Subjects could not be enjoined to pay
tribute unto the Prince, contrare to Romans 13: 6. 15. It is contrare both to the
Law of God and nature: see Timpl. ubi supra.

6. Hence Sovereigns are not proper proprietors of their Kingdoms: Because 1.
there are other qualifications required of them, then is required of ordinary
proprietors. 2. The People then could never change their Sovereigns. 3. The
Sovereign might sell and dispone his Kingdoms, as he pleased, which Royalists
themselves will not grant. 4. Kingdoms then should come in amongst bona
fortuna. 5. His place should not be properly a function or office, but a proper
possession. 6. Several Kings both in Scotland and elsewhere, have been hindered
from dilapidating the revenues of the crown, or by gifts and other contracts
deteriorating the Kingdom, and punished for so doing. 7. Would rational men
give themselves up for a prey to one, that they might be saife from becoming a
prey to others? 8. How should then a Sovereign be chosen for the good of the
Kingdom, if he might do with it what he pleased, sell it, or dispone it to the
Turk: or such like. 9. Paul, by commanding that tribute and custom be given to
him, supponeth some other thing: see Althus. poli. cap. 24. n. 35, 37.

7. Nor so much as usufructuaryes: For 1. they may not lay their Kingdoms in
pledge, as an usufructuary may do. 2. Nor can they give them freely away. Nor
3. may they do with them what they please, as usufructuaryes may do with what
they have by that right: See Iun. Brut. vind. cont. Tyr. q. 3. p. (mihi) 205.

8. The Soveraigne's power is properly a fiduciary power, such as the power of
a Tutor of Patron, for to this end and purpose was He created of the People
that he might defend them from injuries and oppressions. He is appointed over
them by God for their good, and is to seek that mainly. 2. though he has his
power by way of compact, yet it is not a compact ex condigno, such as betwixt
buyer and seller, upon valuable prices and considerations 3. His power is
limited and restricted and he is bound to conditions, as we showed. 4. He may
not (as was said) dispose of his Subjects, and of their lives as he pleases. 5
if he sell his Kingdoms, Royalists grant he may be dethroned; therefore he
has no other power then of a Tutor, Public Servant, or Watchman, 6. His power
is over his Subjects, as it is over the law of God and religion, but over those
he has no other power, but a ministerial Tutorypower: He is to take care for
them ex officio, as a special pawn committed to his trust, to see that they be
not wronged or violated: see Althus. polit. cap. 24. n. 43, 44, 45. Adrian the
Imperour used to say Ita se Remp. gesturum ut sciret Populi esse. non suam.

Hence we draw these arguments for resistance of Sovereigns by mere private
Subjects, in cases of necessity.

1. If it be lawful for Children to resist their Father, when enraged against
them, and seeking in his fury, to destroy and cut them off, whithout any
violation of the Law of God enjoining Children to obey, and be subject to,
their Parents in the Lord; Then it is lawful for Subjects though private
persons, to resist the fury of their enraged Sovereign, when he is seeking, in
his cruelty and rage, contrary to compact, oaths and vows, to destroy Them
and their Religion. But the former is true. Therefore etc. The Assumption
cannot be denied by any rational person. It being most just and rational, that
when the Father is taken with a distemper in his brain, and in his madness
seeks to destroy or cut the throats of his Children, They may join
together, bind his hands, pull the weapon out of his hand and defend
themselves the best way they can. The connection of the proposition is certane;
for, the most the adversaries can make of the Sovereigns power is that it is
paternal, and that he is parens patriae the Father of the Commonwealth: and yet
seeing natural Fathers may be resisted by their natural Children, in case of
necessity, without the help or conduct of Magistrates: Why may not also private
Subjects, without the conduct of a Parliament, defend of themselves, in case of
necessity, against the fury and rage of their civil father, when he by his
bloody emistaries, is seeking to undo them? But next we may draw the argument
from the less to the more. If it be lawful for Children, in cases of
necessity, to defend themselves against, and to resist the unjust violence of
their enraged Father: Then much more is it lawful, for private subjects, in
cases of necessity, without the conduct of Parliament, to defend themselves
against and to repel the unjust violence of their Sovereign. For there is not
such a connection betwixt the Sovereign and his Subjects, as betwixt Parents
and their Children, as we have abundantly cleared: And again, if some of the
Children may resist the unjust violence of their Parent and of others of their
Brethren, joining with their enraged Father to cut them off, that they alone
may enjoy the whole inheritance or for some such ends: Then far more may a part
of the Commonwealth resist the Prince's unjust Tyranny, though he has the
other parts of the Commonwealth concurring with him, to their destruction: For
the argument follows, as I said, a; minori ad majus, from the less to the
more: And the union, tie and relation betwixt Brethren, Sons of the same
Father, is as great, yea greater, then the tie, union and relation betwixt one
part of the Commonwealth and another; this relation being but political and in
itself no ways indissoluble, but the other natural and indissoluble.

2* If Wives may lawfully defend themselves against the manifest and unjust
violence of unnatural and enraged Husbands, and repel, in case of necessity,
violence with violence, without the conduct or concurrence of other
Magistrates. Then it is no less, yea much more, lawful for mere Private
Subjects, in cases of necessity, to resist without the help and conduct of a
Parliament, the furious and unjust assaults of their enraged Sovereign. But
the former is true, as all will grant. Therefore, etc. The proposition is
clear from this. That there is not so great a tie betwixt Prince and Subjects,
as betwixt Husband and Wife: And say that he had an equal power over his
Subjects, with that which the Husband has over his Wife (which is false,) yet
the connection will be firm, as to a lawfulness in this case, as well as in the
other.

3. If there be not such a connection betwixt the Sovereign and his Subjects,
as is betwixt the natural Head, and the Body. Then it can no more yea, far
less, be an unnatural thing for Subjects to defend themselves against the
violence of distempered Princes, Who seek directly to destroy the Commonwealth,
when necessity does urge; Then it is for the members of the Body, to defend and
fortify themselves against danger, pain or sickness, occasioned by a
distemper of the brain, yea and with violence seek to cure and remove that
distemper in the head, that is like to destroy the whole body.

4. If the Sovereign has not a Lordly domination, and masterly power over his
Subjects, but they be is Brethren and not his Slaves; and, if the very Law will
allow Servants to defend themselves against their Lords and Masters, L. Minime
35. de Rel. and sumpt. funer. and no man with us will account it unlawful for
servants to defend themselves against the unjust and violent assaults of their
Lords and Masters. Then far less can it be accounted unlawful for private
Subjects to defend themselves, when constrained with necessity, against the
unjust assaults of the Sovereign or his emislaries. But the Antecedent is
cleared, and confessed. Ergo.

5. If the Sovereign have no despotick or Masterly power over the goods and
heritages of his Subjects, as we have proved. Them very lawfully may they
defend their lands goods and heritages, from the violent and unjust
oppressions; of the Prince or his emissaries, sent out to plunder, rob, destroy
their corns, cattle, goods, land sums of money, etc.

6. If the Kingdom be not his proper heritage, nor he proprietor thereof, as
was showed; Then when He or his Emissaries come to destroy a considerable part
of the Kingdom, and to alienate the profits and emoluments thereof unto
others, then the proper owners and proprietors, unjustly. Then may that part of
the Kingdom lawfully resist these unjust oppressors and invaders, and defend
their own.

7. If He be not so much as an usufructuary of the Kingdom: then when He
labors by his Emissaries to waste and destroy the Kingdom or any part
thereof, by unjust violence, private Subjects may resist that unjust violence,
and oppose his oppressing Emissaryes. If a Master may hinder his usufructuary
tennants who would deteriorate the land, which they possess by compact; Then
much more may subjects resist the Princes Emissaries when laboring utterly to
spoil, and lay waste these lands, whereof he is not so much as an usufructuary:

8. If the King's power be only fiduciary as is showed. Then when that power is
manifestly abused, and the pawn which he has got to keep, in imminent and
manifest danger, lawfully enough may he be resisted; When the Lives, the
Liberties of the People, or their Religion is committed unto him, as to a
public Tutor, Watchman, or Servant; and He what through negligence, what
through wilful wickedness, labors to destroy, and undo, and overturne all,
very lawfully may Subjects, in that case of extreme necessity, seek to secure
the Necessary and desirable things, and resist his fury and unjust violence,
who contrare to his oath and promise, seeks to have all overturned and
ruined. Althusius pol. cap. 38. n. 39. speaks well to this, saying [ Octava
ratio sumitur a natura contractus mandati, quo summa Magistratui administratio
est delata a populo, ad hoc ut Reip pro^it non ut noceat, Romans 13. Vasq. lib.
1. c. 44. n. 6. etc. 1. and 2. Illust. Contr. quando igitur mandatarius fines
mandatiexcedit non illi obligatus est mandator, 15. qui Just. de Mand. Luc. 16:
1, 2, 3, etc. and quando conditio, status and fortuna mandatarii mutatur in
deterius L. si quis cum de procur. L. cum quis desolut. Aut mandatum a mandante
revocatur, vel ipse mandans agere and tractare negotium incipit ut tradunt J.
CC. Vide Vasq. Lib. 1. c. 43. n. 5. etc. 4, n. 12. Illust Controv.] What he
adds is worth the reading.

CAP. VIII.
The Peoples saifty is the supreme Law. The King is not absolute. Hence some
More Arguments.
THat salus populi est suprema Lex is asserted by the law of the 12 Tables. The
worthy author of Lex Rex has fully confirmed this truth, and vindicated it
from the exceptions, and false glosses, of the Royalists, Quaest. 25. And
therefore we need say less to it, especially seeing this Surveyer, has nothing
against it, that I have observed.

That it is a truth, That the peoples saifty is the cardinal law, hence
appareth, 1. That the attaineing of this end, was the maine ground and motive
of the peoples condescending upon the constitution. 2. They levelled at his
end, in making choice of such a form, and not of another; for had they
thought another fitter for their temper, and more conduceing for their good,
they had not pitched on this, but on that. 3. with an eye to the saife and sure
attaineing of this end proposed and designed, they made choice of such
persons, and of none else. 4. upon this account, did they condescend upon that
manner of conveyance of the supreme authority, which they thought best, 5. For
no other end, was it, that the Prince was limited and bound unto conditions. 6.
The end being always preferable to the means as such, The Peoples saifty,
which is the end, must be preferred to all such things as are made use of as
means conduceing to this end. 7. By the very Law and institution of God, the
Magistrate is ordained for the Peoples good, Romans 13. ver. 4. and to this end,
(next to the glory of God, unto which we always give the preference) is he
direct all his public actions as a Magistrate, and by this, is he to stir
his course, in governing the helm of the Republic. 8. Hence it is that all
the municipal laws of the Land, are made, renewed, corroborated, explained, or
rescinded and annulled, so as they most conduce to this great end which is ever
anima and ratio Legis. 9. Hence also it is, that no law in its letter tending
to the hurt and detriment of the Realm, is or can be of force. 10. Hence it
is, that the Sovereign in cases of necessity, may neglect the strick
observation of the letter of the laws, and for the good of the community,
neglect private men's interests. Finally the very law of nature requires this,
as Boxhornius Inst. Polit lib. 1. Page 25. tells us.

Doctor Sanderson in his book dc obligati^ne conscientiae praelect. 9. and 10.
labors to put another gloss upon this axiom: But he may be easily
answered: for we shall readyly grant with him, that by saifty here is not
meaned dignity, or liberty in some small and inconsiderable triffles, unto
which some small and inconsiderable hurt is opposite: nor shall we say that any
extraordinary thing is to be attempted in a Commonwealth, against the laws,
whenever any leading popular man or bold rhetoricator or a Demagog shall say
that Princes and Magistrates, have violated the laws, done injuries to the
people, and neglected their duty; yet he must give us leave to say, That the
saifty of the people, is in hazard, when it is manifest and notour, so as they
who run may read it, that laws, once established, and for the future good and
through security of the subject, by Oaths and Covenantes corroborated, and
made irrepelable, by any Magistrate higher or lower, are annulled, condemned,
and rescinded; nay the Covenants whereby the land was devouted to God, and
their Religion secured to them, and the fundamental law or ground of the
Constitution, and condition on which the Sovereign was admitted to his throne,
overturned, and trod under foot: All forced to condemn their former actions
and Covenants, Vows, Oaths, Prayers, Tears, Fastings, Fightings etc. by
subscribing contradictory, condemnatory, and rescissory acts, and declarations,
and forced to run counter their own oaths and Solemn Engagements, otherwise
to be exposed to ruin by arbitrary mulcts, fineings, imprisonements,
quarterings, cruel and inhumane usages, plunderings, vastations, depopulations
and the like. Is not this equivalent to incursions of foreign adversaryes? Is
not this depredation committed by wicked subjects? Is there not here impious
and horrible acts of tyranny? But he will have the word People taken for the
Prince distinct from the People, or in a collective sense, for Prince and
People together. He must be a strong rhetoricator indeed that will persuade any
to believe this, seeing there is no reason in the world for it: For though we
should grant that among the Romans it was sometimes used to design, not only
the plebeians, but also the equestral crder conjunctly, as in that axiom
Senatus populusque Romanus. The senate and the people of Rome: And that
sometimes it did design the Fathers, the knights, and the Plebeians
conjunctly, yet it will not follovv that it is so it is so taken in this
axiom; for if we should follovv his own rule, viz. That collective words
should be collectively taken, unless the opposite which is annexed, require
otherwise: And with all, make use of this own words prael. 10.. 19. A
romana gente etc, 1. e [I have told that this axiom is come to our hands from
the Romans, and now I add, that in the 3 book of Cicero de legibus that
sentence is frist found, for any thing I know; yet, as he testifies himself,
taken out of the ancient laws of that nation, and copied out of the very
letter of the law. Now this Cicero after he has described and explained, in
the preceding book, the laws pertaining to Religion and the worshipping of the
Gods, at length? in the third book, he comes to rehearse these laws which
concearne the Republic and the Magistrates, where these words are to be found.
Regio Imperio duo sunto, iique praeeundo, judicando, consulendo, praetores
judices consules appellantor, militiae summum jus habento, nemini parento,
ollis (i.e. illis) salus populi suprema lex esto he says, to these the chief
law should be the peoples saifty: Now who are these? those, viz. Who were
endued with King'ly power, and had the chief disposal of the militia, etc.] It
will then be as clear as can be, that the opposite which is added or annexed,
does sufficiently show that the word People in this axiom, is to be taken for
the People, as contradistinguished from the Magistrates, and not for People and
Magistrate conjunctly; far less for the Prince as distinct from the People.
And does not this same sentence of Cicero's fully confirm our Gloss, and say
that Princes and Magistrates, as such, ought mainly to design the good of the
People, over whom they are set, and to have that for their end in all their
public actings, whether in making, or in executing laws? How then can he say
that this axiom is rather to be understood of the Prince alone, then of the
People alone? But for this he tells us, That the ancient Fathers did esteem of
them as next unto God ad inferior to him only, and that the People of Israel,
2 Samuel 18: 3. Did prefer the saifty of the King unto the saifty of all the
rest, and in the Lament. 4: 20. He is called the breath of our nostrils. To all
which it is easily answered, 1. That all this will not prove, that Princes are
bound by reason of their office, only to seek their own good, greatness and
power; or to prefer that unto the good of the People; and not rather design,
as their proper and principal end, the promoving of the good and saifty of the
People committed to their charge. 2. The Fathers might have spoken so of the
Emperors, as they were then de facto and in regaird of their supereminency,
but notwithstanding of that, they and their supereminency both, was subordinate
unto the good of the People, and was ex natura rei, but a mean for that maine
and great good. 3. It is true in some cases, and at such a nick of time, as
that was 2 Samuel 18. The loss of a good King, when he is the maine person
hunted for by the adversaries, would prove more destructive to the
Commonwealth, then the loss of ten thousand, and this rather confirms the
axiom then weakeneth it, for it was upon the account of the public good of
the Commonwealth, that the life of King David was preferable to the lives of
many. 4. It is not said, that His life was better then, and preferable to, the
lives of the whole body of the Commonwealth. 5. That metaphorical expression
Lament. 4. she weth only how useful and steadable the King would be unto them;
even a necessary mean to keep them in a politic life as to a Commonwealth; and
so it says that, his whole design as a Magistrate should be to procure their
good. 6. Moses a good Prince did prefer the Peoples life unto his own: and
David did the same 1. Chron 12: 17. and these do abundantly confirm our sense.
He replyeth further; That it was no wonder that among the Romans from whom we
have this axiom, the Peoples saifty was the principal law, seeing in that
democratical government, the People were the Supreme powers. Ans. This is but
a mere shift; for even in a democrat. governm. the Peoples saifty is
distinguished from the Supreme power which is to level all to this maine end,
the saifty of the People. 2. Cicero told us that the Consuls and Praetors were
bound to propose this end unto themselves; and so we find that the People,
whose saifty is the Supreme law, are distinguished from these who, whether in a
Popular or Aristocratical govern. excerced the supreme power. 3. This same is
insert in the law of the XII tables, and so it was in force whatever form of
government was exerced. But syes he Prael. 9.. 19. Hence it will not follow,
That People may, when they perceive, or cry out that they perceive their
libertyes hurt in some things; take arms without the Princes leave, and
violate all laws and duties, and so raise tumults and seditions. Ans. Neither
do we say so, nor resolve to draw any such conclusions therefrom; but this is
clear, that when the covenanted work of reformation is overturned, laudable
laws establishing the same, contrary to oath, and solemn Engagement,
rescinded, libertyes palpably violated, People in humanely persecuted for
adhereing to their Covenants, etc. and unjustly oppressed by the Kings
emissaries, people may then take arms in their own defense, though the King
should refuse to consent, or should countenance the oppressors, and carry on
that inslaving course. Again, he says let any read, and read over again that
sentence of Cicero and search every pairt of it, where will he find any
vvarrand for Subjects to rise up against princes, to injure them or dethrone
them. Ans We do not intend to search the sentence for that end, it will
suffice us, if hence we find ground to conclude the lavvfulnesse of Peoples
defending themselves against tyrannizeing Princes, in cases of necessity: and
let him, or any for him, read, and better read that whole period, and
narrovvly consider and examine every sentence and word in it, and see if he
can find this condemned.

Ere I come to speak to the other particular, I shall from this draw some few
things useful for our purpose, and,

1. It is irrational, and mere flattery to cry up and exalt the Sovereigns
prerogative, in prejudice, and to the destruction of that, for which both He
and His Prerogatives are, and were appointed, as subservient means, the saifty
of the People. That being de jure his maine end, and it being for this cause
end, that he is endued with such power, and has such privileges and
prerogatives conferred upon him, and allowed unto him, He and his Prerogatives
both, should veil unto this Supreme Law the saifty of the People: so that
when they come in competition, The Peoples saifty of right, is to have the
pre-eminence.

2. Since all other laws municipal, made and established in a free Realm,
must be subordinate unto this Principal, and Cardinal law, and have tendency to
promove, corroborate and establish it: Then, when any of these Laws, in their
letter, strick directly at the root of the saifty of the People, and thoward
and cross that maine and highest law, That law is Eaienus null, and really no
law. So that it is but childish scrupulosity, to start at the letter of a law,
when the Commonwealth is in hazard: and it is but brutish ignorance to object
the letter of a low against such as are endeavoring the saifty of the people,
which is the maine business, and to preserve the Commonwealth from ruin; and
destruction, against which no law is, or can be, of any force or value, but
null and of no effect, for here it holds true, that summum jus is summa
injuria.

3. Since Laws themselves, when in their letter they cross this maine law,
must be accounted as no lowes really, and de jure; and may saifly be neglected
and passed over, when the Peoples saifty is in no small hazard by the strick
adhereing to the letter thereof? Then, much more may punctilioes, and law
formalities be laid aside, when the Commonwealth is in danger. When there is a
fire in a City, all the formalities of order are not strickly to observed.

4. Since The privileges, and lawful prerogatives of the Sovereign must veil,
in cases of necessity, unto this High and Supreme Law, the saifty of the
People. Then no less must the privileges of a Parliament yield unto this: for
whatever privilege they enjoy, it is in order to this end, and the means must
always have a subserviency unto the end, and when they tend to the destruction
of the end, they are then as no means unto that end, nor to be made use of for
that end.

5. Though King and Parliament both should conspire together against the good
of the Land, yet di jure they have no power or authority to destroy that End,
and whatever they enact or do, tending to the ruin of this maine and
principal good, which they should have before their eyes, as their end, is ipso
facto null.

6. When acts and actings of King and Parliament tend directly, and are made
and done of purpose, to destroy and overthrow the work of reformation in
doctrine, worshipe, discipline and government; which was owned, and established
by laws, with all formalities of law, and was avowed by solemn vows,
Covenants, attestations, protestations, declarations, and engagements of all
ranks of People, from the highest to the lowest: and courses are laid down, to
force and constrain People to renunce their Covenant with God, to turn
perjured apostates; and when by acts and actings, the fundamental terms and
conditions of our reformed constitution, confirmed by unrepelable laws, by the
King's accepting of his Crown and Scepter, and all other Magistrates accepting
their places, upon these terms, are overturned; and when by an arbitrary and
illegal tyranny, no man has security for his life, his lands, his libertyes,
nor his religion, is not the saifty of the People in danger? No man needs to
say who shall be judge, The Magistrates or the people? For all who have eyes to
see may judge, whether the Sun be shineing or not, and all who have common
sense may judge in this case. When these things are done and avowed, they
cannot be denied, and no man of reason or religion will deny the inference.

Hence then it is clear, that no man in reason can condemn the late act of
defense, which was the only mean left for preserving of that which all
government and Governors should level at, viz. The saifty of the People, both
in soull and body, their Religion, Lives, Liberties, Privileges, Possessions,
Goods, and what was dear to them as men, and as Christians, howbeit it vvanted
the formality of the authority of Sovereign, Parliament or Council. No man who
will not deny this axiom, can condemn them as Traitors, seeing they were
noble Patriots and loyal to that Supreme law, The saifty of the People.

As to the other particular, concerning the absolute power of the Soveragne, We
say.

1. That the Sovereign is under obligations to his People, and bound and
limited by conditions, we have showed above: which conditions he is bound to
observe, see Hoen Disp. Pol. 9.

2. That the Sovereign is not exempted from the laws of God, none but profane
graceless, vvreatches will deny; since he is a creature of God's and a
subject to him, and his servant, Romans 13. and therefore must not transgress
his laws, under the pain of high treason and laese Majesty. It was but a base
saying of an impudent whore Iulia to her step sone Antonius Caracalla, si libet
licet, an nescis te imperatorem esse, and no less impious was that saying of
Anaxarchus to Alexander the Great, when he had Killed Clitus in a rage, Nesus
adsess^rem jovi justitiam, and fas esse quo quicquid actum a dominante fuerit,
id jus and fas sit, as if for sooth Alexander could do no wrong. It was an
abominable saying of these judges to Cambyses. That though they could find no
law permitting a brother to marry his sister, yet they knew of another law,
whereby it was lawful to the Kings of Persia to do whatsoever they pleased. All
Divines will grant this: and so do Lawyers and Politicians: See Bodine de
Repub. lib. 1. cap. 8. Hoenon. Disp. Polit. 9. These. 7. Paul. Voetius Iurispr.
Sacra. Gerhard de Magist Polit.. 119. Althus. Polit. cap. 19. n. 9, 10, 11.
Timpl. Polit. lib. 5. cap. 1. Our Surveyer grants this, page 57, 58. and
elsewhere.

3. Neither is he exempted from the Laws of Nature and Nations; for the law of
nature is the very Law of God, and God has no where Subjected his Law unto the
will of Princes.

4. Neither is the exempted from all the civil Laws, says Hoenon. ubi
supra. For, says he, many civil Laws are but declarative of the Law of
nature, and consectaryes thereof, and what power he has, he has from the
People, and the People are certanely bound by these Laws: Yea as Boxhornius
says, Instit. Polit. lib. 1. page 33. Principi tantummodo licet quantum
populus ei voluit licere: No more is lawful for him then the People will. The
Surveyer in the forecited place says, [ It is a Royal thing for a King to
live by the same good Laws, which are given by him to the People, and it is of
efficacious influence upon them; to move them to walk in their duties orderly:
Rex tenetur servare Leges, si non ut Leges tamen ut rations. But he might know
that our King is bound to observe the Laws, even as Laws, and must pay his
debt, and submit to the decision of Judges as well as others.

5. Our Surveyer confesses, Page 75. That the King is bound before God to rule
his People according to the Law of God, of reason and nature; yea and to take
his directions in government, from the rational Laws of the Kingdom (which
are deductions from, or determinations of, the Law of God, reason and nature,
to particular circumstances) agreed to by the consent and good likeing of his
People. Hence it follows, 1. That he cannot dispense, by his prerogative
Royal, with a just Law, according to his sole pleasure, and so pardon such as
deserve death? 2. He cannot kill and slay whom he will, but according to law.
3. Nor can he alone make laws. 4. Nor can his will stand for a law. 5. Nor is
he the sole interpreter of the law. 6. Nor in interpreting of the law, has he
a dominion over it to expone it as he will: for if these be not granted, it
cannot be granted that he is bound to rule us by the Law of God, of reason, and
of nature, or by the Laws of the Kingdom, but according to his mere will and
pleasure.

6. It must be a most unreasonable thing to say, That the Sovereigns power is
absolute, which Royalists contend so much for, and say that he is above all law
of man; for then he might do what he pleased without control. But 1. did ever
the People set a Sovereign over themselves, upon these terms? Did ever
People set him over themselves to rage at randon, to kill, murder, massacre,
and do what seemed good in his eyes? 2. Their condition should necessarily, be
worse after the constitution then it was before. 3. The saifty of the People
should not be the supreme Law. 4. He might then break all bonds and oaths,
and keep no conditions which he had made. 5. If so, a Prince as a Prince,
should be a great plague and judgment to a People. 6. All his Subjects should
be formal Slaves unto him, their lives and all they have should be at his
devotion. 7. He should not then be the Servant of God for the good of the
People, contrare to Romans 13: 4. 8. If this power agree to him as King, then it
is from God, and so God should give him a power to sin and tyrannize, which is
most false. 9. Then there could be no Tyrants. 10. Yea a King as a King, should
be a Tyrant in actu signato, and a Tyrant should be nothing but a King in actu
exercito. 11. Yea if so, they might not so much as be rebuked by the messengers
of the Lord, for their enormities, contrare to the many instances in the Old
Testament of Prophets rebuking Princes 12 if his power were absolute, laws
would become no laws, neither were there need of laws, nor should the making
of laws be a mean to promove the good of the Realm: all which are most
absurd.

And as for for our King That he has no such prerogative Royal, as puts him
above all limitations is already sufficiently evidenced by Lex Rex and by the
Apology though this Surveyer is pleased to say Page 11. That his prerogative
Royal is disputed down most weakly and foolishly in the Apology: Yet he will
not see so much weakness and folly there, as he imagines, when ever he comes
to handle that disput. But I grant it is easier to him to say, that all is weak
and foolish, which pleases nor him, then to undertake the confutation thereof.
It is enough to him, that he show his teeth once, and then run away. But if he
will afterward undertake that debate, let him consider the particulars there
mentioned, and also these 24 particulars Mentioned by Lex Rex. Quaest. 23. page
205. 206. Unto which I shall add (that he may make one work of all) these
particulars, which will further serve to confirm what is there said, and prove
our point.

1. As it is not proper and peculiar to the Kings of Scotland to make laws,
and to explain and interpret laws: so nor is it peculiar unto them, to
appoint punishments unto transgressors, and to liberate and free from the
stroke of the law, As the late Parliament declared by their deed, in
murdering some, and in liberating others guilty of Treason, more then such as
were executed: and this by politicians is made a part of the Soveraignity See
Bondin. de repub. (mihi Edit. Gall.) page 236. Volgm. in Synop, de jure
principum, page 58. Hoen. Disput Polit. page 124. Timpl. Polit. Lib. 5. c. 1.
q. 2.

2. The last appeal comes not always to our King: and yet this is reckoned
among the royal prerogatives by Bodin ubi supra, Page 321. and Heen. Page 127.
Timpl. Pol. Lib. 5. Cap. 1. quaest. 2.

3. It is not proper and peculiar to the King to appoint new imposts, customs,
and taxes: but Parliaments do this, Act. 277. Parl. 15. Iam. 6. c. 2. Parl. 23.
Iam. 6. Act. 1. Parl. 1. Char. 1. and act. 14. 15. of the same parl. act. 13.
parl. Anno 1661. Charl. 2. and this is reckoned by the forementioned
politicians among the prerogatives. Volgm. page 57. Hoen. page 129. Bodin. page
244. Timpl. ubi supra.

4. Nor does it belong to him alone to appoint the value of money, as is clear
by our acts. act. 67. parl 8. Iam. 3. act. 93. and 97. parl. 13. Iam. 3. act.
23. parl. 1. Iam. 1. act. 33. parl. 8. Iam. 2. act. 59. parl. 13. Iam. 2. act.
2. parl. 1. Iam. 4. act. 17. parl. 2. Iam. 4. act. 40. parl. 4. Iam. 4. act.
17. parl. 1. Iam. 6. act. 20. of the same parl. act. 249. parl. 15. Iam. 6. c.
9. parl. 16. Iam. 6. and yet the forecited authors reckon this also, among jura
Majestatis.

5. He must not rule us by his mere will, but by the laws of the land, act.
79. parl. 6. Iam. 4. act. 130. 131. parl. 8. Iam. 6. and not by any special
grant or private privileges act. 48. parl. 3. Iam. 1.

6. He is not the proper judge of all causes in the first instance act. 45.
parl. 2. Iam. 1. act. 62. parl. 8. Iam. 3.

7. Some causes are fully exempted from his judgment and determination act.
105. parl. 14. Iam. 3.

8. The Lords of the Session may finally decide causes, according to the act.
65. parl. 3. Iam. 1. without any liberty granted to the party to appeal to the
King act. 63. parl. 14. Iam. 2. and this privilege of the Session in ratified
act. 93. parl. 7. Iam. 5. act. 1. parl. 2. Mar. act. 170. parl. 13. Iam. 6.
act. 183. of the same parl. act. 211. parl. 14. Iam. 6. act. 23. parl. 1.
Carol. 1. act. 23. parl. Anno 1661. Charl. 2. Yea the judges are allowed to
discern according to equity notwithstanding of any write of the King's to the
contrary, act. 92. parl. 6. Iam. 6. act. 47. parl. 11. Iam. 6. act. 79. of the
same parl.

9. He is limited in granting remissons sic act. 46. parl. 2. Iam. 1. act. 51.
parl. 3. Iam. 1: act 75. parl. 14. Iam. 2. act. 42. parl. 6. Iam. 3. act. 94.
parl. 13. Iam. 3. act. 62. and 63. parl. 6. Iam. 4. act. 174. parl. 13. Iam. 6.

10. He is limited in alienating of lands, possessions or moveable goods act.
2. parl. 1. Iam. 2. act. 41. parl. 11. Iam. 2. act. 70. and 71. parl. 9. Iam.
3. act. 112. parl. 14. Iam. 3. act. 5. parl. 1. Iam. 4. act. 10. parl. 2. Iam.
4. act. 22. ejusd. parl. act. 50. parl. 4. Iam. 4. act. 90. parl. 6. Iam. 4.
act. 84. parl. 6. Iam. 5. act. 115. and. 116. parl. 7. Iam. 5. act. 6. parl. 9.
Iam. 6. act. 176. parl. 13. Iam. 6. act. 159. ejusdem parl. act. 203. and 204.
parl. 14. Iam. 6: act. 236. parl. 15. Iam. 6. act. 242. and 243. ejusdem parl.
act. 1. parl. 16. Iam. 6. cap. 4. parl. 23. Iam. 6. act. 10. parl. 1. Carol. 1.

11, So is he limited in erecting Royal brughs act. 43. parl. 11. Iam. 2.

12. He is limited in appoynting public offices for admininistration of
justice, act. 44. parl. 11. Iam. 2.

12. He may not pass gifts, signatures, or remissions, but with the consent of
the privy Council, act. 12. parl. 2. Iam. 4.

14. He has been aftentimes admonished of his duty by the Parliament: see act.
23. parl. 1. Iam. 1. act. 5. and. 6. parl. 3. Iam. 2. act. 14. parl. 6. Iam. 2.
act. 92. parl. 13. Iam. 3. act. 8. parl. 2. Iam. 4. act. 29. parl. 3. Iam. 4.
act. 17. parl. 1. Iam. 6.

If this Surveyer has a mind to defend the King's civil prerogative royal, or
his absolute power, Let him take all these particulars to his consideration:
but we go on to our purpose.

From what has been said concerning this limited power of the Kings we draw
these particulars for our purpose.

1. If the King be a limited Prince, Then he may in some cases be lawfully
resisted. Gerhard himself de Magistrate. Pol.. 484. page 1303. in answering of
that quaestion what shall Subjects do, if a Magistrate, who is an infidel or an
haeretick, does force them unto a false religion, says That such a Magistrate
who has absolute and unlimited power, and is under no compacts may not be
resisted, by such as are mere Subjects: So that he would grant in this case
That it is lawful, for mere private Subjects to resist a limited Prince, who is
bound by compacts and contracts. It is true when he comes afterward to speak
of resisting a Tyrant, and proponeth the quaestion. 486. whether such who have
absolute power and turn Tyrants may be resisted, after he has cited some
sayings of Papists, he tells us. 487. That all the arguments of iunius Brutus,
Rossaeus, Buckerius are solidly answered by Barclaius Albericus Gentilis,
Cunerus and Arnisaeus, and this passage our Surveyer brings in Page 89. But
who sees not, that it comes not at all home to our purpose, seeing our King is
not a King of absolute power, though he has his Kingdom by succession, but is
limited by conditions, and stipulations. And further every one may see the
weakness of Gerhard's reasons, and how inconsistent he is with himself: For.
1. Says he, such is only under Gods jurisdicton. But alas 1. May not I
resist, a person, who is not under my jurisdiction? 2. Royalists will say the
same of all Princes, even Barclaus and Arnisaeus. Again he says The People
have translated their whole power unto such a Prince and cannot recall it. But
1. They have never translated over unto him a power to inslave themselves, for
that was not in their power to do. Nor 2. Could they ever give away the power
of self defense, which is their birth right. 3. Says he, Subjects, in this
case, want God's command and a Superior power. But 1. They have God's command
in nature, no less then these who are under limited Princes. 2. They have a
superior virtual power in cases of necessity. 4. Says he, He is a Father of
the Republict and not a Tutor only, and therefore as Children have no power
over their Parents, no more have Subjects over their Princes. But, 1. Are not
even limited Princes, as well Fathers to the Commonwealth? So that by this
argument, it shall be as unlawful to resist these, which he will not say. 2.
Yea such absolute Princes Look rather to be Tigers, and stated enemies unto the
Commonwealth, then Fathers. 3. They have no proper Parental power, as we
showed, but Metaphorical. 4. Even natural parents may be resisted Ergo much
more they. 5. We are not speaking of giving judgment against Tyrants but of
resisting of them: and if he grant this, we have our desire. And his question
was touching resistance. 485. Quest. 4.

2. A Limited and pactional Prince may be legally resisted, Ergo also with
force when a legal resistance cannot be had. The antecedent is true and no
Scottish man will deny it, as to our king: For if he or any for him should
pretend a right to their inheritance and intend an action of law against them,
they may defend themselves by law; or if he should take possession without a
sentence of law, They might pursue him and his tennants, or who ever came in
his name, to take violent possession, and procure letters of ejection, and the
like: Yea by force they might vvithstand any that should come to take violent
and illegal possession. The consequence is hence clear, That whatever ground a
man has to defend his rights and possession by law, the same ground he has
to defend his right by force, when he cannot use the legal mean; for if the
King had real right, and not he, unto what he possesses, it were as
unlawful to vvithhold the King from possession of his own, by quircks of
law, as by force. Again, This legal resistance is no resisting of the
Ordinance of God, but of the man, who seeks no enjure. No more is this
violent resistance a resisting of the ordinance of God, but only of the man,
who abuses his power. Hence,

3. If the King have not absolute power to do and command what he will: Then,
when he crosses the rules prescribed by God's law and Man's law, without any
injury offered to the ordinance of God, he may be resisted by his Subjects,
over whom he thinks to exerce an absolute, arbitrary and tyrannical power.
The reason is because. That power, which is not the ordinance of God, may be
resisted, without the lest injury done unto the true ordinance of God. But this
absolute power is no ordinance of God, it is not appointed of him, nor allowed
of him. Therefore, etc. But say Royalists, Though that absolute and Tyrannical
power be not simply from God; yet it is so from God, that no man can lawfully
resist it Answ, 1* If it be so from God, as that it may not be resisted, then
it is from God, and is the ordinance of God: for it is the ordinance of God
that cannot, must not, be resisted. But says the Surveyer Page 37. [It may be
easily seen that subjection to the power (opposite to resistance) is all alongs
enjoined (viz. Romans 13.) whether the power be rightly used or otherwise: If it
be rightly used, subjection without refuseing active obedience is required: if
it be not rightly used, subjection without resistance, violent or forcible
repelling of the power, is required upon this formal reason and ground; Because
even when the power is abused, it remains a power ordained of God; (although
the abuse of it be not ordained) even as a man's eye remains his eye, although
sometimes it is not rightly used. The formal reason of the subjection, and
non-resistence pressed, is not the right use of the power, but because it is a
power ordained of God (however perverted in the use by man) Answ.] 1. By this
man's doctrine, The King might not be resisted if he should turn another Nero
or Caligula, or should deal with us all, as the Turk does with his subjects, or
the King of Spain, with his slaves in America. If he should fill ditches with
his living subjects, and to satisfy his lust and pleasure should tumble them be
thousands down a precipice into the midst of the sea: yea though he should
bring in an army of Turks or Tartars to destroy all his subjects young and old;
Though he should sell and give away the whole land unto the Turk or any
foreign Tyrant, and become the most habited not our and complete Tyrant: and
should against all appearance of law, manifestly seek the destruction of the
whole land, man, wife and child, and of the very being of religion, according
to law, and of all known libertyes, and should force and compel, with armed
heathens, all his subjects great and small, to offer sacrifice to the Heathen
Gods; and the like: For in all this and the like, there is but an abuse of the
power, and the power is still of God however it be abused, and because it is a
power ordained of God, this abuse must be submitted unto, without the least
resistance, is not this sufficient to make all men abhore this man's
principles? 2. He must say that it is not possible to resist the abuse of the
power, but the power it self must be resisted, and so, such as do resist the
most dreadful tyranny imaginable, do resist the ordinance of God, which is most
false and absurd. 3. If the abuse of the power be not from God, then such as
resist this abuse, do not resist that which is ordained of God, but that which
is not ordained of God. And therefore resisting of the abuse of the power, is
no resisting of the ordinance of God. 4. Subjection is only required to that
which is the ordinance of God, because subjection is required when and where,
and so far as resistance is prohibited: Now resistance to the ordinance of God,
is only prohibited, and not resistance to the carnal and bloody lusts of men,
which is rather the ordinance of the devil then the ordinance of God. 5. The
vvrong use or abuse of the eye may be resisted, hindered, and obstructed,
without any injury done to the eye it self. So may the wrong use or abuse of
Magistratical power be resisted, without any vvrong done unto the power which
is of God. 5. It is false to say that all resistance of the abused power, is
forbidden upon this formal reason and ground, because even when the power is
abused it remains a power ordained of God: Because the abused power is not at
all ordained of God, nor never was, it is no part of that power which God
ordained: a power to murder the innocent, to kill the vvidow and fatherless,
and to oppress the people of God, is not of God: God never appointed that
power of David's to murder Vriah and to commit adultery with Bathshebah.
These were no acts of the Magistratical power ordained of God, but acts of
lust the wickedness. 7. If this reason hold good, we must never resist by
refuseing active obedience, let him command what he will: for his sinful and
unjust commands are but the abuse of that power which is ordained of God, and
the power even when abused by giving out edicts, and mandats, (according to
this man) remains a power ordained of God, as a man's eye remains his eye,
though sometimes it is not rightly used. Now how will he loose his own
argument? what ever answer he give here, it will helps us out. Sure, if a man
many refuse obedience to an unjust command, of an abused power, without doing
injury unto the power which is ordained of God, it will be no less clear,
that a man may refuse subjection to and resist abused power, without doing hurt
unto the power which is ordained of God. And I Desire that the Reader would
seriously notice this, and see how all he objecteth is answered by it, and the
wicked ensnared in the work of his own hands.

4. If the King have not absolute power, but be limited both by the laws of
God, and by the laws of Man: Then when he transgresses the bounds prescribed
to him, he may be resisted. The reason is because. He who is no Magistrate many
be resisted. But the King going beyond his bounds is no Magistrate. Therefore
he may be resisted, The proposition cannot be denied: for he who is not a
Magistrate, is not that ordinance of God, which we are forbiden to resist. The
assumption is granted by Arniseus de auth: princi. c. 2. n. 10. saying, Dum
contra officium facit Magistratus, non est Magistratus, quippe a quo non
injuria sed jus nasci debeat. while the Magistrate does against his office, he
is no Magistrate; because a Magistrate should do no wrong but right, l.
miminerint 6 c. unde vi. c. quod quis 24.

5. If the King's power be not absolute, and if he cannot do whatsoever he
pleases: Then when he makes his lust a law, and follows the dictate of his
tyrannical corrupted will, he may be resisted: because, what power he never
got from the People to exerce, if he exerce it, he may be, by them resisted.
But the People never gave him a power to rule as he lists, and to do what his
missed understanding and enraged will did prompt him to do. Ergo they may
resist him when he exerceth no power given him, but a power assumed to himself,
through the corruption of his heart and wicked will.

6. If the King's power be not absolute, then the People are not denuded of the
power of self defense. Royalists, and such as trade their steps think, that an
absolute prince, or a prince integrae Majestatis, as they call him, has gotten
all Power from the People, even that power of self defense (which yet is false)
but though this were granted, it will not follow, that a limited Prince has
got away that power of self defense from the People, and left them naked to
his tyrannical will, to be disposed of, as he thinks good.

7. The King's power being limited, and not absolute, says that, by the
constitution and limitation, more regaird was had to the security of the
People, then to the King's mere will and pleasure; and that the Kings mere will
and pleasure should not be followed, but resisted, when thereby the good of the
People and their saifty was in hazard: all men are bound to look more to the
end then to the means, and to hinder such things as are destructive of the end.

8. If the King's power be no absolute; then the Parliament's power is not
absolute: And if the King may be resisted in cases of necessity, because his
power is not absolute: Then the Parliament also may be resisted, upon the same
ground, when they do violence and oppress the innocent: And if the Parliament
may be resisted by Subjects, then it cannot be unlawful for, Subjects, in the
cases of necessity, to defend themselves against the unjust violence of their
limited Prince, albeit they want the concurrence, countenance and conduct of a
Parliament or Public Representatives.

9. If King and Parliament both be limited, they cannot make what laws they
will. Nay, themselves declare that they cannot make any particular act or
ratification in prejudice of the lavvful rights of a third party, and therefore
in the end of their Parliaments or Sessions of Parliaments they usually pass
an act salvo jure cujuslibet. And if their particular acts are no force, in so
far as they prejudge the rights of a third person, nor to be submitted unto nor
obeyed, Then their other acts made in prejudice of the glory of God, of the
good of his Church, and of the interest of Christ in the land, are of no force,
nor to be obeyed and submitted unto: and, if in the former case particular
persons are allowed to defend their rights, notvvithstanding of these acts:
Then much more may private Persons be allowed to defend Christ's rights, and
their own rights, as to their soull and consciences, notvvithstanding of any
act or law general or particular made to the contrary, the best way they can,
when all formal legal vvayes are taken from them.

10. If the King be not absolute. He cannot execute the Laws made, according
to his own lust and pleasure: nor may any inferior judictory do so: For that
is a piece of tyranny: and when he or they, following their own tyrannical
wills, transgress the Laws and Bounds prescribed, and take an arbitrary way
of executeing their cruelty, They may in that case be resisted: Because that
power is no proper magistratical power, but tyranny, and an arbitrary
ebullition of rage, no power ordained of God, but the lawless will of corrupt
creatures.

11. Since He has not absolute power to execute the Laws after an arbitrary
manner according to his own lust and pleasure, if when he is doing so, he may
be resisted; then much less can be Empower his Emissaries with an arbitrary,
tyrannical, lawlese cruelty, under pretense of executing the Laws; or if he
do, the resisting of such in that case, can be no resistance of the Ordinance
of God. Neither God nor Man ever gave him power to confer on others a
Lawless license to oppress, rob, spoil, plunder and tyrannize over
innocents. And therefore the resisting of such bloody executioners, without any
lawful power, tyrannyzing over the subjects, can be no sin or rebellion,
condemned by God or his Law.

12. Since the King may not by an absolute power command what he will. His
Subjects are not bound to an absolute obedience, but always in the Lord: It
being better to obey God then Man; and when his Subjects are not bound to obey,
he cannot Lawfully inflict punishment on such, as contraveeing his Laws, obey
the Laws of God: Because just punishments are for transgressions of just Laws:
And when he inflicts punishment where God allows a reward. he goes directly
against his commission, which is to be a terror to evil works, and not to good
Romans 13: ver. 3. And when a Servant, or public Messenger goes contrare to his
commission, it is no disloyalty to the King, to refuse subjection unto such. So
nor is it distloyalty to the King of Kings, to refuse Subjection unto his
Minister, when he runeth cross to his own express commission. And therefore
the Late Act of defense, being the defense of innocents in the case of extreme
and inevitable necessity, against illegal commissions, contrary to the Law of
God, cannot be branded with rebellion, but accounted an Act of lavvful
self-defence.

CAP. IX.
Of the Peoples Power in the works of Reformation. Our Argument hence.
THe Author of Naphtaly, Page 18. 19. had these words, [ As we have already
cleared, that in case either the People, or any part of them be violented to a
compliance, or be wickedly persecuted for adhereing to God, in the profession
and practice of the contrary duties, they may lawfully defend themselves, and
are mutually bound to assist and deliver one another: So it now comes to be
considered that, seeing the maintenance of truth, and the true Worshipe of God,
were and are the principal ends and motives of contracting of Societyes, and
erecting of Governments, whereunto both the People and Rulers, are not only
separatly every one for himself, but jointly obliged for the public
advancement and establishment thereof: And that God does therefore equally
exact, and avenge the sin of the Rulers only, or of the People only, or of any
part of the People only, upon the whole body of Rulers and People, for their
simple Tolerance and connivance, without their active compliance with the
transgressors; of necessity, both from the principles deduced, and from the
most visible judgments of God agreeable thereto, there must be a supeperior and
antecedent obligation to that of submission, incumbent upon all both jointly
and separatly, for the maintenance, vindication, and reformation of Religion,
in order to the promoving of these great ends of the public profession of
truth, and true Worshipe, which the Lord does indispensibly require.] By which
any, who read with judgment and attention, and consider what preceedeth, and
what follovveth, may see what was that Authors scope and intention, viz. to
show in few words, the lavvfulnesse of Peoples standing to the maintenance
and defense of truth, and the true Worship of God, when violated and enjured
by these, who, by their places and callings, should endeavor the establishing
and perfect security thereof, both from adversaries within and without; as
well as to the defense of their persons and libertyes, when wickedly
persecuted for adhereing to God: And that, as it was not his scope and
intention; so nor will the words give ground to any (who is not utterly
blinded with prejudice, and resolved to pervert the fairest and smoothest
expressions that can be used, to the end they may pervert truth, and deceive
the simple who readily believe every thing) to think that he pleads for any
magistratical authority, and power to give out mandats, and enjoin execution
upon transgressors in point of reformation of Religion, unto private persons:
Far less, that he pleads for a power due unto them, to rise against, and
throvv down King and all Magistrates, supreme and subordinate, and to use
the vindicative punishing and reforming power of the sword, even in case of
defection in matter of Religion. If any will but look to the end of that
Paragraph, they shall see this fully confirmed, where he is applying what he
said, to the purpose he was upon, viz. in vindication of what was done by
our first Reformers, in the days of Mr Knox (of whom only he is speaking in
that part of his book) for thus he speaks [ and had not our Reformers great
reason to fear and tremble, least the manifest toleration of proud cruel and
flattering Prelates, who had perverted the lawful powers into bloody
persecutors; and of idolatrous Priests, whose wickedness and idolatry had
corrupted the whole Land, might involve not only themselves, but the whole
Nation in destroying and overflowing indignation.] Was there any such thing
pretended, or assumed by these Reformers, but a power to defend, and maintain
the true reformed Religion, and their reformed Preachers, against the malice of
powers perverted and enraged against them, by the bloody and pestilent counsel
of the these idolatrous locusts, and to hinder open and avowed idolatry, which
provoked God against the whole Land? Did they ever arrogate to themselves the
magistratical, vindicative, punishing and reforming power of the sword against
all Magistrates Supreme and Subordinate? Or does Naphtaly say any such thing?
And yet this Surveyer because he cannot confute what is there nervously
vindicated, asserted and demonstrated; That he may not be seen to do nothing
for his hire, he will thraw Naphtaly's words as he thinks best, and falsely
and most impudently assert Page 83. That Naphtali says [ Any party of mere
private persons may rise against, resist, throw down King and all
Magistrates, Supreme and Subordinate; and in their Phinehas-like motions, use
the vindicative, punishing, reforming power of the sword, especially in case of
defection in matter of Religion: and that there is a joint obligation laying
upon the people, and every party thereof, to vindicate and reform Religion, in
a public punitive way, even against all Magistrates and Nobles, and against
the plurality of the people. So that if any part of the people do think the
Magistrates, all of them, or the plurality of the people, patrons of
abominations, any private party that think they have power enough, may flee to
the vindicative, punishing and reforming sword, and falt upon all Rulers and
other, whom they think to be in a defection, and will boldly say that in truth
they are so.] Who sees not what perverting of truth is here? When Naphtali
only asserts, that in case the Magistrate, to whom the vindicative, and (in
case of backslideing) the reforming power is committed, and who should make
this his maine work, shall turn the principal perverter, and chief patron of
these abominations, some other thing is required of the people then
submission, and there lies upon them some obligation antecedent to that, even
an obligation to the maintenance, vindication, and reformation of Religion:
Which may be, and is, something distinct from that vindication and reformation,
which is incumbent on Magistrates, even a vindication and reformation, by way
of maintenance of the received truth, and hindering of idolatry and blasphemy,
or what is dishonorable to God, pernicious to the commonwealth, and opposite to
the true reformed Religion: which may be done without arrogateing in the least,
that power which God has committed to the Magistrates: And this is far from
useing the sword against the Magistrate, and from throwing him down. It is
incumbent to the Magistrate, to defend private subjects from Robbers; and if
they spoil and robe a man's house, to recover what is by robbery taken away:
but if he neglect this, and rather patronize such Robbers; It is a duty on the
subject, to defend his own, and vindicate and recover his goods, the best way
he can: and who will say that it is an usurping of the Magistrates sword,
whereby he should punish Robbers, defend the innocent, and recover the goods of
the spoiled; or a riseing up aginst the Magistrate to dethrone him. There is a
private maintaining, vindicateing and recovering of goods stolen, which yet is
active, and may be effectual: and there is a public, authoritative and
magistratical defending, vindicating and recovering. The other may be incumbent
to private persons in some cases, when yet they do not usurp this. So in the
Matters of Religion, there is a private, yet active and real maintaining,
vindicating and reforming of Religion when corrupted, and there is a public,
authoritative and Magistratical maintaining, vindicating and reforming. The
former may be assumed by private persons, in some cases, without the least
hazard of incroaching upon this, far more without the hazard of calling
Magistrates to account, judging, condemning, and dethroning them, and the like.

Having thus cleared how little ground he has, to cry out so against Naphtaly
and his party, as the sanguinary faction (as he does Page 83.) and to prosecute
that dispute as he does in the following Pages, we will not have much
difficulty in answering what he has said: but first let us prosecute our own
business, and show what real power People have, without their Magistrates, in
the maintaining and reforming of Religion: And,

1. It is lawful, yea necessary, for every private person, whether the
Magistrates Superior and Inferior give their countenance, concurrence, or
consent thereunto, or not, to purge their hearts, and reform their lives, and
to walk in all the ways of God's Commandments. Our Surveyer himself grants
this, Page 84. for says he, every one is bound to amend one, and so all will
be more easily amended. Very ture: And if this were done, our work were at an
end, and himself would be a Hangman to his own pamphlet, unless he think
himself exeemed from that duty of reformation, and that he has a dispensation
to lie, slander, calumniate, and blaspheme the work, ways, and People of God.

2. It is the duty of all private persons, notwithstanding that idolatry,
superstition, or any other corruption in the worshipe of God be established by
authority, or countenanced and encouraged; or conformity there to pressed, to
keep themselves pure from such courses as provoke the eyes of God, who is a
jealous God, and will not give his glory to another; This is undeniable by all
who are not professed Atheists, and who know another God, then a clay creature,
and who know that it is better to obey God, then a Man. Our Surveyer grants
in the forecited place [ that every one of the people ought to reform
themselves from all real corruptions in the worshipe of God.] But, it may be,
he makes this real, an open door for him and his fraternity, to escape by; and
so conclude that he and they are arived at the hight of perfection, (because
forsooth they are fallen backward, and have a mind to go backward, and never
to advance) and so fall not under the compass of this duty. But corruptions
will be real corruptions, though they account them perfections.

3. It is the duty of private persons to rebuke, admonish, exhort, reprove,
observe, edify and provoke one another to love and good works Lev. 19. 17. Mat.
18. 15, 16. Romans 15. 13. Col. 3. 16. 1 These. 5. 11. Heb. 3. 13. and 10. 24. 25.
And thus instruct one another in the right ways of the Lord, persuade move and
induce them by motives and arguments, and all means possible, to embrace the
truth, and to forsake error, or any false way, Even though the Magistrates
should prohibit and discharge this, and by their command and authority should
establish error and corruption, and banish truth with their edicts and
proclamations. Our Surveyer grants Page 84. [ that no man should say, am I am
brothers keeper, but by faithful instruction, warning, reproof, strive to save
others from the evil of the time and places wherein they live] And yet he
knows who are persecuted upon this account, of meeting together for these and
such like ends, to strengthen the hands one of another, that they faint not in
this evil day, and to save one another from the evils of these times, as
keepers of conventicles, and seditious disturbers of the peace.

4. When there is any corruption in the reformed Religion, whether in doctrine,
worship, discipline, or government creept in; or any corrupt sinful practice
come in use, and abounding in a land, and these corruptions not only connived
at by the Magistrates, but also countenanced, approved and authorized; it is
the duty of all the faithful Ministers of Christ, to be laying out themselves
to the utmost, in their pastoral functions, for the suppressing of these
corruptions and enormities, notwithstanding of any prohibiton of the
Magistrate, whose power is not privative in this case, to the contrary. Though
this be abundantly cleared and confirmed by the practice of all the faithful
Prophets and Apostles of the Lord, both under the Old, and under the N.
Testament; yet we all know how impiously and tyrannically this is denied to the
honest Ministers of Scotland, who, left they should speak any thing against the
rageing evils and abounding corruptions, both in matters of opinion and
practice, which hasten the curse and wrath of God upon the land, and make us
ripe for destruction, are not permitted to preach uncontroverted truths, and
the undeniable grounds of Christianity. But however this piece of tyranny and
persecution be established by law, yet the law of God stands unrepealed and in
full force and vigor, and by this law, all who have a trumpet and a mouth
should set the trumpet to their mouth, and cry aloud and not spare, and both
privately and publicky labor thus to reform the grievous abuses, that abound
in the land.

5. Private persons may, let Magistrates command or discharge what they will,
yea are bound to, obey the whole some exhortations and admonitions of Ministers
and others, who faithfully declare the mind of God, and discover abominable
corruptions, and crying abominations: and notwithstanding of any law to the
contrary, Embrace, and practice the true Religion, and reject the corruptions.
This is certane, for it is God's mind and will that his commands be obeyed
rather then man's; and if Ministers, and private persons be bound to exhort,
rebuke, warn, reprove, admonish, move and persuade, it is Peoples duty to
hearken to, and obey these good and necessary exhortations, rebukes, warnings,
reproofs, admonitions and persuasions. God's mind should be followed, hold it
forth who will, especially when it is declared by his Ambassadors, who in a
special manner are authorized by him for that effect. We know what a dreadful
plague and judgment came upon Judah 2 Chronicles. 36:16. 17. because they mocked the
messengers of God, and despised his words, and misused his Prophets, the wrath
of God arose against his People, till there was no remedy. And it was this,
which occasioned the Nonchurching of the Church of the Jews Act. 13:46. Sure
when Peoples ear is so uncircumcised that they will not hear, and the Word of
the Lord is a reproach unto them, and they have no delight in it, then is there
ground to fear the verification of that sad threatening Ier. 6:11, 12. that
wrath shall be poured out upon the children abroad, and upon the assembly of
young men together, so that even the husband with the wife shall be taken, the
aged with him that is full of days, and their houses shall be turned unto
others, with their fields, and wives together; for I will streach out my hand
upon the inhabitants of the land, says the Lord.

6. From what is said, it is apparent, that all who would have peace with
God, and peace in their own consciences, and joy in the day of their
accounts, should embrace, profess, and practice the truth of God, and the true
Religion reformed in doctrine, vvorshipe, discipline and government, Though
King, Parliament, and Council should reject and condemn the same, and
countenance, or command and authorize the practice of idolatry, superstition,
or any false way in the vvorshipe of God, or in the doctrine and discipline.
For, no law of man can vvarrand iniquity, no act or constitution of any
Magistrate under Heaven, can rescinde or invalidate the mandats of the King of
Kings, or exempt People from obedience due thereunto. No true Christian
(whatever court flatterers and atheists may do) can deny this.

7. Nor can it be denied, That in Kingdoms or Commonvvealths where once the
True Religion, reformed in doctrine, vvorshipe, discipline and government, has
been received, publicly embraced, approved and countenanced by authority,
ratified by laws, statutes, acts, declarations, proclamations, oaths, vows
and engagements. Though the Magistrates Superior and inferior should turn
Apostates from that Reformed and received Religion, and by their laws
condemn the same, and establish corruptions, and enforce corrupt practices by
penaltyes; yet it were the duty of all Subjects, who had any regaird to the
matters of their own salvation, to adhere to the truth once received and
established, and vvorshipe and Serve God, after the right manner, and refuse to
obey these iniquous laws. Will any deny such a truth as this, except such as
have sold soull, consciences and all, unto the lust of Men; or think there is
no Religion, but what King and Parliament will have, and consequently if they
should enjoyne the imbraceing of Mahomet's Religion, or the worshipping of Sun,
Moon, and Stars, or of Satan himself, obedience must be yielded.

8. If in the forementioned case, The Magistrates Superior and inferior
should combine together, and conspire against Christ and his interest, and
should not only, by their acts and statutes, banish him, and his glorious
interests out of the Kingdom; but also, by their cruel executions, labor to
force, constrain and compel all their subjects or a part of them, to the
renunceing of the formerly received and avowed truths, and to the imbraceing
of the introduced corruptions, and so to run with themselves unto the same
excess of iniquity, perjury and abomination: Then it is lawful for these
Subjects so oppressed, persecuted and abused for their constancy in adhereing
to the truths once received, contrare to all engagements, vows and Covenants,
to defend themselves against that unjust tyranny and rage, and maintain the
reformed truth, which is unjustly and violently taken from them, by force, when
there is no other probable mean left for them to essay; nay when liberty to
supplicate or petition is inhumanely and severely, under the very pain of
Treason, discharged. The reasons are 1. because, we have showed above, that it
is most lawful for Subjects to maintain their lives, persons, and Estates,
against the unjust violence and tyrannical oppression of their enraged
Magistrates: And if that be lawful, this must also be much more lawful; for as
the soul is much more precious then the body, so matters that concern the
soul, should be preferred to such things as concern the body. And therefore
Religion, which is necessary for the life of the soull, should be with no less
Zeal, care and industry, maintained and preserved pure and uncorrupted, then
what concerns the lives of our bodies. 2. It is lawful for Subjects to
maintain their natural and civil libertyes, by force, when no other way can be
used, lest they, and their posterity after them, should be redacted unto a
state of perfect slavery and bondage, worse then that of the Israilites in
Egypt: And shall it be unlawful to fight for the defense of Religion, wherein
is comprised all true and desirable liberty, and to save posterity from
tyranny and bondage in their souls and consciences, much more dreadful and
terrible, then the most insupportable and bitter bondage of the body
imaginable? Shall men be allowed to fight to preserve their own bodies, and
the bodies of their posterity from the slavery of men, and shall they not be
allowed to fight that they may preserve their own soulls and the souls of
their posterity, from the tyranny of Satan? Who but such, as either think they
have no soulls, more then beasts, or know not the worth of their souls, will
deny this consequence? 3. It is lawful for Subjects to defend their lives and
libertyes, in order to the defense of the true Religion, and the interests of
Jesus Christ's, when their losseing of these should certanely tend to the loss
of Religion. Ergo It cannot be unlawful to defend Religion, which is the maine
and principal thing. 4. If it be lawful to maintain the interests of a King
against an usurper, whether a stranger, or an inferior Magistrate, who is
under the King, and is seeking to eject him and his interest, contrare to his
faith and trust: Then much more must it be lawful, to defend Christ Jesus and
his interest, when King and Parliament, contrare to their sworn allaigance
unto him, have rebelled; and are seeking to dethrone him, by their wicked Laws
and Ordinances, and to banish him and his interests out of the Kingdom, by
their tyrannical cruelty and inhumane and merciless executions. Will any deny
this but ingrained Atheistical Malignants, whose chief character hitherto has
been, to prefer man's interest unto Christ's? Or such as have renounced all
faith and loyalty unto the King of Kings, and have set up a creature as their
only God, whom they mind to Worshipe and adore, and for whom they mind to
fight against all breathing, and against the God of heaven also: But their
weapons shall fall out of their hands when They shall feel the lighting down
of his arm, with the indignation of his anger, and with the flame of a
devouring fire, and with scattering and tempests and hailstones, and when he
shall cause his glorious voice to be heard. If any should Object, That because
Christ's Kingdom is not of this World, therefore his Servants should not fight
for him. It is easily answered. That, as hence it will follow, that Religion
cannot be forced by the sword upon any; So it will not follow that Religion
should not be defended; for then Magistrates should not defend Religion, nor
Christians should not defend their Religion against the Turks. Which is false.
And hence, 5. If it be lawful for People to defend their Religion against an
army of infidells, Mahometans, or Papists, invadeing the Land of purpose to
spoil us of our Religion, and to force us to embrace heathenisme; Turcisme, or
Popery: Then it must be lawful to defend the same true Religion against King
and Parliament, when they seek to rob the People thereof, and force corruptious
upon them: because King and Parliament have no more authority from God, to
oppress the consciences of their Subjects, to corrupt Religion, and force
corruptions upon them; then the Turk or the Pope has: and therefore, no less
lawfully may they be resisted. 6. If private persons may resist and withstand
the Prince and Parliaments, when they sell them, and their land and heritages,
unto a forraigner, to the Turk or such an adversary: Then much more may they
withstand them, and defend their Religion, when they are selling it by their
apostatical acts, and thereby selling them and their Souls unto Satan the God
of this World.

9. When Religion, by the constitution of the Kingdom, is become a fundamental
law, and a maine article and cardinal condition of the established Polity, and
upon which, all the Magistrates Supreme and Inferior, are installed in their
offices: Then may that Religion be defended by private subjects, when their
Magistrates have conspired together to destroy the same; and to enforce the
corruptions of their own brain. The reasons are 1. because, it is lawful to
defend the just and laudable constitution of the Realm, and in so far, as
Religion, which is a principal fundation-stone of this constitution, is
subverted, the constitution is wronged, and the fundations thereof are shaken.
2. In so far, the Magistrates are no Magistrates: And therefore they may be
resisted. Magistrates, I say, in so far as they overturne the constitution, are
not Magistrates; for that is a maine pairt of their work, to maintain it: For
upon the constitution hang all the libertyes and all the good and necessary
Ends, which People have set before their eyes, in the setting up of
government, and His own being as such; and the subversion of that, subverts
all, and declares the subverter to be an enemy to the Commonwealth, and an
overturner of the polity: and this is inconsistent with being a Magistrate. 3.
In so far as they overturne or shake the fundations, they cannot be seeking the
good of the Community, but their own, with the destruction of the Common good,
and this is the mark and true character of a Tyrant: And when they seek not the
good of the Community, they cannot be looked upon as Magistrates doing their
duty* but as Tyrants seeking themselves, with the destruction of the
Commonwealth. Therefore, in so far they may be resisted. 4. In so far, The
compact, the ground of the constitution, is violated, and as Magistrates, in
this case, in so far, fall from their right, in so far also, are People
liberated from their obligation, so that if They become no Magistrates, the
Subjects become no Subjects; for the relation is Mutual, and so is the
obligation, as was showed above. Therefore, in this case Subjects, may lawfully
resist, and defend their Religion, which is become the principal condition of
their constitution, and of the compact betwixt King and Subjects.

10. Where Religion is universally received, publicly owned, and countenanced
by persons in authority, ratified, approved and established by the laws, and
authority of the land; There, every person is bound and obliged before God, to
maintain and defend that Religion, according to their power, with the hazard
of their lives and fortunes against all, who under whatsoever color and
pretense, seek to subvert and overturne the same; and to hinder any corruption
that King or Parliament at home, or adversaries abroad, would, whether by
subtilty, or power and force, bring in; and lay hold on the first opportunity
offered to endeavor the establishment of Truth, and the overturning of these
corrupt courses, which tend to the perverting thereof: And the reasons are,
because. 1. When the True Religion is once embraced, and publicly received,
That land or Commonwealth is really dedicated and devouted unto God, and so in
a happy condition; which happy condition, all loyal subjects and true
Christians, should maintain and promove, and recover, when nearby or
altogether lost. And therefore, should do what they can, to hinder any course
that may tend to recall this dedication, to deteriorate the happy condition of
the Realm, and to give up the land, as an offering unto Satan. 2. By this
means, they endeavor to avert the wrath and anger of God, which must
certanely be expected to go out against the land, if defection be not
prevented and remedyed: For if but a few should depairt, wrath might come upon
the whole, much more if the Leaders turn patrones of this defection. But of
this more in the next chapter.

11. Much more, must this be allowed in a Land where Reformation of Religion in
doctrine, worshipe, discipline and government, is not only universally owned,
publicly received, and embraced: nor yet only approved, authorized, ratified
and confirmed, by public authority, and the laws of the Land. But also
corroborated by solemn vows and Covenants, made and sworn unto God, by all
ranks and conditions of People, from the King to the meanest of the subjects,
in a most solemn manner, and that several times re-iterated: in which
Covenants, all swear to Maintain and defend this Riligion, with their lives
and fortunes, and to labor, by all means lawful, to recover the purity and
liberty of the gospel; and to continow in the profession and obedience of the
foresaid Religion, defend the same, and resist all contrary errors and
corruptions, according to their vocation, and to the uttermost of that power
that God puts in their hands, all the days of their life: as also mutually to
defend and assist one another, in the same cause of maintaining the true
Religion, with their best Counsel, bodies, means and whole power, against all
sorts of persons whatsoever. And [ Sincerely, really and constantly, endeavor,
in their several places and callings, the preservation of thereformed Religion
in doctrine, worshipe, discipline and government. The extirpation of Popery,
Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Prophannesse, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contray to sound doctrine and the power of godliness. And to
assist and defend all those that enter into the same bond, in the maintaining
and pursueing thereof. And shall not suffer themselves directly or indirectly,
by whatsoever combination, persuasion or terror, to make defection to the
contrary party, or to give themselves to a detestable indifferency, or
neutrality in this cause, which so much concerns the glory of God, the good
of the Kingdoms, and the honor of the King; but shall, all the Days of their
lives, Zealously and constantly, continue therein, against all opposition, and
promote the same, according to their power, against all lets and impediments
whatsoever.] Now I say, in such a case as this, when after all these
engadgments and covenants, a court of defection is carried on, by a strong and
violente hand, by King and Parliaments, and there is no mean left unto Private
Persons, when violented and constrained to a compliance, by acts, and
tyrannical and arbitrary executions, of either preventing their own
destruction in soull and body, or preserving the reformation sworn unto, or
recovering the same when corrupted, and of purging the land of that dreadful
sin of perjury and defection. They may lawfully take the sword of just and
necessary defense, for the maintenance of themselves and of their Religion.
This is abundantly clear from what is said, and shall be further cleared and
confirmed, when we examine what this Surveyer allaigeth against it.

12. Scripture gives us ground to believe, that in such a case as this, when a
defection in a covenanted land, and a land devoted to God, is carried on, more
is required of Private Persons, then to mourn and sigh in secret: as,

1. Deuteronomy. 13:12, 13, 14, etc. If thou shall hear say in one of thy cities,
which the Lord thy God has given thee to dwell there, saying, certane men the
children of Belial are gone out from among you, and have with drawn the
inhabitants of their city, saying, let us go and serve other Gods, which ye
have not known. Then shall thou enquire and make search, and ask diligently,
and behold, if it be truth, and the thing certane, that such abomination is
wrought among you, thou shall surely smite the inhabitants of that city, with
the edge of the sword, destroying it utterly and all that is therein, and the
cattle thereof, with all that is therein, etc. Which words were undenyably
spoken to the People, to whom the rest of that chapter was spoken and
particularly directed: So the dutch annot. in the contents of that chapt. say,
that the way is showed how the People of God were to demean themselves to
wards a city that was fallen off: and though, we readyly grant, that these
words do not empower private persons to act the part of Magistrates, and brevi
manu judge and condemn, or put to death such as are guilty of the crime
mentioned; nor to fall upon the execution without previous judging and trial of
the cause; yet it will be no wire drawing of Scriptures, whatever this Surveyer
allaige, to say, That this place will warrant private persons to defend their
Reformation, when by oppression and violence, it is taken from them, and when
defection is carried on in a land devoted to God, and Magistrates either
neglect to take course therewith, or countenance the same. The Zeal of the Lord
should stir up people to do more for vindicating the glory of God, and saving
the land from an universal apostasy, then privately mourn in secret. Sure
this being spoken to the people, says, they should manifest and declare their
Zeal otherwise; seeing by this, they might have sufficiently known how
detestable such a defection was unto the Lord, and that no less would pacify
his wrath against that part corrupted, then utter exterminion and overthrow of
young and old in it, with their cattle and goods: Will not any readyly yield,
that they had been bound, to have concurred with the Magistrate in this
execution; and that if the Magistrate had been negligent, to have remonstrated
the matter unto him; and if either that had not prevailed, or Magistrates being
chief actors and patrons thereof, they durst not have remonstrated the matter,
they might lawfully have joined together, and with their swords in their hands,
have moved the Magistrate to purge out that abomination, and to have granted
them security, that the contagion should not have spread, nor they be infected
therewith, left the fierce-anger of God had not been turned away from them? And
if this be granted (which cannot easily be denied) we have our purpose, and
Naphthali has all which he desired, And certanely, to say, That this course
was only to be taken, when one city was infected, and not when more, when ten or
twenty, or possibly the major part, were but to elude Scripture, as Naphtali
said: seeing the same reason will hold in these cases, which holds in the
cases instanced: and whatever the Surveyer say page 56. such a cleaving to the
literal meaning of Scripture, as will not admit consequential arguments to be
drawn therefrom, to the like cases, nor an argument drawn a minori ad majus,
from the case instanced, is neither the Doctrine of Christ, nor of found
Divines: nor is the following of Christ's example and of the Apostles, who made
use of such consequences, a making a nose of wax of the holy Scriptures, nor a
wringing or wresting them, to bring in our own fancyes, nor a covering of our
crooked courses with such a cloak: (however we be branded by him, for this, and
as being men of blood and violence, but his falsely rubbing that aspersion on
the innocent, will never wipe that right name off him and his party, whose
violence and thirsting after blood, is more then sufficiently known) yea
himself in his 3 Answer page 57, 58. will allow something to be done by virtue
of this text, where the major part is corrupt, and the minor part found, saying
[ Though the lesser part is not to acquiesce in the way of the greater, running
into rebellion against God, but by all means competent to them, bear witness
against that way, and study to keep themselves pure, when they cannot prevail
to have matters rectified, as to the whole body] And yet the carnal
luckwarmnesse and indifferency of this latitudinarian Politician in the matters
of God, appears. That after he had said that [ there is no coming to an
accommodation in this matter whether the True God, or other Gods should be
served.] he presently adds, in a parenthesis [ and yet this man would be very
severe, if no Nation in the world, might (having before been embodyed in a
Kingdom or State) continue and abide in their peaceable communion in civil
interests, upon supposition of such an equal division ariseing amongst them.]
It seems this meek peaceable man, would suffer Satan to be worshipped in the
same State with the true and living God: and that (if he apply this to the
purpose) if the equal half of the Kingdom of Israel had worshipped, the devil,
he would not have been severe, but advised the other half to abide united with
them in civil communion. But, leaving these and the like, which are not much to
our purpose, let us see what he says, to the thing. He tells us Page 57. [
That no exposition of a text can subsist, that is either contrary to other
texts of Scripture, or to sound reason.] This is granted: But how shows he
that the exposition given, is contrary to either? [ It is contrary to
Scripture; because ( says he) the Scripture commits the vindicative and
punishing sword only to the Magistrate, who only is the sword bearer. Romans 13.]
But this is not against us or our exposition: Naphthali speaks only of private
persons taking the defensive sword, and thereby keeping the land pure, and
laboring (still in their private way, not in a judicial authoritative and
Magistraticall way) to purge out corruption, and maintain Reformation; can he
show us Scripture against this? Again says he [ this is poynt-blank contrary
to reason, remedyles^y tending to dissolve humane Societies, and all Kingdoms
and Comonwealths.] Then it seems though Magistrates should concur, with the
minor and sounder part, to purge out the corruption of the greater; or concur
with the equal half, to purge the other, or with a greater part to purge the
lesser, if a considerable part, it might not be; because, that were a way to
dissolve humane Societies, and all Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Ay, but he
means that it is so [ To teach that any mere private persons, or any part of
a People, who think themselves strong enough, should take on them to sit and
act as punishing judges, over all Magistrates Supreme and Subordinate, yea and
upon the Major part of the People themselves, and upon their own fancyes, led
with their own lusts, draw the Magistratical sword.] Answ. But then against
whom does he fight? Naphtaly spoke not so: Nor does our cause require that we
should say so. We say not, that private persons should take up the Magistrat's
sword, and with Magistratical power and authority judge and execute the whole
body of the People, and the Magistrates Supreme and Subordinate; far less do
we say, That they should do this upon their fancies, or when led with their
own lusts. This is nothing else but to fansy an adversary to himself, when he
cannot answer or stand against his proper adversary: and after he has busked
him up in as ugly a shape, as he can, then he may well cry out [Oh horrid
confusion, to be detasted of all rational and Christian hearts!] But this is
not fair dealing, yet suitable enough to him and his cause, which he can get
defended no other way? But then he tells us Page 59. [That though the words be
spoken to the People; yet it is always to be understood, that the Peoples
concurrence in the punishing of an Apostate city, was to be within the bounds
of their calling, and under the conduct of the Magistratical power set over
them: As when inticers to idolatry are, in the former part of the chapter,
enjoined to be taken order with, (however nearly they were related to People)
and to be stoned, it is not to be supposed that the charge is given to every
private person brevi manu to do this, but judgment was to be execute on them
after judicial conviction, and sentence given by the Magistrate, as says
Diodat. on v. 8. and Pelargus on v. 14.] Answ. 1. That the Peoples concurrence
was to be within the bounds of their calling, we grant: But the question is how
far the bounds of their calling did extend: Did it extend no further then to
go out when called thereto of the Magistrate, to punish that Apostate city?
Then if the Magistrate neglected to call them out, they were not so much as to
mourn for that Apostasy, by this text; Nor to use any other means to have the
Matter rectified, nay nor to bear witness against that way: For if the
Magistrate was to preceed, and they only to go under his conduct, if he called
them not forth, they were exonered, all that was required of them, being only
to be willing and ready at a call. But sure this interpretation is not
consonant to other texts of scripture, as we shall show. 2. If we look to the
other particulars spoken to in that chapter, we will find that there was more
required then that, or a simple mourning in secret; for no man will think they
were exonered, if they had been only willing to execute the sentence of the
Magistrate upon the false Prophet and dreamer, that sought to draw them after
other Gods. Seeing they were not to hear him. So as to the enticer, they were
not only not to hearken unto him, but they were not to pity him, nor to
conceal him v. 8. but now, what in case the Magistrate should have refused to
have done his duty, to have examined the Matter; or, what in case the
Magistrate should have countenanced and encouraged such an one, was there no
more required of them, but to have made offer of there Son, Daughter, Wife, or
Brother unto justice, and when justice could not have been gotten executed upon
them take them home again to their house and into their bosom, and live as
formerly good friends together? I fear such cleaving to the letter of the
scripture shall be found a mere eludeing of scripture, and a mocking of the
holy ghost by whom it was given. 3. Yea that which Diodat says, is more, for he
says, [They were to procure vengeance on him, in way of justice accusing him
to the Magistrate by information or sufficient proof.] And if the Magistrate
refused to do justice, I suppose, they might have provided for their own
security, and shot him or her out of doors with violence, that was seeking to
draw them a way from the true God. So that granting what the Surveyer would be
at, the place will make for us: For though the Magistrate was bound to examine,
judge and sentence the Apostate city, in a judicial authoritative manner; yet
in case the Magistrate should have connived at, or countenanced such apostasy,
they were to use other means to have the land purged of that crying
obhomination, then simple mourning in secret, even to have taken the sword in
their hand, in case the defection was approaching to themselves, and
Magistrates were forceing them to a compliance with that evil, or apostasy; and
never to have laid it down, till not only themselves were secured as to
theirpart, but the land were purged of that idolatry and the idolaters executed
according to the law, Their Zeal in this case should have carried them without
doors, though not to an assumeing of the Magistrates juridicall authoritative
and punishing sword.

2. Esai. 59: v. 4. None calls for justice, nor any pleads for truth. Where
the Prophet among the rest of the evils whereof that People was guilty, and for
which heavy calamities did press them, reckons this, that there was none who
called for justice, or did plead for truth; that is, there was none who
endeavored to relieve, and right the wronged, or to redress what was amiss,
see the English Annotat. no man owned the right cause, or took God's part
against falsehood and wickedness, [No man (say the Duth Annotat.) to dehort
them that deal unjustly, or to maintain a just cause, and the truth to the
utmost of his power.] So that by this we see what was required of People, in a
day of defection, even to call and cry aloude, that justice might be executed,
and deal with such as were Magistrates to do their duty, and not to bring and
keep on the wrath of God upon the Land; And this is more then the Surveyer will
have to be the only duty of private persons in a day of general defection,
Page 52. viz. To keep themselves pure without any degree of acting these
sins, to mourn and sigh for the evils that are done, to be earnest in prayer
that God may convert others, to admonish faithfully, and study to reclame these
who are out of the way. But this will be more clear by the following passages.

3. Esaias. 59: 15, 16. [ Yea truth fails and he that departs from evil
makes himself a prey, and the Lord saw it, and it displeased him that there
was no judgment, and he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was
no intercessour.] Truth and the cause of God was so at under, that a man could
not get leave to live, if he depairted from evil, he was a prey unto the
persecuters, so general and universal was this defection; and at this time, he
saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessour to
interpose, none that would stand up and lay out themselves to the utmost, to
set things in order, none that would bestirre himself for truth and the right,
which was then oppressed: see the English Annot. on the place: the word is used
2 Samuel 22. 17. where it is said the servants of Saul would not fall upon the
Priests of the Lord. So Exodus 5. 3. lest he fall upon us etc. So that we see,
there was some positive thing required of them, some effectual mediating, and
interposeing, and hindering of these iniquities; some public owneing and
avowing of the truth, and by public testimonies, or other ways of
interposeing, and falling-into impede, and stand in the way of that course of
wickedness.

4. So Ier. 8: 6. [I hearkened and heard but they spoke not a right no man
repented him of his wickedness saying what have I done] It is not probable that
there was none penitent among them, where then was Baruch and Ebedmelech Cap.
38. 7, 9. and others that stood for the Prophet Cap. 26, 8, 16, 17, 24. But
there must be some other thing imported, viz. That there was few or none
repenting of national evils, and laboring to remove these, no man was standing
up and opposeing these public land defections, and laboring by this means to
raise up the virgin of Israel who was fallen Amos. 5. 2.

5. Ierm. 9: 3. [And they bend their tongues like their bows for lies, but
they are not valient for the truth upon the earth.] that is, they were ready
enough, all of them, to employ their power to the utmost, for the evil cause,
to establish error and a false way; but they used no valor for the oppressed
cause and truth of God, they did not their utmost to have Truth established,
and the true Religion: They did not put out themselves, or make use of their
strength, for the maintenance of truth, and equity in the land, say the
English Annot. and they make it parallel with Esa. 59:4. This was their guilt,
and hereby we see what was the duty even of private persons (for of such this is
to be meaned, as the context clears.) in such a general day of defection,
viz. to be valient owners and maintainers of Truth against all opposers.

6. Ier. 5: v. 1. [Run ye to and fro throw the streets of Jerusalem, and see
now and know, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, if
there be any that executes judgment, that seeks the truth, and I will pardon
it.] We can hardly think, that there were no mourners in secret in all
Jerusalem, though it is like they were very few: but there was none to own the
good cause, that was now trodden under foot, none bestirring themselves, to
oppose and hinder the carried on course of defection. If that had been, the
Lord says, he would have spared the place; which shows, how desirable a thing
this was, and how acceptable it would have been in the Lords eyes, that for
that cause he would have forborne to have destroyed them or to have cut them
off.

7. Ezech. 22: 30. [And I sought for a man among them, that should make up the
hedge, and stand in the gap before me, that I should not destroy it, but I
found none.] There were some even at this time sighing and mourning in secret,
for these abominations, who were marked Cap. 9. but there were none to make up
the hedge, which their provocations had made, none to redress the public
defection and Apostasy, and stand for the truth and the suppressing of error
and iniquity. So is it laid to the charge of their Prophets Cap. 13: 5. that
they did not go up into the gaps, neither made up the hedge, for the house of
Israel to stand in the battle in the day of the Lord, Whereby we see, that by
this standing in the gape and making up the hedge, more is meaned then a secret
mourning, even a faithful and public owneing of the truth and opposeing of
defection, and putting a stope unto it, as Moses did when he stood in the
breach, Exodus 32. (though with authority, as a Magistrate, which private
persons have not) he not only prayed and wrestled with the Lord v. 11, 12, 13.
but in great zeal took the calfe, which they had made, and brunt it in the
fire, and ground it to powder, and strawed it upon the watter, and made them to
drink of it v. 20. If there had been any who thus effectually would have stood
in the breach, the Lord says, he would have spared them: so acceptable would
such a work have been to him.

8. So that word Ier. 13:18. [Say unto the King and to the Queen, humble your
selves sit down, for your principalities shall come down, even the crown of
your glory.] Will import something more; it being spoken to all indefinitely,
gives a warrant to all, to deal with King and Queen, to prevent the sad days
which were coming by reason of the defection and abounding sins.

9. So that word Hos. 2: 2. [Plead with your mother, plead, for she is not my
wife,] which is spoken to private persons, and so is a warrant to them, to
contend in judgment (as the word does import) against the Church, which was
corrupted, and had forsaken the Lord, and his ways; and so to stand to the
defense of truth, and to plead for the cause of God, against their very Mother
the Church, The body of the Nation, that not only they might exoner their own
consciences, but also get things reformed, so far as lay in their power; and
keep the memory of the cause of God afresh that it should not be buried.

These places and the like, though we bring them not to prove immediately our
maine Question (as it may be the Surveyer, who uses to take but half a look of
matters, will suppose) yet when duly considered, in their just latitude and
extent, they will clearly evince; That more is required of private persons, in
a general day of defection, then to keep themselves free of the same, or to
mourn in secret, or the like. And if we lay them together, they will clearly
prove it the duty of private persons, in such a day of defection, to be
publicly declareing their abhorrence of the wicked courses which are carried
on: to be actually and effectually interposeing with King and Great ones, that
a stope may be put unto the course of wickedness, and God's wrath averted:
that they would plead Zions cause against all opposers, and thus stand up in
the gape, and make up the hedge by public and avowed owneing of the oppressed
truth and cause of God: and valiently seek and plead for the truth, and with
their Mother the Church, when all is corrupted, left a bill of divorce be given
her: And this is something more then our Surveyer will allow. And what way
this shall help us, we shall see afterward. Now we must examine What the
Surveyer says.

He Page 46. after some rambling after his wonted manner, andmisrepresenting of
the thing which was said in Naphtaly, (as any judicious reader will perceive,
so that we need not trouble ourselves to discover the same unfaire dealing so
often as we meet with it, lest we should waiste paper and pains, as he has
done, in repeating the same things over and over again,) He tells us That [It
is not to be doubted that Religion is the chief interest, that men and
Christians should look after, and where it becomes a legal right, and the
Magistrate who bears the sword leads the way, no doubt private persons may
follow in the violent defense of it, against all opposeing the Magistrate, the
law, and themselves in owneing of it.] Answer. This cold laodicean will give
Religion the best word, but no more: He grants that it is the chief interest
that men and Christians should look after; and yet so cautious is he in showing
the manner how they should look after it, that in effect he does postpone it
unto many other lower concernments: For 1. it must become a legal right, ere
they defend it. 2. And when it is become a legal right, they cannot defend it
unless the Magistrate lead the way. But what if a virgin has not a legal
right unto her chastity, by such a law as that leacherous King Ewen the 3.
made, shall she not be allowed to defend the same? And if she shall, shall not
men be allowed to maintain their Religion, though some iniquous act of
Parliament take the legal right of it away? Yes doubtless if it be the chief
interest. Again, what if an unjust act take away a man's right to his
heritage, shall he not be in case to defend it against robbers? 2. By his
second caution it would appear, that if an army of Turks or Tartars were
landing in Scotland to robus of our Religion, we might not resist, unless the
Magistrate did lead the way. But might we not in that case defend our lives and
lands? If he should deny it, I know few that will be of his opinion, and if he
grant it, he must not account Religion the chief interest. Again, what if the
Magistrate shall permit Subjects to defend their Lives and Libertyes against
invaders, though he should not lead the way? Will he allow it in that case?
Then he must prefer these unto Religion; for Religion, he says, must must
not be defended, but when the Magistrate leads the way: [Neither (says he) can
it enter into a Christian heart, that it is to be surrendered unto the
arbitrament or pleasure of any power in the world, nor of any Magistrate over
us, as this man wickedly suggests is done] Answ. The Surveyer is this wicked
person, who not only suggests, but upon the matter affirms it, and avowes it;
for what is it else, then to surrender our Religion to the arbitrament of
Magistrates, to say, that we may not stand to the defense thereof, unless they
will both authorize it with their law, and also lead the way when any oppose
it? That which we will not maintain without the approbation and conduct of
another, we wholly give up to the disposeing and pleasure of that other. What
he says concerning our present case, shall be considered in end, once for all.
Then Page 47. [Whatever may be said concerning private men's resisting the
powers that urge them to idolatry, or false Worshipe, or invading their lives,
if they will not so do, comes not home to the present case.] Answ. He would do
well to speak plain, and not look with a double face; Either he thinks it
lawful, in this case to resist, or he thinks it unlawful; if he think it
unlawful to what purpose does he make mention of it, as a different case from
what is presently under debate; And will not any see that if he deny this to be
lawful, our Religion is wholly given upto the arbitrament of the Magistrate? If
he think it lawful, he must then grant that Religion may be defended, even when
the Magistrate who bears the sword, does not lead the way, and why then it
should not come home to our present case, I do not see; for he does not lay the
stresse of his answers on the inconsiderablenesse of the ground of the
resistance, (though here and there He hint at that) but upon the unlawfulness
of resisting the Magistrate, who bears the sword: Now this ground fails him
here. But he ads [Yet Lactantius word, Lib. 5. c. 20. is to be well remembered
by all private persons, Defendenda est Religio a privatis omnibus, non
occidendo, sed moriendo] Answ. Then according to Lactantius it must be unlawful
to defend Religion, even when the Magistrate urges to idolatry, invading lives
if they will not do it: yea if this be generally received as a truth, The
People of Scotland might not defend their Religion against an army of Pagans
Turks or Tartars, if the Sovereign should not concur: Which I know not who
would assent unto.

But he will come off with a few notes Page 47. etc. That whereas Naphtali said
That to be violented in Religion (which cannot be without an unjust force,
either on men's persons, or on their goods) is the most wicked and insupportable
of all injuries He thinks such a word should have been better guarded, lest all
coactive power of the magistrate in matters of Religion, might seem to be
disowned, which would favor such, as are for absolute toleration. But what
needed this? Could he think that the author of Naphtaly did imagine, That to be
violented in any Religion whether true or false, was such an insupportable
injury? Or that it was his mind to plead for an universal toleration? What
ground had he for so thinking? Sure that had been prejudical to his hypothesis,
which this Surveyer himself will not call a false Religion: will it not suffice
to say, he meaned a violenting in the true Religion? [No (says he) for what
Sectary will not pretend, that he is violented for the true Religion, which he
will avow is so, according to his conscience, -- and it is this man's
principle, that every man in his discretive judgment, is judge of the justice
or in justice of his own sufferings, and accordingly must determine a nent his
resistance to the violence] Answ. 1. Then it seems his guairding of it, in
his own words, saying [It is true, to use violence upon any in their persons
or goods, to bring them to an external false Religion, or to drive them from
the true (otherwise Religion cannot be violented) is the greatest of injuries]
Is not sufficient to salve the Magistrates co-active power in matters of
Religion; for notwithstanding of what he says, the pleaders for universal
toleration have the same door open they had. 2. If he will deny this discretive
judgment in matters of sufferings, he must deny it also in matters of acting;
for if no man must judge, whether the violence offered him be just or unjust,
why should a man judge, whether the commands enjoined him be lawful or
unlawful? And so, as he may not so judge of the violence offered him in the
matters of Religion, as to repel unjust violence with violence, neither must he
judge of the lawfulness of the commands concerning Religion, so as to refuse
obedience to unjust commands: And then it will follow, that subjects must yield
blind obedience to all the commands of the Magistrate in matters of Religion,
and never question any of them: This, I grant, is not to plead for absolute
toleration, but it is clearly to plead for absolute tyranny over consciences,
fit to be heard and received by Atheists, but by none else. 3. We know the most
lawful thing may be abused, and he dar not say that every one who pleads for a
lawful thing, pleads also for the abuse of it. He who says a man must not
change his true Religion, at the command of the Magistrate, does not say that a
man must not change that Religion, which he thinks in his conscience is the
true Religion, and is not, at the command of the Magistrate: So he who fayeth
a people may defend their true Religion, when the Magistrate is violenting them
in it, Says not that every Sectarian company may defend that Religion, which
they take to be true, and is not, when the Magistrate is violenting them in it.
We say not that an erring conscience obliges, or that a man's thinking that he
is injured in the true Religion, is sufficient ground to engage him in violent
resistance. And he himself dar not say, the Religion as reformed in doctrine,
worshipe, discipline, and government (which the late defenders owned) is a
false Religion: Nor dar he say, that the corruptions which they opposed, were
the only true and necessary Religion. He seems to chant some other thing here
and there, in this part of his pamphlet; but we look for more in the following
parts, where we shall have his mind more fully. Sure the Religion they owned,
and we stand for, was the Religion he himself once owned, and all the
Magistrates, Supreme and inferior sealed and approved, with their oaths and
subscriptions: And the corruptions they and we oppose, were once by himself,
and all ranks of people of the land, abjured oftener then once* So that all this
is but to raise dust in peoples eyes, to the end they may mistake the way
[Againe (says he) does not this man plainly profess to stir up all, with
whom he can prevail, to violente others, Magistrates, Churchmen, people and
all, in the matter of their profession?] Answ. Their profession is manifest and
professed perjury; for they have renunced the reformed Religion which they once
owned, and avowed with hands lifted up to the Most High, and their extant
subscriptions bear witness against them; and all the congregations and
public meetings, in which this Religion was owned, are witnesses above all
exception. And they have with the dog licked up their vomit, which once they
spewed out with an oath of abjuration. 2. But wherein are they violented? Do
they that stand to the defense of their Religion, and labor or endeavor to
have corruptions formerly abjured, purged out, incur the crime of violenting
others? Yes for (says he) even private men are stirred by bloody exhortations,
to be revenged on, and punish all Magistrates and others, whose blood they
thirst for, because of their not being of their way, which they call Religion.)
Answer. This is but one of many of his bloody assertions, savouring neither of
Christianity, nor prudence, but much of cruelty and tyranny: and we see his
teeth, and his tongue both; But the judge of the innocent hears and sees. 2,
Did not this perjured wretch and his fraternity call this way, Religion, and
the true Reformed Religion, when they swore those Covenants, and will he now
come and speak thus? O but he must have a brazen face and an abdured
conscience! Ay but he tells us afterward, Page 48. that [Whether truth lie on
our side or his, as to the points of Church government is the question, and if
we will not admit public powers and authorities to be judges in that matter,
far less have they reason to admit of private persons.] Answ. 1. It seems it
is past question with him, that the vomit which he has licked up, is the most
fatning morsel, that ever he got; but the most fatning food is not always the
most wholesome: And I fear this shall prove so to him, if he repent not, when
for it, the wrath of God and the long and broad curse shall enter into his
dwelling place, and into his very soul. 2. We are content the stresse of the
business lie upon that question, and shall be glade to hear what spirits his
new food has put into him, to maintain that condemned and abjured cause. 3.
We look not upon our public powers and authorities as Judges competent in that
matter, nor did they judge, as Judges should have done, when they set up that
abomination; but as men mad on their idols, so did they run, to please, he
knows, whom. 4. This is the very thing which Papists say anent the judge of
controversies, save that he puts the civil Magistrate, in place of the Pope. 5.
This controversy is not to be judged till now, and private persons may be
sufficient judges of what was sworn and subscribed by King, and all ranks of
People, and must have more solid grounds and motives to induce then to renunce
what they have been fully persuaded was truth, and have owned as such, under
the pain of damnation, by their solemn Oaths and vows; then the mere will
and command of a Creature, as obnoxious to error and mistakes as another. And
as for what he has a mind to say upon that head, it is now a little too too
late, unless he be able to do, what never one before has done, viz. prove
that form of government; the only necessary government, Iure Divino,
perpetually binding all, in all ages: but the vulgar will have a sufficient
antidote against all, which he can say, by seeing and hearing, what they have
seen and heard these years bygone, both when this abomination was but about
to be introduced, and since it has got up to its pinnacle, though nothing
should be said, of the abominable and scandalous carriage of such as have
embraced that Antichristian course, a true historical relation of which would
make the ears of all true Christians to tingle.

His 2. note is upon the probable capacity which Naphtaly spoke of: this brings
to his mind Bellarmin's excuse why the ancient Christians took not arms
against Nero, because they wanted temporal strength. But might not that excuse
be good in itself though Bellarmine made use of it? I suppose upon second
search, it will be found, that they had not such a capacity, as he, it may be,
supposes: But of this afterward. It brings to his mind also what Creswel the
Jesuit said against the Edict of Q. Elizabeth. But all this is nothing to the
purpose, for neither we, nor Naphtaly join with the Jesuits (whatever he say)
as to the deposeing and throwing down of Princes, and all Magistrates, and
punishing them by private hands. But if he think this condition, in private
persons resisting of violence, Iesuitical, viz. if they be in a probable
capacity to do it. He must give us leave to say, It is very rational, and he is
more then brutish to think otherwise: For will he say, that it is an
indispensable duty, for Ten private persons, though they had their Magistrates
with them, to go and resist an army of Ten Thousand, unless they have an
extraordinary particular and peremptory call of God? Sure then he but shows his
folly to carpe at such things as these, let him read, Luke 14: 31.

Next let us see what he has Page 84. 85. 86. Where he says 1. ( That albeit
it be God's holy will, that in erections of civil government, his Truth,
sincere worshipe and glory in these, should be mainly minded and intended by
men, and it is men's duty so to do; yet it is clear that in many places de facto
it is not so; although men in the general profess aiming at Truth, and right
worshipe, yet there are aberrations in the particular.] Answ. 1. This is very
true, and not only do we see that it is so de facto; but also that where
conscience has been made of mindeing Gods truth, sincere vvorshipe, and glory,
and these so twisted in, and interwoven with the constitution of the civil
government, that they became to the subject, a piece of their National
patrimony, secured by all means imaginable, not only these necessary things
are not minded, but they are sought to be overturned and destroyed. 2. Since he
grants that it is men's duty so to do, how can he condemn what the honest
Parliaments of Scotland did, and what the king consented to, and owned? Was
that any thing else but to establish and secure the reformed Religion in
Doctrine, worshipe, discipline and government, for the glory of God, and the
good of the nations?

Next he says, [ Albeit there be in the point of truth, and the worshipe of
God, anotable perversion and swerving, that does not at all invalidate the
authority, nor break the obligation thereunto, although it be injurious, to
favorers of Truth and right Worshipe: for although Religion be not minded, as
it ought to be, God will not have the Commonwealths, where justice between Man
and Man is maintained, for his glory, casten loose; nor have men think
themselves loosed from obligation to the government -- for neither must they be
heard, who hold that civil dominion is founded on grace, nor they who say, That
infidel, heretical, or excommunicate Magistrates fall from their power, or that
the subjects obligation to them cease.] Answ. 1. Yet where the maintenance
of Truth, and of the right vvorshipe is a fundamental pillar of the
constitution, and a maine article of the compact betwixt Magistrates and
subjects, a failing here is a loosing of the government, and of the Subjects
obligation, if not in whole, yet in so far; 2. A pleading for the observation
of the compact and maintenance of the Truth and Worshipe of God, conform to
sworn compacts, is no breaking of the obligation, but rather a way to have it
strengthened and made more firm: Much less can they be charged with this, who
plead only for a liberty of defense of the same Truth and Worshipe, against
manifest injuries, contrary to Covenants, vows and compacts. 3. Such as resist
the unjust violence of Magistrates, do not thereby loose themselves from the
obligation to government, otherwise every woman who in defense of her chastity
resisted the prince, should die as a Traitor, 4. We abhore both that opinion,
that dominion is founded on grace, and that other of the Papists: we stand upon
other grounds, as has been, and may yet be, further showed.

The sum of what he says in the 4 place (for what he has said in the 3 place
is but some concessions, which are touched already) is this [ That to reform
in a public coactive way, by the use of the vindicative and punitive sword,
belongs alone to the Magistrate, so that persons of mere private capacity,
cannot use that sword against all Magistrates, and their fellow subjects, to
violent them in matters of Religion, or which they account Religion, and punish
them for not being, of their Religion.] Answ. It is but his groundless
calumny, to say that Naphtaly says all this, and so it is nothing to the
question in hand, which is concerning private persons maintaineing their
Religion, and endeavoring to have corruptions removed, which may well be,
without the least incroachment upon the Magistrates; and since he speaks not
to this, he either declares himself unable to confute what we say; or he
fowlely prevaricates, to the palpable betraying of his own cause; or both.

Then he tells us further. [ That the great mistake in all this matter is, That
we think the Magistrate and People, are, as to their Covenant with God, debtors
bound in a band conjunctly and severally, for one sum, so that in the
deficiency of the one. the other must pay all, and has power to distress the
deficient -- whereas they bind, but for their several moieties of a sum -- so
that if the People reform themselves, and keep themselves pure from
abominations, the Magistrates deficiency (which they tolerat with grief) shall
not be imputed to them: Because God gives them not a calling to intrude into
the Magistrates office -- there lies no obligation on them to force the King,
or their fellow subjects to external means of Worship and Religion.] Answ.
This is the sum of what he spends many words about, but it may be easily
answered. For 1. By this simile he will wrong the Magistrate: for as the
People may not press the Magistrate to pay his moiety, how may He press the
Subjects to pay their moiety? 2. If the Magistrate break to God, and will not
pay his moiety of the sum, he cannot press the Subjects to break also, and
not to pay their part; but whether he will or not, they are bound to keep
Covenant: and if he force them* his violence is unjust and illegal (for no law
can warrant People to break their Covenant with God) and may lawfully be
resisted; and this is enough for us. 3. A better lawyer then he Althusius pol.
cap. 28. n. 18. tells us that in those Religious Covenants, Magistrates and
People are bound conjunctly and severally, so that the whole sum may be
required of either of the correi: Ita sunt correi (says he) ut in solidum and
in continenti ab unoquoque promissum peti possit, tanquam a principalireo. l.
poen. de duob. reis stip. 2 Chro. 33. 2 King. 24. 4. Deuteronomy. 29.) And his reason
is, because God would not commit to one the care of his Church, and worshipe;
but to the whole People, whom their servants King and Parliaments do represent,
which also he proves from Ier. 17: 20. and again Number. 19. He tells us that
one of the correi must answer for the other and partaketh of his guilt, if he
do not oppose and resist him as much as he can, and so hinder him from
breaking: Which he proves from 1 King. 14: 16. and Number. 23: 24. He answers
Barclaius alleging the same thing which this Surveyer alleges saying, [
Concedo Barclaio in duobus reis promittendi observari, ut uno solvente quod
promisit, alter liberetur, Ergo quando Rex vel Populus ob delicta sua arque
foederis initi transgressiones, poena a Deo est affectus, alter liberabitur.
Verum haecregula, uno correo solvente, alterum, liberari, exceptionem patitur
in casu quo non insolidum and in tot^m correus solvit. sed pro part, uti hic,
unus ex correis poenas persolvens, Deo non in solidum solvere potest. Deinde
haec regula non procedit in delictis; In his enim uterque correus delinquens
and criminis socii puniuntur in solidum, neque unus poenas luendo, alterum
liberare potest, 1 Samuel 12: ver. 27. Et docent id late ICC. Denique praedicta
regula non procedat in casu qnando uterque correus se in solidum obligavit ad
idem factum, uti in hoc foedere accidit, 2 Chronicles. 15: ver. 13: Vbi de poena
subditorum and Regis loquitur, ut, 1 Samuel 12: ver. 7. 4. But now the question
is what is the Peoples duty, in a day of defection? He says it is only to keep
themselves pure from the abominations, and reform themselves. But we have
showed above that the scripture requires more, even some active endeavor, to
have the National Corruptions removed, though not to usurp the Magistrates
place. But says he [ The late Covenant it self, does bind private persons in
their places and callings (which certanely are private, and to be managed by
private means) to endeavor reformation, and does not bind any number of
private persons to pull the sword out of the Magistrate's hand, when they think
he uses it otherwise then he should, and then they would have him use it -- if
the Covenant be passive of such commentaryes, as this man puts upon it, That
whatever any private party accounts Reformation, they may use the vindictive
punishing sword against all, of all degrees, that stand in their way to advance
the same, we have little reason to be in love with it; and just cause to cast
it by, till it be cleared of such corrupt glosses. [ Answer. I fear the
Surveyer be so out of love with it, and have so cast it by, that were it never
so cleared (as it is clear enough) he has no mind to take it up again, and
he best knows what it was that moved him to cast it off. But 2. as Naphtaly
said well, That clause annexed can not be so restrictive, as this Surveyer
would have it; for certanely it cannot bind up private men's hands, from doing
of these things, which otherwise were commanded them to do. Now whether this
Covenant had been or not, more would have been required of private persons, in
a time of great and universal or a national defection, then at other times.
Every man is bound according to his place and station to preserve he Kings
person and authority. Now put the case that some party or faction should
captivate him, This man will grant that private persons, without the conduct
of inferior Magistrates, may join together, if they be in a capacity to break
through impediments, and through the interprize, and labor his vindication and
delivery, and restoration: Would he in this case condemn these men, as acting
without their sphere, or as usurpers: I suppose not: Let him then apply this to
our case. and he will easily see the parallel. So it is the duty of burgesses
in their places and stations, to promove the good of the society: Now suppose a
fire kindle, and such as are appointed to oversee the quenching of fires either
are absent, or careless, or half willing the Town should be burnt, shall
private persons hands be bound up from doing what they can, in what order they
may, to save the Town? shall they be accounted transgressors, or Usurpers of
the Magistrat's place, though they should materially occupy his room for that
exigent? No certanely, they should rather be accounted faithful citizens,
mindeful of their oath and promise. So when an army is engaged with the Enemy,
if the Commanders should perfidiously betray their trust, and leave their
station, or seek the destruction of the army, in their station, It would be
accounted no usurpation, in any private persons, who could best fill these
rooms and places, for these exigents, to do what they could, for the saifty of
the army: Nor would this be thought contrare to their oath. When a Master of a
Shipe either through sotishnesse, or wickedness, would run the ship against
the rock, any private Seaman in that case of necessity, may, to save his own
life and the lives of all who are in the shipe, do the best he can, to prevent
destruction, without any sinful transgressing the bounds of his calling. Whence
we may understand, that in cases of extreme necessity, private persons may do
more, then in ordinary cases; and yet not sinfully go beyond their places and
callings: and though materially, they, for that exigent, occupy the places of
Superiors, who sinfully, unfaithfully, and basely, either neglect or betray
their trust; yet they cannot be accounted Usurpers: nor is it rational to say,
that such as plead for the lawfulness of this, do plead for the lawfulness of
private persons pulling the sword out of the Magistrate's hands, whenever
they think he uses it otherwise then he should, or whenever he uses it
otherwise then they would have him use it; and useing the vindictive punishing
sword against all Magistrates and others, that stand in their way. By this
also, we may see what injury he does to Naphtaly, when he draws such
consequences from what he said Page, 151. and there did show by the simile
adduced, that such a thing was to be done only in extreme inevitable and
urgent necessity. And what the Surveyer has said Page 116. and 117. needs no
other answer.

This is not all, he must harp on this string again Page 103. where he says
[ That it is to ruin all order, to teach that the advancing Religion, not only
actibus elicitis but actibus imperatis, which belong to the Magistrate, may be
meddled with by the people-extraordinary necessities are more easily pleaded
then justified, as ground sufficient for some actions, whereto there is no
extraordinary call] Answ. Though this be sufficiently answered before, yet we
say, 1. That order is already ruined, when the Magistrate destroys what he
should preserve, and so crosses his commission: and who teach that in such an
extraordinary case, when God's order is violated and broken, and all in hazard
to be overturned, such things might be done, which needed not to be done, if
God's order and appointment were observed, do not take a way to ruin all
order, but rather to preserve that, which order it self is appointed, as a
mean, to preserve. 2. We plead not for such formal imperate acts, in matters
of Religion, as due to private persons (as we have said.) But for a power,
according to the ability God puteth into their hands to hinder him from being
dishonored, to defend their own profession and Religion, to hinder an
universal apostasy, and to endeavor in their capacities, to have things
righted, which are out of order. And when private persons are carrying
themselves thus, we deny that they are running out of their rank and calling;
nor can he prove it. 3. Will he say that no actions can be sufficiently
justified because done in extraordinary necessities and without an
extraordinary call? Then he shall condemn the Covenants which David made with
the men of Israel, 2 Samuel 5. and which Iehojadah made betwixt the King and the
People: For he told us that both these were in extraordinary occasions, and he
cannot shovv us any extraordinary call. He adds [ If Magistrates be deficient
-- private persons are sufficiently discharged, if they keep themselves pure,
and do what possibly they can, for advanceing Religion in their private
capacities and by their Elicite acts -- if a man's eyes be put out his ears, or
other senses will go as far to supply that defect, as may be; yet, cannot help
the body by elicite acts of seeing. So whatever length private persons may go,
for the good of the body, they must not go to exercise and exert formally,
acts magistratical.] Answ. All alongs we hear nothing but dictatings: This and
this he says, and there is an end, a noble patron of a desperate cause, and
worthy of a great hire. But. 1. The question still abides undiscussed how far
private persons capacity does reach; for that they must do more then keep
themselves pure we have shevved. 2. If they may do what possibly they can, for
advanceing Religion in their capacities, they may do more then he will have
them doing; for then they may defend Religion with the sword, and with violence
hinder idolatry and superstition, and what of that nature provocketh God to
wrath. All this and more is within their capacity and possibility, as he would
easily grant, if the Magistrate would but countenance it, yea and though he
should oppose, say we. But he will say, these are not elicite acts. And will
he grant nothing else to private subjects but elicit acts? Then he will not
grant them liberty to disput for Religion, to exhort, rebuke and admonish etc.
for these are not elicite acts, more then disputing with the svvord, and so
with his Philosophic distinctions, he would charm us into a perfect
acquiescence with what Religion the King will enjoyne. 3. Ears and other
senses never set up the eyes, and gave them power to see for their good: But
the People set up the Magistrates, and may do, when the Magistrate lays down
his sword, or avowedly betrayeth his trust, what they might have done before
they made choice of him. 4. By this Simile it would follow that the People
cannot only not do the Magistrate's Imperat acts, but not so much as the
Elicite acts which he may do, which is false. 5. Though they cannot exert or
exercise Formally acts Magistratical, if they may do it Materially, we seek no
more. In end he tell us. That it is a dangerous and destructive tenent to be
held forth to be believed by People That in all cases whether concerning
Religion or Liberty, when they account the Magistrate to pervert the
government, that they are Eatenus in so far, even as if they had no King, and
that the royalty has recurred to themselves, and they may act and exercise it
formally as if they had no King at all] and this he tells us is the express
doctrine of Lex Rex Page 99. 100. Now that all may see what a shameless and
impudent man this is, and how little reason any have to give him credit, I
shall recite the authors very words. [ But because ( says he) the Estates
never gave the King power to corrupt Religion, and press a false and I
dolatrous worshipe upon them; Therefore when the King defends not true
Religion, but presses upon the People a false and Idolatrous Religion ( this
is some other thing then when they account the Magistrate to pervert etc.) in
that they are not under the King, but are presumed to have no King eatenus so
far, and are presumed to have power in themselves, as if they had not
appointed any King at all -- If an incorporation accused of Treason and in
danger of the sentence of death, shall appoint a lawyer to advocate their
cause, -- if he be stricken with dumbness, because they have losed their legal
and representative tongue, none can say, that this incorporation has losed the
tongues that nature has given them, so as by natures law they may not plead in
their own just and lawful defense, as if they had never appointed the foresaid
lawyer to plead for them. The King -- is made by God and the People King, for
the Church and People of God's sake, that he may defend true Religion, for the
behove and salvation of all: If then he defend not Religion -- (NB) in his
public and Royal way, It is presumed as undeniable, That the People of God who
by the law of nature, are to care for their own soull, are to defend (NB) in
their way, true Religion, which so nearly concerns them and their eternal
happiness.] Now let any judge if this be so dangerous and destructive a
tenent, As he would make his reader believe. But it is easy for him who has no
shame, to pervert sentences which he cannot confute, and then call them
dangerous and destructive: and thus he will make the rabble of the degenerate
clergy and other simple ones believe, that he has confuted Lex Rex. And thus
deals he with Naphtaly as we have showed already.

Having thus considered all which the Surveyer has here and there spoken
against that which we have said, let us now come to apply what has been said,
unto our present purpose, of vindicating the late act of defense; which, by
what we have said, we find cannot be justly condemned as treasonable or
rebellious, but rather approved and commended as loyal service to God and the
Country.

For 1. Thereby they were professing their constancy, in adhereing to the
reformation of Religion in doctrine, worshipe Discipline and Government, which
was consonant to the word of God, and publicly received with all solemnities
imaginable, notwithstanding of acts and laws made to the contrary: and no true
Christian will say, That subjects should embrace any Religion which Magistrates
will countenance and prescribe, be what it will, or upon that account.

2. As they were thereby declareing their soul abhorrence of these corruptions,
which were countenanced and authorized by sinful acts and statutes; so they
were defending, to the utmost of their power, the reformed Religion, according
to their Covenant, and vow to God. And that such a defense as this, is lawful,
we have showed.

3. They were defending themselves against intolerable and manifestly unjust
violence, offered because of their adhereing to the cause of God, and to the
reformed Religion, which King, Parliament, and all ranks of People in the
land, were solemnly sworn to own, and avow, all the days of their lives,
really, sincerely and constantly* as they should answer to God, in the great
day; no less then they.

4. They were mindeing their Oath and Covenant made with God, with hands lifted
up, with solemn attestations, and protestations; the Covenants which they did
make and renew in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of all hearts,
with a true intention to perform the same.

5. They were endeavoring in their places and stations (according to the
latitude allowed in times of such necessity, and in matters of such weight and
moment) to have the Church and Kingdom purged of these abominable and crying
corruptions, and grievous abominations, which provoke the Lord to wrath,
against the whole Church and Kingdom.

6. They were defending the maine fundamental law and constitution of the
Kingdom, and that maine article of Agreement and Compact betwixt Sovereign
and Subject, which all the members of the Nation, were no Less bound unto,
then they.

7. They were joining together, as detasteing that detestable indifferency and
neutrality abjured, to defend and assist one another in the same cause of
maintaining their reformed Religion, with their best counsel, bodies, means,
and whole power, against the old, inveterate and Common enemy, that malignant
spirit and rage; according to their Covenants.

8. They were repenting of their National sin, in complying (by their sinful
silence, and not giving open, faithful, and fair testimony, when the Truth of
God was openly and violently trod under foot) with that dreadful course of
backslideing, which was violently carried on. They were calling for justice,
and valiently pleading for truth, sinfully and tyrannically borne down and
oppressed. They were with zeal and courage valiently interposeing, and
laboring to put a stop to the begun and far-carryed-on defection, when truth
was failing, and he who depairted from evil made himself a prey, that God might
pardon, and look in mercy on the land. They were endeavoring to stand in the
gape and make up the hedge; and pleading with their Mother Church, or a
malignant faction in her, shamefully departing from God, when there was no
other way or mean to be followed, or essaved.

When all these things are duly considered and laid together, It will appear
to impartial and unbyassed persons, That the late act which is so much
condemned and cried our against, is not so heinous and unpardonable a crime, as
this Surveyer and his wicked party would give it out to be: but was a noble
and laudable interprize, for the glory of God, the good of Religion, Church and
Kingdom; beside that it was a most necessary and unavoydable act of self
defense. Since the Scriptures formerly cited will allow more unto private
persons, then what this Surveyer restricketh them unto, (as we have shevved)
in a time of defection: Then when there was no other way left to do these
duties there required, and when with all several other things did call aloud
to a mutual conjunction in arms for defense of one another, and repelling of
unjust violence, and prosecuteing the holy and necessary ends of the Covenants
which they swore, no man in reason can suppose that such a work is repugnant
to Scripture or right reason, but rather most consonant to both.

And though many do and will condemn the same, even as to this interprize of
Reformation, upon what grounds and motives themselves best know, yet Our worthy
and Noble Reformer famous Mr Knox if he were living this day, would be far from
speaking after the language of such. For he in his appellation Page 22. etc.
has these words [The second is, that the punishing of such crimes, as are
idolatry blasphemy, and others that touch the Majesty of God, does not
Appertain to the Kings and chief rulers only; but also to the whole body of
the People, and to every member of the same, according to the vocation of every
man, and according to that possibility and occasion which God does minister, to
revenge the injury done against his glory, when that impiety is manifestly
known: And that does Moses plainly speak Deuteronomy. 13: v. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. in
these words, if in any of the cities etc. -- plain it is that Moses speaks
not, nor gives charge to Kings, Rulers, and judges only; but he commands the
whole body of the People, yea and every member of the same, according to their
possibility: And who dar be so impudent, as to deny this to be most reasonable
and just; for, seeing that God had delivered, the whole body from bondage; and
to the whole multitude had given his law; and to the twelve Tribes had he so
distributed the inheritance of the land of Canaan! that no family could
complain that it was neglected; was not the People and every member addebted,
to acknowledge, and confess the benefits of God? Yea, had it not been the
part of every man, to have studied to have kept the possession which he had
received? Which thing God did plainly pronounce they should not do, except that
in their hearts they did sanctify the Lord God; that they embraced, and
inviolably kept his Religion established; and finally except, they did put
away iniquity from amongst them, declareing themselves earnest Enemies to these
abominations, which God declared himself so vehemently to hate, that first he
commanded the whole inhabitants of that Country to be destroyed, and all
monuments of their idolatry to be broken down. -- But in such cases Gods will
is, that all creatures stoup, cover their faces, and desist from reasoning,
when commandment is given to execute his judgment. Albeit I could adduce
diverse causes of such severity; yet will I search none other then the holy
ghost has assigned; first, that all Israel hearing of the judgment, should
fear to commit the like abomination; and secondly, That the Lord might turn
from the fury of his anger, might be moved toward the People with inward
affection, be mercyful unto them, and multiply them, according to his oath made
unto their Fathers: Which reasons as they are sufficient in God's children to
correct the murmuring of grudging flesh; so ought they to provoke every man, as
before I have said, to declare himself an enemy to that which so highly
provokes the wrath of God against the whole People: For where Moses says Let
the city be burned, etc. he plainly does signify that by the defection and
idolatry of a few, Gods wrath is kindled against the whole, which is never
quenched till such punishment be taken upon the offenders, that whatsoever
served them in their idolatry be brought to destruction, because that it is
execrable and cursed before God; and therefore he will not that it be reserved
to any use of his People. I am not ignorant That this law was not put into
execution, as God commanded; but what did thereof ensue and follow? Histories
declare, viz. plague after plague till Israel and Judah were led into
captivity, as the Books of the Kings do witness. The consideration whereof
makes me more bold, To affirm that it is the duty of every man, who desires
to escape the plague and punishment of God, to declare himself Enemy to
idolatry, not only in heart hateing the same, but also in external gesture
declareing, that he lamenteth, if he can do no more, for such abominations --
of these premises, I suppose, it be evident. That the punishment of idolatry,
does not appertain to Kings only, but also to the whole People, yea to every
member of the same, according to his possibility: For, that is a thing most
assured that no man can mourn lament and bewail for these things, which he
will not remove to the uttermost of his power.] And a little thereafter^ And
therefore I fear not to affirm that the Gentiles (I mean every City, Realm,
Province or Nation, amongst the Gentiles, imbraceing Christ Jesus and his true
Religion) be bound to the same league and Covenant, that God made with his
People Israel when he promised to root out the Nations before them, in these
words Exodus 34: 12, 13, 14. -- to this same law and Covenant are the Gentiles
no less bound, then some time were the jews, whensoever God does illuminate
the eyes of any multitude, Province, People, or City, and puteth the sword in
their own hand, to remove such enormities from amongst them, as before they
knevv to be abominable. Then, I say, are they no less bound, to purge their
Dominions, Cities, and Countries, from idolatry, then were the Israelites,
what time they received the possession of the Land of Canaan. And moreover, I
say if any go about to erect and set up idolatry, or to teach defection from
God, after that the verity has been received and approved, that then not only
the Magistrates, to whom the svvord is committed, but also the People, are
bound, by that oath, which they have made to God, to revenge to the utmost of
their power, the injury done against his Majesty.] So in his admonition to the
Commonalty of Scotland Page 36. [ Neither would I that you should esteem the
reformation and care of Religion less to appertain to you. because ye are
not Kings, Judges, Nobles, nor in authority. Beloved brethren, you are God's
Creatures created and formed to his own image and similitude, for whose
redemption, was shed the most precious blood of the only beloved sone of God,
to whom he has commanded his gospel and glade tidings to be preached, and for
whom he has prepared the heavenly inheritance; so that ye will not
obstinately refuse, and disdainfully contemn the means, which he has
appointed to obtain the same -- for albeit God has put and ordained
distinction betwixt King and Subjects; yet in the hope of the life to come, he
has made all equal -- and therefore I say, that it does no less appertain to
you, to be assured that your faith and Religion be grounded and established
upon the true and undoubted word of God, then to your Princes or Rulers; for,
as your bodies cannot escape corporal death, if with your Princes, you eat or
drink deadly poison (although it be by ignorance or negligence) so shall ye not
escape the everlasting, if with them ye profess a corrupt Religion -- and
this is the cause that so often I repeat, and so constantly I affirm, that to
you it does no less appertain, then to your King or Princes to provide that
Christ Jesus be truly preached among you, seeing without his true knowledge,
you cannot attain to salvation.] More to this purpose may be read there.

CAP. X.
Arguments taken from the hazard of becoming guilty of the sin of others, and
of partaking of their Judgments. And from the duty of relieving the oppressed,
etc.
IT is not necessary for our purpose to dip much into that question concerning
Gods imputing of the sin of one unto others; and therefore we shall shortly hint
at some few particulars from Scripture, and after we have considered what this
Surveyer says, we shall apply them to our purpose.

That God does punish some, and that most justly, for the sins of others, the
Scripture does abundantly verify: Not to insist on the instances of his
punishing of whole families, for the sins of the Head of the family: as the
family of Pharaoh, Genesis 12: v. 17. of Abimelech, Genesis 20: v. 17, 18. of Corah
and his companions, Number. 16: v. 27, 32, 33. of Achan, Ios. 7: v. 24, 25. of
Jeroboam, 1 King. 14: v. 10, 11. and Cap. 15: 29. of Ahab, 1 King. 21: v. 21,
22, 24. 2 King. 9: v. 8. of Baasha, 1 King. 16: 3, 4. of Iehoram, 2 Chronicles. 21:
14. Nor on the instances of his punishing of Servants for the sins of their
Masters, or the Children and Posterity for the sins of their Parents, as in
the 2 Command, where he threatens to visit the iniquities of the Fathers upon
the Children, unto the 3 and 4 generation. So also Levit. 26: ver. 38, 39.
Deuteronomy. 28: v. 18, 32, 45, 46. So the Children of such as were drowned in the
flood, Genesis 6, and 7. The posterity of Canaan, Genesis 9: v. 24, 25, 26, 27. The
children of the Egyptians, Exodus 11: v. 5, 6. of the Israelites, Number. 14: v.
33. Psalm. 106: v. 27. of Dathan and Abiram, Number. 16. of the Canaanites, Deuteronomy.
3, and Cap. 20. of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 15. of Saul, 1 Samuel 21. of Cehazie, 2
King. 5: ver. 27. of the Babilonians, Esai. 14: ver. 21, 22. of Semaia, Ier.
24. v. 32. Hence true penitents acknowledge and are humbled for not only their
own sins, but the sins of their Fathers, Ezra 9. Dan. 9. Job says Cap.
21: v. 19. God lays up his iniquity (or the punishment of his iniquity, as it
is in the margin) for his children. But to pass these we find moreover.

1. That People have been punished for the sins of their Pastors, or in
hazard to be punished therefore. When Nadab and Abihu had provoked the Lord
with their strange fire, Moses spoke unto Aaron and to his other two Sons, and
said, Levit. 10: v. 6. Uncover not your heads, neither rend your clothes, lest
you die, (N. B.) and left wrath come upon all the People. So that their sin
would not only have brought wrath upon themselves, but also upon all the
People. So the wickedness of Hophny and Phinehas was part of the cause of that
sad discomfiture, that the People of Israel did meet with, 1 Samuel 2: ver. 12.
comp: with Cap. 3: ver. 11. and with Cap. 4: ver. 10, 11. So Esai. 43: ver. 27,
28. because the Teachers had transgressed against the Lord. Therefore was Jacob
given to the curse and Israel to reproaches. So Lam. 4: v. 13. among other
provocations, the sins of her Prophets are mentioned, and the iniquities of
her Priests. So Micah. 3: v. 11, 12. Because the Heads did judge for reward,
and the Priests did teach for hire, and the Prophets did divine for money,
Therefore Zion was to be plowed as a field and Jerusalem to become heaps, and
the mountain of the house, as the high places of the forest.

2. That the sins of a few have procured judgments unto the whole multitude,
or put them in hazard thereof. So Deuteronomy. 13: v. 12, 17. the Apostate city would
kindle the fierceness of God's anger against the whole People: For it is said,
The Lord would not turn from the fierceness of his anger, and show them mercy
and compassion, and multiply them, until it were destroyed, and all that was
within it. So Number. 25. for the sin of these who joined with Baal peor the
anger of the Lord was kindled against the whole congregation. So when Moses was
speaking unto the two Tribes and half, Number. 32: 14, 15. he says, And behold
ye are risen up in your Fathers stead -- to augment yet the fierce anger of
the Lord toward Israel, for if ye turn away from after him, he will yet
again leave them in the wilderness, and ye shall destroy all this People. So
Ios. 7: ver. 5. for one Ahan's sin, all Israel was troubled, and Ios. 22: v.
17. 18. say the commissioners of the whole congregation, unto the two Tribes
and half, And it will be* seeing, ye-rebel to day against the Lord, that to
morrow, he will be wroth, with the whole congregation of Israel. And it was
this which moved all the Tribes to go against Benjamin, Judge. 20

3. That the Subjects have suffered sad and dreadful judgments for the sins
of their Rulers: As Micah 3: 9, 10, 11, 12. formerly cited: Abimelech's sin,
Genesis 20. was like to hazard himself, and all his Kingdom, ver. 7, 9. For
Pharaoh's refusing to let Israel go, not only he and his Princes, but his
Subjects through all his coasts, did smarte, Exodus 6, and 7: and 8, and 9. and
10 Cap. Neh. 9: v. 10. So Readiness sin in seeking to destroy the Gibeonites,
brought on three years famine on the land in the days of David, 2 Samuel 21: v.
1. So David's sin of numbering the people cost the lives of three score and Ten
thousand, 2 Samuel 24: v. 1, 2, 15. 1 Chronicles. 21: 1, 2, 14. So the Lord threatened
by the Prophet, 1 King, 14: ver. 16. that for the sins of Jeroboam, who did
sin, and who made Israel to sin, he would give up Israel, And for Ahab's sin of
letting Benhadad go, the Man of God told Ahab, 1 King. 20: ver. 42. Because
thou have let go out of thy hand a man whom I appointed to utter destruction,
therefore thy life shall go for his life, and thy People for his People. So
for Manasseh's sin, Ier. 15: ver. 4. The Lord says I will cause them to be
removed into all King domes of the Earth, because of Manasseh the son of
Hezekiah King of Judah for that which he did in Ierusaelem. So it is also
spoken, 2 King. 21: ver. 11, 12, 13. Because Manasseh King of Judah has done
these abominations -- therefore thus says the Lord God of Israel, behold I
am bringing such evil upon Jerusalem and Judah that whosoever hears of it,
both his ears shall tingle, etc. And notwithstanding of the reformation that
was in the days of Josiah. Yet this judgment came to be accomplished, and the
Lord sent the bands of the Caldees and of the Syrians: surely, (so it is said,
2 King. 24: v. 3, 4.) at the commandment of the Lord came this upon Judah to
remove them out of his sight, for the sins of Manasseh, according to all that
he did, and also for the innocent blood that he shed, which the Lord would not
pardon. And 2 King. 23, 26. Though there was a great work of reformation done
in the days of that non-such King ( v. 25,) Josiah, yet it is said
notwithstanding the Lord turned not from the fierceness of his great wrath,
wherewith his anger was kindled against Judah, because of all the provocations
that Manasseh had provoked him with all. Yea, so did this sin of Manasseh
provoke the Lord against the land, that how beit Manasseh himself repented, and
found mercy, 2 Chronicles. 33: v. 12. and questionless many of the People turned
with him, yet these same sins of Manasseh are mainly taken notice of as the
procureing cause of that final stroke.

Out of these particulars, these few things are very obvious to any.

1. That People combined into a society have great cause, not only to look to
their own carriage, but also unto the carriage of others; Since the carriage
of others will bring them in hazard of God's judgments, and hasten down
vengeance and wrath from God on all, sure they have need to look about them.

2. Especially, they have reason to take notice of the public carriage and
deportment of Princes and Pastors: seeing in a special manner those highten the
wrath and hasten the judgments of God, as has been showed.

3. If these sins in Princes, Pastors and others were not committed, those
plagues and judgments which are threatened, and at length executed upon that
account, would have been prevented.

4. If People, considering their hazard by reason of these public
transgressions, had actively bestirred themselves, and interposed, as that
these iniquities had not been committed, they had not smarted so for as they
did, not had they felt the weight of the hand of Gods anger, as they were made
to do.

5. It was not enough for them, to have kept themselves free of these actual
transgressions, whereof others were really guilty: for we find some punished,
for that iniquity of others, which could not be laid to their charge, as actors.

6. How ever such as were so punished, were not free of inherent
transgressions, and other sins, which deserved judgment at the hands of the
Lord; yet when the Spirit of the Lord is pleased to make no mention of these,
as the Procureing cause of these plagues, but seems to lay the whole or maine
stresse of the business, upon that sin committed by others, we must think
that that has had no small influence, but rather a mine causality in the
procureing of these plagues, and it becomes us to be sober in inquireing after
other causes hid from us, and rest satisfied with what the Spirit of the Lord
is pleased particularly and evidently to point forth unto us, and pitch upon,
as the peccant and procureing cause

7. Though we could not satisfy wrangling wits, touching the equity of this,
(which yet the common and ordinary practice of men, forfaulting a whole
posterity, for one man's transgression, will not suffer us to account insolent)
yet we ought to rest satisfied with what is clearly and undenyably held forth
in the word, and believe that for these causes, such and such plagues were
inflicted upon distinct and different persons, because the spirit of truth
says so.

8. As all Scripture was given by the inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that
the Man of God, may be perfect, thoroughly furnished, unto all good works, 2 Timothy,
3: v. 16, 17. So these particular passages, so particularly described are
written for our learning, Romans 15: ver. 4. and are out examples, that we should
not do as they did, 1 Cor. 10: v. 6. and are written for our admonition, 1 Cor.
10: ver. 11. And therefore we must not look slightly upon them, but ponder then
narrowly, as so many documents given us for our use and instruction, and
particularly, that we may take warning to prevent such evils.

Now let us hear what the Surveyer says Page 51. He lays down two
assertions [ 1. That no man is involved in divine judgments and punishments,
for the sins of others, (as the deserving cause of his punishment) if he be
no way accessory to these sins of others 2. That no private Subject is
accessory to the sins of Rulers, nor involved in the punishments of the same,
merely upon the accouut of his tolerating the sins, or not violent resisting
the Magistrate in his sinful courses.] Answ. Not to enlairge on these now,
because of what he is to say in explication of these, and we are then to speak,
I would only at present enquire. 1. What accession had the army of Israel which
was defate by the Men of Ai (a stroke, which made Joshua rent his clothes, and
fall upon his face to the Earth, until the even tide, he and the elders of
Israel, and put dust upon their heads) unto the sin of Achan? And why does the
Spirit of the Lord say, Ios. 7: v. 1. That the Children of Israel had committed
a trespass in the accursedthing. And again ver. 10, 11, 12. [ And the Lord
said unto Joshua, Get thee up, wherefore lie thou thus upon thy face? Israel
has sinned, and they have also transgressed my Covenant-for they have taken of
the accursed thing-and they have put it even amongst their own stuff.
Therefore the Children of Israel could not stand because they were accursed,
neither will I be with you any more, except ye destroy the accursed from
amongst you.] Though we can learn of no accession which they had, unto this
particular fact, yet we see the whole body is punished as guilty, and must be
legally purified, and sanctified, and purged from that contagion. 2. What
accession had all these who suffered in these three years famine, which was in
David's days, unto that bloody act of Saul and his house, which was committed
many years before thousands of these who suffered therefore knew the right hand
from the left, or were borne possibly? 3. What accession had the children
unborne to the third and fourth generation, unto the sins of their
forefathers? and yet the holy Lord thinks good to visit their iniquities on
them. 4. What accession had the People unto David's sin of numbering, the
people does not David himself say, 2. Sam, 24: ver. 17. But these sheep, what
have they done? But let us hear how he explaineth this, [ A certane thing it
is (says he) that God does not properly punish any man but in reference to his
own personal sins (as the deserving cause of the punishment) albeit he may and
often takes occasion, in his wise providence, to punish men for their own
sins, from the sins of others, (and in that only sense, they may be said to
be punished for the sins of others.) But every soul suffers for his own sin.
Divine justice finding causes of punishment, in every one that is punished,
either their personal accession to the sins of others (which is their own
sin) or else some other sins, for which he may in justice inflict the
punishment upon them, albeit the impulsive cause, or occasion rather, for
punishing in such a manner and time etc, be from the sins of others.] Ans. 1.
Though we desire to be wise unto sobriety in this matter, and not to meddle
with matters beyond our reach, yet we think it saifer to speak in the
language of the Holy Ghost, then in the words of this Surveyer, who gives us
no Scripture for what he says. The expressions of Scripture hold forth some
thing more then a mere occasion: It seems strange to say that Ahan's sin
should have been only an occasion of that discomfiture: when the Spirit of the
Lord says, that Israel had sinned, and therefore could not stand before their
Enemies, because they were accursed, and that till this accursed were taken
from amongst them he would not be with them any more. 2. He would do well to
explain to us, what he means by a proper punishment, and what is the
opposite term thereunto? 3. We grant divine justice finds deserving causes
of punishment in all, in whom is original sin, but we suppose that when that
is not mentioned as the procureing cause of such a stroke, but the sin
committed by another, we ought to look on that mainly, as having a procureing
causality in that affliction. 4. How ever, we see he grants one may be
punished for the sin of another (or upon occasion of the sin of another, as he
loves to speak.) to which he has no personal accession. 5. If these sins of
others, were only the occasion of punishing in such a manner or time, how
comes it that the very punishment it self is removed, upon the taking away of
that sin, according to God's appointment, and God is pacified toward the whole,
as he was with Israel when Ahan was killed, and Seven of Readiness sons hanged
up? 6. But whether we take these sins of others, as impulsive causes, or
occasions of such punishments. This is clear. That, if these sins had been
prevented, these punishments had been prevented also: so that if Saul had not
gotten liberty to have stain the Gibeonites, in his bloody rage, contrare to
oath and Covenant, these three years famine had not come: And if David had been
hindered from numbering of the people, and had not gotten his will, these
Seventy thousand had not died then as they did: And seeing no other cause or
occasion is rendered of this, it would clearly warn all in a Community and
Society, to labor, by all means, according to their power and places, to
hinder the Committing (or removing when committed) of these sins, which bring
heavy plagues on the Community. The Dutch. Aunot. on 2 Samuel 21: 1. say that so
for this offense, all the land was punished because at least (as it often
happens) the people had not hindered it.

Then Page 52. he comes to explain his other assertion ( It is no less
certane ( says he) to us that if the Magistrate do not connive at the sins
of Subjects, nor neglect to curb and punish them, the sins of the people shall
no way be imputed to him ( he not being thereunto accessory in any way) nor
shall be punished for their sins, which in his place and calling he is
wrestling against] Answ. Yet we know, that for the transgression of a land,
many are the princes thereof Prove. 8. v. 2. And that for a punishment to
people, God may even cut the days of a good prince, and though we should
grant, that it were no proper punishment unto the good Prince, yet materially
and in it self it is a stroke. But he adds. [ Also it is alike certane. That
private persons shall not have the sins of Magistrates, or of the body of the
people imputed unto them, nor be punished for the same, if so be they honestly
endeavor to do all things against these sins, which in their private calling
they are bound to do.] Answ. Be this granted, The main question will be if
people can be said to have honestly endeavored to do all things against these
sins, which in their private callings they are bound to do, if having power to
withstand the committing of these evils, or to remove them after they are
committed, yet they forbear, and suffer these things to be done, and labor
not to remove them. He adds [ If they keep themselves without any degree of
acting these sins, or any way of accession to them. if they mourn and sigh for
evils that are done; if they be earnest in prayer* that God may convert others
from their evil way, if they ( as they can have opportunity) faithfully
admonish and study to reclaim those who are out of the way, and do such like
Christian duties. God will never enter in judgment with them for not doing
violence to the authorityes that are above them.] Answ, If the Surveyer would
do no more then this, he ought neither to be accounted a good Christian, nor a
loyal subject: For, if he saw the King about to cut his own throat with a
knife, or about to do as Saul did, fall upon his own sword, or running down a
precipice to break his neck, would any think he had had done his duty, and
exonered his conscience; if he should not lead his hand unto that mischief, nor
thrust him down the principice, but should roar and cry God save the King,
and admonish and study, with fair words, to reclaim the King from that cruel
deed? would any think but he might have done more, even if he had had strength
enough have holden his hands, and kept him back from breaking his neck, and
yet never have been in any hazard or sinfully touching the Lord's anointed, or
doing violence to the authority that God had set over him. 2. And if Kings may
be-resisted, and with violence hindered from putting hands in themselves, or
from drinking a cup of poison, or doing some such deed, which will or may prove
destructive to their life and posterity, without doing violence to the
authority appointed of God; why may they not also be hindered from doing that
which will ruin their souls, and prove destructive to their Kingdoms, and
bring on the curse and vengeance of God upon young and old, without doing any
sinful violence unto the authority? And as in the former case, a man could not
but be guilty of the King's death, who knew that it was a cup of poison which
he was to drink, and did not, having power to do it, hinder him from drinking
it: So in this case, they that have power to hinder the Magistrate from
drinking poison, or doing what may be deadly to thousands of his innocent
subjects, and bring down the curse of God upon him and his posterity, and do
it not, cannot but be guilty of that sin before God, and so cannot expect to be
free of the punishment which God will inflict because of that sin, as not
having done, even in their private callings, what they were bound to do, viz.
not having used their power for the glory of God, the good of the Sovereign
and his posterity, nor for the good of the Commonwealth, which they were bound
to do.

He tells us moreover concerning that instance of Manasseh, Ier. 15: v. 4.
[That the people were punished, because they were shares of the guiltiness
(not by not violent resisting, which they were never exhorted to) but by direct
or indirect accession otherwise, Hos. 5: ver. 11. Ier. 5: v. 31.] Ans. 1. How
could young children be accessory, either by consent or any otherwise to these
courses of Manasseh? 2. It were hard to say that even all who were come to the
use of reason, were guilty of accession unto these wickednesses, who yet were
carried away captive, such as Daniel, Hananiah, Mishael, and Azaria, and
others. 3. That there were many, yea the far greatest part of the People who
were guilty, of heinous sins, when the final stroke came, cannot be denied;
but, that they were at that same hight of wickedness, which they were at, in
Manasseh's days is doubted, 4. We shalll grant with Calvin on the place. That
Manasseh alone was not in that transgression, but had many of the People
consenting; Yet, as Manasseh himself was dead, long ere the stroke came, so
were they; and yet for that sin of theirs, the posterity suffered: Yea even
notwitstanding that there interveened a National repentance and mourning for
that National sin, and National Reformation of these idolatrous courses, in the
days of Josiah, 5. Though it be true that the People after Iosiah's days,
returned to their vomit, and had wickedness enough of their own, for which
God might have punished them; yet it is very remarkable, how that sin of
Manasseh is particularly mentioned, as if there had not been another, to
procure that stroke: and certanely all who read the places cited before, will
easily observe that there is something more in them, then an occasion taken to
remember that dreadful time of Manasseh, when the wickedness began, as the
Surveyer says in the following words. 6. It was their sin, I grant, that they
did consent; and that says that they should not have consented, but have
refused obedience unto the King idolatrous mandats, and have hindered in their
places, an according to their power, the setting up of these abominations, and
should have adhered to the truth and worship of God, as it was practiced in the
days of good Hezekiah his Father. 7. He needs not say, they were not exhorted
to this violent resisting; for it was but folly to speak of resistance, to
these, who so willingly walked after the commandment, and would not do so much
as disobey. 8. That place of Hoseah speaking of Ephraim's willingly walking
after the commandment, proves not what the people of Judah's carriage was in
the days of Manasseh; albeit we grant the thing was too true of the greatest
part, even of them, then: Neither does the place, Ier, 5: v. 31. speak of the
days of Manasseh: for Jeremiah was not then a Prophet; for he began to
prophecy in the 13 year of Josiah, Ier. 1: 2.

Then the comes, Page 53. and gives some reasons: But first we must take
notice how he wordeth the principle which he accounts so dangerous If it be
once admitted (says he) that the sins of Rulers and Governors involve the
People in sin, and make them obnoxious to judgment, (albeit they be not
accessory thereto directly only they toler at what they cannot amend abiding
within the bounds of their calling) neither can the consciences of people, nor
the state of the commonwealth have any true peace or quietness.] Ans. We might
grant him what he desires, and acknowledge, that this principle is not sound:
we do not say so, for we shall grant that (excepting the Lord's Soveraignity of
doing as he did in the case of Ahan and such like,) that the People who are
come to age must be directly or indirectly guilty of the sin of Rulers, in
which they are involved. But so they are guilty, when they tolerate what they
might amend, abideing within the bounds of their calling. But here the
difference betwixt him and us lies. That he thinks it is beyond the bounds
of the calling of private persons, to hinder Princes from committing such
(...) which would ruin them and their subjects both, which we deny, and we
have not yet seen him prove it: yea we have showed the contrary above. But now
we proceed to his two reasones. [ For 1. (says he) Once grant this then what a
continual puzle should tender hearted Christians be in, anent the actions of
their Rulers and Magistrates, and they behoved to meddle with and examine all
their proceedings -- matters of government not probably or morally possible for
them to know.] Answ. We do not, neither need we extend that principle to all
the private or personal sins of Magistrates, or to such acts which are beyond
the reach of the capacity of the vulgar, wherein their invincible ignorance,
whether as to the jus or factum, may excuse them from any accession direct or
indirect. If he will grant it to us, in sins public, heinous, and which
People can well discern both as to jus and factum, we desire no more: and if
it be limited to these, we will gain our point (for our case is as clear as
the Sun) and tender consciences will be free of all puzle or perplexity. What
is his 2. [ Would not this (says he) be a perpetual Seminary of unavoydable
sedition of the Commonwealth, and of exposeing the Magistrate to violence, no
less when he is acting justly, then when unjustly.] Answ. Then this loyal
Subject, if he saw an house or a great millstone falling upon the King's head,
he would not pull him from under it, lest others under pretense of that, should
use violence to the Magistrate, when he is in no hazard. Or if he saw the King
putting a cup of poison to his head, or a Knife to his throat, he would not
hinder him, lest others under that pretense should hinder him from taking
wholesome food, and so starve him; or should under pretense of saving the King,
put hands in his Majesty, and stob him under the fiftrib. But 2. does he not
know, that the best things may be abused, and will any, that is wise, say, that
he pleads for the abuse of a thing, who pleads only for its use? 4. By this
same reason, he might plead against refuseing to give obedience unto the King
in all his most sinful commands; for may not seditious and unquyet spirits
easily pretend that his commands are unjust, and that if they obey these they
are involved in sin and judgment, and so disobey him, even when he commands
most just and necessary things. If he be not for universal obedience, let him
answer this inconvenience in that case, and we shall make use of his answer
in this case.

In the next place he comes to speak of these scriptures, which he allaigeth
Naphtaly does abuse. The first is Ier. 26: v. 15. If ye put me to death shall
surely bring innocent blood upon yourselves, and upon this city, and upon the
inhabitants thereof, concerning which two things ( he says) are to be
remarked. [ 1. That Jeremiah is speaking to the Princes and all the People,
warning them not to meddle with his blood; The Princes that they should not
unjustly condemn him, The People that they should not consent to, nor
cooperate with an unjust sentence, as to the execution thereof (as the manner
of execution was amongst that People, stoning etc.) And 2. He certifieth both
that if they consented and co-operated to his death, they should bring innocent
blood upon themselves, and upon the City, and inhabitants thereof. He does not
at all incite the People to rise up and rescue him by violence out of the hands
of Rulers, if they should give sentence of death against him, (neither did ever
any of the holy Prophets instigate People to use violent resistance against
their perverse Magistrates, nor did they ever reprove directly or indirectly
that sin of non-violent resistance to Magistrates, as some excessively bold do
averr) but only warns Princes and People both, that they be not by consent and
concurrence accessory to his death] Answ. 1. Here is enough for us: For 1. He
grants the People were not to consent to, nor cooperate with an unjust
sentence; but if they should have refused to have co-operated, the sentence had
not been executed; and so Jeremiah had been really rescued from the sentence,
and decree of the Magistrates; so that there needed no other resistance to have
been used, innocent blood would not have been shed, and this was sufficient. 2.
He needed not to have incited them further unto a violent rescueing of him, for
though they should have given sentence of death against him, yet if none would
have executed it, he had been sufficiently rescued. But what needed more
incitation, then to tell that by shedding of his blood they should bring
innocent blood upon the whole city, and upon the inhabitants thereof. 3. It was
little wonder that the Prophets did not instigate People to use violent
resistance unto perverse Magistrates, seeing it was usually such Prince such
People, and the People as forward unto wickedness as the Princes, and yet we
find the duty of delivering the oppressed urged upon People conjunct with
their Rulers: Because both, in their places, should have concurred hereunto;
which says, that people, though they were not formally to execute
Magistratical power, yet they were to concur to have Justice, executed, and
to have the oppressed delivered, out of the hands of oppressors. And these
were judges as well as others, but more of this afterward. 4. This place does
abundantly clear, That the shedding of innocent blood by Magistrates brings
judgment on the Subjects: for Jeremiah says, that if they should have killed
him, they should have brought innocent blood not only to themselves, who gave
out the sentence, and did execute it; but on the whole city, and on the
inhabitants thereof. To this he has many words Page 55. but little answer.
The sum is this (for it were wearisome to transcribe all his needless
tautologies and repetitions, which if taken away, his pamphlet of a 120 pages,
might be reduced to 20) [ All who were defiled behoved to be accessory either
by doing, or not hindering what they were called and capacitated to hinder,
which was not by violent resistance: nor does the Prophet mean, that all the
absents should be guilty and properly deserve Gods wrath upon that account, but
only that the actors, and such as were accessory, should be guilty, and others
should, upon this occasion, fall under wrath, though for other sins: and yet
the judgment on the People might be a punishment to the Rulers, for that same
particular sin; for God may punish Princes or Fathers, in the punishment of
Subjects and Children; and yet these same Subjects and Children have no reason
to quarrel with God, or to say as it is, Exech. 18. v. 2.] Answ. We grant God
may and does punish Princes and Parents, in their Subjects and Children; and
That these same Subjects and Children so punished, have no just cause to say
that their Fathers have eaten sour grapes and that their teeth are set on
edge, as if there were no sin in themselves. But that God may not visit the
iniquities of the Fathers upon the Children, who have not formally acted these
evils, nor consented thereto, we dar not peremptorily assert, against so many
clear scriptures. 2. Sure this place seems to hint something else, then that
this sin of shedding Ieremiahs blood should be an occasion of God's visiting
the City, for their other sins: For he says you shall bring innocent blood
upon this city: so that by this Murder, they should have brought innocent
blood as well on the other inhabitants, as on themselves, who were to be
actors: the text makes no difference. 3. If the People here had done all which
in their calling and station, they were capacitated to have done, for hindering
of this sheding of blood, they would have hindered it effectually; and further
violent resistance was needless. If a wicked Magistrate should condemn an
innocent person, and make this his sentence, that he should not have the
benefit of a lodging within the land, The People need do no more to resist the
Magistrat's unjust sentence, but, notvvithstanding thereof, receive the
innocent into their house, and intertaine him friendly. And still we say, the
People were to do all that lay in their power, to hinder innocent blood to be
shed, that so innocent blood might not be laid to their charge: And in so far
as they came short in this, they made themselves guilty be accession,
notvvithstanding of any thing he has said.

The next place he speaks to, is Deuteronomy. 13. which we have already
vindicated, and must observe this further, That in all his long answer he
speaks nothing to that which now we are upon, viz. the hazard that People
in such a case are into, both of sin, and of judgment, if effectual course be
not taken to suppress idolatry, and apostasy from God, and to put that crying
evil away from amongst them: For v. 17. it is clearly held forth, that till
this city and all which was within it, was rooted out: the Lord would not turn
from the fierceness of his anger, nor show them mercy, nor have compassion
upon them, nor multiply them, as he swore unto their Fathers. So that their not
doing their utmost to execute this sentence of God, made them liable to the
constant abideing of the fierce anger of God upon them, and closed the door of
Mercy and compassion, so that they could not expect the blessings promised and
Covenanted.

Then Page 59. he comes to speak to Ios. 22: ver. 17, 18, 19. and tells us
That they were not private persons that transacted that business with the
Children of Reuben: for the body of the People concurred with the Magistrates
Supreme and Subordinate. What makes all this for the encroachment of mere
private persons upon the use of the Magistrates avenging sword?] Answ. It is
true the Magistrates and major part of the People were here concurring; but why
does he not take notice of the words cited by Naphtaly (which clearly hold
forth the end of his adduceing that passage) If ye rebel to day against the
Lord, to morrow he will be worth with the whole congregation of Israel, which
do clearly hold forth, that the defection of a part (though a minor part) will
bring wrath upon the whole Nation and Society. And may not any see hence; That
each are to concur in their places and stations, according to their power,
to prevent this defection, or to remove it, even when the major part is
infected with it; yea even though Magistrates should be remiss, and should
rather encourage then discountenance such rebellion against God? Seeing the
reason holds a fortiori, for it upon the defection of a minor part, wrath
will come upon the whole, much more will wrath come upon the defection of a
major part, and of the Magistrates too: And therefore if in the former case,
private persons be bound to concur with Magistrates, for rooting out of that
provoking sin of a few, then it cannot be unlawful for private persons, in
this later case, to do what they can, to stir up Magistrates to their duty, if
it be possible; and to prevent their own destruction from that wrath of God,
kindled against all; and to remove the provokeing cause of that anger: And, as
we have said, they may take an effectual course for this, without encroaching
upon the use of the Magistrate's avenging sword, or exercing any formal
Magistratical power.

The next place he speaks to, is Judge. 20. where Israel warreth against
Benjamin because of a notorious crime acted there, and countenanced and
defended by that whole Tribe, to the end that such a crying abomination might
be purged out of the land, To which he answers in short (to let pass his
unchristian jibes) thus [ Though this was when there was no King in Israel, yet
it is likely they retained somewhat of their Sanhedrin appointed Deuteronomy. 17.
which in such a horrid case might draw together in an extraordinary meeting: It
was the body or the major part of the People, that uses the sword against the
lesser; which makes nothing for the minor parts using the sword to punish
Magistrates and the major part of the People also.] Answ. Though I should grant
that they retained yet something of the Sanhedrin, yet in all this passage,
there is no mention made thereof; but it is said v. 1. That all the Children of
Israel went out, and the Congregation was gathered together as one Man, to
Mizpeh; and resolved not to return to their own houses, ver. 8. until these
Children of Belial in Gibeah had been executed, and evil was put away from
Israel, Cap. 13: v. 2. To say that this speaks not to our case, is but to
wrangle; for sure if we should suppose that Benjamin had been maintaining their
integrity, and the true worshipe of God, against the generality of the People,
who had turned idolaters, and had raised war against them, because they would
not depart from their profession; would he have condemned the minor part for
standing to their defense in this case? Or if they should have joined together
to have hindered the defection of the major part, or removed the corruptious
that were prevailing; would he have condemned them? Sure this is not improve
Scripture a right, but rather to elude it; for there is not the least shadow,
that the stresse of the matter is laid on this, that they were the major part.

Finally he comes to Achan's case, Jos. 7. and tells us, [ That there is
nothing in it, to justify private persons rising against the Magistrates, and
plurality of the people, to avert the judgments of God; for what was done to
Achan was done by the Supreme Magistrate Josua.] Answer. But Naphtaly only
makes use of this place, to show that our reformers had great reason to fear
and tremble, lest the manifest toleration of proud, cruel, flattering Prelates,
and idolatrous Priests, whose wickedness and idolatry, had corrupted the whole
land; might involve the whole Nation in destroying indignation; since the wrath
of God for the hidden and secret sin of one poor Achan suddenly and fearfully
overtook the whole People, and all the congregation of Israel, so that that man
perished not alone in his iniquity. Now can any body deny this consequence? But
our Surveyer lays down again his peremptory assertions without further
proof, and we have spoken to them already, and need not repeat things so often as
he gives us occasion so to do, otherwise we should follow this fool in his
folly, and weary the reader as he does, in repeating almost whole pages
verbatim, let any look and he shall find the whole 61 page, (except some
groundless jibes which do not help his cause) nothing almost but repetitions.
We shall then go on, and draw forth our arguments from what is said, to show
that the late act ought rather to be praised then condemned.

For 1. Thereby they were endeavoring, according to their power and places,
(as that exigent required) when all doors were closed from essaying any other
mean, not only to defend themselves against manifest and intolerable injury
and oppression, but to save themselves, their posterity, and the whole land (so
far as lay in their power) from the wrath and vengeance of God, and the
dreadful plagues and judgments that were and are to be expected, for the
dreadful and unparallelable apostasy and defection of a corrupt ministry. Did
God threaten that Zion should be plowed as a field, and Jerusalem become as a
heap, That Jacob should be given to the curse, and Israel to reproaches, for
the sins of a corrupt ministry; and when our eyes did never see a more
corrupt company, who have partly apostatized from their sworn profession, and
partly are thrust in over flocks, to the ruineing of their souls, the
corrupting of the truths of God, and to be a standing occasion of dreadful
persecution unto them; and when, for this cause, nothing could or can be looked
for, from the hands of a just and jealous God, but wrath without remedy, and
judgment after judgment, till we become as plowed fields, and as heaps: Can or
ought these to be blamed, who standing to their sworn profession, were
laboring in the integrity of their hearts, to purge the land of these plagues
and locusts, that we might become a holy and pure Church unto the Lord, and
that the Lord might delight to dwell among us; and for this end, took their
lives in their hands, and essayed that now sole remedy, seeing there was no
other mean left unto them, whereby to attain this noble End.

2. When one Apostat city not taken course with, according to the command of
God, would provoke God to anger against the whole assembly of God's People, so
that till it was destroyed, he would not have mercy or compassion upon them;
was there not much more reason to fear, that God's anger should burn against
Scotland his covenanted People, and that he should have no more mercy on us,
since there was such a dreadful defection in it, whereof not only one city, but
many cities were in an eminent manner guilty, having so foulely departed from
their sworn truth and profession, and openly and avowedly revolted from God
and his ways, and since there was no other way imaginable to prevent this
heavy indignation of God? Shall any condemn these, who our of Zeal to God's
Glory, and for the good of the poor land, whereof they were members, took their
lives in their hands, and did what lay in their power, to have that corruption
and apostasy removed, and God restored to his honor, and the land to its
Covenanted integrity?

3. Since the backslideing and defection of a few members of a Society, joined
together in a Covenant to God as his People, brings wrath upon the whole; if
timeous remedy be not used, as the forecited places show: Shall any condemn
these who endeavored according to their power, to prevent the destruction
that was and is to be feared, for the defection not of a fevv, not of one poor
Achan, but of multitudes, and that of all ranks and conditions?

4. Did the people of Israel go out as one man, to prevent apostasy, when they
heard some rumore thereof in a part of their number; and to take course with,
and purge the land of a crying evil that was committed in one of their cities:
and who shall condemn these who lately went out with one heart and spirit, to
do what in them lay, to remove the farcarryed-on defection, and the dreadful
evil of perjury and many other heinous crimes, that did and yet do abound,
whereof Many of all ranks were guilty, even such as should have been, by their
public places and stations, eminently appearing on the head of these worthyes,
for the glory of God, and the good of the whole Church and Kingdom.

5. Seeing the public transgressions of Kings and Princes, do hazard the whole
Realm and Commonwealth, as the instances formerly adduced do clear; How much
reason have People of all ranks, qualityes and conditions, to be doing what
lies in their power, either to prevent and hinder that these iniquities be not
committed, which prove destructive unto the Land, or labor by all means to
have them done away when committed, before the fierce anger of the Lord break
forth? And since it is not our and undeniable how our Kings and Nobles, and
other judges have revolted from a sworn Covenant, Truth and Profession, and
openly and avowedly, renunced the interest of Christ, and conspired against his
truth and cause; can any blame these worthies who endeavored according to
their power, to have these crying abominations remedyed, that the wrath of God
should not consume us root and branch, and burn so as it should not be
quenched?

What can be replied to these reasons, is sufficiently answered already; and I
would further propose this to be seriously considered by all: let us put the
case, That King and Princes should conspire together, to poison all the
fountains of water in the Land, and lay down a course, how they should be
kept so, and people should be forced to drink of these poisoned waters; would
not any rational man think, that when no means else could prevail, People
might lawfully with force, see to their own lives, and to the lives of their
little ones? And shall we be allowed to use violent resistance, for the lives
of our bodies, and not also for the lives of our souls? shall people be allowed
to run together, and with force, when they can no otherwise, keep the springs
of water clear, for their own lives or healths, and of their posterity also;
and shall they be condemned for running together to keep their Religion as it
was reformed, pure and uncorrupted? Who but Atheists will say this? Again put
the case. That the Magistrates of some Brugh or City were about to do, or had
already done, some public prohibited bited action, which would so irritate the
Sovereign or Prince, that he would come with an hudge army and cut off the
city, man, wife and child: would any in this case, condemn the private
inhabitants of that Brough or City, if, when no other mean could be essayed
effectually to hinder the same, they should with force, either hinder them from
doing that irritating action, or if done, should endeavor to remedy the matter
the best way they could, for the good of the City, to prevent its ruin and
overthrow, and for their own saifty, and for the saifty of their posterity?
And why then shall any condemn the late defenders, who, when the Magistrate,
by their many sinful and public actions, had provoked the King of Kings to
anger and jealousy against the whole land, so that in justice they could expect
nothing but the wrath and vengence of God to root them out and their
posterity, labored what they could, to have the wrath of the King of Kings
pacified, and the wicked deeds provoking him remedied? Would the Sovereign in
the former case account these private persons traitors to their Magistrates,
and not rather more loyal Subjects to him, then the Magistrates themselves? And
shall we think that the King of Kings shall account the late act, disloyalty to
the King and Magistrates, and not rather commendable loyalty to him, and
faithful service?

There is another argument much of the Nature with the preceding, taken from
the grounds of Christian love and affection, whereby each is bound to preserve
the life and welfare of another, as he would do his own: and as each would
have another helping him, in the day when he is unjustly wronged and oppressed,
so he should be willing to help others when it is in the power of his hand to
do it according to that royal law of Christ's, Mat. 7: ver. 12. Luke 6: ver.
31. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so them, for this is the law and the prophets. It is unnatural and
unchristian both, to say am I my brother's keeper. Sure he who helps not his
brother against a murderer, when he may do it, is before God, guilty of the
man's blood. Meroz and the inhabitants thereof were to be cursed bitterly,
because they came not out to the help of the Lord and his People, against the
mighty, Judge. 5. Was not David helped thus against the Tyranny and wickedness
of King Saul? And honest Jonathan rescued from the hands of his bloody Father?
Prove. 24: ver. 11, and 12. If thou forbear to deliver them that are drawn unto
death, and these that are ready to be slame: If thou say behold we know it
not, does not he that pondereth the heart considerit? And he that keeps thy
soull, doih not he know it? And shall not herender to every man according to
his work? Now the text makes no difference whether they be drawn to death
unjustly by private persons or by Magistrates: They are (if they can do it)
with force to rescue such; for so the word imports as I Sam. 30: 18. 2 King.
18: 34. 1 Samuel 17: 35. Hos. 5: 14. And this did famous Mr. Knox avow unto
Lithingtoun, in his discourse with him, registrated in the history of
reformation. Hence it is that Jeremiah Cap. 22: 23. cries to the People as
well as to the King, execute judgment and righteousness and deliver the
spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor: and though it be true, as Calvin on
the place says, that this did chiefly belong to the judges and Magistrates;
Yet, when their proceeding in this course of oppressing of the stranger, the
fatherless and the widow, and of shedding innocent blood, would provoke God to
execute what he threateneth with an oath, ver 5. And make that house a
desolation, and prepare destroyers against it and the whole city ver. 7: 8. and
when all this is spoken in the ears of the people, it would seem to import,
that even they should have stood in the way of such oppression, and delivered
the spoiled out of the hands of the oppressor; and not have suffered innocent
blood to have been shed, especially when inferior as well as Superior
Magistrates were oppressing and tyrannizing, and were the only oppressors and
wolves as we see Esa. 1: 21. and. 3, 12, 14, 15. Micha. 3: 9, 10. Ezech. 22:
27. And many of the people conjoined with them in the like, as encouraged by
their practice ver. 29. see further for this Isa. 1: ver. 10, 17. Ier. 5: ver.
2, 5, 6. But says our Surveyer Page 53. [That such prophetical preachings
uttered to the body of Rulers and People, are to be understood as reproveing
what was amiss in every one, in their respective calling, and as enjoying such
duties as might be done by every one, salva justitia, salvo ordine, and modulo
vocationis -- but to say that they minded to condemn in People, the grand sin
of non-resistence to the oppressing Magistrates, or to incite private persons
to pull the sword out of the Magistrat's hand, and relieve the oppressed, and
execute judgment on the oppressors, even Magistrates (as Lex Rex does say Page
367,) is not only a most fearful perverting of the most holy scripture -- but a
doctrine that tends directly to horrid confusion and utter subversion of humane
societies] Ans. We shall easily grant, that in those sermons, every one was
reproved for what was amiss in his respective calling, and all were enjoined
to do, what might be done by them according to their places and callings, and
without wronging of justice: But we aver, that it was the duty of private
persons, to hinder, so far as lay in their power, the shedding of innocent
blood, the oppressing of the innocent, and wronging the vvidow and fatherless.
If a Magistrate in a rage run upon an innocent person going by, to kill him, It
is the part of any private person that is next, to hinder the Magistrate from
committing manifest murder, without breach of justice, order, or the extent of
his calling: Bacause in that case he is not acting the part of a judge. So a
judge perverting judgment, and manifestly oppressing the innocent, is no judge
authorized of God for that; but a private person, and may as justly be withheld
from murdering or oppressing, as any other Man. 2. They might press them to
relieve the oppressed though they did not incite them to pull the svvord out of
the Magistrat's hand: viz by hindering, according to their power, oppression
to be committed; and this might be without the least violence done to the
Magistrate's power and authority, as is shevved: So might they move them to
execute judgment not formally but materially, by hindering justice according to
their power, or laboring to have the law executed according to God's word.
3. Lex Rex speaks no such thing in that place, as any will see who read it.
4. It is but his ignorance to say, that in this we fearfully pervert the holy
scripture. 5. How will he shovv that this doctrine tends to horrid confusion?
He tells us Page 50. [ That such pretenses will not be wanting to the worst of
men, and the best Magistrate, proceeding most legally, shall never have
security from seditious partyes] Answ. But sure his doctrine tends more to
confusion; for, by it every Magistrate of the land has power to kill and
destroy whom he will: and thus Magistrates should be formally constituted
wolves. 2. But how often will he put us to tell him, that the best truth may be
abused? 3. But let him speak in earnest, what would he do if he saw his wife
carried away by some drunken officers, before a judge drunk as a beast, so as
he could neither hear nor speak sense, who yet without further process, would
condemn her to be brunt as a witch, or executed as a harlot, would he not
labor, if he had power, to relieve his innocent wife out of the hands of these
bloody oppressors? What would he then do with his pretenses? Would these scar
his tender conscience? I suppose not. And what if he saw the King, without
ground, or color of reason, possibly upon a mistake, running in a rage to kill
his wife, or only son, would he not help the innocent in that case, and hold
the King with force? Or would he only assist them by prayers to God for them,
by consolatory words, by giving counsel to them, or by supplications to the
Magistrate with all dutiful respects, and if nothing could avail, sit down as
having discharged his duty; and would not resist more? (which he thinks is
all which is required of private persons Page 49.) If so, many might think he
were accessory to the death of his wife or child, and so possibly might the
King, when he came to himself, and his rage was off him, and he convinced of
his mistake. And if he would hinder innocent blood to be shed (as rational
people will easily think he might) how shall he salve the matter, for the
vvorst of men may resist the best Magistrate, proceeding most legally, upon
pretenses, that the King is in a rage, he has no shadow of law or reason for
him, he is mistaken of the persons etc. And would he think, that in this case,
there were a necessary connection betwixt resistance and revenge? and if he
should have the upper hand in the matter of resistance, could he not sit down
satisfied? If he could: then he may think that these two, may be separated in
exercise and practice, in other cases, as well as in his own, unless the
fault be on the Magistrate's side. Thus is answered also what he has P ag.
49. for it is but the same thing which he has in the place before considered,
He is tedious in his repetitions, and therefore we Proceed to our arguments.

And. 1. If Humanity, Brotherly Affection, Christian Love. Tenderness and
Compassion to a suffering injured brother, call for help and releef at the
hands of others, according to their power and capacities: Then none can justly
blame or condemn the late risers for endeavoring in their places, and
according to their power, the releife of their oppressed brethren, with
violence, when no other mean was left feasible or practicable. Their Solemn
covenants did engadge them to account each injury done unto any Covenanter,
upon that account, as done unto themselves; And to vindicate and maintain the
libertyes of the Subjects, in all these things, which concern their
Consciences, persons, and Estates, and who can blame them for paying their
vows unto God*

2. If this same duty was expressly required of the people of God of old, that
they should endeavor to relieve the oppressed, and to prevent the shedding of
innocent blood: Then none can justly blame those late valient vindicators of
justice, and relievers of the oppressed. But the former is true, as the places
above cited do show. Therefore etc.

3. If their forebearing had made them guilty before God, of the oppression and
bloodshed committed, when it was in their power to help it: Then they could
not forbear to do what they did, without sin. But the former is true. The very
Egyptians knew so much by the light of nature, when by their law, such as did
not relieve the oppressed, when it was in their power, were accused upon
their head; and if they were not able to help, they were bound to accuse the
oppressor, or else they were to be vvhipped, and to endure three days hunger.

I shall close this chapter, as I did the former, with a testimony of famous
Mr. Knox, that it may be seen to be no new doctrine of ours. In his admonition
to the Commonalty of Scotland he has these words, near the end, [ These vain
excuses I say, will nothing avail you, in the presence of God, who requires
no less of the Subjects, then of their Rulers -- and if ye think that ye are
innocent, because you are not the chief actors of such iniquity, ye are utterly
deceived, for God does not only punish the chief offenders, but with them,
does he condemn the consenters to such iniquity, and all are judged to
consent, that knowing impiety committed give no testimony that the same
displeases them. To speak this matter more plain: As your Princes and Rulers
are criminal with your Bishops, of all Idolatry committed, and of all the
innocent blood that is shed, for the testimony of Christ's truth: and that
because they maintain them in their tyranny: So are ye (I mean so many of
you, as give no plain confession to the contrary) criminal and guilty with
your Princes and Rulers, in the same crimes; because you assist and maintain
your Princes in their blind rage, and give no declaration that their tyranny
displeases you. This doctrine I know is strange to the blind world, but the
verity thereof has been declared in all notable punishments from the
beginning; when the Original world perished by water; when Sodom and
Gomorah were punished by fire; and finally, when Jerusalem was horribly
destroyed, does any think that all were alike wicked before the world?
Evident it is, that they were not, if they be judged according to their
external facts; for some were young and could not be oppressors, nor could
defile themselves with unnatural, and beastly lusts; Some were pitiful and
gentle of nature, and did not thirst for the blood of Christ, and his Apostles:
but did any escape the plagues and vengeance which did apprehend the multitude?
let the scripture witness, and the histories be considered, which plainly do
testify that by the waters, all flesh on^arth at that time, did perish, ( Noah
and his family reserved) That none escaped in Sodom and in the other cities
adjacent, except Lot and his two daughters; And evident it is that in that
famous city of Jerusalem, in that last and horrible destruction, none escaped
God's vengeance, except so many as before were dispersed. And what is the cause
of this severity, seeing that all were not alike offenders? let flesh cease to
disput with God, and let all men by these examples learn betimes to flee and
avoid the society and company of the proud contemners of God, if that they list
not to be partakers of their plagues. The cause is evident, if we can be
subject, without grudging, to God's judgments, which in themselves are most
holy and just; for in the original world none was found that either did resist
tyranny, nor yet that earnestly reprehended the same. In Sodom was none found
that did gain-stand that furious and beastly multitude that did compass about
and besiege the house of Lot -- and finally in Jerusalem was found none that
studied to reprepresse the tyranny of the priests who were conjured against
Christ and his Evangel; but all fainted (I except ever such as gave witness
with their blood, or flying, that such impiety displeased them) all kept
silence, by the which all approved iniquity, and joined hands with the Tyrants,
and so were arrayed and set, as it were, in one battle against the almighty,
and against his Son Christ Jesus; for whosoever gathers not with Christ, in
the day of his harvest, is judged to scatter, and therefore of one vengeance
temporal, were they all partakers, -- will God in this behalf hold you as
innocents, be not deceived dear Brethren, God has punished not only the proud
tyrants, filthy persons, and cruel murderers, but also such as with them did
draw the yoke of iniquity, was it by flattering their offenses, obeying their
unjust commands, or in winking at their manifest iniquity. All such, I say, God
once punished, with the chief offenders. Be ye assured brethren, That as he is
immutable in nature, so will he not pardon you in that which he has punished
in others, and now the less, because he has plainly admonished you of the
dangers come, and has offered you his mercy, before he pour forth his wrath
and displeasure upon the disobedient.] So in his Exhortation to England, P ag.
107. [ No other assurate will I require that your plagues are at hand, and that
your destruction approaches, then that I shall understand that ye do justify
your selves in this your former iniquity: absolve and flatter you who list, God
the Father, His son Christ Jesus, his holy Angels, the creatures sensible and
insensible in heaven and earth, shall rise in judgment and shall condemn you,
if in time you repent not. The cause why I wrape you all in idolatry, all in
murder, and all in one and the same iniquity, is, that none of you has done
his duty, none has remembered his office and charge, which was to have
resisted to the uttermost of your power, that impiety at the beginning, but you
have all follovved the wicked commandment, and all have consented to cruel
murder; in so far as in your eyes, your Brethren have most unjustly suffered,
and none opened his mouth to complain of that injury, cruelty and Murder. I
do ever except such as either by their death, by abstaining from Idolatry, or
by avoiding the realm for iniquity in the same committed, and give testimony
that such an horrible falling from God did inwardly grieve them. But all the
rest even from the highest to the lowest, I fear no more to accuse of
idolatry, of treason committed against God, and of cruel Murdering of their
brethren, then did Zecharias the son of Iehojadah. 2 Chronicles. 24: ver. 20. fear
to say to the King, Princes and People of Judah. Why have ye transgressed the
commandments of the Eternal God? it shall not prosperously succeed unto you,
but even as ye have left the Lord, so shall he leave you] And, again Page 109.
[., But let his holy and blessed ordinances commanded by Jesus Christ to his
Kirk, be within the bounds so sure and established, that if Prince King or
Emperor would interprise to change or disannul the same, that he be the
reputed enemy of God, and therefore unworthy to reign above his people? Yea
that the same Man or Men that go about to destroy God's true Religion once
established, and to erect idolatry which God detasteth, be adjudged to death,
according to God's commandment: The negligence of which part, has made you
all (these only excepted which before I have expressed) murderers of your
Brethren, denyers of Christ Jesus, and manifest traitors to God's Sovereign
Majesty: Which horrible crimes if ye will avoid in time comeing, then must ye
(I mean the Princes Rulers and People of the realm) by solemn Covenant renew
the oath betwixt God and you, in that form and as Asa King of Judah did in the
like case 2 Chronicles. 15. -- This is thy duty, and this is the only remedy O
England to stay God's vengeance, which thou have long deserved, and shall not
escape, if his Religion and Honor be subject to mutation and change, as often as
thy Rulers list.] The-reader may consider also what he says to this in his
discourse with Litingtoun, who was of this Surveyer's judgment, History of
Reformation, Lib. 4.

This is consonant likewise unto our confession of faith authorized by King
James and Parliament Anno 1567. Act. 14. where among good works of the 2 table,
these are mentioned To honor Father, Mother, Princes, Rulers, and Superior
powers; To love them, to support them, yea to obey their charge (not repugning
to the commandment of God) to save the lives of innocents, to repress
tyranny, to defend the oppressed, etc.] the contrary whereof is [ To disobey or
resist any that God has placed in authority (while they pass not over the
bounds of their office) to murder, or to consent thereunto, to bear hatred, or
to let innocent blood be shed if we may withstand it, etc.] Citeing in the
Margin, Ezech. 22:1, 2, 3, 4. etc. where the bloody City is to be judged,
because she relieved not the oppressed out of the hand of bloody Princes v. 6.

And to what Ambrose says de office. Lib. 1. c. 36. saying qui non repellit a
socio injuriam si potest, tam est in vitio quam ille qui facit. i. e. he who
does not repel an injury from his brother when he may, isas guilty as he who
does the injury: And this he clears by Moses his deed, defending the Hebrew
against the Egyptian.

CAP XI.
Of our qualified alledgiance to the King.
Our Arguments hence.
THe author of Naphtaly Page 177, said [ That all powers are subordinate to the
Most high, and appointed and limited by his holy will and commandment, for his
own glory, and the Peoples good; and our allegiance was and stands
perpetually and expressly thus qualified, viz. in defense of Religion and
Liberty, according to our first and second Covenants - all allegiance and
obedience to any created power whatsoever (though in the construction of
charity apparently indefinite, yet) in its own nature is indispensably thus
restricted.] By which words, any, who will duly consider the scope which that
author does drive at, will see, That his meaning was, That as obedience and
allaigeance is to be given to Magistrates only in the Lord, So the same ought
to be promised with this qualification or limitation, so far as it is not
contrary to Religion and Liberty of the Subject: and thus we all swore to
defend his Majesty's person and authority in the preservation and defense of
the true Religion, and Libertyes of the Kingdoms; and it is plain to all who
will not shut their eyes, that the foresaid author puts no corrupt gloss
upon that necessary clause and qualification; for while he is dissuadeing from
taking of that bond, which was urged upon the People of Edinburgh, he uses the
words cited, and further adds [ To renew the same; or take any the like oath
of allegiance purely, and simply; purposely omitting the former and due
restriction, especially when the powers are in most manifest, andnotorious
rebellion against the Lord and opposition to his cause and Covenant, is in
effect, equivalent to an express rejecting and disowning of the same
limitation, and of the Sovereign prerogative of the Great God and King over
all, which is thereby reserved; and as much as in plain terms to affirm,
That whatever abused authority shall command or do, either as to the
overturning of the work of God, subverting of Religion, destroying of Rights
and Libertyes, or persecuting of all the faithful to the utmost extremity, we
shall not only stupidly endure it, but activly concur with, and assist in all
this tyranny] What could have been spoken either more full, or plain, both for
explicating the genuine import of that restriction or qualification, or the
authors Orthodox sense thereof? Yet behold how this wrangling pamphleter,
because he can get nothing to say against the truth asserted, must wrest words
and sense and all, that he may have something to say against the
straw-adversary of his own setting up. Therefore he tells us Page 6. [ Can
this assertion subsist that neither alledgiance, or fidelity, nor obedience is
to be given to any created power, but in defense of Religion and Liberty? As if
Naphtaly had meaned, That no alledgiance, fidelity or obedience was due, or to
be given to the created powers, but when and in so far as, they did actually
own, and contribute their utmost for the promoving or establishing of Religion
and the Liberties of the People. Whileas his meaning is clearly seen to have
been this, That as all powers are subordinate unto God the great King over all;
So all alledgiance, fidelity, or obedience is to be promised and given unto
them, with a reserve of the allegiance, fidelity and obedience due to God the
Highest of all; and that man's interest is not to be preferred unto God's, but
always acknowledged in subordination thereunto: So that when earthly powers
are stated Enemies to Christ and his interest, no absolute allegiance,
fidelity, or obedience is to be promised, But always with this restriction, or
limitation: Neither are the Subjects bound to concur, or assist them, while
in such a stated course of opposition to the King of King's, and while actively
endeavoring to destroy his great interest in the world. But what says our
Surveyer further [ That obedience is not to be given unto any creature on earth,
against Religion or the revealed will of God, shall be easily granted; we
ahhore the very thought of so doing.] Ans. Though he abhore the very thought of
so doing; yet many will say that he has not abhorred to do it: It is against
God's express and revealed will to commit perjury, and renunce a Covenant
sworn with hands lifted up to the most high God, and yet he knows who is
guilty of this, and makes the will of a creature the Law of the Conscience,
when the appendix is a full belly. [ Again (says he) it shall not be said
that obedience is to be given to powers against the liberty competent to us as
subjects, and consistent with Soveraignity; yet so that the measure of that
liberty must not be made by every man's private will, but by the declarature of
the Parliament, representative of the Subjects, which best knows what
thereunto belongs.] Answ. This royal liberal man would seem to yield something
in favors of the liberty of the People, but with his annexed clause and
restrictions, he takes all back again: For 1. says he, it must be consistent
with Soveraignity, and how wide a mouth this Soveraignity has, in his and his
accomplices estimation, many know, and we have seem in part, even so wide as that
is shall swallow up all the Peoples liberties; like one of Pharaohs lean kine
that eats up the fat and yet is never the fatter. Then 2. it must be
determined by the Representatives, as if the Representatives were not ex
officio bound and obliged to maintain the Liberties of the People, which
belong to the People, ere the Representatives have a being; and as if it were
in the power of the Representatives to sell and betray the Libertyes of the
People; or as if no more were competent to the Subjects de jure then what they
will: Has a man no more right to his lands and heritages then what his
advocate, who betrayeth his trust for a larger sum of money, allows him or
declares? We know Parliaments can basely betray their trust, and sell away the
Libertyes of a People, contrare to their vow and oath to God, and their
obligation to the People, whose trustees they should be; and shall People have
no more liberty competent to them, then what a perfidious company conspired
against the good of the Commonwealth, to pleasure a sinful Creature,
determines by their declarature? This is hard if true, for then a Parliament
might sell them and their posterity for bondmen and bond women to the Turk for
ever. But we see no more reason, for asserting an infallibility, or
absoluteness of power in Parliaments, then in Princes. What further? [ But to
say, that all (not only obedience but) allegiance and fidelity, due to any
created power is indispensably restricted to this qualification in defense of
Religion and liberty, viz. of the Subjects, is a most false assertion.] Answ.
He said not restricted to this qualification, but thus qualified, and thus
restricted. This must be either ignorance, or worse in this pamphleter, thus to
wrong the author. But, what was the authors meaning we have shevved. Let us
hear The pamphleting Prelate [ It is known (says he) that a restriction
excludes all other cases which are not in the restrictive proposition included,
etc. Answ. All this is founded upon his either wilful or ignorant mistake; for
the author took not the restriction, so (as we have seen) as to exclude all
fidelity or obedience, except in things tending immediately and directly unto
the good of Religion and Liberty of the Subject: But so as that we might do
nothing in prejudice of Religion and Liberty, nor yield obedience to him in any
thing tending to the hurt of either: and thus is our obedience to be
restricted, or qualified. We deny not obedience, even when the act of
obedience, cannot be properly and directly said to be either in defense of
Religion or the liberty of the subject: So that we cross not what the
ministers said unto the doctors of Aberdeen: for we take not that clause as
exclusive, that is, that we shall never defend his person and authority but
when he is actually and actively defending Religion and Libertyes; but only as
a restriction or qualification, thus, that we shall defend his person and
authority, so far as may consist with Religion and Libertyes: And thus we agree
also with the general assembly 1639. for we say it is the Subjects duty to
concur with their friends and followers, as they shall be required, in every
cause that concerns his Majesty's honor, yet so as that they do nothing to
the prejudice of Religion or Libertyes But further (says he) as to the point of
allegiance or fidelity, that is another matter then obedience.] Answ. True,
when men will become very critical; but the scope of the place shows in what
sense he took it, not only as includeing an owneing of him as lawful and
rightful King etc. but as includeing also a promise of active concurrence in
defending of him and his interest: and so while this is urged in an absolute,
illimited, unqualified or un - restricted way, he made it all one with
obedience. It is true, a man may keep allegiance or fidelity to the King, when
he cannot obey his commands; yet the clause of the Covenant respects allegiance
as well as obedience, in so far, as we are not to defend his person and
authority absolutely, but in defense of the true Religion and Liberties of the
Subjects. Allegiance then is a comprehensive thing, not only taking - in an
owneing of the King as rightful King, and fidelity to his person crown and
dignity against conspiracyes and treasons; but also an active concurring to
promove his honor and dignity, and to defend his person and authority: And so
all who say allegiance must be qualified according to this restriction, do not
mean every thing in allegiance, but that which is expressed in the Covenants.
So that it is his ignorant inference, to say. That that which Naphtals says
is contrary to the confession of says Cap. 23.. 4. which says is difference
in Religion does not make void the Magistrates just and legal authority, nor
free the people from their due obedience to him, unless he think the article
of the Covenant, interfereth with the confession of faith, which he dar not
assert; but if he do assert it, let us hear by his next what he will say to the
Apologetical Relation, Page 386. 387. 388. 389. 390. where that clause of the
Covenant is vindicated. He adds [ It is the Lord's way for keeping humane
societies from gross disorders, to allow to such as are in supreme power by
lawful calling, the honor due unto their place, although in the maine things
they pervert the Ends of government, dishonouring him by a false Religion, or
seduceing others to their evil way.] Answ. Do we say that honor is not due
unto Magistrates of another Religion, because we say that we must promise
allegiance and obedience to them in the Lord; and must not concure with them,
nor contribute our power unto them, to the manifest detriment of Religion and
Libertyes? This is like the rest of this Man's foolish inferences. Or does he
think that we cannot give to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, unless we
give him also, the things which are God's, and are the Peoples? Then he cites
Calv. Instit. Lib. 4. c 20., 25. 27. But He speaks nothing contrare to the
business we are upon: Does he think that Calvin was of the judgment that
People are bound to swear absolute Subjection, allegiance or fidelity and
obedience to all wicked princes, whatever right they may have to the place?
That subjects are bound to obey, and to swear allegiance in the Lord unto
wicked Kings who denies? do we say that wicked Kings, because wicked, are
eo ipso no Kings; nor to be acknowledged as Kings? What then does this
testimony make against thus? But 2. will he stand to what Calvin says? Then
he must condemn what King and Parliament have done, in taking the life of the
Marquise of Argyle; and say that they are guilty of innocent blood; for by
what Calvin here says, we were as much bound to acknovvledge Cromwell then,
when he did Reign, as now to acknowledge the King: for he speaks of all qui
quoquo modo rerum potiuntur. How will he then free himself from treason? For
sure in Calvine's judgment, Argile did but his duty, though he had done more,
and yet he was condemned as a Traitor: can he reconcile this with Calvine's
judgment?

So then our promiseing and swearing alleagiance, fidelity, and obedience to
the King, being with a reserve of our alleagiance, fidelity, and obedience unto
the Supreme King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and according to that due
subordination, and thus limited and restricted, that we may do nothing against
God, or in prejudice of his interests; no person can with any color of law or
conscience, challenge or accuse any of Treason or Rebellion against the King,
when they prefer the interest of God unto Man's, and labor to secure
Religion and the interest of Christ, unto which they are absolutely, and
indispensably obliged, and from which obligation and alleagiance, no authority
of man can loose them, nothwithstanding that in so doing, they postpone the
authority of man, and their alleagiance thereunto, and lay it by; seeing it is
of no force, when it comes in competition with the authority of God, and is
stated against that Religion, which by divine authority they are bound to
maintain, with hazard and loss of their lives, goods and fortunes; And
therefore the late act of defense being, according to their sworn alleagiance
to God, a necessary defense of Religion, cannot be condemned of Treason or
Rebellion, though it wanted that formality of the authority of Subordinat
powers: As postponing the authority of inferior Magistrates, in act of
obedience, and duty of alleagiance unto the Superior, can be no proper
disloyalty or rebellion; so nor can the postponing of the authority, of
Superior and inferior Magistrates, in point of obedience, and performing
alleagiance unto the most Supreme, be really treasonable, seditious, or
rebellious.

2. If we be sworn to maintain the King's person and authority, in the
defense of the liberties of the subject: Then who ever prefer the Liberties
of the Subject unto his person and authority, are not Traitors or Rebels: And
so the late act of defense, being for the liberties of the subject, when they
were basely betrayed, sold, and given away, by a company conjured into a
conspiracy against the same, and were trod upon, and violently plucked away,
cannot in conscience, or in the law of God, or according to any just law of
man, be accounted, or condemned as; an act of Treason or Rebellion.

CAP. XII.
Some more Arguments Briefly proposed and Prosecuted.
WE have in the preceding Chapters proponed and considered such arguments as
gave us occasion to meet with what this Surveyer allaidged. We shall here, ere
we come to consider his objections, briefly sum up other arguments.

The worthy author of Lex Rex Quest. 28. and 31. has some, which we shall here
set down, partly because that book is not in every man's hand, and partly
because this windy man pretends to have answered much of that book, though he
has not so much as offered to make a reply unto the six hundereth part thereof.

1. Page 261. thus he argues, [ That power which is obliged to command and
rule justly and religiously, for the good of the subjects, and is only set over
the people on these conditions, and not absolutely, cannot tie the people to
subjection without resistance, when the power is abused to the destruction of
laws, religion, and the subjects. But all power of the law is thus obliged
Romans 13: ver. 4. Deuteronomy. 17: ver. 18. 19. 23. 2 Chronicles. 19: ver. 6. Psalm. 132.
ver. 11. 12. and 89. ver. 30. 31. 2 Samuel 7: ver. 12. Jer. 17: ver, 24, 25, And
has been and may be abused by Kings, to the destruction of Laws Religion, and
Subjects. The proposition is clear, for the powers that tie us to subjection,
only are of God. 2. Because to resist them is to resist the ordinance of God.
3, Because they are not a terror to good works but to evil. 4. Because they
are God's ministers for our good: But abused powers are not of God but of men,
are not ordinances of God, they are a terror to good works not to evil, they
are not God's ministers for our good.]

2. (ibid) [That power which is contrary to law, and is evil and tyrannical,
can tie none to subjection, but is a mere tyrannical power and unlawful; and if
it tie not to subjection, it may lawfully be resisted. But the power of a King
abused to the destruction of Laws, Religion, and subjects, is a power contrary
to law, evil and tyrannical, and tyeth no man to subjection; wickedness by no
imaginable reason, can oblige any man. Obligation to suffer of wicked men,
falls under no commandment of God, except in our Savior. A Passion as such,
is not formally commanded, I mean a physical passion, such as is to be killed.
God has not said to me in any moral law, be thou killed, tortured, beheaded,
but only be thou patient if God deliver thee to wicked men's hands to suffer
these things.

3. ( Ibid) There is not a stricker obligation moral, betwixt King and People,
then betwixt parents and Children, Master and Servant, Patron and Clyant,
Husband and Wife, The Lord and the Vassal, between the pilote of a shop, and
the passengers, the Physician and the Sick, the doctor and the Scholar: But
law grants, 1. minime 35. De Relig. and sumpt. funer. If those betray their
trust committed to them, they may be resisted? If the Father turn distracted
and arise to kill his Sons, his Sons may violently apprehend him, bind his
hands, spoil him of his weapons, for in that, he is not a father Vasq. lib. 1.
illustr. quaest. Cap. 8. n. 18. Si dominus subditum, enormiter and atrociter
oneraret; princeps superior vasallum posset ex toto eximere a sua
jurisdictione, and etiam tacente subdito and nihil petente. Quid papa in suis
decis: parliam. great. decis. 32. Si quis Baro. abutentes dominio privari
possunt. The Servant may resist the Master, if he attempt unjustly to kill him;
So may the wife do to the Husband: If the pilot should wilfully run the ship on
a roke to destroy himself, and his passengers, they might violently thrust him
from the helm. Every Tyrants is a furious Man, and is morally distracted, as
althus. says, polit cap. 28. n. 30. and seqq.

4. Page 262. That which is given as a blessing and a favor and a scrine
betwixt the Peoples Liberty, and their bondage, cannot be given of God as a
bondage and slavery to the People. But the Power of a King is given as a
blessing and favor of God to defend the poor and needy, to preserve both
tables of the law, and to keep the People in their libertyes, from oppressing
and treading on upon another. But so it is, that if such a power be given of
God to a King, by which actu primo he is invested of God to do acts of Tyranny,
and so to do them, that to resist him in the most innocent way, which is self
defense, must be resisting of God, and rebellion against the King his deputy;
Then has God given a royal power, as incontrollable by mortal men by any
violence, as if God himself, were immediately and personally resisted, when the
King is resisted, and so this power shall be a power to waste and destroy
irresistably, and so in it self a plague and curse; for it cannot be ordained,
both according to the intention and genuine formal effect and intrinsecal
operation of the power, to preserve the tables of the Law, Religion and
Liberty, Subject and laws; and also to destroy the same. But it is taught by
Royalists, That this power is for Tyranny, as well as for peacable government,
because to resist this royal power put forth in acts either of Tyranny or just
government, is to resist the ordinance of God, as Royalists say, from Romans 13:
1, 2, 3. We know to resist God's Ordinance and Gods deputy formaliter as his
deputy, is to resist God himself 2 Samuel 8. ver. 7. Mat. 10: ver. 40. as if God
were doing personally these acts that the King is doing; and it imports as
much as the King of Kings does these acts, in and through the Tyrant. Now it is
blasphemy to think or say, That when a Kings is drinking the blood of
innocents, and vvasting the Church of God, That God if he were personally
present, would commit the same acts of Tyranny (God avert such blasphemy) and
that God in and through the King his lavvsul deputy and vicegerent, in these
acts of Tyranny, is wasting the poor Church of God. If it be said, in these
sinful acts of tyranny, he is not God's formal vicegerent, but only in good
and lawful acts of Government, yet he is not to be resisted in these acts, not
because the acts are just and good, but because of the dignity of his royal
person. Yet this must prove that these who resist the King in these acts of
Tyranny, must resist no ordinance of God, but only that we resist him who is
the Lord's deputy. What absurdity is there in that, more then to disobey him,
refuseing active obedience to him who is the Lord's deputy, but not as the
Lord's deputy, but as a man commanding beside his Master's warrant?

5. ( Page 263.) That which is inconsistent with the care and providence of God
in giving a King to his Church, is not to be taught. Now God's end in giving a
King to his Church, is the feeding, saifty, preservation, the peacable and
quiet life of his Church, 1 Timothy 2: 2. Esai. 49: ver. 23. Psalm. 79: 7. But God
should cross his own end in the same act of giving a King, if he should
provide a King, who by office were to suppress Robbers, Murderers, and all
oppressors and wasters in his holy mount, and yet should give an irresistible
power to one crowned Lion a King who may kill a Thousand Thousand protestants
for their religion, in an ordinary providence, and they are by an ordinary law
of God to give their throats to his Emissaries, and bloody executioners. If any
say, the King will not be so cruel. I believe it, because, actu secundo it is
not possible in his power to be so cruel; we owe thanks to his good will that
he kills not so many, but no thanks to the genuine intrinsecal end of a King,
who has power from God to kill all these, and that without resistance made by
any Mortal man: Yea no thanks (God avert blasphemy) to God's ordinary
providence, which (if Royalists may be believed) puts no bar upon the
illimited power of a Man inclined to sin, and abuse his power to so much
cruelty. Some may say, the same absurdity does follow if the King should turn
papist, and the Parliament and all were papists, in that case, there might be
so many Martyrs for the truth put to death, and God should put no bar of
providence upon this power, more then now; and yet in that case. King and
Parliament should be judges given of God actu primo, and by virtue of their
office obliged to preserve the people in peace and godliness. But I answer.
If God gave a lawful official power to King and Parliament to work the same
cruelty upon Millions of Martyrs, and it should be unlawful for them to defend
themselves, I should then think that King and Parliament were both ex officio
and actu primo judges and Fathers, and also by that same office, Murderers and
butchers, which were a grievous aspersion to the unspotted providence of God.

6. ( Page 331.) Particular nature yields to the good of universal nature; for
which cause heavy bodies ascend, aerie and light bodies descend: If then a wild
bull or a goaring Ox may not be let loose in a great market confluence of
people; and if any man turn so distracted, as he smite himself with stones,
and kill all that pass by him, or come at him; in that case the man is to be
bound and his hands fettered, and all whom he invadeth may resist him, were
they his own sons, and may save their own lives with weapons. Much more a
King turning a Nero, King Saul vexed with an evil spirit from the Lord, may be
resisted: and far more if a King endued with use of reason, shall put violent
hands on all his subjects, kill his sone and heir: yea, any violently invaded,
by natures law, may defend themselves; and the violent restraining of such an
one is but the hurting of one Man, who cannot be virtually the Commonwealth,
but his destroying of the community of men, sent out in wars as his bloody
Emissaries, to the dissolution of the Commonwealth.

7. ( Page 335.) By the law of Nature, a Ruler is appointed to defend the
innocent: Now by Nature, an infant in the womb defends it self first, before
the parents can defend it; Then when parents and Magistrates are not (and
violent invading Magistrates are not, in that, Magistrates) Nature has
commended every man to self defense.

8. ( Ibid) The law of nature excepteth no violence, whether inflicted by a
Magistrate or any other; unjust violence from a Ruler is thrice injustice 1. He
does injustice as a man, 2. As a member of the Commonwealth. 3. He commits a
special kind of sin of injustice against his office. But it is absured to say
we may lawfully defend our selves from smaller injuries, by the law of Nature,
and not from greater, etc.

These and many more, to this purpose, may be seen in that unansvverable piece:
But I proceed to add some mo^ here.

9. If it be lawful for the people, to rise in arms to defend themselves,
their Wives and Children, and their Religion, from an invadeing army of cut
throat Papists, Turks or Tartars, though the Magistrates Superior and
inferior, should either, through absence, or some other physical impediment,
not be in a present capacity to give an express warrant or command, or through
wickedness, for their own private ends, should refuse to concur, and should
discharge the people to rise in arms: Then it cannot be unlawful to rise in
arms and defend their own Lives, and the lives of their Posterity, and their
Religion; when Magistrates, who are appointed of God to defend, turn enemies
themselves, and oppress, plunder, and abuse the innocent, and overturne
Religion, and press people to a sinful compliance there with. But the former
is true. Therefore etc. The assumption is clear: Because all the power of
Magistrates, which they have of God, is cumulative, and not privative and
destructive, it is a power to promove the good of the Realm, and not a power
to destroy the same, whether by acting and going beyond their power, or by
refuseing to act and betraying their trust. 2. No power given to Magistrates,
can take away Natures birth right, or that innate power of self defense. 3. It
can fare no worse with people in this case, then if they had no Magistrates at
all; but if they had no Magistrates at all, they might lawfully see to their
own self defense. 3. The power given to Magistrates can not loose the
obligation of people unto God's moral law; but by the moral law they are bound,
in this case of imminent danger, to defend themselves, their Wives and
Children, and their Religion: these are acts of charity, which Magistrates
cannot loose them from; otherwise Magistrates might command us to kill the
innocent, the widow and the fatherless, and we might lawfully do it at their
command; which is most false and absurd: therefore neither can their express
prohibition hinder us from relieving such, whom we are bound to relieve, nor
exeem us from the guilt of Murder, before God, if we do it not, but obey their
prohibition. The connection of the proposition I clear thus. 1. The law of self
defense is no less valide in the one case, then in the other. 2. The law of
charity obliges in the one case, no less then in the other. 3. Magistrates
are no more appointed of God to destroy the people themselves, then to suffer
others to destroy them; and so the resisting of their violence in the one case,
is no more a resisting of the ordinance of God, then the resisting or
counter-acting of their prohibition, or silence, in the other case. 4.
Magistrates are no less to be accounted, in so far, no Magistrates, when they
counter-act their commission, then when they sinfully betray their trust, and
neglect their commission. 5. Unjust violence offered in Lives, Liberties and
Religion, is no less unjust violence, when offered by Magistrates themselves,
then when offered by strangers, Magistrates permitting or conniveing.

10. If it be lawful for private Subjects to join together in arms, and
defend Themselves, their Lands, Liberties, Wives, Children; Goods, and
Religion, against a foreign Enemy, invading the land to conquer and subdue
the same, with the Magistrates approbation, or express warrant. Then it is
also lawful to resist domestic Enemies animated by the same power and
authority. But the former is true, because Magistrates, in that case, do
profess and avow themselves tyrants, seeking the destruction of the whole
Realm: and therefore are not Magistrates. Therefore etc. The consequence is
cleared abundantly in the preceding argument, and cannot be denied: for, a
domestic enemy is more unnatural, unjust, ihhumane; illegal, hurtful and
dangerous, then a foreign enemy.

11. Such acts of unjust violence, which neither Magistrates themselves may
immediately commit, nor may any subject under them, without sin and disobedience
to God, execute, may lawfully be resisted by private persons, when committed
in a rage, or cruelly executed by inseriours. But such are acts of oppressing,
plundering, spoiling Subjects of their libertyes, because of their adhereing to
their sworn Covenanted Religion. Therefore etc. That Princes and Magistrates
may not oppress, and wrong the People, is clear 1 Samuel 12: 3, 4, 5. 2 Samuel
23:3. 1 King. Cap. 21. and 22. 2 Chronicles. 9: 8. Psalm. 105: 14, 15. Esa. 1: 23.
and 3: 12, 13, 14, 15. and 14: 15, to 23. and 9: 7. and 16: 5. and 32: 1, 2.
and 49: 23. Ier. 22: 3, to 32. Zeph. 2: 8. and 3:3. Micah. 3:1. to 12. Obad. v.
2, 10, to 17. Ezech. 22: 6, 7, 27. and 45: 8, 9. It is contrare to their
express commission Romans 13: 4, 5. That their unjust mandats for oppression and
useing of violence, are not to be obeyed, is no less clear from Exodus 1: 15,
16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 1 Samuel 22: 17, 18. Psalm. 52: 5. So likewise it cannot but
be clear, That it must also be lawful to resist that violence when wickedly
and unjustly acted and executed: For, what power Magistrates can not themselves
put into execution, is not of God nor ordained of God; and therefore the
resisting of that, cannot be the resisting of any power ordained of God: And
again, what power subjects cannot lawfully put into execution can be no lawful
Magistratical power appointed of God: For, if it were, a refuseing to put the
same into execution were a real resisting of the ordinance of God: And so a
resisting of this, when wickedly put into execution, is no resisting of the
ordinance of God, which causes damnation.

12. That it is just and lawful to flee from the violence of Magistrates will
not be denied. But if that be lawful, when subjects have no power or means
whereby to resist, or oppose unjust violence with violence, It cannot be simply
unlawful to resist the same unjust violence with force, when neither flying,
nor hideing, nor other such like means of saifty are practicable: Because it
is the principle of self defense against violence, that makes flight lavvful,
when there is no possibility of resistance; and the same principle of self
defense will make resistance lawful, when the other is not practicable. Again,
the principle of charity to their Wives and Children and other Relations, makes
flight lawful, when they can not otherwise avoid the unjust violence of
Tyrants; and the same principle will animate to resistance, when practicable,
and when they cannot flee with wives and children and old decrepite parents
etc. Thirdly, the same principle of conscience, viz that they may keep their
Religion and Conscience free and undefiled, which will prompt to a flight, when
there is no other remedy, will prompt also to resistance, when flight is not
practicable. I remember, The Surveyer Page 41. calls this [ a monster of a
stoical paradex which the pair of pseu^o - martyrs brought forth; whereas
flight is only a withdrawing from under his dominion, and putting ones self
under another dominion where his power reaches not: and so by flight and
withdrawing from the Kingdoms, the man cease to be a subject to him, whose
subject he was, and comes to be under other Lords and laws.] Answ. This must
be a monster of men, whose eyes must be of a magnifying glass of a paradoxical
quality; and he must have a strange stoical fancy, who imagines that such a
thing is a paradex, and a stoical paradox, and a monster of a stoical paradox:
what could his stoical brain have said more paradoxically? Flight and
non-obedience both are a resisting of the abused power; and if the cause be
just which is pressed by the Magistrate, flight on that account, and
non-obedience, is a resistance of the powers ordained of God, condemned Romans
13. for such an one is (...) he is out of due order. But. 2. As we have seen,
the consequence will hold, and we seek no more; we need not make it a
resistance equal with forcible resistance. 3. He speaks of a flight out of
the King's dominions, but what says he to a flight, when the persons flying
keep still within the dominions? Will he grant that this is liker unto a
resistance? And he must, if his reasons hold; for in this case, the man cease
not to be a subject nor comes he to be under another Lord: and if he grant
this, our argument will stand as firm as ever. 4. The man, for all the money
he has gotten from his majesty for his pains, or pain, is not afraid to
rub, by what he says here, upon his sacred Majesty and his Royal Council; for,
if persons withdrawn and out of the Kingdom, cease to be subjects to the King.
How could the King and council summon home the Scottish officers who served
under the States of the Netherlands, and were servants to them, and under their
pay, and had been in their bounds, all most all their days, yea some of them
were borne under the States; and yet for not comeing to the Kings dominions
upon his call and charge, they were denunced rebels and fore faulted, and stand
under that sentence to this day, for any thing I know; which, though I account
the most unjust, inhumane, barbarous and irrational act, that can be, so that
it may well be reckoned, among the Surveyer's monsters of stoical paradoxes;
yet I think tenderness to his Majesty's honor and credit, should have made
him spare to have set down this parenthesis: But, some men, it seems, have
liberty to say what they can or will, if it may help the desperate cause,
though it should reflect upon King and Council both. Let a friend go with a
foe.

13. It was not to Parliaments or inferior Magistrates, that Christ said,
alittle before he was to be apprehended, Luke 22: 36, 38. But now-he that has
no sword, let him sell his garment, and buy one -- and they say Lord here are
two swords, and he said unto them, it is enough. Here is enough to evince the
lawfulness of resisting with force unjust oppressors; for if Christ had
thought it simply unlawful, why would he have desired his naked private
disciples, to buy swords, which are weapons for forcible resistance and
defense, and that at such a time? It is true, he would not suffer them to make
use of them as they would, not because it was simply unlawful for them to
rescue him out of the hands of that band of robbers; for he uses no such
argument to dissuade them: but because, he was commanded of the father, to
yield and to lay down his life, of his own accord; and therefore was it also
that he would not use the help of angels, as he might have done, in his own
defense; therefore said he Ioh. 18: ver. 10, 11. put up thy sword into the
sheath, the cup which my father has given me shall I not drink? (and Matthew
adds Cap. 26: 52, 53.) think thou that I cannot pray to my father, and he
shall presently give me, more then twelve legions of angels: God had revealed
his will, that Christ behoved to suffer Mat. 16: ver. 21, 22, 23. Ioh. 20: 24.
and that was sufficient to restrain this act of self preservation hic and
nunc: which was otherwise lawful; as well as it did restrain from flight, a
mean which Christ at other times used, for his preservation: Neither did his
word to Peter import that this self defense was unlawful; but the reasones of
it were (as River says in decal. 6. praec.) 1. Because it had a kind of
revenge in it; for so few could not repel such an army as came to take Christ.
2. He waited not Christ's answer. 3. He could have defended himself another
way. 4. It was contr^re to God's will revealed to Peter.]

14. That doctrine cannot be of God, which to the eye of sound reason, and to
all rational persons, does remedylesly and unavoydably, tend to overthrow and
destroy polities, all order, and all humane society, and open a gap and wide
door to all confusion, disorder, tyranny, oppression, cruelty, and injustice.
Our Surveyer cannot deny this proposition; seeing he makes use if it, or of one
very like unto it Page 43. But to say that a poor oppressed people may not
defend themselves, in extreme necessity, against the oppression and tyranny of
Magistrates, and resist unjust violence with violence is to all rational
persons a remedylesse and unavoydable course laid down, for utter overturning
of all Society, and is an opening of a door to all confusion, disorder,
tyranny, oppression, Murders, cruelty, injustice, etc. for when Magistrates
turn Tyrants, oppressors, set themselves to seek the ruin and destruction of
their Kingdoms, and of all their Subjects, in bodies, goods, and Consciences,
and sell themselves to do such villainy and wickedness, there is no remedy, by
this doctrine; the Commonwealth is utterly gone; oppression and Murders are
increased; all is overthrown and overturned; and there is no help. Thus God
shall have given a power to one man to kill and massacre millions of
Christians, to destroy whole Commonwealthes, and to root them out, and all
their memorial, that no more mention should be made of them. But who can
believe this? Yea if this were received as a truth, what encouragement were it
to tyranny and oppression? And what mischief would not wicked hearts contrive
and execute, if they did not fear opposition and resistance? This Surveyer
tells us Page 103. That it is enough to keep Kings right, to tell them they must
answer to God, But we see that for all this, there are more evil and wicked
Kings, then good; and it is more then probable, that that alone would no more
suppress their tyranny, and keep them from wickedness, then the fear of the
gallows would keep thieves from stealing and robbing; if they knew that no
body would resist them, or oppose them with force, when they came to steal and
rob.

15. By this doctrine, People should be in the most miserable condition
imaginable when under governors; for not only should they be liable to all the
oppressions of Magistrates tyrannizing over them, and have their hands bound
up, so that they could not help themselves; but also unto the opression and
tyranny of every one who could but say, he had a commission from his Majesty to
kill and murder all whom he pleased: For they might not resist whether he had
a real commission or not, lest they should resist the ordinance of God, in
resisting a servant sent of the King to execute his lust and cruelty, with
express warrant and commission: and thus there would be as many irresistible
tyrants, armed with absolute and irresistible power, as one Tyrant will, and
the people might no more use violent resistance against them, then against him.
A doctrine, I am sure, point blanck contrary to all reason and equity.

16. If foreign princes may lawfully help a poor people oppressed by their
own Sovereign: Then people may lawfully, if they be able, hold in the pains
of these foreign princes, and defend themselves. But the former is granted by
casuists and politicians. Therefore etc. The consequence cannot be denied: for
forraigners have no more power or authority over another sovereign, then the
people have themselves: and what justice, or equity of the cause could warrant
them to come to their relief and succoure, the same will warrant the persons
injured to help themselves, if they be able.

17. As the law of Nature will allow this self defense even to private persons,
in cases of necessity, So will the law of Nations, and the Civil law; for it
makes no distinction betwixt self defense used by private persons alone, and
that which is used by private persons having their Representatives concurring:
And where the law distinguishes not, we should not distinguish. As all law
permits to repel violence with violence; so does it give this allowance to all
persons whatsoever l. Liberam C. quando licet unicuique sine judic.

18. To maintain, that in no case it were lawful for Private subjects, to
resist the unjust violence, and to defend themselves from the tyranny of
Princes, would be a direct condemning of our own Princes K. James, and K.
Charles, who helped the private Subjects of other Princes against them: and is
it not unreasonable to plead for more absolute subjection, then princes
themselves will plead for: Or to condemn that resistance which even they will
approve of, countenance and encourage to?

16. If it were not lawful for private persons to defend themselves against the
manifest tyranny of a Sovereign, without the concurrence or conduct of a
Parliament, or their Representative: Then the condition of such as live under
such a government where there are Ephori, or where there is a Representative
constituted, should be worse, then is the condition of these, who want such
Representatives. But that were absurd. Therefore etc. The consequence of the
Major is hence cleared: Because, all the arguments, which have been adduced by
any, for proving the lawfulness of resistance in cases of necessity, will
evince that a people, who have no formal Representative, may resist the tyranny
of their Prince: But now if this were not allowed unto a People having
Representatives, their case should certanely be worse: Because their hands
should be bound up from that necessary defense, which otherwise they might have
used viz. when Representatives should betray their trust, and comply with a
tyrannous Prince against the people. The Minor is most certane, because
Parliaments or Representatives have been instituted for the good and advantage
of the people: And therefore should not prove hurtful and destructive,
otherwise they cease to be a benefit and a blessing. A benefit should not
prove onerous, says the law, si filiusf ff. ut legator nom. caveaetur.

20. If it be lawful for private persons to resist the Tyranny of Parliaments,
and other inferior Magistrates: Then it cannot be unlawful for them to resist
the Tyranny of others, without their concurrence and conduct. But the former is
true, as all the arguments used by divines and politicians to prove resistance,
will evince; and as several of our adversaries will very readily grant, though
they will stiffly maintain, that no resistance is to be used against the
Sovereign. Therefore etc. The connection is hence clear, That to whom the
greater is lawful, the less is also lawful: Now it is a greater matter to
resist a Parliament, then to wave them, and miskend them, or to resist others
without their help; as all may see and will easily grant. There is not a more
express command for Subjects to do nothing without the concurrence of a
Parliament, then not to resist them and oppose them: Nor are people more
obliged to the one, then to the other.

21. Private persons without the concurrence of Parliaments, may resist and
oppose the Prince, yea and bind his hands, when in a fit of frenzy, of a
distempered brain and madness, he would seek to cut his own throat, or with
Saul would run upon his sword. Therefore they may also resist oppose him, when
in madness and fury, he would not only endanger his own life in soul and
body, but would destroy the inheritance of the Lord, and cut off his faithful
and innocent subjects, and destroy the land. The connection is clear: Because
more respect is to be had unto the life of Thousands, then to the life of one
Man. The antecedent is certane, because otherwise they should be guilty before
the Lord, of his death, if they would not hinder it, when it was in the power
of their hands; for he who hinders not a mischief when he may, he wills
it, and so is formally guilty before God.

22. Private persons, without the concurrence of inferior Magistrates, may
resist the Sovereign, when in a rage he runeth upon an innocent man passing
by, and with Saul, when an evil spirit from the Lord came upon him, would
cast his javelin or deadly instrument at the innocent David's. This no rational
person will deny, who knovveth what a hazard it is to partake of other men's
sins: Love to the Prince should press to this perserving of him from
shedding innocent blood; and who does not this when he may, consents to
that murder. Therefore they may also, no less, yea much more, resist him,
when in his madness and distemper, he is seeking to destroy millions of the
people of God: And again, much more may we resist him, when he is seeking to
destroy ourselves, we being much more bound to love and defend ourselves, then
to love and defend others.

23. If it be lawful for private subjects, without the Command or allowance of
Parliaments or their Representatives, to resist a Tyrant, or the Tyranny of a
Prince, with tears and prayers: Then also, in cases of necessity, it shall be
lawful for them to resist his violent Tyranny and tyrannical violence, with
violence, But the former is true. Therefore, etc. The minor is clear: For
Royalists themselves will grant that praeces and lachrymae may be opposed to
Tyranny; Thus did the ancient Christians resist their tyrannical Emperors with
earnest cries and prayers to God, especially Julian the Apostate, whom they
ordinarily styled Idolianus, Pisaeus, Adonaeus, Tauricremus, alter Hieroboam,
Achab, Pharaoh, etc. And we are allowed to pray against the Enemies of Christ's
Kingdom, against the Turk, the Pope that great Antichrist, and all the little
Antichrists that make war against the Lord and his interest. Therefore we may
also resist a Prince Tyrannically oppressing the People of God, destroying the
mountain of the Lord, making havoc of his Church, when we are in probable
capacity for that work. The reason is because, the one is no more condemned in
Scripture then the other. 2. The one is no more a sinful resisting of the
Ordinance of God, then is the other. 3. Adversaries themselves will grant that
resistance by prayers and tears is more powerful and effectual, then the other.
4. This personal resistance is as consistent with that command, let every soul
be subject to higher powers, as the other is with that, 1 Timothy 2: ver. 1, 2. 1
exhort that supplications, prayers and intercessions be made for Kings, and for
all in authority. 5. If the Prince be good, the one is as unlawful as the
other, and a sinful resistance of the ordinance of God, no less then the
other: Therefore when he becomes a Tiger, a Lion, a waster of the inheritance
of the Lord, an Apostate, as I may not pray for him, except conditionally, but
against him, as an enemy of Christ's; so I may also lawfully resist him with
violence. 6. It is clear from other perfsons or things against whom or which,
I may lawfully pray, as inward or outward Enemics, foreign or domestic, be
they inferior or superior, against these I may use resistance, in my own
sinlesse defense. 7. The laws of the land make the one treasonable as well as
the other, and that deservedly, when the Prince is doing his duty: but when
he turns Tyrant, neither can justly be condemned. 8. We have seen the one
practiced in Scripture and other Histories, as well as the other.

24. If it be lavvful for mere private persons to refuse obedience unto the
unjust and iniquous commands of Princes: Then it is also lavvfull for them to
resist the unjust and illegal Tyranny of such. But the former is undengable.
Therefore so is the latter. The connection is clear. For 1. Subjection is no
more expressly pressed in Scripture, then is obedience, to Superiors: Therefore
if not withstanding of this command, non-obedience be allowed yea and
necessary, why not also non-subjection or resistance? 2. The law of God does
not press this as more absolute and unlimited, then the other. 3.
Non-obedience to the power commanding just things is a resisting of the
ordinance of God, as well as non-subjection thereunto: if notwithstanding
hereof non-obedience to unjust commands be allowed, why also shall not
non-subjection to tyranny be allowed? 4. The one does no more derogate from the
lawful authority of the Sovereign, then the other. 5. The one is no more a
wronging of the Minister of God as such, then the other; because he is no more
the Minister and vicegerent of God in acts of Tyranny, then in commanding
unjust things. And therefore 6. such as resist unjust violence, can no more
procure to themselves damnation, then the such as disobey unjust commands.

CAP. XIII.
The Surveyer's grounds taken from Scripture, for absolute Submission to
Suffering, examined.
HAving thus proved the lawfulness of private persons resisting, in cases of
necessity, the unjust violence of Superior powers, by many arguments; and
having vindicated the same from what this Surveyer had to say against them, We
come now to examine his grounds for the contrary assertion. Out of Scripture he
adduceth Three grounds Page 28. etc.

The first is taken from the duty of Children toward Paents unjustly afflicting
them Heb. 12: ver. 9, 10. where, their reverend subjection under unreasonable
and unjust dealing is commended: and from the duty of Servants to suffer at the
hands of unjust and froward Masters 1 Pet. 2: 18, 19, 20. To which we answer,

1. That these examples are so far from making against us, that they fully
comfirme our point, as we have showed above: For, notwithstanding of what is
said in these places, he cannot deny, but Parents may be resisted by their
Children, in several cases, and Masters by their Servants. It would be strange,
if he should press this subjection so close home, that now no Servant might
lawfully resist and withstand the fury of his Master; nor no Child might hold
his furious Father's hands, and defend himself against his unjust acts of
cruelty. And Althusius Pol. c. 38. n. 88, 89. tells us that in several cases,
the father loses the right of his fatherly power over Children; and masters
power, from the law Tit. lust quib. mod. jus Pat. Pot. amit. Domin, lust.de his
qui sunt sui vel alieni juris l. 5. sivel Par. de agant. vel alend. lib. L.
necfilium Cap. de Patr. potcst. L. 2. L. 3. Cap. de Inf. expos. Novel 115. Cap.
3.

2. If these simititudes be hardly pressed, it shall not now be lawful for
Subjects to resist so much as by flying; for the reverence and subjection
required of Children unto their parents, will not suffer that to evite every
small injury from their parents, they should ran away from under their power
and subjection; nor might servants in those days run away from their Masters,
who had another dominion over them, then Masters now have over their Servants,
who are free to go off when they will; himself acknowledges this Page 31.

3. We have showed above what a vast difference there is, betwixt the power of
Parents over their Children; and the power of Magistrates over their Subjects:
And he himself does confess there is a difference; yet says he, Page 29.
There is a full parity and agreement in this, that in the inflicting of evils
upon these who are under them (such as are competent to them to inflict within
their sphaere) a patient reverent subjection is due from their inferiors, even
when they abuse their power.] Ans. This is the question, if the parity hold
even here in all points; for seeing these Relations are different one from
another, even in their nature and ground, it is but rational to think, that
there must also be some difference betwixt them, as to the consequent or result
that flows from that relation, else it would follow that as Children are so
Subject, as that they can never but be subject, to their Parents; so Subjects
could never be free of their Superiors; and yet himself tells us, that they
may, by going under another government, or removing to other dominions. 2. Who
shall be judge, whether the Superior keeps within his spaere, yea or not? If
the Superior, then there is no remedy at all; for when he does most exceed his
bounds, he may judge that he keeps within bounds, and so whether he keep
within his sphaere or not, there must no resistance be used, but a stupide
subjection. 3. Whether may the Superior be resisted by the inferior, when he
does what is not incumbent to him to do within his sphaere, or not? If he may
not, then why is this parenthesis added, As a restriction or limitation of the
Subjection required? If he may be resisted when he really goes without his
sphaere, then this makes for us; for he must grant that the Magistrate does nor
prescribe the limits of his own power, but God and nature, and the
constitution of the Realm. Now God has never put it in the power of Princes
to press their subjects to perjury, or to a compliance with a sinful
abominable and abjured course; so that vvhn he does thus, he goes beyond his
sphaere: His sphaere is to rule for God and the good of the land, and not to
destroy the interest of Christ, and the Commongood: and if he may be resisted,
when he goes beyond this sphaere, then we have all we ask. It was never
within his sphaere, to break his compact with his People: and when he does
so, he is without his sphaere and may be resisted, and this is also for us.
Again he tells us in the 2 place. That though Kings are not fathers by
generation; yet as Kings and Magistrates should have fatherly hearts to their
subjects, (they being a sort of official fathers to them, to procure their
good, and defend them from evil) so subjects ought to have such hearts to their
King, as Children have to their fathers, giving them speical reverence,
subjection and obedience, from their very soul and inward affection.] Answ. All
this says that as Kings are metaphorical Fathers, so Subjects, are
metaphorical Children. But as it does not say, that Kings should become
Tyrants, and not carry fatherly affection toward their Subjects; so it does
not say, that Subejcts may not resist their tyrannical rage and fury, wherein
they act not as fathers, but as Tigers. 2. It is true, special reverence
subjection and obedience is due to Magistrates, but alvvayes in the Lord; The
relation is mutual, if they carry not as official fathers seeking the good of
the subjects and defending them, but as devouring Lions seeking the destruction
of their Subjects both in soul and body, they cannot expect, according to what
he says, that hearty subjection and obedience, which otherwise they might
have. 3. Being but official fathers appointed by the subjects, and set over
them by their will and consent, they must have less power to wrong the
Subjects, then Parents have to wrong their Children, who have not that
relation by virtue of any formal compact with, or consent of their Children. So
that when they do injuries, Subjects are in a greater capacity to help
themselves, then Children are; when their Parents to injure them. He adds [
Although some times they are not such as they ought to be, yet they ought to
account their persons (sealed with Gods ordinance, and the image of of his
Soveraignity) sacred and inviolable, resolving to suffer any thing of them
rather then be guilty of parricide (although under the color of self defense)
Gods law in the fifth command has enjoined reverence and subjection to Princes
under the title of Parents Calv. Iustit. Lib. 4. Cap. 8. etc. [Answ. We are not
speaking of doing violence unto the persons of Sovereigns, or of committing
parricide, but only of the matter of resistance, and of natural sinlesse self
defense, which is far different from Killing of Kings: If he think the one of
the same nature with the other, he vvrongeth the King's life, more then he is
aware of. Though Children as Children may not Kill their parents, yet they may
defend themselves from their unjust violence. 2. We grant Kings are
comprehended in the fifth commandment under the title of parents, as Calvin
does; and not only Kings, but all Superiors: and yet he will not say, I
suppose, that we are not to resist the unjust violence of any superior, but
that they are all so sacred and inviolable, as that in all things, they must be
subjected unto, without the least resistance: and therefore what he adds is
not to the point.

4. We have showed above, that there is a vaste disparity betwixt Masters and
Kings, in reference to their slaves and subjects; He himself acknowledges
this, Page 31. [Yet (says he) though there be these differences betwixt the
dominative or masterly, and the Royal or Magistratical power, the inferiors
subjection in suffering (even wrongfully, if God permit in his providence the
power to be abused) is no less under the one power, then under the other, by
virtue of Divine Law. Subjects serve the Sovereign, (though they be not
slaves:) and not only conquered people are called Servants, 2 Samuel 8: v. 14.
but also ordinary subjects, 2 Samuel 11: V. 24. 1 King. 12: V. 4. -- Though he
also be in a sense their servant (not in relation of an inferior to a
superior, for so the Magistrate is only the Minister of God for the Peoples
good, and never called their Minister) but in relation of the means to the end
-- as Angles are ministering spirits for the heirs of salvation, and Ministers
are Servants to the People, etc.] Answ. That the subjection is alike in both
these relations, can with no color of reason be asserted; for it is absurd to
say, that Subjects who set up the Magistrate, who limite his power, who bind
him by Covenants, and design their own good in setting him up, and do it in a
voluntary way, are the same way subject to their Princes,; as slaves, who are
as other goods for the profit of the Master, and are, both in bodies and
goods, otherwise subject unto their Masters, and that in a manner against their
will, either being sold, or redeeming their life in war, by giving themselves
up as slaves. 2. As there are various Kinds of Superiors, so the relation
varyeth, and is more or less closse and efficacious, and the subjection must
accordingly vary: I am not alike subjected to every one that is over me, as I
am subjected to my Sovereign; nor am I so subjected to him, as to my natural
parents, or as a wife is to her husband. 3. Though the Subejcts in some sense
call themselves servants to the sovereign, (which yet is often a term of
civil respect; for Naaman called himself Elisha's servant 2 King. 5: 15. and
Obadiah said the like to Elijah 1 King. 18: 9.) yet if they be not slaves; they
must have more allowance then slaves have, and so have more power to resist
unjust violence then they had. 4. If the Magistrate be the peoples servant in
relation of the means to the end; then the relation betwixt him and his
Subejcts, is not such a relation as is betwixt Parents and Children, or
betwixt Masters and Slaves; for the end of these relations, is not the good of
Children and slaves: And next, Subejcts must have more power allowed them to
see to the end, which is their own good, and to see that the means prove not
destructive of the end: and if the means prove no means, the relation
falls, and he is no more a servant seeking their good, but a Tyrant seeking
his own. 5. It is sooner said then proved, that the People who set up the King
are not superior to the King: He should have aswered Lex Rex as to this: but
it is like, he thinks that his saying thus, is more firm and irrefragable,
then Lex Rex reasonings to the contrary: But I know not who will think so with
him. 6. There is a great difference betwixt Angels serving the saints, or
rather serving God that way; and the King serving his People: The saints have
no hand in setting up angels to protect them, as People have in setting up
Magistrates. 7. If they be servants as ministers are, then, though in regard of
their official power they should not be subject to the People, yet they may be
resisted, as was shevved above: and this is all we press for.

5. There is a great difference betwixt suffering of Buffettings, and
correction, and such like petty, private, personal injuries, at the hands of
Parents or Masters; and the suffering of loss of Liberties, Life, Lands,
Religion, and such like, which tend to the ruin of the Commonwealth. To this
our Surveyer replyeth two things Page 32. as, 1. [The grounds that such men go
upon for private persons violent resisting the Magistrate (viz. the abuse of
his power) if they hold good, will as effectually evince a non-subjection and
violent resistance to Parents and Masters in abusing their power.] Answ. We say
not that the Magistrate's abuse of his power is the only ground of resistance;
this should have been showed, and not said barely, as it is here: But when
other things give ground of resistance, yea and a call thereunto, it is enough
for us to say, that we resist not the power, but the abuse of the power. 2.
Though we walked upon no other ground (which is false, as is clear from what
is said) yet his consequence would be null, unless he should affirm, which
yet he dar not, That the Magistrate is under no other obligation to his
Subjects, then Parents are to their Children, and Masters to their Slaves. But
what says he? 2. [ as death is not, so no punishment unjustly inflicted is
eligible, where lawfully it can be warded off. But this is the state of the
question, if private persons may lawfully violente the Magistrate abuseing his
power: if in greater evils unjustly inflicted, there is always a liberty for
inferiors violently to re-offend the powers above them? Why not in less evils
too? These gradual differences of inflicted evils cannot make such variation,
in the point of duty, seeing the grounds hold equally strong; if a man may
resist the Magistrate for abuse of his power, he may do so also against his
father, or Master on the same grounds, and if he may not so deal with them, he
may not deal so with the Magistrate neither] Answ. It is true that no
punishment unjustly inflicted is eligible where lawfully it can be warded off;
but there may be more said, for the lawfulness of warding off of death, then
for warding off a little blow. And 2 there may be more said for warding off a
blow, then for warding it off by violenting the Superior: We speak not of
violenting the Superior, but of warding off the blae and bitter blows, and
such other iujuries equivalent to death, done by his bloody emissaries, which
may be done without violent re-offending the powers above us. 3. When the
injuries are great and grievous, and not easily reparable, God and nature will
allow, a warding of these off, even by violence, when they can no otherwise be
shuned. Though a Child may willingly Subject himself unto correction, though
he do not really deserve it, yet if his father in stead of taking a whipe to
chastise him, shall take a sword to hew him in pieces, or a knife to cut his
throat. I suppose in that case, the Child may refuse hearty subjection, and
either flee away, or if he cannot, save his life so long as he can, either by
calling for help, or with his own hands if he be able. And here he will grant,
I suppose, that the gradual difference of inflicted evils will make a
variation in point of this duty of resistance. So in smaller injuries subjects
may be patient, and bear a little, for redeeming more, and rather suffer the
loss of little then hazard all, but when it comes to an extremity; and Life,
and Religion and Liberty, and all that is dear to them as men as Christians, is
in eminent and unavoydable hazard, then they may lawfully stand to their
defense, and resist that abused power, not merely, nor only, nor formally,
because it is an abused power, but because it is so abused, as that it
destroys the ends for which it was appointed, and destroys all that is
dear unto them, and which they are bound to defend, upon any hazard, if it be
in their power; because the loss is irreparable. Though a gradual difference
of evil inflicted do not vary the spece of evil inflicted, the least evil
inflicted being an evil essentially as well as the greatest, to him who does
inflict it; yet it may alter the ground of resistance, not only of superiors,
but also of equals and inferiors; for I may bear with a small injury at the
hand of mine equal and inferior, and not so much as seek reparation by law,
when I see that either the matter is not tanti, or that I shall expend more in
regaining my own, then all my loss was: But will he think that upon this
ground it will follow, that if mine equal or inferior shall endeavor by fraud
or falsehood, to take from me my whole estate, I may not then sue him at the
law, and vindicate my own? Sure it were irrational to say so.

6. This will speak as much against resisting of the inferior powers, as
resisting of the Supreme: For they are metaphorical Fathers too, and
superiors over us, as well as the Sovereign, and the comparison will hold in
the one, as well as in the other. Now if he think that the concurrence or
command of the Inferior Magistrate, will not warrant Subjects to resist the
Supreme; He must also say that the concurrence or command of the Superior,
will not warrant a resisting of the inferour; and so it shall be alike unlawful
to resist any, if this comparison hold, according to his urging of it: For it
was not lawful for the Child to resist the Mother, but to suffer patiently her
chastisment, though the Father should have been indulgent, and would have
pardoned the Child, or extenuated and excused the Child as not guilty of the
fault alleged. So was the child also obliged to be Subject unto his Father's
corrections, though the indulgent Mother would have taken the Childe's part
against the Father.

7. The Servant was to bear buffets patiently 1 Pet. 2. and after Christ's
example was not to buffet again; for Christ being reviled did not revile
again, and so the place speaks not against resistance for self defense; but
against buffeting again, which is no formal warding off of blows, and flows
not from sinlesse nature seeking to defend it self; but rather from a spirit of
revenge: So that, for all this, the Servant might have warded off blows, and
saved his head with his arms, when his cruel Master was seeking to break his
head.

8. It is one thing to speak of what a Child may do, who has no power to
resist his father, or what a slave is called to, who has no power or probable
way to resist his Master; and another thing to speak of what a Nation, or a
Considerable part of a Nation may do against a few, whose unjust violence they
are able to resist.

9. The maine ground of this argument is a mistake; for he thinks that
patient suffering is inconsistent with resisting. But Lex Rex quaest 30. Page
281. has showed a consistencie, (but it is his best, according to his usual
custom, to pass over such things as he cannot answer.) So that the
consequence is a mere nullity: for because servants are to suffer unjust
buffetings, at the hands of their wicked Masters, It will not follow, That
therefore they are obliged in conscience to non-resistence: for as Lex Rex
shows, The Church of God was to bear with all patience the indignation of the
Lord because she had sinned Micah. 9 10, 11, 12. and yet she was not obliged to
non-resistence; but rather obliged to fight against here Enemies. David bear
patiently the wrong that this Sone absolome did to him, as is clear by 2 Samuel
25: ver. 25, 26. and Cap. 16: v. 10, 11, 12. Psalm. 3: v 1, 2, 3. Yet did he
lawfully resist him and his forces. So we are to bear sickness, pains, and
torments, which the Lord sends on us; and yet very lawfully may we labor and
use all lawful means to be freed from them.

10. Christ's Rule to us; Math. 5: v. 39. is, that whosoever shall smile us on
the right cheek, we should turn the other to him also, and what more patient
subjection can be required by a Magistrate of his subjects? and yet this will
not make it altogether unlawful for private persons to defend themselves from
unjust violence offered them, by their equals or inferiors. No more will it
follow from that patient subjection that we owe to Rulers, that in no case we
may resist their unjust violence, and defend ourselves there from.

11. I hope notwithstanding of any thing, that is spoken in these passages, he
will allow children when wronged by their Parents, and Servants when injured by
their Masters, liberty to complain to Magistrates who are over both, and yet
this is the useing of a legal resistance, and as much opposite (if at all
opposite) to the patience and subjection enjoined, as is violent resistance,
when that legal resistance cannot be had; as suppose, when Father and Son, and
Master and Servant are living in no Community, where there are Rulers and
Judges over them: and if this be lawful in this case (as it cannot be denied)
then must it also be lawful for subjects to repel the unjust violence of
Princes with violence: Because there is no political Rulers over both King and
People. But People must make use of that Court and tribunal of necessity, which
nature has allowed, and by innocent violence, repel the unjust violence of
Princes, seeing there is no other remedy.

His second ground out of Scripture is taken from Mat. 5: ver. 10. 1 Pet. 4:
ver. 14, 17. and the like places; [Where there is a commended suffering for
Christ and Righteousness sake, and consequently a sort of commanded suffering:
a suffering contradistinct from suffering for evil doing, even a cleanly
submission to suffer in and for well doing (when God in his providence permits
Rulers so to abuse their power) which passive subjection or submission is not
grounded on the Rulers abuse of his power through his corrupt will, but upon
the peculiar command of God enjoining submission in such cases.]

Answ. 1. These and the like speak nothing at all to the point: For, as we may
be persecuted for righteousness sake by equals, Yea and by inferiors; so we
are to suffer that persecution, when God in his providence calls us
thereunto, with patience and humble submission of Spirit. But is this a good
argument, to prove that it is unlawful for us to resist and repel injuries
offered to us by equals or inferiors? And if it will not prove it unlawful for
us to resist our equals or inferiors, neither can it hence be inferred that it
is unlawful for us to resist Superiors. 2. By this same reason the King if a
Christian, is bound to submit as well to his subjects, as they to him; at
least, he is not bound to resist a foraigne King invading him for Religion,
which I know not who will grant. 3. That God always calls us to submissio
nor passive subjection, when in his providence he permits Rulers to abuse their
power, is the thing in question, and this argument does no way prove it. 4. We
grant, that God calls us to suffer for righteousness sake, patiently and
Christianly, whether at the hands of Superiors, or at the hands of equals or
inferiors, when in his providence we are so stated, as that we must either
suffer, or sin by denying a testimony for his truth and cause: But that, when a
door is opened for eshewing suffering, and God in his providence seems not to
call us thereunto (as he never does, when he gives a fair way of preventing
it) we are called to suffer, and bound to choose suffering at the hands of any,
is denied and not proved by him.

But further he tells us. That [ Lex Rexquaest. 30. Leers at passive obedience,
as a chymaera, as a dream, and as involving a contradiction: And he thinks
(says he) he speaks acutely, in saying, God never gave to any a command to
suffer for well doing, nor at all to suffer (suffering depending on the free
will of another without us, and not on our own free will; and so not falling
under any command of God to us,) but he reasones (says he) very sophistically,
inferring that because mere suffering, which necessarily depends on the action
of another, is not commanded to us, therefore subjection to suffering, or
passive obedience is not commanded, when the Magistrate inflicts suffering.]
Ans. The worthy Author of Lex Rex was there answering the objection of
Royalists, who alleged such places, where, they supposed, we were commanded to
suffer, and among several assertions, which he laid down to solve this, he had
this assertions, That suffering formally as suffering, nor non-resisting
passive, could fall under no formal law of God, except in two cases, 1. in the
point of Christ's passive obedience, and 2. indirectly and comparatively, when
it comes to the election of the witness of Jesus, whether he will suffer or
deny the truth of Christ, so that this alternative must be unavoydable,
otherwise ( said he) no man is to expect the reward of a witness of Jesus,
who having a lavvful possible mean of eshevving suffering, does yet cast
himself into suffering needlessly. Now what a mere vvrangler must this be,
who says, that that worthy Author did reason sophistically in so inferring,
vvhileas he is only answering the objection: and hereby he does it
sufficiently; for if it be evinced (as he has unansvverably evinced it) that
passive obedience or passive subjection is not formally commanded; then their
arguments proving this passive subjection to be our duty, are null; and so they
cannot hence infer, that non-subjection passive is forbidden. And what have
they gained then out of these places? Can this Surveyer affirm that passion as
passion, or suffering formally as such, comes under a command of God? no, he
dar not, but must with Lex Rex say, that it is impossible that mere passion,
(as to be whipped, to be hanged, to be beheaded should be the object of an
affirmative or perceptive command of God. Why then is he offended with Lex
Rex? Why jeers he at that worthy Author, saying he thinks he speaks acutely? is
this to answer Lex Rex to jeer at what is there said, and then be forced (or
speak nonsense) to affirm the same thing that is there asserted? But says
he, Page 34. [Subjection to the passion may fall under a command, and this is
called passive obedience, which implies more then mere passion or suffering;
even a disposition and motion of the heart to lie under that lot with an eye to
God, whose ordinance is used upon the sufferer; only it is called passive
obedience, because as to the precise suffering the punishment, there is no
external action done, enjoined by the law or command of the Magistrate, as
there is in active obedience, although there be some dispositive or preparatory
actions in order to suffering (not inferring a direct preparation to a man's
own suffering) which he may and ought to do, as going to a gallows on his
own feet, or up a ladder, or laying down his head on a block, that it may be
stricken off.] Answ. That subjection to the passion might fall under a command
was granted in some cases by Lex Rex, as was said; but that it falls under a
command when God opens a fair door to eshew it, he is not able to prove. 2.
How proper it is to call that submission passive obedience, is not worth the
while to enquire, Lex Rex told us (and he cannot confute it) that it was
repugnantia in adjecto to call it obedience, since obedience properly so
called, is relative essentially to a law: Now there is no moral law enjoining
this, for no man is formally a sinner against a moral law, because he suffers
not the evil of punishment, nor are these in hell formally obedient to a law,
because they suffer against their will. 3. As for that disposition and motion
of heart, which he speaks of, that is nothing but what Lex Rex said viz. That
modus rei the manner of suffering, was under a command, and indeed obedience to
that was and is obedience to a moral law. But the Surveyer called it an error
to say that only the modus rei is commanded or forbidden, and why? because
(says he,) That same command that forbids resisting the Magistrate in doing
his duty, enjoyneth submission and passive obedience to him, although we were
able by force to deliver ourselves, out of his hand.] Answ. Then by him, there
is no medium betwixt this submission to passive obedience, and positive
resistance: And so, either he must say that flying is resisting, (which yet
Page 41. he calls a monster of a Stoical paradox) or he must say, that flying
and refuseing to submit to this passive obedience, is a submitting to this
passive obedience: And whether this will not rather look like a monster of a
Stoical paradox, let all men of common sense judge. 2. Is the guilty person
bound by any moral law, to suffer death or whipping, if the Magistrate will not
execute the sentence upon him? Or is every one in that case bound to deliver up
himself to the Magistrate, and accuse himself, and pursue the accusation until
the sentence be executed? If not, how does this passive submission fall under a
moral law? If he say, when he is apprehended or in hands, he is not to resist,
but submit to the stroke. Answer. 1. Will not any see, that then the res ipsa
is not commanded, but the modus rei, and so Lex Rex said true, Page 318. That
passive obedience to wicked Rulers was enjoyed Romans 13. only in the manner, and
upon supposition that we must be subject to them, and must suffer against our
wills all the evil of punishment that they can inflict, Then we must suffer
patiently. But 2. Though we be bound to submit to the Magistrate doing his
duty, and inflicting just punishment, will it follow that therefore we are
bound to submit to the Magistrate doing not his duty, but inflicting unjust
punishment? Or does the same passive obedience to powers punishing unjustly
fall under the moral law? How does he prove either the consequence or the
consequent? [ We assert (says he Page 53.) That a private person though
wrongfully afflicted by the lawful Magistrate proceeding according to law, (let
it be so that it is lex male posita or an evil law) is hound not only to
Christian patience in suffering -- but unto a submission without repelling of
violence by violence; and that in conscientious respect to the ordinance of
God, wherewith the lawful Magistrate is invested (although abuseing it in this
particular) and with a tender regard to the prevention of seditions and
confusions in humane societies.] Ans. 1. This is dictator-like to prove the
conclusion, by asserting it; what a ridiculous fool is he to come with his
assertions, and yet give us nothing but the very thing controverted? Is not
this a very hungry empty man, to beg (when he cannot better do) the very thing
in quaestion? 2. Then it seems, he will grant that a private person may resist
the lawful Magistrate, when proceeding contrary to law; where is then the
conscientious respect to the Ordinance of God, wherewith the lawful Magistrate
is invested; and that tender regaird to prevent sedition, etc. which he talks
of? Sure in the one case, the Ordinance is but abused, as it is in the other.
3. Let me ask, if there were a just judge sitting, who would execute justice
and judgment for God, and were summoning him to answer for his perjury,
apostasy, and other villannies which he is conscious to himself of, and some
others are privy to, and could witness against him; would he compeare, or
rather would he not run from under the reach of justice, and secure himself? or
if apprehended, would he not labor an escape to save his neck from the rope?
If so (as all who know him will verily belveeve he would) where would then this
submission be which is due unto the Magistrate? And where would his
conscientious respect to the Ordinance of God not abused, but very rightly used
in that particular, be? 4. If a Magistrate abuseing his power to the
destruction of the Subjects, should be resisted, what inconvenience would
follow thereupon? [ Seditions (says he) and confusions would be unavoydable,
if every one, as he thinks himself wronged, shall be allowed to use force upon
the lawful Magistrate proceeding by law; the greatest Malefactors being ready
to justify themselves, and to violate the justest Megistrates in their just
proceedings.] Ausw. This is but the old song chanted over and over again to
us, and may therefore be dismissed with a word: viz. That as the Magistrat's
abuse of his power in a particular, will not make the power it self unlawful
(as he will grant,) so nor will the abuse of this resistance in a particular,
make resistance it self unlawful. 2. We plead not for resistance by every one
who thinks himself wronged, but for resistance when the wrongs are manifest,
notour, undeniable, ^ grievous and intolerable, and done to a whole land, to
God's glory, to Christ's interest, to a Covenant sworn and subscribed by all,
to the Fundamental laws of the land, to the compact betwixt King and Subject,
to Religion, Laws, Libertyes, Lives, and all which is dear to People. These
wrongs as they are no petty injuries, so nor are they quaestionable or
uncertane, but as manifest as the sun at the nonetide of the day. 3. What if
the Magistrate or his Emissaryes proceed not according to law? And what if the
law, which they pretend, be no law de jure, or a law made a non habente
potestatem (as shall be manifest to be our case) should there no resistance
then be used but a stupid submission, out of a pretended and supposed regaird
to the prevention of seditions and confusions? 4. Since he thinks that so much
regaird is to be had to the prevention of seditions and confusions in
societies, sure he should think that as much regaird is to be had unto the
prevention of the utter ruin and destruction of societies. Now, if magistrates
abuseing their power to the destruction of Societyes, might not be resisted;
how shall they be preserved from utter ruin, which is much more carefully to
be prevented, then seditions and confusions in societies: And since he thinks,
without ground, that our doctrine is so evil and scandalous, and opens a
vvide gap for all wicked seditious persons to work confusion in the
Commonwealth, and to overthrow the best and justest Magistrates; we have
just ground to think that his doctrine is not only evil and scandalous, but
most perverse, wicked and adhominable, opening a vvide door to all tyranny,
oppression, cruelty; and an encouraging of all wicked Tyrants to deal with
their Subjects as so many Brutes or worse, without all fear of opposition;
and to destroy utterly all Commonvvealths, or make them mere prison-houses for
slaves, etc. And, if this doctrine of his tend not more to libertinisme, then
ours, let all judge.

His last ground out of scripture is that known passage Romans 13: ver. 1, 2.
with 1 Per. 2: Ver. 11. ( I think it should have been ver. 13.) Concerning
which, he says, [Such subjection is there commanded to the Powers then
existing or in being (...) (such as were Caligulae. Nero, Domitian, monstrou
Tyrants. enemies and persecuters of God's People) as is opposed to (...), to
stand in order against them (the word is from (...), a military term) every
soul is commanded to be subject or to stand in order under them (...) and for
bidden to be (...) to stand in military order against them either defensive or
offensive: By powers which are not to be resisted are clearly meant the persons
in power, as the Apostle afterward extones himself v. 3, 4. calling them
Rulers, and Ministers of God, he means undoubtedly certane supposita and her
sons invested with power, and cannot mean the abstract ordinance of God, etc.]

Answ. 1. That subjection here required is a standing in order under them, and
is opposite to the resisting or contra-ordinatnesse here meaned, is granted;
For 1. we do not say, that Christianity destroys Magistracy, or exempteth
Christians from subjection unto Magistracy and Magistrates: As some Heretics
then did, abuseing their Christian liberty, to destroy Magistracy; and as
Heathens objected unto Christians 'as Gerhard de Magist. Polit. n. 34.
thinks, which (as some think) was the occasion of Paul's asserting the
ordinance of Magistracy. Nor 2. do we say, That it is unlawful for Christians
to be subjects unto Heathen Magistrates, which, because Christian Gentiles
might have drunk in from some jews, particularly the Gaulonites, who held it
unlawful to yield any subjection unto Roman Emperors, or to strangers, might
have been the occasion of Paul's discourse of this Ordinance. And therefore to
confute these mistakes, The Apostle says Let every soul be subject unto higher
powers, etc. that is, acknowledge even such lavvful Magistrates, though they be
heathens, and ye christians, whether jews or gentiles, and think nor
yourself exeemed from the duty of subjects toward such. So that this makes
nothing against us, and the subjection here required, upon this account, is not
the subjection now in quaestion; for a resisting of open and notour tyranny,
otherwise unavoidable, does well consist with this subjection, viz. an
acknovvledgment of Magistrates as lavvful powers ordained of God, for the good
of the Subjects.

2. The word subjection being thus taken in a general comprehensive sense, as
containing in it all that duty which is required of Subjects tovvard their
Superiors, The opposite term resistance, or counter-orderednesse must also
be taken in a general comprehensive sense, as including all the contrary evils.
Now, as obedience is a special point of subjection unto Superiors, So
disobedience is a special point of contra ordinatnesse. But, as an universal
and unlimited obedience, in all points, is not here required, so neither can an
universal and unlimited subjection to suffering be here required: for as it can
not be proved, that every act of disobedience is a resistance here condemned;
and that every act of obedience, is a part of the subjection here required; So
nor can it be proved, that every act of resisting or refuseing passive
obedience is here condemned, and that every act of submitting to passive
obedience is here commanded. But only that that obedience is commanded, which
is due to Magistrates; and that resistance which is unlawful, and is opposite
unto that subjection required, is prohibited. So that this place cannot prove
that all resistance is unlawful; because non-obedience is resistance, or a
contraordinatnesse; and yet all non-obedience is not here prohibited. Again,
the subjection comprehends that honor and respect, which is due unto
Superiors, and which is both inward in the heart, mind and thought, and
outwardly expressed in words, gestures, carriage, etc. So must the word
resistance comprehend within it self, all that is opposite there unto. Now, as
by this place, it cannot be evinced that it is unlawful to resist abused power,
or persons abuseing their power to tyranny and oppression, in our thoughts, and
by our words: for then it should be unlawful to abhore, and detest the
oppression and tyranny of cruel tyrants; or for the Messengers of the Lord to
rebuke them for the same; or for People to pray and supplicat to God against
them, which is utterly absurd and false: So nor can it be evinced by this
place, that it is unlawful to resist such abuseing their power, by bodyly
force; for the text speaks no more against this, then against the other; and
yet the other is lavvful; and therefore so may this be, for any thing that is
here said: The one is resistance as well as the other, though not so great, but
majus and minus non variant speciem. And therefore, if this text to not
condemn all resistance, it cannot be evinced that it condemns the resistance
vvespeak of.

3. Not withstanding of the Resistance that here seems to be prohibited; yet
we know that the Senate not only resisted Nero, but proceeded against him by
way of open justice, deposed him, and condemned him for tyranny, adjudging him
to have his head fastened to a forke and so to be publickely whipped to death,
and then precipitated from a rock, but he escaped and killed himself (as
historians say:) and in this fact they are approved by learned politicians, and
lawyers. See Bod in de Repub. lib. 2: c. 5. So that either he must say that
Nero was not the higher power, who might not be resisted, but that the Senate
was above him; or that such as justify the Senate are in an error, and so he
must condemn them for what they did, without any color of reason.

4, This text will no more plead against resisting of Superious powers, then
against resisting of inferior Magistrates: For the text speaks of all in any
supereminency: It speaks of powers in the plural number: see the dutch annot
on the place: and Peter mentions inferiors as well as the Supreme. Now will
the Surveyer say, that in no case, it is lawful to resist even by force, the
inferior Magistrates? will he say that we may not oppose them when abuseing
their power: And if he grant that in some cases, inferior Magistrates may be
resisted, he must also grant that this text does not forbid or condemn all
resistance to he higher power; but only a resisting of legal and lavvful
commands, whether by disobedience or by arms.

5. Though we cannot say, that the Apostle is speaking here always of the
ordinance of Magistracy in the abstract, so as altogether to exclude the
persons invested there with; yet we think it hardly saife to say, that there is
nothing here to be understood of the abstract office; as when he speaks of
the original and rise of the office, and of the end and proper native effect
thereof, it is more proper to understand that of the office in abstracto, then
of the Supposita so invested. Next whatever is required here as due to the
Supposita, it is upon the account of the office, with which they are invested,
and in so far, and no further: And therefore though the office and ordinance
cannot be resisted, yet the person who is there with invested, may be
resisted, not as he is invested, but as he abuses the power, and so devesteth
himself: for as he abuses the power he cannot be looked on as invested there
with, in so far; especially if he abuse it in the maine and principal ends for
which it was appointed: for then he is de jure and upon the matter utterly
divested thereof. Further whatever subjection is due to the person, it is upon
the account of the office, which he bears; and no more subjection is due to
him upon that account, then is due unto the office it self, or to the civil
legal authority which is imported by the abstract word (if so much, seeing, a
quo quidquam est tale, id ipsum est magis tale.) Therefore the subjection
which is not due to the office, cannot be due to him: Now subjection is due
to the office as it is the office: And an abused office is not the office, Ergo
that subjection is not required to the abused office which is due to the
office. Ergo nor is it due to him who abuses the office. The office will not
vvarrand a subjection to that which is not the office; and an abused office is
not the office.

6. The submission or subjection here required, is not unto Tyranny, or Tyrants
who abuse their power unto the destruction of the Commonwealth, and to the
ruin of the Subjects as such: For, such are not the ordinance of God (nor
ordained under God, but opposite to God) unto which alone, the subjection here
spoken of, is due. Gerhard de magist. polit. n. 54. Tells us that the apostle
does acurately distinguish betwixt the power, and the abuse of the power;
and says the power itself, and not the abuse of the power is of God; and
also, that he distinguishes betwixt the office it self, and the person in
office: the person often by fraud, violence and falsehood and other evil means,
by cruelty and tyranny, both assumeth the place, and exerceth the office, and
in this respect is not of God Hos. 8: 4. 2. The resisting of Tyrants cannot
procure damnation unto the resisters, because they have violated no command. 3.
Such are not a terror to evil works, therefore submission is not due unto them
as such. 4. Such will not give praise to such as do well; but that is the
power which is not to be resisted, of which we are to be afraid, and of
which we shall have praise while we do that which is good. 5. He is not to
be resisted who is the Minister of God for good. But Tyrants, Neroes who
wished that all the Romans had but one Neck, that he might cut them all off at
one blow, are not ministers of God, in so far, but ministers of Satan. 6. Such
are not the revenger who bears the sword to execute wrath upon him that does
evil, but rather imployeth the svvord to destroy such as do well, to subvert
Laws, Religion and all that is good: Therefore it is not of such as such, that
the text speaks, when it says we must yield Submission. 7. As it is not upon
the account of their playing the tyrant, and overturning Religion, Liberties
and Subjects, that tribute is to be paid to them, so nor is subjection to be
yielded unto them, in all points, but as they are God's Ministers attending
continually upon this very thing, to suppress wickedness, and promove
godliness. 8. Nor is it upon any other account, that fear, honor, and custom
is to be given unto them. And so the text considers these powers, to whom
subjeciton is due, not as Tyrants, or as abuseing their power to the ruin and
destruction of all; but as carrying themselves as the Ministers of God, for the
ends appointed, and not as the Ministers and ordinance of Satan. Therefore not
vvithstanding of any thing in this Text, such may be resisted, or rather their
Tyranny may be resisted, which is not, nor never was ordained of God, and
which is diretly opposite unto, and no part of that power ordained of God.
And though Nero and some others were real Tyrants, yet neither does the text
name him, nor does it press subjection to tyranny in any, for less to his
Tyranny; but only subjection to the powers that are of God, and ordained of
him, of which there might have been some who were not Tyrants, even when Nero
was playing the Tyrant; And it is as rational to understand the text of those,
as of Nero or such like. However we find subjection is pressed to the power
which is ordained of God, and that is not the power as it is abused. From all
which it is clear, that it is not the supposita, but supposita as such, which
are not to be resisted, or such as carry in a due subordination unto God, seeing
all the Apostles arguments press only subjection unto such, and not unto
Tyrants, who are a terror to good works, and a praise to such as do evil and
not the ministers of God, nor revengers to execute wrath upon such as do evil,
but rather on such as do good neither do they attend upon this thing whereof
the Apostle speaks, and are so far from being the ordinance of God, that they
are resisters Themselves of Gods ordinance, by making laws contrary to God's
law, and punishing such as observe God's law. It cannot therefore be more
sinful to resist such, then to resist a deputy persecuting such as keep the
King's laws, and making laws of his own directly contrary to the King's
laws; for he is the Rebel and the resister of God's ordinance, and not they
who are faithful to their Sovereign.

To this he makes some reply Page 37. and [ (says) It has been often
granted, and still is, that no man or Magistrate on earth, has a moral power,
commission or command from God to do evil, or to afflict any unjustly, 2. The
question is not concerning the Magistrat's duty, but anent the Subject's duty,
in case through the permission of divine providence, the Magistrate abuse his
place and power, in unjust afflicting the innocent; whether the private Subject
may use violence against, or upon the Magistrate, or should rather submit to
suffering, (though unjustly) not for reverence to the abuse of the power, but
in reverence to God, whose ordinance the power (which he abuses) is] Answ. 1.
If Magistrates have no moral power, commission, or command to do evil, The
resisting of that evil is no resisting of any moral power from, or commission
given by God; as, if they have no power to command evil or sin, resisting of
that command by nonobedience, is no resisting of their power or commission. 2.
Though the question should not be concerning the Magistrate's duty, yet we are
to enquire, what that power is, against which, Subjects may use no violence. 3.
If Subjects be bound not to use violence, but rather submit to suffering when
the power is abused, not for reverence to the abuse of the power, but in
reverence to God, whose power it is: Why shall they not also be bound, rather
to yield obedience to, then to resist by non-obedience, unlawful commands,
though not for reverence to the abuse of the power, yet in reverence to God,
whose ordinance the power which is abused, is; as he says? Sure the text here
makes no difference, and if there be any difference he must prove it from some
other text, which we have not yet seen, nor expect to see in haste. 4. We have
showed already, that, he says without ground, that the abused power is of God,
or his ordinance. But there after, says he, [ And although the spirit of God
in describing the Magistrate says, he is the minister of God etc. It is not
meant that that is the formal reason of subjection to him, (in the full
latitude of subjection) nor that the Magistrates then existing and in being, to
whom the people are commanded to be subject, and forbidden to resist, were such
de facto in all their actings -- but what the Magistrate is ex officio, and
what he should be de jure.] Answ. 1. He seems to distinguish here betwixt a
subjection in it is full latitude, and a subjection not in it is full latitude;
but how does he explain this distinction, that we may know what to make of it?
He seems also to grant that some subjection, though not subjection in its
full latitude, has that description of the power, for it is formalis ratio,
formal reason: But what can his meaning be, seeing the text makes no
difference? Is this his meaning, that subjection active, or active obedience
has that for it is formal reason, so that the subject is to obey no power, but
that which is for a praise of the good, and a terror to the evil etc. But
subjection passive or passive obedience goes upon another ground, and must be
yielded to a Magistrate even when he is not a minister of God for good? If this
be his meaning; it is but a shameful begging of the question: and if he grant,
that any subjection is due to the Magistrate, only as he is a minister of God,
we are gainers; for he can never prove the other from this text; and subjection
here is considered and pressed in its full latitude; and these are laid down
as the grounds thereof. This we may saifly aver, until he demonstrate the
contrare, which we despair to see done; especially seeing the text fully
clears the same: For as subjection in its full latitude is pressed, so all
the Apostle's arguments, and motives, speak to it in its full latitude: There
is no power but from God, presses whole subjection; because the whole power is
from God, and not a part of it alone: and therefore it must speak to all the
relative parts of subjection. So the other argument. v. 3; taken from the end
of Magistracy, speaks to the whole of submission in its full latitude: and
also the other argument take from the nature of his office: and so the rest. So
that all the motives or grounds of subjection, which are here made use of,
speak to all the parts of subjection: And therefore if they be the formal
reason of one part thereof, they must be the formal reason of the whole. 2. We
do not say, that all the Magistrates then existing were de facto such as they
were bound to be de jure (nor can we say that they were all like Nero or
Caligula) nor dar he say that subjection in its full latitude, as comprehending
as well active as passive obedience, commonly so called, was to be given to
Nero and his like, or was here commanded to be given: and what has he then
gained? But it is like all alongs he takes subjection for passive obedience.
But 1. can that be subjection in its full latitude? 2. Was that the maine thing
controverted then? 3. Does the motives speak to that alone? 4. How will he
prove that passive obedience is here spoken to at all; since all the
particulars mentioned are actions, and duties of action? What says he further?
Page 32. [The Apostle speaking of the person invested with power, calling him
the Minister of God for good, no terror to good works, but to evil, a praiser
of good, etc. shows only what a Magistrate should be ex officio and is de jure;
but lays not this as the ground of subjection and non-resistence to him but
this, that he is a superior power ordained of God: if he abuse his place, he
is to answer to God for it, but the abuse of the power in a particular, does
not nullify the power, or make it no power -- he abides invested with authority
-- subjection of one sort or another is due to him, because he is in officio,
not because he abuses his office.] Answ. The Surveyer gives us here a new
Analysis of the text, that no commentator has hither to thought upon: no
motive, according to him, is here made use of, except one, and yet none can
read the place, but they will find it otherwise: Sure the causal for, ver.
3, and 4. is as clear a ground of a motive as the for v. 1, 2. By his way all
the rest of the arguments used ver. 3, 4. have no influence on the subjection
and non-resistence pressed; and yet the text gives this reason why such as
resist the power receive to themselves damnation viz. for Rulers are not a
terror to good works but to the evil, etc. and this, with what follows has
no small force to press submission, and non-resistence. 3. It is true if he
abuse his place, he must answer to God for it, but that will no more prove
that passive subjection, or obedience (as he calls it) is always due to him,
then it will prove that active obedience is always due unto him. 4. We grant
that the abuse of the power in a particular does not nullify the power; Yet,
when the abuse is such, as destroys the maine ends of the power, sure if it be
not wholly, it is in a great part, nullified de lure. But whether the power be
nullified or not wholly, it may be resisted in case of necessity, when it is
palpably abused: For then the power which is of God, is not resisted: But only
the abuse of the power, or that which is not the power ordained of God. 5.
Subjection, it is true, of one sort or another is due to him because he is in
officio, and therefore so long as he is in officio, he is to be acknowledge to
be in officio, and to be obeyed in things lawful: Honor, reverence, tribute,
and custom is due to him, and, in matters of smaller moment, his penaltyes are
to be endured, when there is no fair way to shun them: But hence it will not
follovv, that he must never be resisted, even when he intends nothing but the
destruction of Libertyes and Religion; and overturneth the ends of government,
and crosses the maine and principal ends of his office and power. Then he
tells us ibid. [That among many things wrong Lex Rex has that true word Page
325. We are to suffer evil of punishment of Tyrants, some other way, and in
some other notion, then we are to suffer evil of equals; for we are to suffer
evil of equals, not for any paternal authority they have over us, as certanely
we are to suffer evil of Superiors Thus he. And this is all we require to
suffer evil of the Magistrate or superior, without violating his person, upon
the account of his paternal authority, which (though in a particular abused hic
and nunc) remains the ordinance of God: and in a respective reverence to that
ordinance wherewith they are invested, we are humbly to suffer wrong from them
(if we cannot by petitions move their for bearance) neither justifying in our
consciences the wrong which they do to us, nor judging them to have a
commission from God, as to this wrong doing, but regarding both God's
providence, and God's ordinance in their persons which cease not to be his,
although abused in a particular act toward us.] Answ. 1. It is strange how
this corrupt fountain, as he calls it else where, Lex Rex can send out good
and svveet waters? 2. Lex Rex is there answering this quaestion: whether any
passive subjection at all be commanded as due to superiors, Romans 13. And
answers. [1. None properly so called, that is purely passive, only we are
for fear of the sword, to do our duty. 2. We are to suffer ill of punishment of
Tyrants, ex Hypothesi that they inflict that ill on us, some other way, etc.]
Now what it there here that makes for him? Says Lex Rex that we are to
suffer absolutely all the evil of punishment, which they would inflict upon
us? No such thing says he. 3. If he seek no more then what Lex Rex says
here, we are agreed; but sure he must then recall what he has formerly said.
4. Ay, but says he, this is all we require, to suffer evil of the Magistrate,
without violating his person, upon the account of his paternal authority: But
1. there is a difference betwixt suffering evil indefinitly and absolutely, and
suffering evil ex Hypothesi that it be inflicted: Lex Rex said this last, and
not the former. 2. We may refuse to suffer evil of the Magistrate without
violating his person: every resistance of unjust violence offered by
Magistrates, is not a violating of his person, nor necessarily accompanied
therewith; for the violence resisted, may be, and often is, committed by his
Emissaries. 3. Though we are bound to suffer ( ex Hypothesi that we do suffer)
of Tytants upon the account of a paternal authority; yet it will not follow
that such may not be resisted; for though the Son is to suffer evils at the
hands of his father, when he inflicts these, upon a paternal account; yet in
some cases, the parent may be resisted, even by the Children, as is said. 4. No
respective reverence to the ordinance does absolutely bind us to suffer; for he
will grant we may flee; and here he says, we may by petitions move a
forbearance. 5. What if the evil be great and imminent, and flying is not
practicable, and not only there is no moving of forbearance by petitions, but
very supplicating is discharged under highest pain? Are we then humbly to
suffer that wrong, and so give up all our Necks, our Liberties, and our
Religion to the lust of a Tyrant, without any resistance? This is the
quaestion, and we are waiting for proof of it. 6. It is true when providence so
orders matters, that we cannot shun suffering, then we are to regaird both
God's providence, and respect that ordinance which is abused, and so suffer
such evils of these, under another notion, then of equals; and yet it will not
hence follow that we are absolutely bound to suffer, and never allowed to
resist.

Thus we see in end, (which I would have the reader specially to notice) that
he cannot urge this place against us; but he must the same way hence enforce an
absolute and universal obedience in all things whatsomever; and also condemn
other Royalists, and it may be himself also; Who, as we heard above, did grant
it lawful, in several cases, to resist Tyrants. Yea and condemn that which
formerly he durst not positively condemn, viz. resistance by the Parliaments
and primores Regni, and thus also condemn Calvin, and other divines, granting,
and positively affirming this: all which, though we had said no more, is enough
to cut the sinew of any argument which he has adduced, or yet can adduce from
this passage; and so we pass to examine his other grounds for absolute
submission.

CAP. XIV.
The Surveyers grounds for absolute Submission to suffering, taken from the
primitive Christians, and reason, examined.
Our Surveyer, comes next to speak of the example of the primitive Christians
Page 38. etc. and this he must usher in with his ordinaire jeers, and ground
less reflections, telling us that His opinion has been the common sense of
the generation of God's children before this fiery iron age; and that their
sober examples, are of more weight and imitation, then the furious practices of
any of late, whereunto they have been inflamed by the doctrines of popular
parasites and fierce demagoges, such as this libeller and his accomplices. But we
have found, and possibly may yet find further, how far he is mistaken in this.
And in deed in some respect, this may be well called a fiery iron age; for I
believe since Christianity was heard of, there was never so much obduration of
consciences, so seared with hot irons, and inflammed with rage against piety,
fidelity, truth and uprightness of heart, as is this day: It were well to be
wished hat this Surveyer and his accomplices would take either the example of the
Prophets, or Apostles, or of these sober Christians, who lived nearest to the
light of the Apostles times, and learn after their example to be more sober,
and constant to his principles; sure he will not find in their practices, so
much perfidy, treachery, debauchednesse, hatred of piety, persecution of truth,
and of the godly, as both he and his accomplices are notoriously guilty of. Will
he find among them such court parasites, such patrons of Apostafy, such authors
of rebellion against God, such Tyrannogogues, and base flatterers, as he and
his fraternity are? Will he find in all their writings such bitter invectives
and reproaches against the way of God, and his People, as may be seen in these
fevv sheets? Will he find such commendations of tyranny, oppression, bondage
and siavery, as if it were nothing but the compound of justice and equity? But
we come to the purpose.

The sum of his argument is this, That though by the testimony of Tertul.
Apolog. cap, 1. 33. and 37, and Cyprian. ad Demetrianum. It is apparent, the
Christians wanted not might to raise arms, against the Emperors; yet they
never used any resistance either for the defense of themselves, or for
therescueing of their oppressed brethren: Yea even after that in Constantin's
days, Religion had been legally established, and the Christians able enough to
defend themselves, yet they used no violence against the Arrian and Apostat
Emperors who succeeded: Under the persecuter Maximinian there was the Theban
Legion consisting of 6666. who yet did not resist him: and that the greatest
part of the army, under Julian the Apostate, was Christian, appears by their
general outcry at the reception of Jovinian, nos sumus Christiani, yet did they
never oppose him width force.]

To which we answer.

1. Though this Surveyer would appear tobe a man of a very meek and Christian
disposition, and cries out of such as are not of his opinion, as men of the
fiery iron age; yet, though we will not take upon us to judge his heart, any
may see part of his scope and intention, in mentioning this argument, to be
this, That we may be reasoned into a perfect stupidity and insensibility, and
the King encouraged to contrive and prosecute an Eleventh persecutoion, on all
who profess the Name of Jesus, in his three dominions: For what end else does
he adduce the example of the primitive Christians, who would not resist the
Emperors their bloody Emissaries, sent out to put into execution their cruel,
inhumane and barbarous Edicts, and to fulfill their lust and desire, to
extinguish the very Name of Christians; but to sing us a sleep, so that if the
King will, the may command his bloody and cruel Emissaries, to make amassacre
on all that will no abjure Christ and his interest, and cut all their throats
in a few days, without the least fear of opposition? If this be not his
design, let him tell me, what he would have Christians doing, in case such a
thing as this should be? Would he have them resisting, or only holding up their
throats to the bloody executioners? If he would not have any resistance made,
even in this case, then we see what his principles drive at, and many may judge
what a cruel bloody heart he must have. If in this case he would allow a
resistance, where is the force of his argument then? To what purpose is their
example adduced? and what becomes of his insolent exclamations. O silly,
foolish, and feminine Christians then! and o illuminated, masculous and martial
Spirits of Christians now!

2. He may remember what he tells us, when he is speaking to the instances of
resistance adduced out of Scripture, Page 67. That every example recorded in
Scripture is not imitable: And may not we say here, That every example recorded
in Church History (far more fallible then Scripture, and far less to be
regairded, seeing what things are recorded in Scripture, are written for our
instruction) is not imitable. So that reduce this argument into form, it will
quickly evanish; for it must stand upon this medium. That what ever the
primitive Christians did, lays a binding obligation upon us; But this is
false, as we shall undenyably evince; and where is then the force of the
argument? Though it appear plausible and taking, yet when pressed it does
evaporat.

3. If their practice be a binding precedent in this matter; so must it be in
all other things: and particularly it must be unlawful for us now to resist, in
our own defense, a raseal multitude, assaulting us with stones in the open
streets, against all law and equity; for Tertullian in the same place tells us,
that they would not resist the Inimicum vulgus the common people, who was
maliciously set against them, and did invade them with stones and fire, suo
jure with out any kind of law or judicial procedoure: Yea Tertullian puts no
difference betwixt the Emperors and mean persons, in point of resistance;
Saying, Idem sumus Imperatoribus, qui and vicinis nostris, male enim velle,
male facere, male dicere, male cogitare de quoquam ex aequo vetamur. Quodcunque
non licet in Imperatorem, id nec in quenquam, we may do no more, whether in
word, thought, or deed against any whatsomever, then against the Emperor. But
who will say that in this, their practice or judgment is to us a binding
precedent? 2. Several of these Fathers thought it unlawful to kill in their
own defense. See A(...) bros. de Offic. Lib. 3. cap. 4. and Augustine also
Epistola ad publicolam, 154. and Lib. 1. de Libero Arbitr. cap. 5. And yet this
cannot now be maintained as a truth; See the contrare proved by Rivet. in 6.
Praec. oper. Tom. 1. Page 1391. 3. Private Christians, not only refused to
resist violence with violence, but they refused also to flee from the fury of
persecuters, when they might saifly have done it, Potuimus (says Tertull. in
Apolog.) and inermes nec rebels, sed tantummodo discordes soltus divortii
invidia adversus vos dimicasse, etc. That is, naked as they were, they might
have removed themselves to some other part of the world, and they would not.
Yea Tertullian did condemn flight in time of persecution, in his Book De fuga
in persecutione. But will any condemn this practice now, or think it unlawful,
or unbeseeming Christians to flee from the fury of enraged persecuters? Sure
this Surveyer does often grant it to be lawful. It seems then that either he
has catched some error in his head, that is not Christian (as he speaks of
us, Page 39.) or all which the primitive Christians maintained in opinion and
practice, was not so Christian as to be perpetually obligeing. 4. The primitive
Christians ran to martydome, when neither cited, nor accused, as is seen in Fox
his Acts and Monum. Vol. 1. Will any say that Every Christian is bound and
obliged to do so now? How then shall their mere example be obligeing in the
other practice? 5. The primitive Christians would not bow their knees upon the
Sabbath Days nor eat blood. Must that example of theirs perpetually oblige us
now? 6. Yea it was the opinion of Ambrose, Libr. 5. Orat. in Auxenti^^, that no
arms should be used by him against the Goths who then invaded Italy, to waste
and destroy the same, but tears: will it hence follow, That a Churchman may
defend himself against open invading enemies, no other way now, but by tears;
because he said, Aliter nec debeo, nec possum resis^ere?

4. The Anabaptists make use of this example of the primitive Christians to
disprove the lawfulness of war, as may (...) seen in Gerhard upon that head:
and would this Surveyer have us yet more Anabaptists, then he (wickedly and
falsely) alleges we are, in his bitter preface? It seems he would join hands
with the Anabaptists as to this, and upon that accountvve have as good ground
to call him an Anabaptist, as he has to call us, Iam sumus ergo pares.

5. He cannot show us, that these Fathers did account it unlawful, simply in
point of conscience, to resist Emperors wickedly persecuting: They hold forth
no scriptural ground condemning the same, but rather seem to say that it was
out of a desire of Martyrdom, which (as Sulpitius Sever us says) they sought
for more earnestly, then in his days men gaped for Bishoprics; and therefore
they willingly yielded up their lives and all, to the cruel rage of
persecuters, that they might obtain the crown of Martyrdom, It is true,
Tertullian says, Apud istam disciplinam magis occidi licet quam occidere. But
this says not that it is simply sinful t kill in self-defence: but that they
choosed rather to be killed or martyred.

6, Though we shall not go about to call in question the truth of Tercullian's
narration concerning the number and power of Christians in his time (and yet Mr
Goodwin in his Antica^valierisme makeyth it very probable that he was mistaken
in his computation, if he did mean it through the whole Empirre. Or that if
it was so, it was not known to the Christians, and so it was all one, as to
resisting upon that ground.) Yet we may say, That there might have been many
things, which in prudence might have made them to forbear to go to an open
war, or rise in arms against the Emperors, even this, that the Emperors
alvvayes had a greart militia, many and strong armies on foot, against which,
for naked persons (though many) scattered up and down the Empire, having fevv
or none to command or lead them forth to battle in their defense, to rise in
this case, had been no probable mean of saifty to themselves, or of defense;
but rather a mean to provoke the Tyrant more, and procure unto themselves more
sudden death and destruction. So that not withstanding of their number,
their capacity to effectuat such an interprise, was but small and very
improbable.

7. The ancient Christians were not so utterly ignorant, nor so void of
humanity and Christian love and Zeal, that being able to help, they would
suffer their brethren to be drawn to death; what ever this Surveyer says:
but some times they rescued the oppressed out of the hands of the oppressors:
For we read that about the year 235. certane men inhabiteing Ma^eota with
force resued Dion^sius of Alexandria out of the hands of such as were carrying
him away. So about the year 342. the good People of Alexandria did with force,
defend Athanasius. About the year 387. the People of Caesaria did defend Basil:
See Nazianz Orat. 20. And also the People of Samosata purposed to retain their
Bishop Eusebius Pius banished at the command of Valens the Emperor, had not
Eusebius himself restrained them. And about the year 356. the People of
Constantinople did in like manner stand to the defense of Paulus: see for this
Blondel's Scholia in Grot. de Imp Sum. Pot. Page 65.

8. Before Constantin's days, none of the Emperors owned or professed the
Christian faith, so that religion was not then established by laws, as our
Religion is: and therefore all that Tertullian or Cyprian say, comes not home
to our case: Yea Tertullian says they were but a number of strangers, exteri
sumus, says he, and vestra omn^o implevimus.

9. Though it is true that when Conflantine obtained the Empire, Christian
Religion was more secured and established then formerly, yet did not the
succeeding Emperors when they came to the throne, swear to maintain the
same, and all who owned it; they did not receive the imperial crown on these
terms; nor were the subjects bound unto them on these conditions; and so the
instances adduced after Constantin's days, suit not our case, wherein Religion
is become not only a legal right of the People, but a fundamental right, and
the maine clause and condition of the compact betwixt Magistrate and Subject,
as has been said.

10. As for the Christians not resisting the Arrian Emperors, it speaks
nothing: For, that controversy was long under debate, even in Constantin's
days, and decreased nothing, for all the sentence of the Nicene Council, which
passed against it; and hereby Bishop was against Bishop, Province against
Province, Council against Council, and at length all the world almost was
turned Arrian. What wonder then that there was no general opposition made
against these Arrian Emperors, when their Subjects embraced the same delusion?
And as for particular oppositions, we shall see some instances afterward.

11. As for the Theban Legion, their non-resistence speaks nothing to our case,
for then Religion was not settled by law. 2. For six thousand, six hundred,
sixty six men to interpise a war against the Emperor and al his army, had
neither been an act of prudence nor policy. 3. When he tells us that they
offered themselves willingly to be butchered, holding up their naked bodies to
the Emperor's bloody emissaryes, we see what he would have all the honest
People of Scotland doing this day, even going with ropes about their necks, and
with open breasts, to the Kings bloody Emissaryes, that they may murder them
all. O But this man must have a blood-thirsty heart.!

12. That all or ^he most part of Iulian's army was Christian is but supposed
not proved; It was but a small part that being deceived by him under color of
a largess, threw some frankincense into a fire secretly kindled in honor of
an idol, and finding the deceit arose from the feast prepared for them, and ran
through the market place, and cried we are Christians, etc. and called upon the
Emperor to kill and behead them, till he was enraged and banished them. And as
for that proof of it, that he adduceth, it is a non-sequitur: for it was the
souldeours affection to Iovinian, and earnest desire to have him Emperor,
after Iulian's death, that made them cry our we are Christians, when he was
refuseing to accept of the imperial dignity (for they compelled him, seyeth
Socrates Lib. 2. Cap. 19.) and for this cause to dissuade them from putting
that honor on him, Or because of his own unwillingnesse to command over
Iulian's army, which was Profaned with sacrileges, as Ruffinus says in his
history Lib. 11: Cap. 1. He told them he was a Christian, and that he would not
take on him the command of Heathens. See Historia tripartitae Lib. 7. Cap. 1.
and so supposed them to be all heathens: And therefore the sense of their
speech was only this: Since ye are a Christian we will be all Christians also,
take you the imperial throne notwithstanding of that. Moreover, though the
soldiers in Iulian's army should have scrupled at making resistance against
their Emperor and General, unto whom they were sworn as soldiers, it
speaks little to the point; for subjects are not so under their Sovereigns,
as Soldiers are under their Commanders and Generals, they are under the
General's pay, and so his servants, and are hired for his behoove, but the King
does not hire Subjects, nor are they his servants and under his pay, and he
stands otherwise obliged unto them, then the Emperor did to his soldiers:
finally Nazianzen in his Orat. 2. in Iulianum seems to say that the reason
why Julian the Apostate was not opposed, was, because they were not able For,
says he, Nos autem quibus nulla alia arma, nec Praesidia, praeter spem in Deum
reliqua erant, ut pote omni humano subsidio prorsus destitutis and spoliatis,
quem tandem alium aut precum auditorem, aut inimicorum depulsorem habituri
eramus quam Deum Jacob, etc. i. e. what could we do, but betake ourselves to
the God of Jacab, since we had no other arms, nor walls, nor strengthes, being
destitute and spoiled of all humane help: Sure this will not say much against
us, nor for our Surveyer* Yea he hinteth in his first oration in Iulianum, That
for fear of resistance and of crossing his end, the Apostate Julian would not
make open war at first upon the Christians, [ Nos enim (says he) si vis
inferatur, acriores obstinatioresque futuros, ac Tyrannidi obnixum pietatis
Tuendae studium objecturos cogitavit: solent enim fortes and generosi animi et
qui vim afferre parat contumaciter obsistere, non secus ac flamma, quae a vento
excitatur quo vehementius perflatur, eo vehementius accenditur. i.e. [If he had
used violence, he knew he had found us more peremptory and refractary, and
ready to have opposed to his tyranny a fixed purpose and endeavor to preserve
our Religion; for stout and generous spirits use to resist with greater
violence such as violently assault them, as a fire blown at by wind, the more
the wind beat^ upon it, the more it burns.] Which she was clearly that if
that Apostate had used force at first, he had met with opposition; and
therefore he thought it fittest by policy to weaken them, disarme them, and
subdue them, and then fall on them with force, and persecute them.

13 If we shall adduce some instances of the primitive Christians defending
themselves and their Religion by force, against the Emperors Emissaries,
whither will our Surveyer then send his soul? while he looked upon them as
altogether free of any such charge, he cried out Balaam-like anima mea sit cum
animabus veterum Christianorum but ere it come there, he must repent of what he
has done and said: But if their practice was suitable to ours, what will he
then do with his soul? for he will not have it with the late Christians, nor
can he now have it with the old Christians, and so it must go to a distinct
place; and so it will, if he repent not. But to our purpose. 1. Blondel, in the
forcited place, tells us, that about the year 310. The Armenians waged war
against Maximius, who was come against them with an army, because of their
Religion, and defate him. 2. S^crates in his Ecclesiastic history lib. 2. c.
30, (after the English translation) tells us [ That by the command of the
Emperor, and cruelty of Macedonius, it was proclaimed that the Churches of such
as embraced the creed, containing the clause of one substance, should be thrown
down even to the fundations, -- as soon as the commissioners for suppressing
the churches had given the onset, immediately a great number of Novatians, and
diverse others, which maintained the doctrine of one substance pulled down
that Church, removed it to another place, and there erected it again -- again
Macedonius (like the prelate of Galloway) understanding that there were many
both at Pophlagonia, and at Mantinium of the Novation opinion which could by no
means be commodiously removed by Ecclesiastical authority, procured that four
bands of soldiers at the Emperors commandment should be sent to Paphlagonia,
to the end the inhabitants might be terrified and thereby brought to embrace
the Arian haeresie. But such as inhabited Mantinium being kindled with an
earnest Zeal toward Christian Religion, went against the soldiers with
cheerful minds, and valient courage, after they had mustered together a great
host, they all marched forward to battle, some had taken in their hand long
hedging bills, some had axes, some other met by chance with rusty armor; when
they joined together and came to handigriping, many of the Paphlagonians were
beaten down, the soldiers (few only excepted) were slain every one.]
Moreover he tells us in the same place, when this Macedonius was about to
destroy the temple in which Constantine lay buried, and had a purpose to
translate the Emperors bones, the people withstood his interprize, and when
he got the bones carried into the Church where Acacius the Martyr was buried,
the multitude of the contrary side ran thither in haste; and this occasioned a
very great slaughter, so that the Church, and the porch, unto the street, was
running with blood, and full of dead bodies: and for this Macedonius got little
thanks of the Emperor. 3. in Hisioria tripartita Lib. 11. c. 15. It is told
us, How the Christians oppressed by Barabanes or Baratanes King of Persia, did
flee to the Romans to seek their help; upon which and some other causes a war
arose betwixt the Romans and the said King. It is true they made not head
against the King while they remained in his country, because they were not
able; otherwise they had not run to the Romans for help. Our Surveyer cannot
deny that they sought the Emperor's help, but he saves, This will not
necessarily Import that they stirred them up to invade their King in their
behalf, but that having come to them, they might have the help and benefit of
their protection. But whether they stirred up the Emp^rour or not, is not much
to the matter, seeing they came as suppliants and (as Socrat. says Lib. 7. Cap.
18.) craved that they would pity their case, and not suffer them to be so
oppressed; and the Emperor made this one cause of the war, which he
undertook against him; and was one of the causes (as the history tells us)
that made the Romans angry with them: and when the Persian King demanded back
his fugitives, it was ansvvered, they would not do that, yea and that not
only they would endeavor to set the suppliants at freedom, and deliver them
from their oppressors; but also that they would undergo any thing for the
good of the Christian Religion and (as socrat says lib. 7. c. 18.) they
purposed not only to aid them, but also with all might possible, generally to
maintain the quarrel in the behalf of Christian Religion. Again our Surveyer
tells us, that the Persian Kings had once submitted to the Romans. Which whether
true or false, is not mentioned in all this history, either as the ground
moving the oppressed Christians to flee to the Emperor Theodosius for help, or
moving Theodosius to wage war against them. And so by this example of
theirs, we see that oppressed subjects may run and seek releef from strangers,
when they cannot help themselves. Thus we see this Surveyer's argument is many
ways weak, and against himself. Moreover, 4. When Athanasius was forced to
flee out of Alexandria, and Gregorius was brought thither with armed soldiers,
and put in possession of the Church, the Citizens of Alexandria, not
withstanding of Syrianus the captane under the Emperor his being there with
five thousand armed men, were so displeased with what was done, that they set
St. Denis Church on fire See Socrat. Hist. Eccles, Lib. 2. Cap. 8. Or, cap. 11.
after the greek copy. 5. When the honest People at Constantinople had chosen
Paulus to be their Bishop after the death of Eusebius, the Emperor Constantius
sent Hermogenes the captain to thrust Paulus out of the Church, and when he
came to execute his commission with force, the People prepared themselves to
aid their Bishop, forced the house where Hermogenes was, and pulled him out by
the ears and killed him: See Socrat. Lib. 2. Cap. 10. 6. When Paulus was
again placed in Constantinople the Emperor sends Philip the president to
remove him, and to appoint Macedonius the Arian, in his stead. But Philip was
so affrayed of the People that he went straight unto the public bath called
Zenxippus, and sends for Paulus, and being in fear of the multitude, who being
suspicious flocked thither, conveyes him secretly out a back window: Then he
and Macedonius went unto the Church, and were guarded all alongs by soldiers
with naked swords, and when they came to the door, the throng was such that
they could not enter, till there were some thousands Killed. If Philp the
Emperors Lieutenant had not been afraid of the People; he had not done as he
did. So for fear of the People the Lieutenant of Valens the Emperor durst not
execute these fowrscore priests, who had come (...) supplicate the Emperor in
name of all the rest in Nicomedia, and were commanded to be killed by the
Emperor; See Socrat. Lib, 4. Cap. 13. all which says it was no rare thing for
People to resist even with force the Emperors Emissaries sent to execute his
unjust decrees. 7. Socrates tells us Hist. Eccles. Lib. 7. Cap. 14. how diverse
Monks inhabiting mont Nitria, espoused Cyril's quarrel, and coming to
Alexandria assaulted the Lieutenant in his Chariot with stones, so that his
guaird was forced to flee away. 8. About the year 404. when the Emperor had
banished Chrysostom, the People flocked together about the palace, so that the
Emperor was necessitated to call him back again from his exile, See Hist,
Tripare, Lib. 10. Cap. 13. 9. When Ambrose was banished by Valentinian the
Emperor, at the instigation of his Mother Iustina, the People did resist such
as came to carry him away, such was their Zeal for the truth, and love to their
injured Bishop: see Hist. Tripart. Lib. 9. Cap. 20. and they would rather lose
their lives, as suffer their pastor to be taken away by the soldiers, that
were sent to pull him out of the Church, and thurst him away by force. See
Ruffini Histor. Lib. 11. c. 15.

Now let the Surveyer tells us what he thinks of their practice? And if he think
their practice any other commentary to Romans 13. then our glosses; and if it be
any thing different from our practice, in these dregs of time, as he loves to
speak?

We proceed now unto his Reasons, which are but the same things we have heard
formerly. The sum of the first is this. [That doctrine cannot be of God,
which to the eye of sound reason, does unavoidably (if practiced) overthrow
God's order for settling Societyes, and open a gap to perpetual seditions
against Magistrates, -- and will please wicked malefactors well, being a
proclamatoin to them, when condemned, to violent the Magistrate -- for the
matter is referred to each particular person to judge of his own suffering,
and his discretive judgment must determine him to resist.] Answ. Here is a
heap of words, but no sinews of an argument, This man is good at catching poor
simple ones that cannot discern his tallacies: But such as are wise will smile
at his confidence in reasoning after this manner: For. 1. His doctrine, not
ours, overthrows God's order: It is God's order that Commonwealths be
preserved from ruin and destruction; that Magistrates should lay out
themselves, and all their power for the good of the Realm over which they are;
for as Ciecro says eo referenda sunt omnia its qui praesunt ali^s, ut ^i qui
erunt eorum in imperio sint quam beatissimi, and elsewhere ut gubernatori
cursus secundus, medico salus, imperatori victoria, sic moderatori, Reipublica
beata Civium vita proposita est. But by his doctrine, if the Sovereign will
(and how mutable and inclineable to tyranny the will of Princes is, all ages
has witnessed) The Commonwealth is remedylesty gone; if he will destroy the
same, there is no help; if he turn Tyrant (and one wreatched Counselor may in
a short time by ass a Prince, that is not otherwise well balasted, to this)
ruin is unavoydable. But by our doctrine, there is a remedy to preserve the
commonwealth from ruin; andmore regaird is to be had to this, which is the
end, then to the Prince who as such, is but a medium to this end* 2. Such as
plead for the good of humane Societyes, should as much labor to prevent the
utter overturning of the same, as to prevent seditions: Good physicians will
labor more carefully to prevent death, then to prevent a little distemper or
sickness; yea and will cause a distemper to prevent destruction: but this
montebank, if he procure with his prescriptions present ease, cares not though
the patient die the next day. But 3. How does our doctrine open a perpetual gap
to seditions? Because (says he) by our way every private person is made judge
not only his own actions, but of his sufferings, and he must suffer no more
then he thinks meet. But 1. would he have all the Subjects becomeing more
senseless and stupide then beasts? Would he have them casting away their soul
and judgment, that they should have no more use of their reason, to judge what
either is commanded or imposed by penalty? If he grant a judgment of
discretion in actings, how will he salve the Magistrat's credit and honor,
and prevent rebellion and sedition, if there be such a necessary connection
betwixt the exercise of this judgment and the consequent he dreameth of? For
disobedience is a resistance, as well as non-submission to the punishment. 2.
Though we allow to every one a judgment of discretion, yet we allow no man's
judgment to be the rule of his walking: We say not that an erring judgment is
a rule to walk by, and therefore we say that a subject is bound to obey the
Magistrates lawful commands, though he in his private judgment should account
them sinful; so we say he is bound to submit to punishment, which is just and
justly inflicted, though he judge otherwise: Yea we grant further, he is bound
to submit to unjust sentences patiently, when he cannot by fair and possible
means shun them. Yea moreover we grant that in matters of smaller moment, he
may lawfully bear with the loss of a little to redeem more, or save more
from hazard. But our question is, if the Body of a land or a considerable part
thereof, ought stupidly to submit to the loss of Life, Lands, Libertyes and
Religion, when not only they judge these to be in hazard; but when all who have
eyes in their head see it andit is undeniable, being written on all the Acts
and actings of these in power, and palpably and too too sensibly felt by all
such as desire to keep a good conscience, and to be kept free from the
rageing wickedness and aposrasy of this generation. 4. Though I know few
malefactors, who, when attached, arraigned and condemned, would not do what
they could to deliver themselves from death, though this question had never been
started; yet our doctrine will not warrant such to do violence to the
Magistrate: For we judge it not enough that they say they are innocent and
deserve on punishment. Our case is a case that is manifest and not our, and a
public injury avowed and maintained: And will he think that because a
Malefactor justly condemned to die, may not resist the Magistrate executing his
office, Therefore a Land may not defend themselves, against the Kings
Emissaries sent out to execute unjust sentences, tending to the ruin and
destruction of Religion and Liberties?

His 2. Reason Page 44. is in sum this [That by this way Magisirates in doing
their duty cannot be secured: for it is not enough to say, let Magistrates rule
rightly, and not oppress, because that in the holy permissive providence of
God, often the best princes are not best used -- some crossing of the will of a
forward, and furi^^s party, may move them to fancy there Prince a Tyrant, and
thereupon account themselves free to offer violence: And from resistance they
will go to revenge (the fury of evil consciences instigating them) -- in
histories it will be found, that hardly did ever people resist a prince, but in
end it came to revenge; and of times the best princes have been worst used, at
least as evil as the naughtiest, as may be seen a mong the Roman Emperors, and
Christian Emperors and Kings: and amongst our own Kings etc.] Answ. Lend us
this argument, and we shall see what to make of it. By his doctrine people can
never be secured from unjust violence, or from continual oppression and
slavery; for it is in vain to say, let them do that which is right, and
Magistrates will do their duty, for albeit it be true that faithful and honest
subjects, may in the way of their duty, expect from God that he will incline
the hearts of Magistrates to respect and encourage them; yet in the holy
permissive providence of God, it comes often to pass that the best people are
not best used by their princes: And this all histories both ancient and modern
abundantly demonstrate. This court divine is all for the secureing of the
Prince in all his tyrannies and oppressions; and speaks nothing for guarding
the saifty of the people, which is the end, for which Magistrates were
appointed: And this is to pervert the order of nature, so to secure the mean
as to destroy the end: For that is to make the mean the end, and no more the
mean. 2. We justify not Subjects as are unruly and seditious against good
Magistrates doing their duty; nor do we plead for Subjects riseing up in arms
against their Magistrates, for every small injury, or when they deviate in a
little from the right way: Let him grant to us, That subjects may oppose their
Magistrates, and resist unjust violence with violence, when, in stead of being
Magistrates they become wolves and Tigers; and in stead of being pastors of the
people, they become lions seeking to destroy and devour them; and when they
overturne the ends, for which they were appointed, and destroy the liberties of
the Subject, and overturne the Religion, which they were obliged and sworn to
defend, in their place and according to their power, and we desire no more. 3.
If any under pretext of repelling of violence, shall unjustly injure the
Magistrate, we approve not such, we justify them not, let them answer for that
themselves. This is nothing to our question: if he say that our doctrine
opens a gap to this, He is mistaken, for such as say that the sinful and
unjust commands of Magistrates should not b e obeyed, do not open a gap to all
disobedience, even in the most just commands. And since he will grant that
unjust commands ought not to be obeyed, let him close the door here, so that
from this there shall be no hazard of mocking the Magistrate, when commanding
just and necessary duties; And with the same engyne shall we close the door, so
that when we say that Magistrates destroying Religion, Libertyes and what is
dear to Subjects, may be resisted, we shall secure the Magistrate from violence
and opposition, when he keeps within his sphaere, and does his duty. 4. If
the matter pass from resistance to revenge, we approve it not; if the pride
and haughtiness of the spirit of Princes be the cause of this, let them see to
it, and labor to prevent it, by condescending to the just and equitable
demands of their oppressed and grieved subjects. 5. We do not deny but God may
stir up an Absolome and other conspirators against a Gracious David, for his
own holy ends. But, in ordinary providence it is to be seen, that good
Princes, while alive and when dead, have had more respect of their Subjects;
then others, who have been most flagitious and wicked: The books of the Kings
and Chronicles demonstrate this. That good Kings have been much honored and
reverenced while living, and much lamented when dead; and upon the contrare,
wicked King's have either been cut off, or when dead have not been desired,
nor burned with the burnings of their fathers, nor buried in the sepulcher of
their fathers, whatever forced submission and outward respect they might have
had while living. 6. As for the difference that God in his providence has put
betwixt Heathenish and Christian Kings see what Evagrius says Eccles.
histor. cap. 41. speaking against Zosimus, he has these words worth the
marking. [ Let us see if thou will, how the Emperors which were Hethnickes and
Panimes maintainers of Idolatry and paganism, and how on the contrary, such as
cleaved unto the Christian faith, ended their reign: was not Cajus Julius
Caesar the first Emperous, slain by a conspiracy? did not certane soldiers
with naked swords dispatch Cajus the nephew of Tiberius? was not Nero murdered
by one of his familiar and dear friends? Had not Galba the like end, Otho and
Vitellus, who all three reigned only Sixteen months? what shall I speak of
Titus whom Domitianus poisoned, although he was his own brother? what say
thou of Commodus? -- what shall I say of Marcinus? did not the soldiers use
him like a captive, about Byzantium, and cruelly put him to death? -- what
shall I say of Maximinus whom his own army dispatched -- were not Gallus, and
Volusianus murdered by their own army? had not Aemilianus the like miserable
end -- But since Constantine began to reigne-was there any one Emperor in that
city (Julian a man of thine own Religion-only excepted) that was murdered by
his own subjects?] It were an endless work to run through histories, and show,
how for the most part, (contrare to what he says) these Kings who have been
resisted by their Subjects, whether in the time of Heathenisme, or since
Christianity was professed, have been most flagitious and wicked? Sure, if we
should go no further but to our own history, we shall find this put beyond
all question, the Surveyer himself being witness, who says Page 78. that the
instances of opposition made unto the Scottish Kings adduced by the Apolog. were
but [ the insurrection of Nobles against the Kings, and violent oppressions of
such of them, as have been flagitious and tyrannous.] And thus he
contradicts, what he just now said. But to what purpose is all this stir? He
says, but can he prove, that we assert, That any party of the people, when
strong enough, may get up against the King and all Magistrates, when they judge
that they deal wrongously and injuriously with them? Sure the thing which we
affirm is far contrary to this, as has been often times showed. We know that
[ the evil wit of a seditious party can soon paint the Best King as a black and
ugly Tyrant] and we know also, that the evil wit of a hired court-parasite,
and bese flatterer can paint out the blackest Nero, or Caligula, or a
Heliogabalus, as a brave and virtuous prince. And this is nothing to our case,
when the acts of Tyranny and oppression, are as legible, as if written with the
sunbeams: It behoved to be strange virmilion that would serve to make the
apostasy, perjury, oppression and tyranny of the now Prince and Rulers, appear
whit and comely; and he needs no great wit who would painte out these
gross acts under the form of ugly Tyranny: Yet with all we shall willingly
grant to him, that, [All the fearers of God should rather endure some acts of
real tyranny, then by doctrine or practices of resistance, open a door to the
destruction of good Kings (by a party not of their spirit, but lurking under
their pretenses) and to the continual dissolution, concussion, and desolation
of humane societies] for this is not the thing we are against: Some acts of
Tyranny we are vvilling to endure, provideing he will grant us liberty both
to teach and practice resistance, when the acts of tyranny are not one or two,
but many; nor acts of Tyranny in smaller and less considerable matters; but
such as tend to the destruction of the true Libertyes of the Subject, to the
overturning of a Covenanted work of Reformation, svvorne-to by all ranks and
degrees of people; howbeit men of corrupt principles, and of another spirit,
should lurk under these pretenses. Is it not reasonable, that we also demand
of this Surveyer while he is in a good mood, That he would evidence so much
fear of God, as not to condemn resistance unto real tyranny, so as to open a
gap to all the ingrained and bloody Ner^es and such prodigious Canibales, to
waste and destroy at pleasure the best of Subjects. What follovveth concerning
obedience active and Subjection passive, has been spoken to formerly, and it
is needless fill up pages with repetitions, as he does: only whereas he
cites Apolog. Page 376, and 377. granting that subjection is necessary, and
supposes that this is repugnant to what Naphtali says, He would know that
he is in a great mistake, for the question there is concerning obedience in
things indifferent, or of submitting to the penalty, and that by a few private
persons; and though in this case a single person, who will not obey the
Magistrate in these matters must yield the penalty, and so acknowledge his
subjection, it will not follow that a multitude or a Community, forced under
intolerable penaltyes to acts of impiety and heinous transgression, and who can
defend their rights and just privileges palpably and iniquously violated, may
not repel such unjust force with force; and resist intolerable tyranny, abusing
the ordinance of God to all acts of wickedness, and to the overturning and
destroying the very ends of government? And to this Naphtaly speaks Page 28.
So that he but gives vent to his profane Spirit, to cry out, as he does Page
46. and say [ Good God! to what times are we reserved? to see so certane
truths, that may be reckoned among the immoveables of Religion, and the ancient
land marks removed, by an upstart furious Crew, who by their new principles (as
false as new) seek to confound both Church and State? The lawfulness of private
men's counter acting, and violent resistance to a whole Church and a whole
State, is a maine article of their new faith, and to do so is one of their new
commands added to God's.] For 1. It never was a certane truth, nor ever was
reckoned among the immovables of Religion (except by Court divines, andbase
flattering Sycophants, whose maine and only Religion was and is, to please the
King, that he might full their bellies) that absolute and illimited subjection
was due to Princes by the whole body of the People, so that if he should send
our Emissaries, like so many wild Bears, to kill Man, Wife, and Children,
Without color and pretense of Law or reason, People should do nothing but cast
open their breasts, and hold up their throats, that they may be devoured at
once: what sound Divine says so? What sound Divine puts this brutish
subjection among the ancient land marks? Yea what sober Royalist (that is not
with this surveyer intoxicate with Royal gifts, till his brains be cracked,
and his rationality brutified) dar positively aver that this is to be put
among the immoveables of Religion? 2. This principle which he calls new, and
as false as new, is an old truth verified by the practices of all ages, and is
as true as old; which he might easily see, if his new dignities and gifts had
not blinded his eyes, and made him as false and perfidious, as he is notour. 3.
He tells that our principle tends to confound both Church and State; because we
plead against Tyranny either in Church or State; a pretty reason: Because we
plead for that, which tends to the preservation of Church and State, in being
and purity; therefore we plead for confounding Church and State? whereas his
principle of Tyranny, in Church and State, is the readyest way imaginable to
destroy both, as has been seen by many sad and dreadful examples, before our
days. 4. This man who has perfidiously renunced his Covenant with God, and
avowed his perjury to all the World, and his palpable breach of, and casting
behind his heels the third command, talks of our adding new articles to our
faith, and a new command to God's; because we will not deny the principles of
nature, nor grant that freeborn subjects are slaves or brutes: And with him,
Tyranny is the ancient Landmark, and the chief point of his Religion, and a
maine article of his faith, and one of the grand commands of the time. But many
know at whose girdle his faith and his Religion hangs: But we will choose none
of his Religion, principles, articles of faith, or commands; For they change
with the Court: and we know Court Divinity is a coat of many colors, fair and
fashionable, but such as will neither keep from cold, nor cover our nakedness,
far less save from God's wrath in the day of accounts.

CAP. XV.
Some other Particulars, alleged by the Surveyer, against us, examined.
HAving in the two preceding Chapters answered his maine andCardinal
Arguments, our labor will not be great in confuteing what follows.

He says Page 22. We shake hands with any Papists, asserting that any person,
unjustly pursued by Magistrates, may defend himself by arms, and slay them if
he cannot otherwise escape, no less then Robbers or cutthroats. Thus Becan.
Tom. 2. contr. Tract. 3. quaest. 8. and Swarez. contra Reg. Angl. Lib. 6. cap.
4.. 6. So Aquin. 2. 2. qu. 70. Art. 4. c.] To which we answer 1. That the
question, which these Papists speak to, is different from ours: We speak not
concerning what a private single person may do when arraigned and unjustly
condemned, but concerning what a community may do, when unjustly oppressed and
persecuted by Magistrates, contrare to their trust and oath; 2. We speak not of
private persons killing Magistrates at their own hand; but of private persons or
a community their defending themselves against unjust violence: and this truth
which we maintain, was owned and practiced before ever any Papist put pen to
Paper.

Next he tells us, That Mr Calvsn is of another judgment, Inst. Lib. 4. cap.
20. 26, 31. To which we answer 1 Mr Calvin is asserting that wicked men may be
Magistrates, and that such, though wicked, while they are in office, should be
acknowledged as God's deputyes; for, (so says he. 25.) [ In homine deterrimo
honoreque omni indignissimo penes quem modo sit publica potestas, praeclaram
illam and Divinam potestatem residere, quam Dominus justitiae ac judicit sui
Ministris verbo suo detulit: proinde a subditis eadem in reverent: a
anddignatione habendum, quantum ad publicam obedientiam attinet, qua optimum
Regem, si daretur, habituri essent.] And in the following Sections shows that
such ought to be so accounted who are in the possession of the Throne, whatever
way they have attained to it, as Nebuchadnezzar (who yet was but the hammer of
the earth, Ierem. 50: ver. 23.) Belsazer, and the rest, of that Kind, and
therefore. 29. he says [ Hunc reverentiae atque adeo pietatis affectum
debemus ad extremum prafectis nostris omnibus qualescunque tandem sint.] And
would have us. 31. careful not to rub contempt upon, or to violent the office,
or ordinance of God, even in such; which we easily assent unto: Because that
this is not repugnant to a sinlesse self-defence, and resistance made to their
open Tyranny, when seeking to destroy Religion, Libertyes, and every thing that
is previous and dear unto the Subjects. It is true, some-where his expressions
seem to condemn resistance, but that which we have mentioned is the maine
thing he presses: and he does not speak to the case of resistance
particularly. 2. Though we should grant that in this particular Calvin is not
ours; yet the Surveyer must know that. 31. he is against him also, for the
Surveyer puts Parliaments and all inferior Magistrates in the same
condition with private Subjects; and yet Calvin says that such as are as the
Ephori among the Lacedaemonians; the Tribuns of the people among the Romans; and
the Demarchi among the Atheniens; and the Estates of Parliament, may and ought
to suppress the Tyranny of Princes: And so in this matter Calvin shall be more
for us then for him. 3. It would be noted, both in reference to the testimony
cited out of Calvin, and to the testimonies of other following, That the case
which they speak to, is different far from ours: For with us, both King and
Subject are bound in a solemn Covenant to God, to maintain and promote a work
of Reformation, and upon these terms did out King embrace the Scepter, and
became obliged by conditions unto his People: And sure more may be said for our
defending our selves, our Covenant, and our Religion, when unjustly persecuted
by the King, then for other private Subjects, who are (by Gods Providence) under
Heathen Princes, or conquerours, or under Princes of a different Religion, and
who have no security or immunity covenanted unto them by these Princes.

Then the cites some passages out of Peter Martyr's Loc. Com. Class. 4. Cap.
20. Page 680. etc. To which we answer, 1. The question which he moves Page
680. does not concern us: For there he says that mere private persons may not
depose Kings or Princes, or rise against them for this end, Vt eos a dignitate,
seu gradu suo deturbent. Now this is not our question, which is concerning
necessary self-defence in cases of extreme necessity. 2. He grants it lawful
to inferior Magistrates, who set limits to the Prince, if the Prince violat
his compacts, and break his Covenant, to force him to stand to his conditions,
eum in ordinem cogere, ac vi redigere, ut conditiones and pacta quae fuerat
pollicitus, complete, idque vel armis cum aliter fieri non possit. Our Surveyer
will not assent to this which Martyr says, notwithstanding he account him one
of the most learned of our Protestants. 3. It is true Page 682. he would have
private persons enduring a Tyrant, who commands contrary to equity, and good
laws, and suffer him patiently, as we are to suffer patiently sickness. But
who sees not, that notwithstanding of this patient submission, we may use
resistance, as we may use resistance, by all lawful means, to sickness and
diseases. 4. Though we should yield that such a Tyrant as he described should
not be resisted, viz. such an one as commands contra aequum bonum ac leges,
yet our case is different: For not only are there such acts of iniquity
commanded; but also Subjects are compelled by mere force and cruelty, to
consent to, and approve iniquous courses; and our Magistrates are in a singular
manner obliged to prosecute the Ends of a sworn Covenant, which the Subjects
desire to adhere unto, and for adherence thereunto, are persecuted in a most
inhumane and cruel manner. So that this is tyranny of a higher nature, then
what Peter Martyr speaks of.

In the next place he cites Rivet. in Decal. Page 233. and 235. But we
answer. 1. Rivet grants it lawful unto all, vim vi repellere to repel force
with force, a proves it. 2. In the place by him cited, he is speaking of a
private man's resisting the violence of another, who, if (under pretext of
exponeing the law of Nature) should avenge himself, privato appetitu vel
contumacia, or raise seditions against the Magistrates, he should but abuse his
power and liberty, and this we grant. But our case is of a Community, to which
Rivet speaks nothing. Yea 3. in the other place, though he will not have a
private person kill his Father or a Magistrate, in his own defense; yet he
grants it lawful to resist, so far as can be, to hinder our own destruction
[ Id (says he) nos absolute sontimus de Parente and Principe; quibus licet
quidem resistere, quantum id fieri potest, cum invadunt injuste; eo fine ut
impediamus perniciem nostram.] Whence it appears that Rivet is much for us;
for he acknowledges it lawful for a private single person to defend himself,
as much as is possible, from the unjust assaults of Princes, Much more then
shall it be lawful for a community to defend themselves against the King's
Emissaries.

After Rivet he cites D. Ames cons, cas. Lib. 5. cap. 20. But Doct. Ames
speaks nothing against us, for he is summarily holding forth what is the duty
of Superiors toward their inferiors, and of inferiors toward their
Superiors; and among the duties of inferiors, he reckons subjection and
obedience, but what calls he this subjection? Does he mean thereby a stupide
and absolute submission to all acts of Tyranny and opression? No, but such an
acknowledgement of their power and authority as has with it a care to preserve
the same unhurt. Now this is consistent with resistance in cases of necessity:
A community may defend themselves from unjust violence of Magistratees, and yet
attempt nothing against their just power and authority, but labor tenderly to
preserve the same. 2. It is true, that he says all violent insurrection is
opposite hereunto, and also contempt: But that is violent insurrection against
the power and authority, and not against the person who is abuseing his power
to the ruin and destruction of the Commonwealth; for no body will deny but
tyranny, and the Tyrant as such, may be despised and undervalued, without
vvrong to the power and authority if self. So may that be resisted without
violation of the power. 3. It is true he says that subjection may be, where
there is not obedience, but wherein says he does this subjection consist? In
submissa recusatione obedientiae, quando illicitum esse constat quod a
superiore mandatur; in a submissive refuseing to give obedience. And this is
some other thing, then a stupide submission to all acts of Tyranny. 4. This
same Ames Cap. 25. where he is speaking of Maagistrates and Subjects, and
showing the duty of subjcets unto them, puts subjection and obedience together.
16. Wherefore, as hence it cannot follow, because obedience is due unto them,
when they command things just and agreeable to God's Law; that therefore
obedience is due unto them, when they command things unjust and repugnant to
the Law of God: So nor will it follow, that because subjection is due unto
them, when their power is not abused to the destruction of the Commonwealth;
therefore subjection is due unto them or non-resistence, when they tyrannize
over the consciences, states and bodies of their subjects, and labor to
overturne all. 5. It is true he says Cap. 31.. 10. that the person invading
may be such, and there may be such other circumstances, as that the person
invaded may rather choose to die, as to Kill: But that speaks nothing to our
case, which is a resisting to the King's bloody emissaries, not by one private
person, but by a Community: And since D. Ames in the same Chapt.. 4. 5. etc.
thinks it lawful for a private person to defend himself even by killing the
aggressor, when there is no other remedy, he will abundantly justify our
practice. And likewise he allows this defense even in the behalf of others..
9. Recte etiam extenditur ad defensionem non tantum nost^um, sed and aliorum
innocentium: Hoc enim postula lex, ut proximum diligamus sicut nosipsos! And
therefore Amesius is much for us.

As for the two Papists Estius and Tollet whom he cites* they speak not
against us, who plead for the Liberty of self defense unto a Community against
the Magistrate, and not to every private single person; neither plead we for a
power of Killing Kings. And if they were against us he could not have much
reason to say, that we joined hands with Papists. Thus are all his authorities
from divines answered, let us see what he says further.

He tells us Page 25. 26. [That when Lex Rex had in severral places (such as
Page 313. 314. 322. 463.) vented that principle in reference to the civil
government, That no man is bound in conscience to subjection passive under
unjust punishments inflicted by the Magistrate, more then to active obedience
unto unlawful commands; and that passive obedience under unjust sentences comes
under no command of God? Yea that it is a sin against God's command to be
passively subject to unjust sentences, and that it it an act of grace and
virtue, for a man to resist the Magistrate violently, when he does him wrong:
and a self murder against the sixth command, not to resist when he offers to
take away the life without cause, though not without law: They were quickly
applied to the Church by this man and his party, who pleaded for non-submission
unto, and counteracting of all the judicatories, Whenever the persons
injured thought the sentence wrong -- and how well their practices in the
Church do homologate with their practices as to the State, we may now see; for
it is the way which they clearly own, that every person (when and so long as
they are able, or are in probable capacity, to act violently against the
Magistrate) ought to counter-act him violently, when he thinks the Magistrate
wrongs him (for this must be referred to every man's private descretive
judgment, as Naphtaly tells us Page 141. -- How contrary such principles and
practices of private men's non-submission to, and counteracting of Church
Judicatories (supposed to do wrong) are unto the Word of God; how subversive of
Church government; how introductory of schism, heresies and all mischiefs into
the Church, is well discovered by the learned Reviewer of the pamphet entitled
presbytery no papacy, etc. And with equal reason, may the same grounds be made
use of against this man's inciteing all private persons, to counteract the
Magistrate violently, when they think he does them vvrong, or when they account
their sentences unjust.]

Answ, 1. It is a poor defense of a weak and tottering cause, to follow such
courses as this Surveyer does. To wrest and wire-draw the sayings of his
adversaries, is neither a fair way of confirming his own opinion, nor a solid
way of confuteing his adversaries. He sets down some sentences here, as
assertions of Lex Rex: And if any will consult the places cited, they will
discover unhandsome dealing. I shall only set down what Lex Rex says, and
the Reader, when he compares, may judge. Lex Rex says Page 313. [ That
patient bearing of evil and resistance, are not incompatible in one and the
same person] Page 314. He says [ one act of grace and virtue is not contrary
to another, Resistance is in the Children of God, an innocent act of self
preservation, as in a patient suffering, and therefore they may well subsist in
one.] And ibid [Neither suffering formally as suffering, and so neither can
non-resisting passive fall under any moral law of God, except in two cases]
Page 322. [ when a man may preserve his own life, and does not that which
Natures law allows him to do, rather to Kill as be Killed, he is guilty of
self murder; because he is deficient in the duty of lawful self defense.] And
Page 463 [It is not dishononrable to the Majesty of the Ruler, that we deny
Passive subjection to him, when he punishes beside his warrant, more then it
is against his Majesty and Honor, that we deny active obedience, when the
Commands illegally.] I shall not trouble the Reader with words, to discover
the difference betwixt what Lex Rex says, and what this Surveyer alleges he
did say; seeing the judicious and observant Reader will Sine monitore easily
perceive it.

2. What the Surveyer drives at in making this parallel now, may be obvious to
any, even to imbarque with himself and his party, the few of those who were for
the Public Resolutions, that have hitherto gotten grace of the Lord to abide
faithful, and not to say a confederacy with all, with whom this Apostate
generation has now basely conspired, against Chirst and his interests. But we
hope that those few will be so far from intertaining their former prejudices
against their faithful and affectionat Brethren, who withstood these
Resolutions, and owned the Protestations; that on the contrare, perceiving
themselves mistaken as to what they feared, concerning the Protesters, as if
they had intended to overturn all discipline and Church government, and to side
with Sectaryes; since themselves have now seen some of them owneing the same
unto death, and becomeing a martyr upon the account of Church privileges, and
all the rest (scarce three of four excepted) abideing faithful, and suffering
upon that account unto this day; and since with all they see the fears of the
Protesters, concerning the inclination to Malignancy and Prelacy, of the far
greater part of these, who stiffly maintained these Resolutions, now verified
beyond all contradiction; and that their objecting, that the major part of the
Ministry was then corrupted, was too too true, and too well grounded, which
things, if these faithful men who now stand, had but suspected then, as now
they see with their eyes, they would, (we are confident) have forborne to have
sided with them in these debates, and much more heartily have concurred with
the honest proposals of the Protesters, for a through way of purging the church
of such corrupt naughty persons, as have now most basely betrayed the interest
of Christ, and departed from their profession and Covenant, and made that
Church a hissing and a byword to all nations, by returning with the Sow to the
puddle and with the dog to their vomit. These worthy men, I say, perceiving
now how far they have been mistaken not to their grief but to their joy (as
famous and zealous Mr Wood one of their number, did before his sickness, after
some heavy groans, plainly profess and declare to a credible person, yet on
life to verify the same, if any should question it) will be so far from owning
this man and his principles, that they will rather, (we hope) condemn their
former practices, if not altogether yet in so far at least, as it is now
visible they did tend, to the setting up of a arbitrary government and tyranny
in the Church, and are now improved by this Surveyer to confirm a Tyranny in
the state. Sure they now see, what some at least of these, who were very active
and forward to screw up that debate to the hieght, and to press and absolute
subjection, might have been driveing at under hand, though they made such fair
professions of their firm purpose to adhere to presbyterian government, as
moved others to entrust them with the management of their affairs at Court, and
while entrusted therewith, destroyed and overturned the whole government, so
that now they will be loath to say as the Reviewer did Page 5, 6. [ That the
innocence of his agency, to prevent the evils the protesters were endeavoring
to bring upon this Church, and his carriage and integrity in managing that
Trust, are so well: known at home and abroad, that we believe he needs not write
Apolog^ticks against the slanders of their tongue or pen.] And rather blush
when they read or remember this: and we are hopeful that such and the like
perfidious practices well pondered, will not only contribute much to reunite
them in hearty affection, unto their faithful Brethren now in the same furnace
with themselves, for the same cause and interest; but also cause them reflect
upon their former proceedings, and consider what a native tendency, that which
gave the rise to all that debate, had unto this, which is to day our sin, our
shame, and our Sorrow, that they may join with the Rest of the faithful of the
land, in mourning for such national sins, Whereby the wrath of God may be
turned away from us, and the Church restored to her former beauty and
integrity, in the Lord's good time.

3. It is Manifest, that this Surveyer, who ever he be, and some others with
him, had some other thoughts in their heads at that time, then they durst
express; and finding the far greater part of the Ministry corrupted, would
have had the rest resolving upon an absolute submission to all their
determinations, though they had been openly and avowedly to introduce prelacy,
yea and popery, and to have submitted to their summar censures of deposition,
and what else they thought good to inflict, without the least resistance or
counteracting, and thus to have patiently submitted, to see Christ and his
royal truths banished out of the land by ecclesiastical acts, and Popery and
Prelacy re-established by horrible iniquity: Though we were ever confident,
such as now through grace abide steadfast, had no such thoughts or intentions.

4. This Surveyer deals with all alike: as he misrepresented Lex Rex in the
civil debate, so does he now misrepresent the protesters in the Church-debate;
for when or where did they say, That persons were not bound to submit, but to
counter-act the judicatories of the presbyteriall government, whenever they
thought the sentence wrong and unlawful? Did they ever assert that a man's own
conscience, was the only vvarrand and ground of his submission or
non-submission, or of his obedience or disobedience?

5. So does he abuse and misrepresent Naphtaly, as any will see who
considers his words in the place cited, which are these. Now how a discretive
judgment in these cases, both of unrighteous commands, and wicked violence, and
specially in the later, which is (by far) the more sensible, does necessarily
remain with the people, and in what manner the same is to be determined and
cautioned, so as neither to license disobedience against authority, nor create
seditions in the Commonwealth, is already fully cleared.] This is some other
thing then to say, that al is to be referred to every man's private discretive
judgment, without any caution or limitation added or supponed.

6. Because it is not our purpose to revive that debate which was betwixt
the Protesters and the Public Resolutioners; but as we vvish it had never
been heard of, so we desire it may buried in perpetual oblivion; and that
hence forth there may be hearty joining in the cause and covenant of God, for
prosecution of all the ends thereof, according to our several capacities, That
so we may become one stick in the hand of the Lord, and renunce this apostasy,
and all courses tending thereunto, and so go on as before that un happy
difference broke out, with zeal, and unanimity. Therefore we shall forbear to
examine what that Reviewer, of presbytery no papacy, said: And though we find
that much of what the Surveyer says here, is borrowed from that Reviewer, and
is answered already as to our purpose; yet we find the Reviewer grant several
things, which will quite destroy the parallel, as to our case, and show the
Surveyer to have been but a fool in mentioning that pamphlet now. For 1. He
Page 104. says [ We do not urge submission, in this matter betwixt us, in
matters of doctrine, or articles of faith, in morshipe, government, nay nor
rules of discipline.] And so insinuats as much, as that if the Dogmatick and
Diatactick power of Christ's courts be abused, and corrupt doctrine and
practices pressed, he would not be for submission: And therefore upon this
ground, waves the arguments of the protesters, taken from the instance of
Athanasius not submitting to the Arians, deposeing him for asserting the
divinity of the Sone of God; and the 11. Arg. making a supposition of enacting
the Mass, and all the heresies of Rome, saying [ For when Church judicatories
deny homage to the Sone of God and return to Rome, We shall not debate the
point of non-submission only with them, but shall run from them as from
synagogues of Satan.] Upon this same ground he waves the argument 13. which did
show that this submission was prelatical: And the passage of our confession of
faith ratified An. 1567. which is thus, art. 12. [ So far as the Council
proves the determination and commandment that it gives, by the plain word
of God, so soon do we reverence and embrace the same; but if men under the name
of a Council, pretend to forge unto us new articles of our faith, or to make
constitutions repugning to the word of God, then utterly we must refuse the
same, as the doctrine of devils, which draws our souls from the voice of our
only God, to follow the doctrines and constitutions of Men.] So does he upon
this ground lay by what they said Page 49. [ That by this submission there was
no remedy, but that, at one stroke, the precious interests of Christ and
truths of God must be borne down, and buried in oblivion, and the Saints and
Ministers of the gospel be buried under the rubbish thereof.] As also their
Arg. 15. which did show, that this unlimited submission did [ Leave the Church
destitute of all Ecclesiastical remedies, in the case of a general defection,
and open a wide door for making the government of the house of God degenerate
into Tyranny, etc.] And their 2 Argum showing how contrary it was to Scripture,
and how hard it was to say that a man duly qualified, being suspended from the
Sacrament, or from the exercise of his Ministry, or excommunicated, because of
his pressing and holding forth some precious Truth of God, which a Church
judicatory condemns for a lie, should submit: And also their 8. Arg. Page
108. which was this [ What is denied jure to Oecumenick Councils, and so
lawfully called Prophets and Ministers of the gospel, to Nathan, to David, to
Paul, to an Angel from heaven Gal. 1: ver. 18. cannot warrantably be given to
General Assemblies. If -- they teach or decree not according to the word of the
Lord, we are to counteract, and to contradict Gal. 1: ver. 8. Therefore, etc.]
Now in all these cases the Reviewer would not plead for submission to Church
judicatories: Why then does this Surveyer plead for absolute submission and
unlimited to civil powers, since he is pleased to draw a parallel betwixt them?
But we see that evil men and seducers wax worse and worse. So that by the
Reviewer's concessions, we are not bound to submit when the higher powers
persecute us for truths sake, deny homage to the Sone of God, press the
approving of corruptions in the point of government, destroy the precious
truths of God, and interests of Christ, make a general defection and Apostasy:
And in a word, turn Enemies to the liberties of the People, destroy the
Covenanted work of God, oppress the Subjects in bodies, States, and
Consciences; and so cross the very ends for which they were appointed. 2.
The Reviewer Page 109, 110. though he would have submission, in the matter of
discipline, where the hazard is only personal, and a man's suffering is not
tanti as to disturb a well settled national Church, where doctrine and
vvorshipe are in their integrity; yet he thinks the case is of greater moment,
when a National Church in her judicatoryes introduces falfe doctrine, and
corrupt vvorshipe, to be imposed upon a Church: And so dar not affirm that
submission is in this case due. Why will not the Surveyer take notice of this
and grant so much in our case? We should readyly grant to him, that submission
might be yielded in smaller matters, when the hazard was only personal, and the
suffering of one, or of a few, was not tanti as therefore to disturb the settled
State, wherein the maine matters were kept in their integrity. But he cannot
in reason demand more of us, (if the parallel hold) or seek submission, when
Higher powers are overturning the precious Truths of God, and interests of
Christ, are destoying a glorious work of reformation, are pressing all to open
and avowed perjury, are destroying the fundamental rights, libertyes and
privileges of the Christian Subjects, and tyrannizing over their Estates, their
Bodies and their consciences. 3. So tender was the Reviewer that Page 115. he
would not urge submission to sentences of inferior courts, when appeals from
one judicatory to another could not be had; yet so untender is our Surveyer
that he will have absolute and unlimited submission yielded, when he knows
that not only is there no liberty of appeal granted, but not so much as liberty
to petition and supplicate, to get any thing that is amiss righted. Thus he
would have the whole land submitting to mere and cruel tyranny. 4. Page 129.
the Reviewer said [We never asserted a judicatory might be contra-acted in no
case, as we cleared before] far less will be affirm, that a judicatory may
not be contradicted in any case, ibid. How comes it then, that our Surveyer
does not follow the Reviewer's footsteps; but pleads for absolute and
illimited submission, in all cases vvhatsomever. 5. Page 131. when he comes to
that argument taken from the Tyranny which would hereby be introduced in the
Church, which would consequently condemn defensive arms used against Tyranny
in the State: He only says [That no learned man would ever allow people to
rise (far less a party only) against a prince upon the account only of the
unjust sufferings of particular persons, whole yet the affairs of Church and
State were well ordered-while yet they adhered unto and overturned none of the
righteous things in a nation.] Sure then it will be allowed by him, that
people, though the lesser part, defend themselves against Tyranny; when not
only particular persons are unjustly suffering, but the righteous things once
concluded and confirmed by laws, Oaths Vows, Covenants, Acknowledgments,
Declarations, and Protestations, are overturned; the work of God razed to the
fundation; perjury and breach of Covenant established; Conrses laid down for a
constant exercise of tyranny and oppression etc. again. 6. page 134. [ let
once (says he) a judicatory grow so corrupt as to condemn the duties of
preaching Christ, and participation of public ordinances, in the very nature
and kind, and as to all sorts of persons universally -- and in that case we
shall without scruple conclude them no true courts of Christ, and consequently
not to be submitted unto; yea in case such decrees were published, we should
hold it a case of confession for ministers to preach* and people to frequent
ordinances so long as they had liberty or opportunity.] How then can submission
be given to these in power, who now have destroyed the interests of Christ,
and will suffer none to plead or contend for Christ and his oppressed truth,
or speak against perjury and dreadful defection, where of the land is now
guilty? But enough of this, we proceed.

Another particular which we shall here examine is that discourse he has
concerning I Sam. 8: ver. 10. Page 63: 64. The sum of what he says is this.
[It is true ( says he) the place, I Sam. 8: ver. 10. neither contradicts nor
repeales that law Deuteronomy. 17: ver. 14. -- But it is false that only the tyranny
of a King is there spoken of by way of mere dissuasive: Moses and Samuel agree:
The one shows what a King should do ex officio and de Jure, The other what a
King may do, by the power he has, and yet not be ^b^oxious to punishment, from
Subjects, -- or what a people should suffer of an evil King, without attempt of
violence upon him. The one sets out Gods approbative law, The other his
permissive law -- as albeit the Lord approve not divorce, yet by a permissive
law, Deuteronomy 24: ver. I. Husbands had liberty to put away their Wives, without
being obnoxious to humane punishment -- The fact it the manner of Tyranny, but
the permissive power without punishment from subjects, is the just right of all
lawful Kings -- Though Samuel might have here intended to dissuade the people;
yet his maine intention was to show the people their duty under a Kings
oppress^on, what they were to suffer without resistance; for to what purpose
should he have written the Manner of the King in a book, and laid it up before
the Lord, 1 Samuel 10: ver. 25. But to teach the people their beheaviour to the
King? So that this was not the law of the King, Deuteronomy. 17. which was already
kept in the Ark.]

Answ. 1. It is well that he grants that this ^us Regis Or the manner of the
King is de facto the manner of tyranny; and so that it was no ways lawful for
the King to do these things there mentioned, which yet other Royalists do
peremptorily, deny and aver hence, that Kings have full, absolute and
illimited power over the Subjects persons and goods. And thus as to the King's
part, he must grant that what is here spoken, is contrary to what is said,
Deuteronomy. 17.

2. All the circumstances of the text show, that this tyranny of the King is
spoken of merely in way of disswasive; for it was a King to judge them like
unto the Kings of other Nations, which they were seeking, and this displeased
Samuel ver. 6. and the Lord said to Samuel, that hereby they had rejected not
Samuel, but himself, that he should not reign over him, ver. 7. and the Lord
commanded him solemnly to protest against them, and then show them the manner
of the King: and what else was this for, but to bring them off their purpose,
and dissuade them from prosecuteing it any further? But it is said, ver. 19.
Nevertheless the people refused to obey the voice of Samuel. now what else was
the voice of Samuel then a disswasion? Let him look the English and Dutch
Annot. upon the place, and other Commentators, and he will find it so

3. That which he takes the meaning of this manner of the King to be, is the
old saying of Barclaius long since exploded by Althusius in his Politic. cap.
19. number. 58. thus [ Impunity (says he) in committing wickednese can make no
right: Princes have no power to do evil, but only to help, comfort, and to
promove the good and profit of the people, Vasq. Lib. 1. cap. 1. and 2. c. 26.
number. 2, 3. contr. Illustr. -- To do evil is no act of power, but of infirmity
that cannot abstean from doing evil, Vasq. D. L. C. 27. for so a company of
Thieves, and Incendiaries, which can do many things, which they ought not,
should be said to do these things by a kingly right, and if this Jus Regium be
understood of permission, which de facto cannot be hindered, That is common to
others, as well as to Kings; for both a King and a private person may be free
of punishment, either because the fact cannot be proved, or because they cannot
be gotten punished, or because these evils are permitted by law L. non omne
144. de Reg. Jur. Tyranny is not to be reckoned among these things which are to
be permitted; for Tyrants are Adulterers, Ravishers, Murderers, and such as
are guilty of other capital crimes; whom Scripture styles, Lions, Bears,
Dragons, Wolves, Prove. 28: ver. 14. Ezech. 22: 27. Dan. 2, etc. and the like,
Pfal. 58. Esa. 13: ver. 11. and Cap. 33. v. 1.] Let him consider also what
famous and learned Voetius says to this, Disp. select. part. 4. page 222.
Where he tells us that to do evil with impunity, is not Ius, does found no Ius
Or right, neither is founded on the law of God, of Nature, of Nations, nor on
the civil law. And as to that which the Surveyer says, that it is a Ius,
because it shows what people were to endure willingly, and might not resist.
He answers, Page 223. That then the people should be the subject of this
right or Ius, and not the King; and so it could not be called the manner of the
King, but the manner of the People. Again he says, evil, loss, vexation,
passion, and not to hinder evil, in Scripture phrase, is rather called somewhat
opposite to Ius, then Ius or right, viz. a privation of it.

4. As for his simile of a permission granted to men to put away their Wives,
it is not of the same nature with the former evils (says Althusius in the
place above cited.) And the Author of Lex Rex, page 137. said well, [If so, a
power to sin, and a power to commit acts of Tyranny, yea and a power in the
Kings Sergeants, and bloody Emissaries, to waste and destroy the People of God,
must ^e a lawful power given of God; for a lawful power it must be, if it
comes from God, whether it be from the King in his own person or from his
Servants at his command, and be either put forth in acts, as the power of a
bill of divorce, was a power from God, exempting either the husband from
punishment before men, or freeing the Servant who at the husbands command
should write it, and put it into the hands of the Woman. I cannot believe that
God has given a power and that by law, to one man, to command Twenty Thousand
cut throats to destroy and kill all the children of God, and that he has
commanded his children to give their necks and heads to Babel's sons without
resistance. This I am sure is another matter then a law for a bill of divorce
to one woman, married by free Election, of a humorous and inconstant Man. But
sure I am God gave no permissive law from Heaven, like the law of divorce; for
the hardness of heart, not of the jews only, but also of the whole Christian
and heathen Kingdoms under a Monarch, That one Emperor may, be such a Law of
God as the law of divorce, kill by bloody cut throats all the nations that call
on God's name, men, women, and sucking infants.]

5. The reason which he gives Page 64. is the same that Barclaius gave viz.
[To what purpose should he have written the manner of the King in a book, and
laid it up before the Lord after the King is set over them 1 Samuel 10: ver. 25.
When there was no pleace for repentance, no remedy, no use of terrifying or
dissuading them, the only use of recording it, was to teach the people their
beheaviour toward their King, and patience under him, and that it should not
be free for them to shake off the yoke of his government, or to offer violence
to him albeit he should overstretch his power too far. This recorded was not
the law of the King, Deuteronomy. 17. which was already kept in the ark with therest
of the law.] Answ. 1. Though the King was set over them, he had need to have
had his duty written before him in a book, and kept to posterity, no less
then the People should have stood in need to have had their duty so recorded.
2. To say that it was to teach the People their duty, is but a begging of
what is in question: And it is not probable that Samuel would write the
rules of Tyranny in a book, and lay it up before the Lord in the Ark of the
Covenant, seeing he was to teach both King and People, The good and right way,
1 Samuel 12: ver. 23, 24, 25. 3. The English Annotators tell us on the place,
that this manner of the Kingdom which Samuel vvrote, was [Not as it is
commonly practiced, Chap. 8. ver. 9, -- 18. but as it-ought to be in a lawful
and free Monarchy appointed by God himself, according to the fundamental laws
of the Kingdom, teaching what duties the King ought to perform in the
government of his people, and the people in their subjection and obedience to
their King, according to that description of a King set down by Moses, Deuteronomy.
17: ver. 14, etc. Ezech. 45: ver. 9, 10. and Cap. 46: ver. 16. Romans 13. v. 1.
1. Tim. 2: v. 2.] The Dutch Annot. say, [ This is not of the way, manner and
custom of actings which Kings sometimes take up contrary to law, but of the
laws which Samuel by God's instinct made or inacted, concerning the government
of Kings; see Deuteronomy. 17: ver. 18. Or of the ordinances for to instruct as well
the King as the Subject. And Iackson in his notes on the place says, [ That
it was both the duty of the King toward his Subjects, and of the Subjects
tovvard their King; and these were the fundamental laws of the Kingdom: and
this book was carefully laid up before the Lord, says he, 1. for the sure
preservation of it, 2. to signify that even these civil laws were the
ordinance of God, which men were bound to obey, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake, Romans 13. ver. 2, 5. 3. To intimate that God would take
care of these laws, to uphold and maintain them, and to punish these that
should vilify and break them] Cornel. a Lap. and Lyra say the same upon the
matter, Deodat tells us that* (it was the fundamental laws of the Kingdom,
inspired by God to temper Monarchy, with a liberty befitting God's People and
equity toward a nation -- to withstand the abuse of an absolute power.] But
this Surv. says that all this is but a guess without ground. But what are
his reasons? [Had there (says he) been any such special fundamental laws, the
Ten Tribes had a fair ground of pleading upon the same, before their revolt,
but no such thing is heard of, and it is as easy to deny it, as it is to
affirm, that there was any such fundamental law] Answ. Whether the Ten Tribes
did plead this in terminis or not, is not, it is true, asserted or heard of,
but it is undeniable that they did plead it upon the matter, when they required
nothing but what was consonant unto the law Deuteronomy. 17. and because it was
refused, they thought themselves free to make choice of another King. 2. What
more force has his denial then ours? we bring approved authors for what we
say, and he satisfyeth himself with his own word, and thinks that that is
sufficient to confute all commentators, even such as himself a little
thereafter cites and approves in other things viz Deodat. What says he more?
[The People claimed no vote in such fundamental laws -- and it was their
interest to be consulted with in the matter.] Answ. The People were so bent to
have a King upon any terms, that they consulted little their own welfare and
faifty. But Samuel was more tender of them, and they might have concredited
that matter unto him, being a Man of approven integrity, and known to be one
that sought their good, and had no good will to set a King over them. But says
he, [had they thought of any such Covenants or laws fundamental, wherein
liberty might be left them to resist their Kings, or take order with them, how
easily could they have showed the weakness of Samuel's disswasion, and said,
if the King be evil, we will resist him] Answ. This was done after the matter
was past remedy, and a King they would have, and a King God would give them in
his wrath. 2. We find chap. 14. that they did resist him, when he was going to
shed innocent blood, whether according to these fundamental laws or not, is
not much matter.

6. Though all which he desires here, should be granted to him, he would not
gain his point, unless he should prove that this was a standing precedent to
all nations in all time coming. Which ere he do, he must consider and confute
what worthy and renowned D. Voetius has said to the contrary, in his book
before cited, disp. de Iure Regio Hebraeorum. 1.

What he says; Page 68. shall be considered in the next chapter, and what he
says Page 69. 70. 71. is already answered: for this windy man would seem to
be voluminous, by filling many pages with the same things repeated over and
over again, that if he cannot say much for his hire, he may seem to be at some
pains to say many words, and waste much paper. And therefore we proceed to
take notice of some other objections.

CAP. XVI.
Three Principal Objections Answered.
THere are three grand objections which the Surveyer, here and there throw his
pamphlet, makes use of, and which seem to militate against some of our
forementioned arguments; as. 1. That there were not (in the case now under
debate) inferior Magistrates, a Parliament, or the primores Regni, or the
Epiori, and States of the Realm, concurring in that defense: and whatever may
be said in the defense of a war carried on by these, against the illegal
violences and extreme oppressions of a prince, will not warrant the
insurrection of mere private persons. 2. That in the case now controvetted, it
was not the Body of the land or the whole Community that made this opposition
to Magistrates Superior and inferior; But only a small inconsiderable
company, in respect of the whole land: and so though it should be lawful for
the whole body of a land to join together, to defend themselves against the
tyranny and oppression of a Prince, without the conduct and concurrence of
inferior Magistrates; yet it will not hence follow, That it is lawful for any
part thereof, to use such resistance. 3. That the party, which lately made
opposition, had no sufficient ground to take arms, suppose it had been lawful
in its own nature, there being no such provocking cause or occasion given by
the Prince. And though it should not be thought very necessary to insist on
these now, seeing this last was spoken to in the clearing of the question, and
the first was touched also formerly cap. 2. And all our arguments conclude for
a People without their primores or Parliaments; and So do many both of our
arguments and instances adduced, speak clearly and undenyably, unto the case
of a considerable part, though not the whole of the community, defending
themselves against manifest and unjust violence; yet that the matter in hand
may be fully cleared, we shall speak alittle further to these three objections
here.

As to the first (though the surveyer be in mala fide to make use of it,
unless relinquishing all his brethren the Royalists, he grant it lawful for
people with a Parliament to resist, which neither will he nor dar he do; And
therefore we shall speak to this objection, rather for the satisfaction of
others.) We desire these things may be considered.

1. That as necessity did put people at first, upon the constitution and
election of a Parliament, to manage their affairs, which they could not so
conveniently do themselves, without confusion, discords, and other
inconveniences, which would neccessarily attend a communities meeting together,
for carrying of these matters: So it was the certane expectation of their
profit and advantage, that did prompt them unto the settling of this frame and
constitution.

2. Whatsoever power these Commissionated, according to that frame and model
condescended upon, had or have, is not in and from themselves, but from the
People, no less then the Prince has his power from the People; as was showed
above: For no man can imagine any difference, as to the subordinate and
instrumental rise of the power, of the Prince and of the Ephors: So that as his
power is from the People under God, so is the power which they have. [These
public Ministers of the Kingdom (says Althus. Pol. c. 18. n. 3.) are chosen
by the united and consoc^ated body of the People preserve the whole associated
body, and her rights; and are instructed with necessary power and authority,
which to perform they are obliged by oath.]

3. Hence, really the power of the People is greater then the power of any
delegated or constituted by them; for the cause is more then the effect: and
the Parliament does represent the People, but the People do not represente the
Parliament. Therefore the power of the People must be more. His power who does
constitute another, or depute him as a guardian to some business, or to
oversee some of his matters, is greater then any power, which that other
deputed or constituted Curator has. Parliaments then being but as Tutors and
Curators unto the People, must have less power then the People have [mandans
vero) says Althusius pol: c. 18. n. 92.) vel injungens alii rerum suarum
procurationem, est instar imperantis, rogantisve, suscipiens vero talem
administraetionem, instar obtemperantis, inservientis, and officium suum alteri
praestantis.] So that the Parliament is but a servant to the People: and the
power of a Master is alvvayes superior to the power of a Servant as such.

4. It is irrational to think, that the People in chooseing the Ephori or
Parliament-members, and committing the administration of their weighty affairs
unto them, did denude themselves of all that innate and radical power, which
they had to manage their own matters; seeing no urgent necessity could compel
them to it, nor any foreseen advantage or profit, which thereby could redound
unto them, move them and persuade them thereunto: but on the contrary, much
hazard and disadvantage might at the very first appear upon such a surrender
as this. Much less could they denude themselves of that power of self defense,
which by no law of God or man they might law fully give away.

5. Whatever power Parliaments have, it is to be exerced and put in practice
for the good and advantage of the People. Their power is for the profit, and
not for the hurt of the People, and to this scope and end should they level all
their labors, travails, pains, endeavors, cares, thoughts, consultations,
conferences, votes, deliberations and conclusions, L. Imperial. C. de nuptijs
L. been a Zenone C. de quadr. L. 8. C. de legibus. L. praecipimus 34. C. de
appell. (See Althus. pol. c. 18. n. 7: 17.

6. Hence Their power is not absolute, infinite, or unlimited; but has its
own bounds and limits over which it cannot lawfully pass. They are to rule
and do all, for God and the good of the Realm, whose servants they are. They
are the Ministers of God for the Peoples good Romans 13. 4.

7. When they transgress) their true limits (which no man will say is
impossible) by commanding what God has forbidden, or forbidding what God has
commanded in his holy law: or when they seek not the public good of the Land,
but their own private advantage, They are not, but cease to be, the Ministers
of God and of the People, and become private persons, who ought not, in these
particulars wherein they go beyond their bounds, to be obeyed: As says
Althusius ubr supra n. 41. and proves by many authors: And the reason is
clear, for no inferior can disannul God's Law, or free us from subjection
thereunto. They have no power to command sin, God never gave them such a power:
And the People could not give it, for they had it not themselves, neither had
they a power to wrong and destroy themselves, and so they could not give this
unto them.

8. If these Ephori or Trustees betray their trust, and feel or basely give
away the libertyes and privileges of the people, which they were entrusted
with, the people cannot thereby be brought into a remediless condition, or
lose their privileges without all hope of recovery. If a Tutor waste and
destroy the Pupil's Estate, the law provideth a remedy for the Pupil: If a
commissioner or deputy betray his trust, the master's loss thereby is not
irremediable: If an advocat betray a client's cause, The client will find some
relief. [ The peoples right (says althusius ubi supra. n, 124) suffers no
prejudice, nor does the Prince -- obtain any more tyrannical power, by the
negligence, perfidy, deceit, collusion, treachery, prevarication, and
conspiracy of the Ephori or primores regni, with the prince -- for it is unjust
and absurd to affirm that the Ephori (or parliament men) can transfer unto
the Tyrant, what they never had themselves, or can destroy or alienate the
rights of the Community, in prejudice of the whole Realm, and that contrare to
the fundamental laws of the land, or such, as the prince swore to maintain,
and which contain the spirits and life of the Commonwealth.]

From these irrefragable truths, so consonant to right reason and attested by
learned politicians, it will clearly follow. 1. That the Peoples case is not
worse by Parliaments, then it would have been without them. 2. That
Parliaments, cannot tyrannize by any law or right over People. 3. That no
treachery or perfidy of Parliaments, neglecting their duty or betraying their
trust, can prejudge the people of their due rights and privileges. 4.
Parliaments not concurring with the People in their necessary defense, cannot
loose them from the obligation of nature, to defend themselves from tyranny and
intolerable oppression. 5. If Parliaments in stead of acting the part of
Trustees, Tutors, Curators, Delegats and Servants, shall turn Tyrants, wolves,
Tigers, and Enemies to the Commonwealth themselves, of conspire, join, or
enter into a confederacy with a Tyrant, and so seek the destruction of the
community; The community is allowed to see to the preservation of their own
rights and privileges, the best way they can. 6. And so in some cases, when the
hazard is great, the loss irreparable, private persons may defend themselves
against manifest Tyranny and oppression, without Parliaments.

All this seems to be clear and undeniable In thest. Let us next see what
way this shall suit, or what more can be said for, our case, In hypothest.

And. 1. It is beyond contradiction, that the late Parliament did basely betray
its trust: for politicians tell us, That it belongs to these Ephori. To
vindicate and maintain the compact and Covenant which is betwixt the Prince
and the People. To keep the prince or the supreme administrator of justice,
within his bounds and limits, that he turn not a tyrant, or an oppressor of
the People. To hinder him from violating the law of God. To restrain and
coerce him from violating the laws of the land, and the rights of the
kingdom. To hinder the execution of the unjust and illegal decrees and mandats
of the Prince. To defend the proper and incommunicable rights and privileges of
the People. To cognosce whether the Supreme Magistrate has done his duty or
not, and to hinder him from committing Tyranny. See for these particulars
Althusius, Pol. c. 18. n. 48, 55, 63, 65, 68, 83, 84. Where all these are
abundantly confirmed. Now, it is not our to all who consider either what they
did, or what was enacted by them, and stands registrated to all generations,
how the late Convention (which hardly can be accounted a lawful Parliament) not
only came short of their duty in these particulars, but stired a direct
contrary course, as we shall show in a few words. For 1. So far were they from
maintaining that compact and Covenant, which was betwixt the King and the
People. That they declared these Covenants and engagements null: declared the
very Parliament and committees, that called him home and crowned him, null:
condemned the very transactions that were had with the King before he came
home. 2. So far were they from keeping the Prince within his bounds and
limits; That they screwed up his prerogatives to the highest peg imaginable,
and did investe him with such an absolute unlimited and infinite power, that he
might do what he pleased without control. 3. So far were they from hindering
him from transgressing the laws of God, That they concurred with him, to enact
laws diametrically opposite to the Law of God, to condemn and overturne the
work of God, To set up an abjured prealcy, and force conformity thereunto,
beside other acts which they made to hinder the course of justice. 4. So far
were they from hindering him from violating the wholesome well settled and
established laws of the land, that they concurred with him to overturne these,
to the great loss and detriment of the Nation. 5. So far were they from
preserving the rights of the Kingdom, That they made a voluntary and base
surrender of these unto the pleasure and arbitrament of the Prince, in annexing
to the crown The sole choice and appointment of the officers of State and
privy Councellers, and the nomination of the Lords of Session; in dischargeing
all meetings, Councels, conventions, or assemblies of the People, without the
King's command or express license: In giving away to him as his right, the
sole power of raiseing the Subjects in arms; of commanding, ordering,
disbanding and otherwise disposeing of them; And of all strengths, forts, or
garrisons within the Kingdom: all which politicians will grant to be the
proper native rights of the Kingdom: 6. So far were they from hindering the
execution of his unjust decrees and mandates, that whatsoever he pleased to
command, was by them embraced yea and fortified, strengthened and corroborated,
and put into a standing law, how dishonorable so ever it was to God, how
repugnant to equity and reason, and how noxious soever it might prove to the
Nation. 7. So far were they from desending the Libertyes and Privileges of the
People, that they basely gave them away, by denying them to have any power to
defend themselves against manifest oppression, or power to call Parliaments or
other meetings for their advantage, in cases of necessity; by giving away to
the King yearly forty Thousand pound Sterline, to the impoverishing of the
Nation and redacting it to slavery: And by Tendering unto him all the lives and
fortunes of the subjects, to maintain his interest; and offering Twenty
Thousand foot men, and two Thousand horsemen sufficiently armed and furnished
with forty days provision, to be in readiness as they shall be called for by
his Majesty, to march to any part of his three dominions, for any service
wherein his Majesty's honor, authority or greatness might be concerned: Which
how ever it may be colored with specious pretexts; yet, al circumstances
considered, was nothing but a real mancipation of the liberties of the People
unto the will and pleasure of a Prince. 8. And so far were they from calling
the King to any account, and from impedeing Tyranny, that in effect they
declared the King exempted from all such trial or examination, and that he
might exerce what tyranny and oppression he pleased without control: For they
gave unto him absolute and unlimited power over all persons and in all causes;
They declared him to have absolute power to call, hold, prorogue, and dissolve
Parliaments and Conventions and Meetings of the Estates: And That no acts,
sentences, or statutes to be past in any of these meetings, can be binding or
have the authority and force of laws, without his authority and approbation
interponed, at the very making thereof.

2. It is notour to all who read their acts, How they have enacted and
concluded things most unlawful and unjust, repugnant to the Law of God and
right reason: Condemning Solemn Covenants sworn by all ranks of People in
the land, in the most solemn manner; introduceing abjured Prelates;
Establishing tyranny in the Church; condemning and razeing to the fundation the
Covenanted work of God; enjoining a conformity unto corrupt courses; pressing
perjury and Apostasy, by forceing all in public places, and others, to
subscribe declarations and oaths, contrary to their former sacred and
inviolable Covenants and oaths made to God.

3. By confirming, ratifying and approveing these courses of Apostasy and
defection, and establishing these into laws, and binding and forceing the
People unto obedience, by their irrational and insupportable penalties annexed,
They have laid down a constant course for tyranny and oppression of the People
in Estates, bodies, and consciences, without all hope of remedy or redress.

4. As Parliaments with us are not constant and fixed courts, but ambulatory
and occasional, so they have laid down a course, that we shall never have a
Parliament that shall redress the wrongs, injuries, oppressions and tyranny of
Princes; or hear the just grievances of the Subjects: For when the Prince
oppresses the People, and turns a Nero and a Caligula; there shall be no
remedy, because they have given him absolute power to call Parliaments, and who
can expect he will call a Parliament in that case? or if he do call, he has
absolute power to raise them and dismiss them when he will; and is it probable
that he will suffer them to sit when they are doing any thing against him? Or
if he should suffer them to sit, what can they do? None of their sentences or
acts have power, unless he will add his authority, and will he ratify or
approve any thing that is against himself, and his tyrannous will? Beside, that
they have denuded themselves of all power of suppressing tyranny, by declareing
his power so absolute and infinite, as that no bounds can be set unto it, no
power can suppress his tyranny, or call him to an account.

5. Not only have they laid down a course that we shall have no Parliament to
interpose for the relief of the People, and to suppress Tyranny; But also they
have laid down a course that there should be no Magistrates in shires or
brughs, that should help, according to their power and place, the oppressed and
grieved Subject, and concur for their relief: Because all such, ere they be
admitted to their places, must conform unto this abominable course of
defection, and by subscribeing declarations, Binding themselves by oaths
impious and opposite to the solemn Covenants, under which the Land stands
bound and obliged before the Lord, conspire with them in this Apostasy, against
the interest of God in the Land.

From all which we think these things will clearly follow.

1. That it may be much doubted if this last convention can be accounted, by
any law either of God or Man, a lawful Parliament, having so palpably betrayed
their trust, in ruleing not for God and his interest, but against him, end
enacting things to his dishonor; in selling and giving away the old and
undoubted Privileges of Parliament; and in betraying, dilapidating, disponeing,
and giving away the native and unquestionable Rights and Privileges of the
People; and in overturning the fundamental laws of the Land; and annulling the
fundamental article of the compact betwixt King and People. Seeing Politicians
will grant, that such are to be accounted but private persons: though we
should make no mention of other informalities which usually weaken or annul the
constitution of a judicature of that nature, in point of formality; as liberty
denied to some shires to choose such members as they thought good;
prelimitation used to all; the admission of some as members not capable of an
election, according to our ancient and received custom; the denying of free
liberty of debateing, reasoning, dissenting and protesting, which is allowed in
all free Judicatories, and the carrying on of matters in a headstrong,
violent, and tyrannical manner, without such previous deliberation, or serious
consideration, and pondering the weight and moment of matters, as would have
become a judicature by its constitution and nature so sage and honorable.

2. The native, ancient and undoubted Privileges of the People are de Iure
entire and inviolated, notwithstanding of any thing done by this late meeting,
which had no power to do what they did: And therefore could not wrong the
rights and Privileges of the People.

3. That there is no hope, or human probability now left, that ever the
People of Scotland shall have a Parliament by the course laid down or
inferior Judges to resent the injuries, oppression and Tyranny done to and
exercised upon them; but that still their bands shall be made stronger, and the
yoke of oppression and Tyranny wreathed closser about their necks. So that
there was not, neither is there any hope (so long as this course of defection
stands and is not overturned) that Parliaments now, or the Primores Regni, or
inferior Judges, shall concur for the suppressing of Tyranny, bearing down
of oppression, defection and apostasy, according as they ought.

4. That while matters are so, the People of Scotland are as if they had no
Parliaments, nor inferior Judges, for that end; and cannot be supposed or
imagined to be in a worse condition, then if they never had had my such, to
protect them from the tyrannical and arbitrary lust and domination of Princes.
And therefore must be allowed to use the privilege and liberty which nature
has granted unto them, to defend themselves from unjust tyranny and oppression
of Princes, Parliaments, and inferior Judicatories, when their Representatives
palpably betray them into the hands of their adversaries, yea and conspire with
their adversaries against them, and their Privileges; and instead of Patrons
and defenders of their rights and privileges, turn enemies thereunto, and take
courses utterly to destroy all.

By this, I suppose, the first Objection is sufficiently answered, yet I shall
add this word more, and would desire that all who are of a contrary judgment
would answer this quaeree. Whether or not would they think it unlawful, for
private persons without a Parliament, privy Council, or other inferior
Magistrates, to resist a Prince, or his Emissaries, if he with the consent of
these should transfer unto him self the proper and immediate right unto all
the Lands, Rentes, Tenements, possessions, Heretages, and goods within the
whole Land, with full power to sell, dispone, and give away the same unto
whom he pleased; and presently upon the passing of that act, cause eject,
dispossess and remove all the present heretours and possessours, or put them
to buy it of new of him, or take tackes thereof as taksmen, fermers or
tennents? If they think that in this case they might lawfully resist such
horrid tyranny, Then why not in our case, when the People, contrary to all law,
oaths and vows, are put out of the possession of their Covenanted Religion,
reformed in doctrine, worshipe, discipline and government, and that by mere
violence and tyranny? Sure such matters as touch Soul and consciences, ought to
be as dear to People, as what concerns their bodies and estates. Or if we
should put the case, That the King were about to sell the whole Land unto the
Turk, or unto Irish bloody Papists, and by bribes or promises, should procure
the consent of a Parliament, and the concurrence of Council and other
judicatories (as really upon the matter, walking according to the acts they
have made, he may) Might it be unlawful for People in this case, without the
concurrence of inferior Magistrates, who had now sold them, and basely
betrayed their trust, to stand to their own defense, and to the defense of
their posterity, and their lives, rights, liberties and privileges? And if this
cannot be asserted by any man, who has not made a perfect surrender of his
own reason, unto the will and lust of another, why can resistance in our case
be condemned: Seeing soul matters are of infinite more worth, then these outward
things; And it were less bitter to know and see our posterity redacted into a
state of perfect slavery unto forraigners, as to their outward privileges, them
to see them shut up into a closse prison of soul slavery and bondage, destitute
of the pure and lively ordinances of salvation, and frustrated of the glorious
and excellent liberties and effects of a purely preached gospel, and so shut
up in a dungeon of ignorance, superstition, and all Prophanity, that they
should never know what true liberty means?

As for the next objection taken from this, that they were not the Whole Body
of the land, but only a part thereof, which cannot be so well justified. It may
easily be answered. That it being lawful for a single person, in some cases,
to defend himself from unjust violence: It will be much more lawful for a
considerable part of a Kingdom to defend themselves, though they get not help
of others. Though all be bound to help a ravished maid, yet though none should
help, she may resist and defend herself. But to leave this, because we have
adduced many arguments that concludes the case lawful even for a part of the
Kingdom, we shall speak to the complex case, not only as it was a defense but
also a probable mean to put a stop unto the course of defection. Which was and
is carried on; and to redeem the land from spiritual bondage and slavery, as
well as bodily. And to this we say. That when the case is a public case
concerning all the land, no less then these who jeoparded their lives for the
same, no man in reason can condemn these few that undertook the interprise,
the profitable effects of which would have redounded to the whole: When a city
is on fire, no man will think the few that hazard their lives, to quench the
same, are to be blamed, though the rest do lie by, and will not concur. The
men of Ephraim, Benjamin and Issacher, who followed Deborah and jeoparded their
lives upon the high places of the field, that they might deliver the whole land
from under the Tyrranny of Iabes King of Canaan, though Reuben God and Zebulon
did not concur, according to their duty, were not the more to be blamed, but
are the more praised and commended; and such as came not put to the help of the
Lord against the mighty were under a bitter curse. The common tie of
Christianity and brotherhood and other supervenient obligations did oblige all
the Land (as was showed above) to concur as one man, to endeavor the
deliverance of he Land from dreadful oppression and tyranny, and because the
greatest part, like Issacher in an other case, loved to couch under the burden,
and refused to contribut their help for their own delivery, and proved
enemies, shall these few who ventured their lives and Estates, and all which
they had, for the liberation of the land, be the more, upon that account,
condemned? What hight of absurdity were this? Had the Men of Ephraim good
reason to challenge Iephthah Judge. 12: ver. 1, 2. etc. because he fought with
the Midianites without them, when he says, that he had called them and they
would not come out? If an Enemy invade the land, and such provinces as are
furthest from danger shall neglect or refuse to concure with the rest to expel
them, yea shall strengthen the invadeing enemy, shall these be blamed who are
next to the danger, to take the alarm at the first, and do what in them lies,
for their own saifty and the saifty of the whole land? Therefore, seeing the
cause which these few owned was of common concernment, and equally respecting
the whole land, since the rest would not concur, as they were bound to do,
they are more praiseworthy then blameworthy that ventured all for the good of
the whole land, and did what in them lay, to redeem the whole land from that
oppression and bondage, under which it was lying. If it had been some small
petty particulare of their own, it had been more liable to the censures of
men; but the cause being Common, which they did own, (a Covenant sworn by all
ranks of People, and a Covenanted work of reformation, and liberty from tyranny
both in Church and State, was a cause not peculiar unto them, but common to all
the land,) it is the hight of absurdity, illegality, yea and inhumanity, to
accuse them of Treason of sedition, or to condemn their interprise upon that
account. So that though the major part of the land turn so corrupt, as to
embrace a corrupt abjured course, see their privileges taken from them, the
work of God overthrovvne, laws ratifying and approving Religion reformed in
doctrine vvorshipe discipline and government, and secureing people in their
peacable and Christian possession of these, now abolished rescinded and
annulled; their libertyes, as civil scottish men, and as Christians, sold away;
their fundamental compact, and the cardinal clause of that contract betwixt
King and Subject, cancelled and shamefully brocken; Tyranny and oppression of
consciences, bodies and Estates established; and no legal remedy or redress
apparent or probable; and shall notwithstanding of all this, love to sit still
and not to be stir themselves, according to their places and power, for
secureing Religion, laws, and libertyes; For extirpating abjured prelacy, and
malignancy; and restoreing the Ordinances of Christ to their wonted purity, and
delivering the land from slavery and bondage, and from stupenduous apostasy and
defection, at which the Heavens may stand astonished, and all men and angels
may wonder: Shall their negligence and deficiency in duty, bind up the hands
of the well affected, and render them utterly incapable in law, to mind
themselves and the good of the whole land, the good whereof they are obliged by
many bonds and obligations to seek by all farie means possible? Neither does
the laws of Nature, the laws of God, nor particularly the bond of Christian
love to their Native land, to their Mother Church, and to their Christian
oppressed brethren, nor the bond of their Covenants, solemn vows and
engadgments, so limite this duty, and loose them from all endeavor after a
performance. But by the contrare, if God give any probable capacity, upon all
these considerations, they are the more obliged to lay out themselves to the
utmost, and to account themselves the more indispnesably obliged thereunto,
that as the hazard is greater, the loss is the more certane and irrecoverable.
Wherefore, seeing the ground and ends of the riseing of these few, was not
particular, but general and national, the good and benefit of the interprise
redounding unto all, no less then to themselves, and being that whereunto all,
no less then they, were obliged by solemn vows and moral bonds, their case
must be otherwise considered, then the case of a few malcontented persons, who
because of some particular injuries done to themselves and for some particular
ends proper and peculiar to themselves alone, arise in rebellion against the
lawful Magistrate. The Royalists themselves allow it lawful for any private
person to kill an usurper or a Tyrant sine titulo, and why? But because the
good of this action does redound not to himself alone. But to the whole Land;
So in some places a reward is promised to all such as shall kill a Bear, or any
such noisome beast, because the good and fruit of this action concerns more
then themselves, and therefore though all were bound to do what they did* yet
they are not blamed but rewarded for what they have done. So should these
rather have been revvarded then blamed or condemned, for what they did
interprise, for the universal and national good of the whole Land.

As for the third Objection, so much has been spoken of that already; whether
we mean the particular sufferings and oppressions of the People of Galloway,
(The Naphtaly is full to this purpose,) or the general calamity, by reason of
apostasy, defection, perjury and oppression in Religion and libertyes, which is
so noture that none who has not renunced common sense together with Religion
and honesty, can deny it, or pretend ignorance thereof, that we need do no more
here, but give a short reply to what the Surv. has said to this matter: only
we would add this. That if That learned lawyer Althusius in his politikes Cap.
38. n. 5. etc. give the right characters of a Tyrant, and of Tyranny, we may
have good ground to say that our land bears many blae marks of that tyranny:
for, says he [there is one kind of Tyranny, which consists in violating,
changeing or removing of fundamental laws, specially such as concern
Religion: and such, says he, was Athalia, Philip the King of Spain, who
contrare to the fundamental Belgic laws, did erect an administration of
justice by force of arms; and such was Charles the IX. of France that thought
to overturne the Salicque law] and whether our King be not in this guilty in
overturning the fundamental laws, concerning our reformed Religion, let the
world judge. Next says he [ when he keeps not his faith and promise, but
despises his very oath made unto the people.] and who is more guilty of this
then King Charles the 2 ^ n. 9. He gives us this mark [ when the supreme
Magistrate marketh use of an absolute power, and so breaks all bands for the
good of humane society] and are not the bonds both of piety and justice now
violated? n. 11. He tells us a Tyrant does take away from one or more member of
the Commonwealth, free exercise of the orthodox Religion: and n. 12. that for
corrupting of youth he erecteth stageplayes, whore houses, and other
play houses, and suffers the colleges, and other seminaries of learning to be
corrupted, and n. 15. that living in luxury, whoredom, greed and idleness, he
neglects, or is unfit for his office.] How these suit our times we need not
express, Then n. 16. He says [ he is a Tyrant who does not desend his
Subjects from injuries when he may; but suffers them to be oppressed] and
what if he oppress them himself? n. 19. [ who (says he) by immoder at
exactions, and the like, exhausts the subjects Jer. 22: ver. 13. 14. Ezech. 34.
1 King. 12: 19. Psalm. 14: 4.] and n. 10 [ who hinders the free suffrages of
Members of Parliament, so that they dare not speak what they would.] and how
much of this we find to be true, in needless here to express. Then n. 23,
24, etc. he tells us [ he is a Tyrant who takes away from the people all power,
to resist his tyranny, as arms, strengthes, and chief men, whom therefore
though innocent, he hates, afficteth and persecuteth, exhausts their gods, and
lively-hoods without right or reason] all which he confirms by several
Scriptures: And how apposite these are to our present case, all know who is not
an utter stranger to our matters, So that when we have so many things to
allege, none can justly blame us for saying, that we are oppressed and borne
down with insupportable tyranny; and now we go on to consider what he says.

And as to the first he tells us, Page 68. [That their life and blood was not
sought upon any terms, there was no forceing them to idolatry, nor false
worshipe, nor frighting them to any thing of that kind, upon pain of their
lives; only for contempt of the outward ordinances of God, purely administered
in an orthodox Church, they were put to pay such moderate fines, as the public
laws had appointed: Without any actual invasion of them or their persons.
They were the first aggressors, murdering the Kings Servants, and seiseing on
his chief officer. They had never before that assayed supplicating, (which was
not forbidden them to do, if so be they would have done it without tumults and
combinations) but flew to the sword and marched on to mock authority with armed
petitions, as they mocked God by sinful prayers, to prosper their evil course.]
Answ. 1. What intention there was to seek the life and blood of these People,
God koweth: But sure all who knew their case, saw that their life was only left
them, that they might feel their misery. So were they oppressed and harassed,
that death would have been chosen rather then life. Were they not beaten,
wounded, and bound as beasts, their goods and substance devoured before their
eyes? were not their lands and tenements laid waste, and many redacted to
beggary? Besides other inhumane barbarityes, which they were made to suffer. 2.
We see he would allow it lawful to resist, if the King should force to idolatry
and false worship, and what will he do then with his arguments, which will not
allow that exception, as they are urged by him? He must necessarily grant that
they are inconcludent, and that it holds here Argumentum nih^l probat quod
nimium probat. 3. How beit they were not forced to idolatry; yet by the same
law, reason and equity (or rather Tyranny and inquity) they might have been
forced to that, as to what they were forced. That is by the law of Tyranny and
violent oppression. They were pressed to own and countenance perjured profane
wicked and debauched Curates, thrust in upon them contrare to their Privileges,
as lawful and duly called Ministers, and thereby to own and approve of
Prelacy which was abjured, and cast out of the Church with detestation, and so
to concur in their places and stations with, and give their testimony unto, a
most wicked and unparallelable course of defection and Apostasy from God, and
his holy ways and works; and thereby to condemn the Reformation of Religion
in doctrine, Worshipe, Discipline and Government, which God had wonderfully
wrought amongst us, and which all ranks of People were solemnly sworn to
maintain and defend. 4. He talks of the outvvard ordinances of God purely
administered; when all know how these profane vvretches, made all who, ever
knevv what the service of the true and living God was, to abhore the offering
of the Lord: For they despised the Name of the Lord, and offered polluted bread
upon his altar, and made the table of the Lord contemptible, they offered the
blind, the lame, and the sick, and torn, and thus they vowed and sacrificed
unto the Lord a corrupt thing: Yea their administration of ordinances was, and
is to this day, rather like histrionick acts, and scenes, then the service of
the true and living God: And what sober serious Christian, yea what soul that
has any believing apprehensions of the Majesty of God, can be witness, let
be a concurring actor in, and consenter unto, such abomination and idol-like
Worshipe? 5. He talks of an orthodox Church, wherein perjury and such like
abominations are approved and countenanced, maintained and avovved; and
wherein the work of Reformation of Religion, in Doctrine, Worshipe,
Discipline and Government is condemned; a Covenant abjureing Popery, Prelacy,
Profaneness, Schism and Heresy, and whatsoever is contrary to sound doctrine,
and the power of godliness, condemned and annulled; and wherein Atheism,
wickedness, ignorance, licentiousness, and all sort of prophanity, yea and
blasphemy abounds, and wherein there is so much Popery and idolatry
countenanced and connived at, and such abominations reigneing. Our first
confession of faith recorded in Parliament Cap. 18. gives this as one note of
a true Church viz. That in it Ecclesiastical Discipline be uprightly
ministered, as God's Word prescribes, whereby vice is repressed and virtue
nourished! But now there is a discipline repugnant to Gods Word administered,
whereby vice is nourished and virtue suppressed. 6. He says that the fines
were moderate? But more immoderate fines, and exorbitant penaltyes, were never
imposed by Rulers, except such whose design was to Tyrannize over the souls
and consciences of poor people: and to the payment of these transcendently
exorbitant penaltyes, they were constrained, not in a legal manner, as it ought
to be in a civil and free republic, but in a military, compulsive
constraineing way, whereby their persons and goods were tyrannically and
inhumanely invaded, plundered, destroyed, and ruined. 7. It is true, providence
so ordered it, that the first that was vvounded was one of the soldiers: But
Naphtali tells him that the country men were necessitated thereto in their
own defense; for when they but desired the soldiers to loose the poor man,
whom they had bound hand and foot like a beast, they were assaulted with
drawn swords; and so first and last they were invaded, and provoked, and
were not the first aggressours: and beside, that was but a mere accidental
emergent: and though they had formally, without that occurrent provocation,
joined together to have repelled unjust violence, none in reason could have
called them the first aggressours, being so long before that time, at two
inrodes, beside this last, so barbarously and inhumanely used by Sr James
Turner that bloody executioner of illegal tyranny, and brutish beastly Doeeg,
who having renunced all humanity and compassion, raged like a wild bear to
the laying waste of that country side. So that here was no violent
re-offending used without a previous actual invasion, made by companyes of
armed men, sent to eat up, root out and destroy a worthy and precious
countrey-side An imminent danger says the law, is a sufficient ground to take
up arms, and that is not previous strokes but the terror of armor or
threatening L. sed and si. ff. ad Leg. Aquil. l. 3. quod qui armati ff. de vi
and vi armata. Sure here was enough to warrant a Community to stand to their
defense, and to prevente their utter ruin and destruction, which was certanely
expected, and this was to them the last and most inexorable case of necessity:
And so the places which he cites out of Lex Rex do partly confirm this, and
partly are not to the purpose, being spoken of a single person buffeting his
master after he has been buffeted, or having received deaths wounds, seeks
to revenge himself on his aggressor. 8. He tells us they should have first
supplicated these in power: But they had supplicated already Sr James Turner,
and their case was made worse and not the better thereby, and all joint
petitioning was condemned as treasonable, and what could they then have done?
The most peacable manner of supplicating, if it had been in a joint manner,
that could have been devised, had been interpreted tumultuous. And Since it was
so, what could they do, but after the example of our progenitors, advance with
arms in the one hand and a petition in the other? 9. The Profane man talks of
their mocking God by their prayers, and of their spoiling loyal persons: but as
they have the testimony of all among whom they were, that they were not to be
charged with plundering, taking nothing unless it were a few horses, and such
things as were necessary for the defense of their lives, and for the welfare of
the Country, wherein many do suppose they were but too too spareing, seeing the
benefit was common to all, and they were to venture their lives, not for
themselves alone, but for the whole Country: So the Lord gave proof that he
has accepted their endeavors, though it was not his appointed time to restore
our Kingdom, in that he did so signally own and countenance such as were
honored with martyrdom, for the Testimony of Jesus, and for his interest and
cause. But this man speaks like himself when he adds that both they and
others have cause to bless God that they had no success, which might have
been a snare and stumbling block to them and others also. For we know indeed
that it is no small mercy, not to thrive in an evil way, and therefore we
think that He and his wicked fraternity, on whom the Lord is raineing snares,
by suffereing them to thrive, have great cause to lament the blak day that is
coming, and to tremble both for the imminent judgments, and for the dreadful
plague and judgment of hardness of heart, with which they are already
visited of the righteous God; Yet we know That a way may be his way, which
he will not prosper for a time, till the cup of the Amorites be full, and he
has attained his other holy ends, which he designeth in casting his Church
into a furnance: And if he judge of causes alvvayes by the event, he shows
himself a stranger to the Sovereign way of the Lord, in all ages.

As to other thing, he speaks Page 10. and says ( does not the true
protestant Religion as it is held forth inscripture, and was publicly
confessed by our first reformers (which confession is Registered Parl. 1. K.
James 6.) through God's mercy continue with us, without variation from it in
the least? Does not the Kings majesty protect and advance this blessed Truth of
the Saving Gospel, and encourage and invite all, according to his power, to
embrace it? Is he not willing and desirous that the laws be vigorously
executed against papists, and all perverters of this sound doctrine? are any
spoiled of their lawful civil libertyes? What one thing has he done without
consent of the Peoples Representatives in Parliament, at which any may except
as a grievance? what burden has he laid upon their Estates, but by law or by
their own consent, in a necessary exigence? Answ. 1. If the protestant
Religion continue without variation, in the least, what means then the
bleating of the sheep and lowing of the oxen; in every ones ears? what means
the many Jesuits, and Seminary Priests that go up and down the land? what
means the many masses that are used in several parts of that land, and in the
very heart thereof, in and about Edinbrough? What church discipline is used
against these? belike the Prelates have no will to trouble their old brethren,
the native and faithful children of their catholic Mother, the whore of Rome,
because they mind, yet once again, to take a drink of the cup of her
fornications, and to return as prodigal Children unto their former dear
Mother, the bloody harlote, the mother of fornications. And how comes it that
one Mr. Tyry, formerly a known papist, is admitted to a prefessorshipe in St.
Andrews, who not only cannot be reconciled to that minister who motioned the
giving to him, that Head to handle de anticbristo Romano, but even in his
theses did assert that the Pope was not Antichrist. But what is become of the
Religion of the Church of Scotland, as it was reformed in doctorine, worshipe,
discipline and government? What is become of these Covenants which were our
strong bulvvarks against propery? and what is become of the many acts of
Parliament ratifying and approving these Covenants? Are not all these cast
away? are not we cast open unto the assaults of that bloody Beast? what
means the great increase of the number of papists, so that the very
Parliament it self, in their statute 8. sess. I. (a mok-act never put into
execution) said that the number of Jesuits, Priests, and Papists did now
abound more, then ever they did under the Government of his father and grand
father? What means the rescinding and anulling the first act of the 12. parl
of K. James 6. holden Anno 1592. in all the heads clauses and articles thereof,
in their act. 1 sess. 2. whereas that act did not also ratify and approve
presbyterial government; but did also ratify and approve all privileges,
libertyes, immunityes, and freedoms, granted by his hieghnesse his Regents, in
his name, or any of his predecessors, to the true and holy Kirk established
within the Realm, and declared in the first act of Parliament Anno 1597. and
all and whatsomeever acts of Parliament and statutes, made before by his
Highness and his Regents, anent the liberty, and freedom of the said Kirk;
and particularly the first act of parl Anno 1581. and all other particular acts
there mentioned: and this act Anno 1581. ratifieth all preceding acts,
particularly that made in the reign of Queen Mary, Anno 1567. anent abrogating
all laws, acts and constitutiones, canons civil and municipal, with other
constitutions contrare to the Religion then professed, and all posteriour acts
namely such as abolished the Pope and his uspurped authority; that anulled the
acts made against God's word and for maintenance of Idolatry, the act
ratifying the confession of faith of the protestants of Scotland; the act
abolishing the Mass, and for punishing hearers and sayers of the same: acts
made, anent the admission of them that shall be presented to benefices having
cure of ministry; anent the King's oath to be given at his coronation; anent
such as should bear public office hereafter; anent teachers of schools; anent
the jurisdiction of the Kirk; anent the true and holy kirk; anent the
ratification of the liberty of the true Kirk of God and Religion; anent such as
are declared not to be of the true Church: And also the said act Anno 1592.
ratifieth all other acts made in favors of the Kirk, since the year 1581. So
that by this late Act made Anno 1662. all the acts made in favors of the
Church and of the protestant Religion, are annulled and rescinded; for there is
no exception added, but the said act in all its heads, clauses and articles, is
declared null and void. Where is then our legal security for our protestant
Religion, and Libertyes of the Church? Sure these things presage no good to the
protestant Religion. But 2. What way the King does advance this blessed truth
of the saving gospel (if he mean hereby the protestant Religion) we are to
learn: For his publishing in print that the Papists have been faithful
subjects to him and his father, whilst others, under pretense of Religion, had
involved the Kingdoms in blood; and by these Papists meaning with others the
irish rebels, who, for promoving the Romish bloody design, executed that
bloody Massacre in Irland: the report whereof made all protestants to tremble
and to stand astonished, gives us but small hopes, that so long as he is of
that mind, he shall ever do any thing effectually for promoving or
maintaineing the Protestant interest: His advanceing of Papists to greatest
places of public power and trust England, in Parliament, Council, Court,
Counteyes, and the Army, speaks rather an encourageing and inviteing of
persons to turn Roman Catholics: His provideing a house for Fathers and friars
speaks out no good intention and design. Let the Surveyer read what is said to
this purpose in the Preface to Naphtaly. 3. He tells us that the King is
willing and desirous, that the laws be put in execution against Papists and
perverters of sound doctrine; But how comes it then, that there are no sayers
of Mess and seminary Priests sentenced, according to the law? Did ever the
King write to the Council for suppressing of Popery. as effectually as he has
done for suppressing of conventicles? Or did he ever chide the Council, or
depose any member thereof, or any other inferior Magistrate, upon the account
of their negligence in this? But be it whose fault it will, sure we are there
is more care taken to search out conventicles, then the meetings of Papists or
Quakers: Is the Town of Edinburgh under such a bond to suppress meetings for
Mass, and others of the like nature; as they are for suppressing of honest
Protestants, meeting for the Worshipe of God according to the purely reformed
Religion? Did ever any Arch-Prelate procure an order from his Majesty to stir
up the leazye council to diligence in this matter? Wherein I pray does either
the Kings willingness, or the willingness of the Council, or of other
Inferior Magistrates to have the laws against Priests vigorously put into
execution, appear? And where are we then, when all Magistrates from the highest
to the lowest connive at, if not encourage countenance and approve of Papists,
and Popish idolatry; and the true Worshipers of God are hunted out, cast into
prisones, banished into America and Tangyr, and made to suffer such inhumane
Barbarities, and all to pleasure the perjured Prelates, who are more afraid of
a few honest seekers of God, then if legions of Papists were swarming in the
Land, knowing how soon, they would be willing to embrace these serpents in
their bosom, and join with them to root out the Protestant interest; whileas
they hate the truly godly with a perfect hatred, as being of principles
irreconcilable with theirs, and having ends before their eyes diametrically
opposite to what these intend? Yea, where are we, when almost all the Rules
proposed by Adam Contzens the Jesuit, for introduceing of Popery, in his
Polit. Lib. 2. Cap. 18. are so exactly followed: as when he advises that. 1.
They proceed as musicians do in tuneing their instruments, gradually, and piece
by piece. 2. That they press the Examples of some eminent Men as a mean to
draw the rest. 3. That Arch-heretikes (that is most Zealous Protestants) be
banished all at once, or if that cannot be done saifly, by degrees. 4. That
such be put from their dignities, and all place and power of trust. 5. That
Protestant Religion be made odious, by loading such of their opinions, as are
most obvious to a harsh construction. 5. That they foment the quarrels that are
among Protestant, and strengthen that party that is most ready to comply with
Rome. 7. That they discharge and hinder all private conventicles of
Protestants. 8. That severe Laws be made, and rigorously executed (though not
against all, yet) against the most dangerous. Who sees not, what a conformity
there has been and yet is, betwixt the practices of this Apostate, Popish,
Prelatical and Malignant faction, which has now destroyed the work of God, and
those Rules mentioned? And what lies latent under board the Lord knows. 4.
He asks the question if any of the People of the Land be spoiled of their
lawful civil libertyes? As if a man should enquire if the Sun were risen at
twelve hours of the day. Our Religion reformed in doctrine, Worshipe,
Discipline and Government, which was one of our maine civil and most lawful
libertyes, is taken from us. The liberty of supplicating, which the Law of God,
the Law of Nature, and the Law of Nations allow, it taken from us. The liberty
of free election of Members of Parliament, was taken away. Liberty of
protesting in Parliament was taken away. The Kings prerogative is screwed up to
such a hieght, that it overturnes the true native libertyes of the Subjects
Many honest Subjects are cast into prisone, no transgression being once
alleged far less proved against them. The due exercise of their Religion as
was covenanted, is taken away, Laws are not executed in a civil manner, as
they ought to be among free Subjects. Iudicatories are set up and erected
without the consent of the People, or their Representatives. Libertyes and
Privileges of brughes and such incorporations are taken away, unless they will
renounce and abjure a lawful, religious, and necessary Covenant. The free
exercise of justice especially against Nobles, is stopped. The Lieges are not
ruled by the Laws of the Land, but by the arbitrary will and lust of few
Prelates and the privy Council. Will he ask now if our libertyes be taken from
us? or will he call these unlawful? 5. He asks in the next place, what one
thing the King has done, without consent of the Peoples Representatives in
Parliament, at which any may except as a grievance. It seems he is either of
a very short Memory, or he thinks the High commission-court a very small
inconsiderable business; for the consent of Parliament was never had unto
this inquisition-court, neither of old, nor of late: And yet this was such an
heavy yoke of bondage, that made all the land to groan, and against which, as a
most intolerable grievance, all the corners of the country could give in their
exceptions. And as for this late Representative (so called,) they have enacted
many things contrare to their power and turst, as we have showed: No power
under heaven could enact what they have enacted: No power under heaven could
anul, condemn, and rescinde lawful Covenants made with the most high God: They
were not in tuto to rescinde and anull unalterable laws, more firm and fixed,
then any Laws of the Medes and Persians; For laws confirmed with oaths, and
solemn vows to God, are not ambulatory, as other politic laws. And
therefore all the laws being good and necessary in their own nature, by the
supervenient addition of an oath confirming and ratifying the same, became
absolutely unalterable by any Man or company of Men whatsoever. So that all the
laws made by King and Parliament to the prejudice of the Covenanted work of
reformation, are intolerable grievances, dishonorable to God, and prejudicial
to the welfare of the Subject; and to which, neither People, nor their
Representatives real of supposed, could ever lawfully consent. 6. He asks
what burden he has laid upon their Estates, but by Law? But this is a vain
flourish, seeing all that know what that Parliament was, know how prone and ready
it was, to devote (if it could) unto the lust of the King, the Souls,
Consciences, Estates, and all which the Subjects had, little regairding either
the true liberty or real advantage of the People.

CAP. XVII.
The Objections of others examined.
WE have now examined all which this Surveyer has said against us, in the
point of resistance; yet that we may satisfy (if possible) all persons and
parties touching the lawfulness of this act, of private persons defending
themselves and their Religion from manifest Tyranny and oppression, we shall
remove likewise such other objections, as some others are pleased to make use
of; and which our Surveyer has possibly forgotten to adduce.

1. Obj. Subjects are obliged to perform all duties of obedience and fidelity
unto their Magistrates, and albeit the Magistrates turn a manifest Tyrant,
every one cannot loose that obligation at his own hand. Hoen. Disp. Pol. 9.
These. 55. Ans. 1. Subjects, as we have seen, are but conditionally obliged to
perform these duties unto the Magistrate, and not absolutely, whether he play
the Tyrant or not, by Hoenonius his own confession. 2. Though each particular
person can not loose the obligation when he will; yet when a Tyrant has, by
his acts of tyranny, loosed the obligation, upon his part, a body of a People
or a considerable part thereof, may defend themselves against his tyranny, as
if there were no obligation betwixt him and them. 3. Though the obligation
stand uncancelled, and not abrogated, resistance may be granted; for a Sone may
resist his Father, and a Wife her Husband, though the obligation continue firm
and not dissolved.

Obj. 2. By this means a window should be opened to all seditions,
conspiracyes and rebellions, Hoen. ubi supra Ans. Incommodum non tollit
argumentum. The abuse of a liberty does not destroy the liberty. 2. By this
argument absolute and unlimited obedience might be pressed, lest if private
persons might refuse obedience, a door for all sedition and disobedience
should be opened. 3. By the contrare assertion, a door shall be opened to all
Tyranny and oppression, which should tend not only to disquyeting of the peace,
but to the ruin and destruction of the Commonwealth.

Obj. 3. Subjects are to pray for their Magistrates, Hoen. ibid. Answ. True,
but the consequence is naught. Therefore I may not resist them, when they
tyrannize and oppress unjustly, it does not follow. I must pray for my equals
and inferiors, and open enemies, whose unjust violence, I may notwithstanding
resist.

Obj. 4. A son may not do violence to his Father though never so unworthy; for
no impiety can be punished by paricide: Far less may violence be done to the
Prince, who is the Father of the Country, Hoen. ib. Answ. 1. This simile
helteth as we have showed. 2. If the Father abuse his power, the law will
deprive him of it, L. 6. Lenones, L. 7. C. de Inf. expos. L. 2. C. de Parent.
qui Fill. distrax. L. 2. de his qui sunt sui vel alieni Iuris. sed Domin. Just.
D. Titul. L. ult. si quis a Parente manumissus. 3. The simile is for us who
plead only for resistance, as we showed, not for killing and destroying
Tyrants. 4. If the Sone be a Judge and the Father a malefactor, the Son must
execute judgment on the Father.

Obj. 5. Destroying of the head, though it be sickly and tender, tends to the
destruction of the whole body, Hoenon. ibid. Answ. There is no such connection
betwixt King and Subjects, as betwixt Head and Members of our natural bodies. A
Tyrant may be, and often has been, destroyed, and the body of the Republic
has remained entire and in better condition then formerly. 2. Opposition may
be so made to the Head, that it destroyed not the noble parts, with defluxions
sent down thence; and it must, to prevent the destruction of the body, be
purged: so may a Tyrant be resisted for the saifty of the Commonwealth.

Obj. 6. It is better to have a sick head, then no head. id. ibid. Ans. Datur
tertium, there is a third, a sound wholesome head. 2. A commonwealth needs not
want a head long.

Obj. 7. There is greater hazard in casting out a Tyrant, then in suffering
tyranny, idem ibid. Ans. 1. resistance may be without destroying or casting out
of a Tyrant. 2. That hazard speaks not to the lawfulness or unlawfulness of
the thing, but only to the expediency or inexpediency of it; which is a
different question: An interprize may be hazardous and yet lawful. 3. It will
not always be found to be such a hazardous thing, even to cast away Tyrants;
as to suffer them to tyrannize.

Obj. 8. A Tyrant can never be destroyed, without the ruin of these who have
destroyed him, for some of his posterity will avenge the quarrel, id. ibid.
Ans. 1. We have many instances to the contrary in the Book of God: See the
Books of the Judges and Kings: who of Joram's posterity avenged his death, on
Jehu or his posterity? 2. A Tyrant may be resisted lawfully notwithstanding of
such difficultyes.

Obj. 9. God punished the wicked Kings of the Jews not by the Jews, but by
strangers, id. ibid. Answ. This is contrare to many examples in Scripture. Jehu
was not stranger. 2. We speak not of punishing wicked Kings, but of resisting
their unjust violence.

Obj. 10. David spared Saul, 1 Samuel 24, and 26. Whom he might lawfully have
killed, as some think, because he had given David's Wife to another, had
banished him and his Parents out of the country, and had killed the Priests,
id, ibid. Answ. If David was a public Judge, and might lawfully have killed
Soul for his injustice, murder, and oppression, and did it not. I see not how
he can be justified: But to me it is a question if David was any other then a
private person, so long as Saul lived: and his resisting of Saul, and defending
himself with armed men against his fury, does abundantly confirm what we say.

Object. 11. Jeremiah does not arm the jews against Nebuchadnezar with a
sword, but with prayers for him Id. Ibid. Answer. 1. We have not Ieremiahs now
to reveal God's mind to us extraordinarily. 2. If this were a standing
precedent, The Supreme Magistrate might not defend himself and his subjects,
against a foreign Enemy, comeing to destroy and conquer the land: for
Jeremiah commanded the King to submit to Nebuchadnezar

Object. 12. Christ commands tribute and not poison to be given to Princes.
Id. Ibid. Answ. We plead not for Poisoning of Princes, but for resisting their
unjust violence, against which Christ does not speak: but rather he ought to
have remembered these words Let him that has no sword sell his coat and buy
one.

Obj. 13. Paul Act. 23: ver. 5. Will not have an evil Prince so much as cursed
Id. Ibid. Answ. Then no Magistrate, no not an inferior should be resisted: for
such may not be cursed, doing their duty. 2. We may not curse nor revile any of
out equals or inferiors Mat. 5: v. 44. Romans 12: v. 14. Livit. 19: ver. 14.
and 20: v. 9. 1 Cor. 6: ver. 10. and yet such useing violence against us may be
resisted; we may not curse the rich Eccles. 10:20. and yet they may be
resisted, when violently and injuriously they assault us.

Obj. 14. War is not lawfully undertaken without the warrant of the Superior:
But Subjects have no superiority of authority over the Magistrate. Gerhard de
Magist. Pol.. 483. Answ. 1. A war defensive may be undertaken without the
express warrant of the Superior. 2. Defense may be used by such as are
inferior to the aggressors, as by a Wife, a son, a Servant, as is showed; yea
the injurer is ever eatenus inferior to the injured, in Law.

Obj. 5. Christ said Mat. 26: ver. 52. that such as took the sword should
perish by the sword. Id. Ibid. Answ. That is true of such as uses the sword,
further then God has allowed, or contrare to his express revealed will, but
not of such as have a lawful call thereto by the Law of Nature, and use it in
their sinlesse defense, when there is no countermand of God. Which place we
have abundantly vindicat already, where we showed that his commanding them to
sell their coat to buy swords sufficiently warrandeth this self defense: And
though some do take that speech to be allegorick, yet the whole context
clears that it is meaned of swords of steel; for they said, Here are two
swords, and he said it is enough. Sure these were swords of outward metal, as
the event proved: And to answer Mat. 26: ver. 52. with Luke 22: ver. 39. is
not to set Scriptures by the ears, but a solid way of answering an argument
brought from abused Scripture, as Christ's practice teaches us, answering the
devil's argument taken from Psalm, 91. 11. by produceing another passage Deuteronomy.
6. 16. see Mat. 4:6, 7.

Obj. 16. The example of the saints in the Old and New Testament is against it;
neither the Prophets nor Apostles gave this Command, but rather prescribed unto
them patience, and prayers. That Citizen of Nieomedia, was condemned of all,
who tore in pieces the Emperor's edict against the Christians, Id. Ibid. Answ.
1. We have seen instances both in the time of the Old Testament, and in the
days of the New Testament, making for us. 2. We find not the Prophets nor
Apostles forbidding this. 3. Their pressing to patience and prayers is not
repugnant to this innocent res istence: we may pray against foreign invaders,
yet may we resist them. 4. Tearing of the Emperor's edict is no act of self
defense.

Obj. 17. This would close up the way of persons acquireing the crown of
Martyrdom, Id. Ibid. Answ. If upon this account private persons might not
resist Magistrates, neither might inferior Magistrates resist the supreme,
which yet he will not condemn. Yea. 2. If this ground hold, the Supreme
Magistrate might not resist an army comeing to destroy him and all his
Kingdom, for Religion, but He and all were bound to hold up their throats that
they might receive the Crown of Martyrdom. 3. It is good to wait for this
Crown in God's way, and not to run to the stake without a clear call: and if
People may fairly and with a clear conscience, deliver themselves, it is a
question if they be called to suffer.

Obj. 18. Some adduce that place Eccles. 8. ver. 2, 3, 4. I counsel thee to
keep the Kings command and that in regaird of the oath of God -- he does
whatsoever pleases him, where the word of ^ King is there is power, and who
may say unto him what do thou? Ans. I. Will it hence follow that we must obey
all the Kings unjust, unlawful and iniquous commands? No true Christian can say
so. Neither will it hence follow, that in no case he may be resisted. 2. Kings
way not de jure do what they please, but they have power to execute the Law in
way of justice, which is the thing that they as Kings should and do please: And
therefore, we should not stand in an evil matter. 3. Notwithstanding of this,
Princes have been rebuked, 2 Samuel 12: ver. 7. and resisted 2 Chronicles. 27: ver.
17, 18, 19, 20. and so the meaning is, no man must question his just actions
warranted by his lawful authority. Or, it is but folly for a man to strive
with such an one, as is able to execute his cruelty and to do what he will: see
the English notes on the place, and Mr. Iackson's: but as this does not justify
Kings in their oppressing; so neither does it condemn a resisting of their
tyranny, more then the resisting of the oppressing violence of some mighty
robber, who has power to do what mischief he will, whom yet lawfully we may
resist if we be able.

Obj. 19. The author of an appeal to conscience adduceth that place Psalm. 105:
ver. 15. Touch not mine anoyneted. Answ. Hence it clearly follows that Kings
and Princes should not enjure the Saints and Servants of God; for this was
meaned of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and of their Wives and Families, who were
sojourning as strangers from Nation to Nation, as the context clears, and the
words following and do my Prophets no harm. And so relates to what we hear
Genesis 12: v. 10, to 20.and 20:1. etc. and 26:1. etc. and is not meaned of Kings
and Princes as such. So that this anointing is such as is common to Priests and
Prophets, and to all the saints who are spiritually anointed, and so become
Kings and Priests unto God 1. Pet. 2: 5. Rev. 1: 6. and 5: 10.

Obj. 20. D. Fern, Resolvig of conscience would prove from 1 Samuel 8: ver. 18.
that subjects may do nothing against Tyrants, but cry to the Lord. So Grotius.
Answ. Subordinata non pugnant. We may both cry to the Lord and resist, as Judge.
10. Exodus 14. 2 Chronicles. 32: v. 20. 2 King. 19. 2 Chronicles 14: v. 9. etc. and 13:
14, 15, * 16. 2. The text says not, they should have no other remedy left them
but crying; or that it should be lavvsul for them to do no other thing. We
find that they resisted this King, when he was about to kill innocent
Jonathan. 3. The words at most but import a prohibition of attempting to have
the government changed from King to judges 4 Suppose it were so; yet, it
importing only a punishment unto them for their importunat and headstrong
affecting of a King, will not in reason reach other Nations not guilty of this
crime. Yea 5. This praediction could not bind up their own hands from a
defense; but at most import, That all their resistance or defense should be in
vain, through God's not hearing or helping them in resisting.

Obj. 21. The author of an appeal to thy conscience proposes this argument.
That evil Kings and Tyrants are afflictions and punishments inflicted on us by
God. Therefore we should submit patiently, and not resist. Answ. The
consequence is naught, for so are foreign enemies, the riseing up of
inferiors against us, sickness and pains on our bodies, and the like, and
yet these may very lawfully be resisted.

Obj. 22. Equals have no power over equals, much less have inferiors over
Magistrates Alber. Gentil. in. dispp. regalib. Answ. Superiority, is not
requisite to lawful defense, as is said: 2. A Tyrant as such is no Magistrate,
but a private person.

Obj. 23. No punishment for Tyrants but vexation of conscience id. ib. Answ.
All evil doers may expect that punishment as well as Tyrants, and yet they may
be resisted, yea and punished with civil punishments.

Obj. 24. The removing of a Tyrant occasioneth civil wars, which makes the
remedy worse then the disease id. ib. Answ. 1. We speak not of removing
Tyrants; but of resisting them. 2. This is the way to prevent ruin and
destruction to the Commonwealth, even to resist Tyranny. 3. A civil war may be
more advantageous, for Religion and the libertyes of the subjects, and so
preferable to a brutish submission to illegal tyranny: And every kind of evil
is not to be endured for avoiding a worse in probability? 4. Desperate diseases
must have desperate cures; and it is better to hazard some thing in a war, then
lose all: We know not what the event may be, we are bound to defend Religion,
and the libertyes of the country, and commit the event to God. 5. It has been
found that the putting away of a Tyrant, has proved very advantageous to the
Country, and to Religion: and hereby all their loss by war was more than
abundantly repayed: yea and sometimes this has been obtained without much
shedding of blood.

CAP. XVIII.
How weakly and foolishly The Surveyer maintains the Union of his Majesty's
Dominions, is cleared.
HAving thus discussed all which the Surveyer has in his railing pamphlet
said, against this truth which we have maintained; and having (sufficiently as
we suppose) vindicated the Peoples right to defend themselves, and their
Covenanted Religion, from manifest and intolerable violence and oppression, we
might without the least injury imaginable to our cause, wave the examination of
what he Principally aims at Cap. 1. and 3. and 4. as being extrinsick to the
present question, and because we are not necessitated to maintain these
opinions which he sets himself against in those chapters, our question being
distinct from those, and easily maintained without touching upon those rocks.
But yet because this windy man would feign make his Majesty believe that he had
not gotten his reward for nothing, but that he had done some notable piece of
service worthy of it; And had discovered some rare secret, the discovery of
which, is of no small advantage, but of great use both for the preservation of
the union of his Majesty's dominions, and for the saveing of his life from the
stroke of adversaryes; we shall manifest how little ground he has to father
any of these assertions on Naphtali, and then discover how vveakly and
foolishly he maintains his Majesty's cause, in both these; that all the world
may see, that he has come short of performing that service to his Maj. which
he here undertaketh; and that he has been so far from laying the devil after
he had raised him, that he has done his Maj. no small piece of disservice in
starting questions so dangerous to his Majesty's Kingdoms and life, when he
had no ground given him; and after he had moved the question, left it worse
then he found it; and so did little less then invite such as pleased, to do
what he alleges Naphtaly and his accomplices had a mind to do.

The first question which he speaks to Chap. 1. Is touching the dissolving of
humane societies, which in some cases politicians will yield to see Althus.
pol. c. 38. n. 76. And the thing he drives at, is to fasten on the honest
party a resolution and design, to dissipate and dissolve the immemorially
settled frame (as he loves to speak Page 9.) of that Nation and Kingdom, which
through divine providence has in many generations subsisted under our lawful
Sovereigns, for the common benefit of subjects at home, and to the honor and
renown of the Nation abroad; yea and to the glory of divine providence, which
has through many storms in several ages; preserved us in this comfortable
constitution. And this he devises of his own wicked heart, of purpose to make
these cordial lovers of Religion and of their Country, hateful to all the
world, if he could; and therefore he would represente them as men of strange
principles, and purposes. But woe to such as make lies their refuge! This man
thinks to make the King glade with his lies, but we know that the mouth of
such as speak lies shall be stopped.

But sure one would think that he behoved to have some clear ground to walk
upon in asserting this of us, and especially when he is at the pains to spend
a whole chapter, to confute it. And yet when he has rambled up and down that
book of Naphtali, to seek out a ground for this assertion, he can not adduce
any one sentence, that even with half an eye does look there away, except one,
which yet has no such design or import. The sentence is this Page 150. [ That
through the Manifest and notorious perversion of the great ends of Society, and
government, the bond thereof being dissolved, the persons one or more thus
liberated therefrom, do relapse into their primeve liberty and privilege, and
accordingly as the similitude of their case, and exigence of their cause does
require, may upon the very same principles again join and associate for their
better defense and preservation, as they did at first enter into Societyes.]
For clearing of which these things would be observed.

1. That the author there is only adding a few observations, to clear the
innocence of these noble witnesses, who died owneing the interest and cause of
Christ, and to show how free they were of the crime of rebellion, with which
they were charged. Now all know that as these worthies, had no design, of
erecting themselves into a distinct commonwealth, nor to make such a civil
politic separation from the rest of the land; so the way which they took, did
directly tend to have the whole land united unto God, and among themselves, as
one for God and to God, in the bond of the solemn league and covenant. Had
they designed such a separation, they behoved also to have chosen more apposite
and fit means, then these were which they did use, as any of half a judgment
may perceive.

2. That as the maine and only design of these worthies, was to defend
themselves and their Covenanted Religion, from manifest oppression and tyranny,
and to have the land recovered from that woeful course of backsliding and
departing from the Lord, whereof it was guilty, and wherein it had lain for
many days: So, This author is only clearing their innocence, as to that: and
therefore in the first observation Page 147. He clears the native ground of
self preservation: and in the 2. How the perverting of the ends of government
does not destroy this native right, but that then people are as free to defend
themselves as ever, even against the oppressing Powers, who in that case,
according to King James his testimony and practice, become Tyrants, and are to
be resisted: and in the 3. How all powers are obliged, if not expressly, yet
tacitly, to walk in a due subordination to God, and to prosecute these great
ends of government: and particularly in the 4. How our king is bound by the
laws of the land, and by his coronation covenant oath, to Rule for God and the
good of the People: And in the 5. How all even the most Malignantly affected,
would assent to this, as an undoubted truth, in their own particular cases:
And comes in the 6. Place to the words cited, which must have the same import
and tendency, to wit, to clear the innocence of private persons self-defence,
and defense of Religion, when the powers which should mind and study according
to their place and power, to promove the great ends of society and government
viz. the glory of God, and the good of the Subjects in soul and body, do
manifestly and notoriously pervert these ends, and prefer themselves, and
their own lusts, unto the will and glory of God; and to the good of the
People. The same is also clear from the following observations, which do
manifestly point at the clearing of people being bound in duty to defend
themselves and their Religion, conform to their engagements vows and
Covenants, which still stand in force, notwithstanding of any thing done to the
contrary of late, in their acts rescissory and condemnatory.

3. The very words themselves, to any who is not utterly blinded with
prejudice, can import no more then that, when through the notorious and
mainfest perversion of the great ends of society and government, the bond
thereof is dissolved, and the persons now relapseing into their Primeve liberty
and privilege, may no less now join and associate together, to defend
Themselves and their Religion, then at first they entered into societes: For,
as their entering into societies was for this end, and their setting up of
Magistrates over themselves was for this end; so when the Magistrates cross
their end and rule, and thereby annul the relation, or make it invalide for the
ends, they may join together now for these ends, as they might have done
before the formal institution of Government. And who can deny this to be a
truth? Or who can hence infer (but he who is of a perverse spirit, and for
his perverse ends seeks to pervert all things) that he pleads for the
lawfulness of Peoples crumbling together in lesser fractions and petty
commonwealthes.

4. Suppose the words should be capable of that glosse' which the Surveyer
puts upon them; yet as they lie connected with what preceedeth and with what
follows they can, at most, be but a Medium for proving the intended
conclusion; and so must be considered as founding an argument a Majori ad
minus, from the more to the less; to this purpose: if when through the
manifest and notorious perversion of the great Ends of society and government,
the bond thereof is dissolved, and persons relapse into their primeve liberty,
so that according as the similitude of their case, and exigence of their cause
requires, upon the same principles, they may again associate and combine into
new and distinct Societies and Commonwealthes, for their defense and
preservation: Then much more may they lavvfully now join and associate
together for their defense and preservation, without making any such rupture,
or new erections: but endeavoring to keep the old Society firm and entire,
undissolved, and unweakened. So that though his gloss should be admitted, he
does but bewray the ignorence of his capricious brain, to take the Medium for
the conclusion. And the antecedent will be granted by politians, and is
expressly asserted by Althusius, Polit, Cap. 20. Number. 20. in case the Prince
keep not his promise, but violate his faith and Covenant.

5. Suppose also that this which he alleges had been the authors positive
assertion, can he hence inferred with any color of reason, that it was or is
the design of the author and his party, to dissipate and dissolve the old
settled frame of this Kingdom, and erect new Commonvvealthes with new
distinct Sovereigns? Seeing every one knovveth, that many things are lavvful,
which are not expedient, convenient nor necessary; and that it were the
result of no mature deliberation, but of madness and folly, to intend and
design such a thing. which (though lavvful in it self, yet) all things
considered were, very inexpendient and unnecessary, yea not only not
advantageous to their ends and purposes, but quite destructive thereof.

Now since the Surveyer has drawn in this controversy by the ears, and set
it in the front of his learned and elaborat pamphlet, we must suppose him one
who is well versed in this topic, and can give a good account of his
politic notions touching this quaestion. But alas if he had a real adversary
to deal with (as now he does but faigne one to himself: and it is easy
fighting against a man of straw, or one of our own making) his ridiculous
and yet audacious folly, would easily be made to appear: his adversary would
laugh (as indeed he would have cause) at the shakeing of his spear.

He makes this the thesis which he undertaketh to confirm. That [ when
politic bodies are settled in voluntary associations, or whatever way in the
course of divine providence, they have been reduced to live under the same
laws and authorities, and have continued long in the union of a common
interest, under the protection of magistracy, to break off from the body in
seditious secessions, cannot but be displeasing to God; and they are no other
then firebrands, confounders of humane society, fighters against God and his
ordinance, who instigate People to cut off themselves from the body of the
Common wealth whereof they are members.] But would not his adversary tell him
that he had granted as much in the words immediately preceding, as would make
him and his position both ridiculous: For he has granted That the Lord has
not by any precept particularly determined the bounds of every embodied
Political society, There being some greater, and some lesser, acting under
their several heads and souveraigne Magistrates. And seeing neither God nor
Nature has determined the quantity and extent of each Republicki or embodyed
Politic Society, what more affinity has it with sinful sedition, to say, that
greater bodies may be divided and subdivided into lesser Republics, then to
say that more lesser bodies may associate together to make one greater,
especially seeing Politicians tell us that the ends of government are more
easily attained in a lesser Republic, then in a greater; and that a mid way
commonwealth neither too larg^, nor too little, is the best, as being less
subject to vices and greater calamities, as was to be seen in the Roman
Republic before it was enlarged in the days of Marius, Sylla, Pompey, and
Caesar, and is to be seen this day in the Commonwealth of Venice, and the like,
as Althusius shows us, Polit. Cap. 9. number. 11. The time was when all the World
was under one head, and after they were multiplied, they became distinct
Republics without any sinful or seditious secession. The time was when all
these western parts were under one Emperor, and was nothing but a seditious
secession, caused by firebrands, the ground of their becoming many and distinct
Republics? The time was when Scotland, England, and Irland, were distinct
Kingdoms, and under distinct Sovereign Magistrates, and what repugnancy were
it either to the Law of God or nature, to say they might be so again? So were
there once Seven Kings in England at once: and more then one King in Scotland at
once: and by no reason can he prove that it should always be, as it is at
present, but by the same reason his adversaries could prove him guilty of
treason; for he behoved to say, that because we were once all under one
Emperor, we ought to be so still, and that the King must either hold his
crown of the Emperor, or be an usurper and a seditious rebel; for in the
course of providence we were then reduced under the same Laws and Authorities,
and continued in the union of a common interest for some good space of time,
Yea and observe many of these civil Laws yet. Thus we see whither this
advocate will drive the matter, and how little service he does his Majesty for
all his rich recompense.

But it may be his arguments are cogent and binding: He has many words, Page
4, and 5. to prove that this is contrary to Religion, The sum is this. [ Never
greater perversion of government then in the times of many of the Prophets, and
in the days of Christ, and his holy Apostles, and primitive Christians, and
yet this was never their doctrine or sense.] Answ. Is this all that he can say,
to prove that this is contrary to Religion? Sure his adversary will think that
he has little Religion who says so, and that he has farlesse loyalty to his
Master the King of Great Britane; for why? Because contrare to the doctrine of
Christ and the Apostles, and the sense of all the primitive Christians, he
acknowledges the King of Britane to be a distinct King from the Roman
Emperor, and not to depend upon him. They never taught that Britane and Irland
should be ruled by a King distinct from him, and that these Islands should be
separate from the Roman Empire, and so the King holds his Crown by usurpation,
and by an irreligious secession from the Empire, which neither Christ nor his
Apostles ever taught, and must not this man and not we, acknovvledge Judas of
Galilee, and Theudas to be his Masters: For they taught (especially the first,
as Josephus, and Ruffinus out of him show us) that no tribute should be given
to the Roman Emperor; and he vvil do the same, and say that it should be paid
to king Charles the II. Next his adversary would tell him, that if this were
held and maintained as a point absolutely necessary to salvation, then his
argument would say something; But seeing it is only held as lavvful, and
according as providence determines it to be convenient or inconvenient, to be
practicable, it is sufficient if the doctrine of the Prophets and of Christ and
his Apostles, do not condemn it, as simply sinful: And that by this argument
of his, it should be utterly unlawful now for Frame and Holland, and other
adjacent Countries, to join together in one: and proclaim King Charles their
Sovereign Lord and King: because neither Prophets nor Apostles taught any such
doctrine, that many several societies should join together under one head: And
who is a friend to the Kings greatness now? If this man be worthy of his
wages, let all the World judge. Moreover they would tell him, that in the days
of some of the Prophets, there was a greater dissipation and secession, then
any that is now desired, when the Ten tribes separated themselves from the
other two, in the days of Rehoboam and erected themselves in a distinct
Republic, under a distinct Supreme Magistrate; and we find not this reproved
by any of the prophets, yea we find a Prophet sent to tell Jeroboam that God
would give him Ten Tribes, 1. King. 11: ver. 21. etc. and when Rehoboam would
go and reduce them under his subjection by the power of the sword, we find
another Prophet sent to dissuade him, in the Name of the Lord, 1 King. 12: ver.
22, etc. and saying that that was from the Lord. And sure this positive is as
forcible, as his negative. And further, even in the days of the primitive
Christians, the Roman Empire was divided, and how it is now subdivided and
re-subdivided into many fractions, we all know: and can he show us where any of
the godly zealous Christians and servants of God spoke against this as a
seditious practice?

But is may be that he will prove this assertion, though not dissonant to
Religion; yet dissonant to sound reason. Let us hear how he does it? [ For
(says he Page 5.) it has a clear tendency to break in pieces all humane
societyes -- which no wit of man can preserve from dissolution, if this
principle be drunk in: For by this Man's opinion, the judgment of the
pervesion of the ends of government is put over to the discretion of the
sufferers of prejudice, and they are accordingly to determine their actions,
and nothing should hinder them but want of probable capacity to through their
work.] But poor Man, as he has made shipevvrack of faith and of a good
conscience, so has he made shipvvrack of his reason also; for his adversary
would now think the cause vvon: For grant once that a secession and
separation may be made, when the ends of government are manifestly perverted,
and they will seek no more, for they will readily grant it ought not to be,
when there is no just cause, suppose that a great part should in their
discretion judge there were real cause; And where is he now? Where is the
position that is so dissonent to Religion and Reason? Will he also own it? Did
Naphtaly say that when ever a few of a society thought in their judgment of
discretion, that the ends of government were perverted, they were replased into
their primaeve state of liberty, and free to make separations from the old
society and associate into new combinations? And since he did not say so, how
can this advocate make his position appear dissonant either to Religion or
Reason? But the man, let him be never so well hired, is obliged to reason no
better then he can. Let him grant (and he cannot well deny it) that it is
lawful for a great society to divide into two or more lesser, when the ends of
government are really and manifestly perverted, in that greater society so
united, and his adversaries will soon satisfy him (if he be rational, or a man
fit for society who will be ruled with reason) concerning the judgment of that
perversion. He but exposes himself to pity, when he cries out (taking also
God's name in vain) [ To what times are we reserved, wherein the unmeasureable
and aciousnesse of Men dar present such poison to a Christian People, and to
attempt the breaking them in pieces by such doctrines which both Religion and
sound Reason abhorres.] For no body has either seen Religion nor found Reason
alleged against that position (which he says Naphtaly sets down.) But we
will see more of this vain Man's ridiculous ranting in the following words [
Dar this libeller (so speaks this non-sensical railer) say that this is a
fundamental constitution of political societies, that at the arbitrament and
lust of any minor part of private persons, pretending a perversion of the ends
of government (a pretense that will never be wanting to Malcontents and
Malapert wicked ones, Even Katherines and highlandish thieves, and it is real to
them if they themselves be admitted judges) they may make secession from the
society in which they are imbodied, and renunce their obligation to the
government thereof.] Now he soars high in his scurril rhetorik, and as
ornaments of his discourse, he must bring in his Katherines and Highlandish
thieves, but to what purpose is all this superfluity of vain empty words?
Where or when said Naphtaly, That that was the fundamental Constitution of
politic societies? What rational Man ever said so? Is this the only thing
which he denies? Sure he is an ill maintainer of the union of his Majesty's
dominion; for his adversaries will grant all this, and yet say and be able to
maintain (for any thing that he has said) that when the Ends of government
are mani^estly and notoriously perverted, people relapseing into their primaeve
liberty and privilege, may, according as the exigent of their case requires,
associate into new societies for their defense and preservation. But he adds
page 6. [Suppose there be a breaking off, upon that pretension (which will
never be wanting to cover sedition and confusion) of perversion of the ends of
government, the party making secession may happily meet with the same measure
they gave, for if a minor party arise among them with the same accusations,
must they not have the same privilege? And where shall there be a stand?] His
adversaries would soon reply, that whatever be in that absurdity, it does not
concern them, for they plead not for a dissolution upon a mere pretension of
this perversion: And beside, they plead not for it, even where there is a real
and not our perversion, as a thing necessary, which they must go about, never
once consulting whether it be expedient or inexpedient, and whether they see a
more feazable way of attaineing the ends of government, without such
perversion, after the separation is made, them before, or not: But only as a
thing lawful, which may be done when they see it most convenient for the ends
of government: And when they walk by this rule and principle, they will soon
see where to make a stand. For they will find that the crumbling of Societies
into too many and too small bodies, would put them as far from attaineing the
ends of governments, as they were while associated in a greater body. And this
is all which he has to this purpose. For as touching his application of this
page 9. and 10. all alleging that there is no perversion of the Ends of
government now, it has been spoken to already, and his adversaries in this
position (if there be any such, which I am ignorant of) will think and make
out, that the ends of government are so far perverted, that if there were no
other thing lying in the way of a secession, then what he has said, they
would think it of concernment to mind this outgate, which they had no
thoughts of before. And the King should then think himself little obliged to
this man and his defenses, and wish that he had been sleeping when he wakened
such a debate, and himself had bestowed his gold another way: For sure, if such
a thing were upon the heart of people now (as I hope and am confident it is
not) they will profess themselves obliged to this Surveyer, for putting it
into their head first, and that all which he has said against it, would rather
invite and encourage them to it, then discourage them from it.

May not then this Man be ashamed to take his Majesty's Money, and do so bad
service for it, as he has done? But Some will possibly say what could any
persons have said more; Well, though some should think me officious to take his
Majesty's part and defend his cause, un-hired, yea and undesired, yet I will
propose one thing, which I am confident, shall be more effectual, for
preserving the immemorially settled frame of this Nation, and the union of all
his Majesty's Dominions, to all generations, without dissipation or
dissolution, or any hazard or fear thereof; Then what this Pamphleting Prelate
has said, Or will say, though he should write volumes, at this rate: What is
that, you will say? It is no great secret, yet if heartily followed, it shall
prove infallibly effectual. Let his Majesty Turn to the Lord with all his
heart, and repent of his fearful perjury and defection, and mind his oath made
unto the great God, and perform his vows, and fulfill his Covenant which he
swore with hands lifted up to the most high God, and solemnly promised to own
and prosecute, as he should answer to God, in that day, when the secrets of
all hearts shall be disclosed; and execute judgment on the Apostate Prelates,
by hanging them up before the Sun, that the fierce anger of the Lord, evidenced
by more as twice three Years famine of the word, may be removed, and on all
others who have been authors and abettors of this norrible course of defection,
and unparallelable apostasy, which makes these lands an hissing and a byword
to all nations; and let him honestly and with an upright heart prosecute the
ends of these holy Covenants, and with that Godly King Asa. 2. Chron. 15. Enter
into a Covenant, that whosoever will not seek the Lord God of Israel, shall be
put to death, whether small or great, whether Man or woman: And let his
successors follow his footsteps in this, and he and they shall find, no
imaginable bond so sure to tie his Kingdoms together perpetually, as an
indissoluble Society, then these holy Covenants, particularly that solemn
league and Covenant. In which all his subjects in Scotland, England, and
Ireland, did swear in a most solemn manner, to maintain and promove
reformation of Religion in Worshipe, Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, and
endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the Three Kingdoms, to the nearest
conjunction, and uniformity, in Religion, Confession of faith, Form of Church
government, Directory for worshipe and Catechiseing, etc. that they and their
posterity after them, may as brethren live in faith and love, and the Lord may
delight to dwell in the midst of them -- and that the Lord may be one and his
name one in the three Kingdoms; and to endeavor the discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be incendiaries, Malignants, or evil instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, divideing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or make any faction or parties among the
People, contrary to this League and Covenant, that they may be brought to
public trial and receive condign punishment: And that they should each one of
them, according to their place and interest, endeavor that the Kingdoms may
remain conjoined, in firm peace and union to all posterity: And that they
shall not suffer themselves directly nor indirectly, by whatsoever combination,
persuasion or terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this belssed union and
conjunction. Now what bond more strong to unite and keep together his
Majesty's Dominions can the wit of Man imagine? And shall not the owneing and
prosecuting of this Covenant, Appear to all rational persons the most
infallible mean to effectuate this indissoluble union and lasting Conjunction,
that can be invented?

CAP. XIX.
How weakly and foolishly the Surveyer defends his Majesty's Life, is showed.
THe surveyer, finding how poorly he had defended the cause now mainly
controverted. viz. The unlawfulness of Peoples defending themselves, and
maintaining their Religion against manifest and intolerable oppression. Cap. 2.
That he might do something for his money, would start another question, wherein
he thought he should do his Majsome acceptable piece of service, and secure his
life, when all came to all: Though he could not cudgil with his railing (for he
can move none with his reason) the People into a stupide, and irrational
subjection, so that let the King rage worse then ever Nero did, they should not
lift a hand to resist and withstand him; He thinks he shall do the next best,
viz. he shall fortify his Majesty's person, and set such a guard of
impregnable reasons about him, that no man, no company of men, yea no
judicatoure, shall ever approach to touch his sacred person, or to spoil him
of his life; a guard of reasons like lion rampants, be-like he thought them,
more invincible and saife, then a legion of the most valient Champions that his
Majesty's kingdoms can aford. But poor man, he may dream that such arms are
impenetrable and proof, because they are the best in his armory, or that his
dull head could hammer out: But no man of reason will think so; yea all who
know that belongs to this controversy, and are not professed adversaries (yea
and the most ingenuous of them too) will upon second thoughts be forced to say,
That never any put pen to paper in the King's quarrel, who has so foolishly
and childishly, managed that disput; and how little he deserves thanks (let be
a reward) for his pains, such as are sober will judge, when they consider how
little ground, he had to move such a question now, seeing the wronging of the
King's Person or his just authority, was not intended by those worthies who
arose for the maintenance of Religion; as such of them who were publicly put
to death, did openly upon the scaffold confess and avow; and consider also how
the Author of Naphtaly has been miserably misunderstood by him.

It is not our purpose, nor our present business, to speak unto this head, and
show for what causes, or by whom kings are to be questioned, deposed, or
executed: Far less is it our purpose to defend the taking away of the late
King's life, though this railing Pamphleter thinks to fasten this upon
Naphtaly. And therefore we might palse what he says to this purpose, Chap. 3.
Yet as in the preceding Chapter, we have showed how ill he has maintained the
union and conjunction of his Majesty's Dominions; So in this, we shall shovv
how vveakly he has guarded his life, against such as would oppose themselves
unto him, in this question.

But first, we would take notice whether Napthtali has given him such
ground to fasten upon him the justification of the murder of the late King, as
he allegeth. [ The matter (says the Surveyer) in dealing with Magistrates
(according to Naphtali's mind) rests not in a mere resistance of them by mere
private persons, but goes on to a retaliating and revenging upon them wrong
supposed to be done -- for his man again jeers at the Sovereign Powers
Privilege, and Impunity of Divine exemption.] Ans. Does this man know what he
writes? Does Naphtaly say, That private persons may revenge wrongs upon the
Supreme Magistrate, because he jeers at such as plead for such a Privilege and
impunity unto Sovereign Powers, as will exempt them from all trial and
punishment, both of God and Man? What means he else by this impunity of
divine exemption? Then he tells us, page 71, and 77. That Naphtaly Page 29.
reflects not obscurely upon the horrid murder of our late Sovereign. Let us
hear Naptaly's words, then shall we better judge, [ And as these inferior
Princes (says Naphtaly, Page 29.) Do often forget their subordination to the
most High in their unjust commands, and would usurp his throne, by an
uncontrollable Soveraignity: So the Lord by the warrant of his Word and
approbation of his providence, and also of the People (when by them oppressed,
but by himself animated and strengthened) has declared and made void this
their pretended exemption and impunity, and removed the carcasses of such
Kings, and broken their scepter: amongst which precedents, the instance of
these times, whereof we now speak, is worthily recorded, and deserves better
to be remembered] Now Naphtali is speaking of what fell out betwixt the year
1494. and the year 1560. in that place, and makes no mention of what fell out
an 1560. and afterward till he come to Page 31. etc. Sure then, the times he is
speaking of being before the year 1560. are far from the times wherein King
Charles the first was executed. But says he, there was no such thing as
murdering of Kings or dethroning of them, at that time, Answ. Yet the Lord, at
that time, declared and made void the pretended exemption and Impunity of
Princes and Sovereign Governors, by removing in his providence their
carcasses, and by the approbation of the people, when by them oppressed, and by
himself animated, breaking their scepter; as we find was done to the Q.
Kegent anno 1559. when she was by the People, the Nobles, Barons and Burgesses
assembled to deliberate upon the affairs of the commonwealth, October. 20.
deposed from her Regency, and upon the ninth of I^n the next year, God removed
her carcass by death, so that the land was no more troubled with her.

Who may not now see what a poor ground this Railer had, to father such a tenet
on Naphtali, as he does? And what advantage the King's cause has gotten by
this, we shall now see. He tells us Page 72. [That most of the venom this man
(meaning Naphtali*) has against the powers ordained of God, he has sucked out
of the breasts of Lex Rex. It were not right to dig up all the pestilent
untruths of that piece, set forth in most impertinent and sophistical
reasonings, mixed with infinite humane bitterness, against the late King: Only
as it were to be wished that such errors, might be buried in eternal oblivion;
so it is to be regrated that too too many of the Ministry and others in
Scotland have been poisoned with such principles, and the same not being very
like to be suddenly extirpat, the more need have the powers above us to be
watchful] Ans. The author of Lex Rex and of Naphtaly also, ascribe as much to
the powers ordained of God, as God's word will allow; and are no way opposed
unto them, but only unto Tyranny, which is no Ordinance of God: and this Man
rather spitteth venom in the face of the power ordained of God, when he goes
about to patronize and defend their illegal and iniquous exorbitances, as if
these were the ordinance of God, which are rather the ordinance of Satan: Sure
this is not far from blasphemy, to call such courses the Ordinance of God. 2.
He has taken a short cut. I confess, to answer that unanswerable book Lex
Rex. To say, that it is full of pestilent untruthes, set forth in most
impertinent and sophistical reasonings. Had King Charles the first, when he
read that book, remembered this, or thought upon it, he would not have said he
feared (as is reported he did) that it should not have been answered. But what
Man, who has not de nuded himself of all wit and reason, will take, upon this
perjured Apostat's word, these Truths which Lex Rex has demonstrated (and
which this Man was so unable to answer, that I much question if he well
understood many of them, or if his lumpish brain could discern betwixt a
sophistical reason and a true and real reason) to be untruthes; and these
truths so wholesome and useful to all Republics, and necessary to be known
and well digested by all who consult the welfare of commonwealths, to be
pestilent untruthes, and his unanswerable reasons, to be impertinent and
sophistical? 3. I am sure all the Cavaliers, and the Malignant squade would
have thought him well worth his gold, if he had in a sober rational manner
discovered the impertinencies and sophistical reasonings in that book, which
yet is like to speak after it is burned, and under a legal restraint, though he
should have spent the most part of his days upon it; it may be, the Royal
cabal would have thought it Dignum opus, and have canonized him for it, and
advised the King of Remember the issue of such a worthy and singular pillar of
the tottering throne. But the man knew how far his stock would reach, and that
all the gold in the Kings treasures could not make his head stronger then it
was, how ever it might superabundantly fortify his purse; and therefore, seeing
his short horns could reach no further, his Majesty must rest satisfied with
this: And Lex Rex must be declared, as it is, to be further unanswereable. 4.
Seeing he wishes that such errors might be buried in oblivion, why did not his
work follovv his vvish? Why did he dig up the untruths (if such) again, when
he was not able to bury them dead nor alive? Prudence (if he were not innocent
of it) might have taught him silence, seeing he knew he could answer no better.
5. Such as have received these principles find them more wholesome food then
his sour leaven. 6. He needs not stir up the Powers to more cruelty and
tyranny then already they exerce, neither will that be a way to extirpate
these principles, but rather a way to root them more deeply in the heart.

But now what says he to the thing. He tells us in the first place: That [ The
God of order has in all humane political Societyes appointed under himself a
supreme power, whether subjected in a single person, or in a complex company,
which orders the whole body, having nothing before or above it, in the nature
and order of civil authority, and governs all in the society, and is governed
by none therein: to say that a person is chief, and yet has a Superior or
equal is to speak contradictions: wise men have said, that a multitude of Gods
is the nullity of Gods, and multitude of infinites so called makes none of them
infinite, so a multitude of supreme powers in one civil society destroys
divine order.] Answ. 1. It is true, God has appointed in all humane political
societies, a supreme power. But I suppose, the Surveyer will grant, that this
may as well be a Parliament, as the King, and what has he then said for
security of the King's life, by this argument? 2. What ever supreme power,
whether in one or more persons, God has appointed over politic societies, he
has done it by the People; and so the People, who make and set up, under God,
these supreme powers, are above these supreme powers; If he will not take my
word for this, let him read and consider how it is proved in Lex Rex, in many
places, specially quaes;t. XIX. And if he will not rest satisfied therewith,
let him try his hand, And answer what is there said, if he can. 3. Politicians
will tell him that the King's supremacy of power, is only in respect of the
administration, and execution of the laws, according to the power committed
unto him, by the People: let him read and consider well Althusius his
politics, as to this. 4. And so, though in respect of this executive
administration, he be chief, and governs all: yet in respect of the royal
fountaine-povver of Government, the People are above him, because they give
this out to him, and may, in cases of necessity, recall it, and give it to
another; So that still they reserve a fountaine-power over him, to be exerced
in cases of necessity: and therefore, there is no contradiction here, because
non ad idem: the father is above the sone, and yet subject to him, if he be a
judge. The Emperor is above the prince palatine, and yet in some cases that
Prince^ is his judge; as the Tutor has the supreme executive power, and the
pupil can not act without him; Yet in case of male administration, the pupil
has a power to call him to a account. But finally what if his adversaries
should say, that the King is not that Supreme power in Scotland, but that a
Parliament, as the Peoples Representatives are above him? He may see much said
to prove this in Lex Rex, and in the Apology. And how shall he be able to
confute that? And if Parliaments have power to depose Princes in Scotland (as
has been often practiced) how has he saved the King's Scepter and Person?
But he adds, as a short answer to cut all off that is said, [ A chimaera of
idle distinctions is whelped by the late Masters of confusion of coordinate
and collateral Sovereigns in one Kingdom, the fountality of Royalty in the
People (resumable at their pleasure) is talked of, also Kings and People there
being mutual Magistrates to punish one another, -- and courts of necessity and
tribunals of nature, where People are judges accusers and all, are bigly talked
of; but these are only cloaks of fig leaves to cover horrid rebellion and
disorder.] Ans. Every thing must go for a new whelped Chimaera, which this
blunt head cannot understand: Can he confute such of these distinctions as Lex
Rex makes use of? Why does he it not then? How does this master of disorder
blow away these figleaves, yea or discover them to be such? Is this the way
he takes to salve his Master's life? By his calling such distinctions
Chimaeraes and figleaves; he will not save a tyrannical Magistrate from
deposition or worse, by that power which is cleared by these distinctions.
2. As for these courts of necessity, etc. Royalists must grant them, who grant
power in some cases to People to resist and depose Kings, viz. when they
turn habitual tyrants, sell the Commonwealth and the like: and in such cases,
when the Prince does such horrid things, which himself Page 24. thinks can
hardly befall a Prince in his natural and right wits: How shall these things
be judged, if he allow no courts, but the ordinary courts of justice, and no
court of necessity? Ay, but he says thereafter [ That it is certain Supreme
power is indivisible and incommunicable to distinct subjects, in any one
political Society.] Though the supreme executive power of administration be
so, either in one, called a Monarch, or in the plurality of best and chiefest,
as in Aristocracy, etc. yet the fountain power of government (which Lex Rex
tells him is distinct from the power of governing Page 50.) abides entire in
the People, by which they may call the Governors to account, depose them, and
set up others to execute the laws* 2. Grotius will tell him that the King may
have one half of the Sovereign power, and the Senate or Parliament the other,
and if the King assume that part which is not his, he may be resisted, where is
then the indivisibility or incommunicability of this power, which he talks
of? Thinks he that there is no mixed Monarchy? And if part of the Soveraignity
belong to the Parliamet, as the Peoples Representatives (as is certain in our
constitution) the King cannot be so Supreme as he would have him. Therefore he
adds. [ But why should we doubt that where there is a King (one truly so)
his Soveraignity is matchless on earth, when the Scripture calls him supreme.
1. Pet. 2: ver. 13. is there any equal to the Supreme, in order of civil
government, by whom he is judgeable or punishable? if any, he is not not
Supreme not the government Royal.] Answ. This Chimaerical Man gives us a
distinction of Kings, some truly so and some falsely so: And what, and who are
these? It is like the King of Poland and the Emperor of Germany are not Kings
truly so, as he said, because forsooth they are not absolute above all Law and
coercion. But what if more learned politicians then ever he was, say, that such
are most truly Kings? And what if his adversaries say and prove also, that the
King of Britane is not such a King, as he accounts truly so? His saying that
the King of Britane is absolute, will note prove that he is so, and will be
found but a weak defense for his life, if he be not able to prove him above all
judgment and punishment, which we have not yet seen, and despair to see,
done. 2. These words 1. Pet. 2: ver. 13. may be as well rendered, The King as
supereminent, and can import no more, but one who had a supreme or supereminent
place in the administration of government, notwithstanding whereof he might be
and was accountable to the Senate of Rome: for learned politicians and lawyers
prove that the supreme power of government was in the Senate, even at this
time, which clearly appeared in their judging and condemning Nero, and other
impious and tyrannical Emperors. So that even hence we see that one may be
supreme in order of civil government, and yet both judgeable and punishable.
3. His adversaries will not much care how he call that government, Royal or
not; and whether he call the government of Britane Royal or not. Names in these
matters and titles, which go much by fashion or fancy, are but weak arguments;
and he will never be able to stop the mouth of his adversaries, who would plead
for calling King Charles to account and for judging him and punishing him, by
saying he is a King, and the government is a Royal government, they would
account these but thin walls, and useless cloaks of fig leaves to preserve
and defend intolerable tyranny. Has this man no better arguments then thise
wherewith to defend his Majesty's Royal life and person? Or has the King no
better advocate to defend his cause? But it may be this profound Statist will
speak more nervously in the following observations. Therefore,

Let us hear what he says in the 2 place, [ It is certane (says he) no man
can be judged or punished but by his own judge, who is above him, and has
authority over him, by lawful commission from God; or from men authorized by
God to give such commission, now who shall be judge to these invested with
Sovereign Majesty, seeing Every soul under them is commanded to be subject to
them* Romans 13: ver. 1. and seeing the Supreme Power of the sword is committed
unto them, and not to others, but by deputation and in dependence upon them --
in a true Monarchy there must be an exemption and impunity (as to subjects) of
the person invested with Soveraignity and Majesty: God's Law, Natures Light,
and sound reason, are all for this, that such as are invested with Sovereign
Majesty, having the legislative power; the jurisdictional power, the coercive
and punitive power originally in himself, must enjoy exemption and impunity (as
to subjects actings against them) the contrary tenet overthrowes the order of
God And Nature, and precipitates humane societies in a gulf of endless
confusions.] Answ. 1. Here is enough to satisfy his adversaries: For 1. They
will tell him, that he has not yet proved the government of Britane a true
Monarchy, in his sense; and so he but begs the thing in question here. 2. They
will tell him, that the King has not the sole legislative power, nor sole
jurisdictional power, nor sole coercive and punitive power; far less, all
these solely and originally in himself: And it is but to such Sovereigns that
he pleads for this exemption and impunity. Does not his Advocat deserve a
singular reward; who pleads his Master's cause so dexterously, by proving an
uncertanty, by that which is more uncertane, and founding all upon his bare
word? A noble champion forsooth, or rather a Monster, whose word must be a law,
and an irrefragable reason too. Thus it seems, what ever power he give to the
King there is the Dictators power that the thinks is solely in himself, and
that originally: but for all this he has one disadvantage, that he is of
little authority and of as little credit, with sober rational persons. 2. He
will grant that such Monarchies, as he accounts only true, are not every where,
no not where there are persons called Kings and Emperors: How comes it then
that the order of God and nature is not overthrown in these Dominions and
Republics, and that their Societyes are not precipitated into a gulf of
endless confusions? Shall nothing preserve the order of God and nature, but
that which is the most ready mean to destroy it, viz. an uncontrollable power
in one Tyrant, to destroy all his Kingdom, Man, Wife and Child. 3.
Politicians will tell him, that the Ephori, the Parliament are his judges; and
that the People who by a lawful commission from God made him King and
authorized him, are above him and have authority over him, in case he turn a
Tyrant and pervert the ends of government. 4. Though it be requisite there be
an ordinary standing judge to cognosce of controversies which fall out betwixt
one private person and another; yet it is not always necessary there be one
condescended on, to judge betwixt the Sovereign and the People, when the
controversy falls out betwixt them, more then that there should be a
standing ordinary judge to decide controversies falling out betwixt two
distinct and independent Kingdoms. 5. What commission from Man authorized by
God had the high Priest, and such as joined with him, when they deposed and
killed Athaliah? if he say, she was an usurper True, yet she possessed the
place six years peacably without molestation; and who was judge, whether she
was an usurper or not? Had the matter been referred to her, she would have been
as far from calling herself an usurper, as a Tyrant now will be from judging
himself a Tyrant: And so as in this case, the Tyrant sine titulo had a judge
above her, though she was invested with Sovereign Majesty, so in the other
case, The Tyrant exercitio, though invested with Sovereign Majesty, has a
judge above him. 6. The place Romans 13. is to be understood (as was showed
above) of inferior Magistrates as well as of the supreme: And it says of all
in authority, that such as are under them should be subject unto them, In so
far as they are subjects unto them: so in point of administration of justice
according to equity, all are subject to the supreme or supereminent governor;
but when he becomes a Tyrant, he becomes subject unto them, who gave him that
power, and set him up, under God. 7. He insinuats that inferior Magistrates
are not essential Magistrates, but deputation from and in dependence upon the
King. But Lex Rex, Quest. 20. has by many clear and unanswereable arguments
evinced the contrary.

In the third place he cites some sentences of Tertullian, calling the
Emperors second unto God, and above all men, and only subject unto God: Of
Optatus saying, that none are above them but God. And of Ierom speaking of
Psalm. 51. against thee thee only have I sinned, saying that David spoke so
because he feared none; And of Ambrose, on the same words saying, that he was
King, and under no Law -- and therefore he did not sin against man.] But all
this is no purpose: For 1. himself will grant that all Kings are not thus
exempted, and his adversaries will prove the King of Britane one of these
limited, and restricked Kings, that are obnoxious to examination, and
punishment; and these sayings cannot prove that all Kings are so, yea or ought
to be so. 2. Tertullian, to vindicate the Christians who would not acknowledge
the Emperor to be God, and to show how notwitstanding they respected him
according to his place, would give him as high titles as he could, though not
out of flattery, and so make him the highest person in the Empire, and above
the heathen Gods; yet he did not set him above all the People in their
Representative the Senate, or if the did, the Senate proved him to be in a
mistake, by taking course with several of these lewd and wicked Tyrants. 3.
David's single act of adultery and murder were no such acts of Tyranny, as are
censurable with deposition, and so it speaks not to the case. 4. It might be
that de facto he did not fear another, as Jerome says. But that will not say,
that David might have destroyed the inheritance of the Lord without controlle,
or that other Princes are, or should be, exempted from restraint and
punishment, if they turn ingrained and habituated Tyrants. 5. Himself will not
stand to what Ambrose says, for he adds immediately, [There is no doubt but
David was sensible both of the horrid injury he had done to Uriah (the occasion
of that Psalm) and of the scandal he had given to God's People, in which sense,
he might be well said to sin against both.] 6. The words of the text will not
bear that weight. viz. That he had no other judge but God, or that (as
Deodate says) he was exempted from all punishment of men, and was obnoxious
to no humane tribunals; but as other commentators say, the words are to be
taken in a comparative sense, that this was the greatest aggravation of his
guilt, that it was such a heinous trasgression, in his sight who was privy to
it, however he did conceal it from all others, so far as he could: see the
Dutch Annot. on the palce: and therefore to express his spiritual sense of the
sin committed against God (against whom properly sin as sin is committed) he
uses this rhetorical ingemination: And if the words should have imported what
the Surveyer would have them to import, they had not been apposite to express
his spiritual grief and sense of the heinousness of the crime committed. Then
he tells us what excellent Mr Calvin says Instit. Lib. 4. cap. 20. 27. and 31.
and then says [ It is a wonder how many who pretend respect to Calvin should
dar to violate the sacrosanct Majesty of Kings, if they will but read over that
chapter.] But is it not a wonder, how this man who seems to have read over
that chapter and particularly. 31, should pass by what worthy Calvin says in
the end of that section, or should have so little respect unto that worthy man
(whom he himself accounts to be worthy of respect, and but deservedly) as to
plead for an incontrollable power in Kings, When yet famous Calvin tells us
there that if the Ephori or States of Parliament, connive at the King's
tyranny, and suffer him to oppress and insult over the poor People, they are
wickedly perfidious, and palpably betraying their trust.

Then in the 4 place he tells us [ That it is not denied, that the King is bound
before God to rule his People according to the Law of God; and that it is
gross to say, Regi quicquid libet licet.] This is good, but what then? What if
he deviate? [ We maintai^^ (says he) that as sure truth That impunity (as from
subjects) necessarily attends Soveraignity by the Law of God, reason, and
nature: For no man can be judged or punished but by a judge above him; and the
Supreme has none such, etc. Answ. But Mr Prelate, your adversaries will
maintain the contrare, as a sure truth: We looked for a fourth proof and not
for the thing in question, or a repetition of what is said: The same thing
repeated six times will not make six arguments; Mr Bishope give a new proof, if
you can, of this firm truth which you maintain? We maintain, by the Law of
God, Nature, and Reason, No man has an uncontrollable power to destroy
millions, to cut off the heretage of the Lord, to destroy his Interest: And we
have showed our grounds for this. 2. How was Athaltah judged? And what a judge
was Iehu? 3. It has been told him, that the supreme governor has a supreme
power above him: The power of the People that made him Supreme governor, is
above him, and can depose him, and put another in his place. He may be a
Supreme governor and dispensator, and yet their servant, accountable unto
them, and censurable by them, when he deviates and turns a Tyrant, and a
Wolf, and a Tiger. When one King wrongeth another, that other will both judge
and punish him, if he be able, and yet is not properly a judge above him. Much
more may the Representative of the People; who set him up and empowered him,
both judge him and punish him.

But the good man thereafter would advise Kings not to abuse this
inviolablenesse, but so much the more to fear sadder punishments from God; and
for this cause would have them reading the 6 chapter of Apocryphal Book of
Wisdom. But was there no texts in all the divine Word of God, that he would
put into the King's hand to read, that he must send him to the Apocrypha? It is
true Kings would do well to remember that they have a God above them, who will
not be mocked, but will bring them to an account of their doings, though they
should escape Men's hands: and to the end they may be put in remembrance of
this, they stand in need of other monitors, then the Men who have forgote it,
and send them to Apocrypha to find it: And this should keep them within the
boundaries of God's Law. But as the fear of punishment from Man, will restrain
some from stealing, whom the fear of God would little overawe; So it may be the
fear of punishment from Men, would have no small influence to make some Kings
walk by a rule. And Sub^rdi^a^a non pugnant* He would do well to mind them of
both, and it is like he would find that more effectual to suppress Tyranny,
then to tell them, that their sacred persons are inviolable as to Men, but yet
they would do well to read the 6 chapter of Wisdom.

He comes Page 77. to speak particularly to what Naphtaly said, and alleges
that [ It is most falsely and wickedly said, that God's providence or God's Word
approves the murdering or deposing of Princes by Subjects, who are not his
judges: And what his word approves not, his providence does not approve: To say
that God animates his People to such actions, is blasphemy, albeit he
extraordinarly may stir up the spirits of some to actions not according to the
ordinary rule (as in the times of the judges) but they were sure of their
warrant from him, the like whereof none have ground to wait for now*] Answer.
Certainly God's Word declares that the persons of Kings (how sacred soever he
account them) are not inviolable, when it threateneth destruction unto them,
whether by their own Subjects or by strangers; and when these same judgments
are executed, his providence declares that they are not uncontrollable or
inviolable. 2. His adversaryes will tell him, that the deposeing of Tyrants,
or the executing of justice on them, is no sinful Murder nor sinful deposeing
of Princes. 3. If he had once proved that such actions as these, were horrid
and sinful, then he might say that it were blasphemy to say, that God animates
People unto them. 4. How did God animate Ieh^jada and these with him, to
depose and kill Athaliah? To say she was an usurpers, will not help the
cause: for he will not have usurpers killed by the Subjects now, seeing we
have no ground to expect such an express vvarrand to rise against them, as the
judges had; and yet certanely these against whom the judges were animated,
were Tyrants without title. And thus we see this Surveyer out stripeth all
the Royalists, that ever wrote before him, and not only will have the persons
of lawful princes, though flagitious and tyrannous, sacred and inviolable; but
also the persons of the most manifest usurpers; for he says, that it was not
according to any ordinary rule, that God stirred up the spirits of some, to
make head against these Tyrants that oppressed the people of God, in the days
of the judges, but extraordinare, which motions we have no ground to wait for
now. And so this advocate comes at last, to plead as much for the exemption of
Cromwell, as of the King: And if this be a faithful advocat let all the world
judge, and let the author of the pamphlet entitled Killing no Murder rebuke
him, for his impertinency and ignorance.

He tells us thereafter how [ The Apologist labors to produce many instances of
the Parliaments of Scotland punishing Princes for their enormities, all which
he sets forth as laudable and imitable presidents and examples.] Answ. The
author of that Apologetical relation drives at no such design there, but only
clears thereby, that the Kings of Scotland have not a supremacy above
Parliaments; but that rather Parliaments are above them; for they have punished
them. He adds [ The most that all of them amount to is nothing, but the
insurrection of Nobles (Proceres as Buchanan calls them) against the Kings,
and violent oppressions of such of them, as have been flagitious and
tyrannous-but neither Buchanan, Nor this Apolog* can produce any one instance
of our lawful Parliaments or Peoples, taking on them in a judicial way, in cold
blood, and under forms of process, to punish or destroy their Kings.] Answ.
What if his adversaries shall be contented with a shorter process, and shall
supercede many forms of legality, which use to be followed with other
notorious Malefactors? Is not this a brave Goliath that comes out to defend the
King's sacred person, when all which he at length can do, is to defend him,
from being adjudged in a formal mode, to loss his head and his Crown; that he
shall not be called publicly (as other Malefactors are) to the judges bar,
and there be impannelled as a Tyrant and Traitor to God and the Country? If
this man deserve his wages, let wise Men judge; seeing all know that there is
greater difficulty in taking away Tyrants, then in taking away other
Malefactors: And that hardly can such a legal way with all its formalities be
followed with them, which is followed with others: And that sometimes, some
Malefactors, though they were never Princes, must be sentenced in a more brief
manner and privately also, and yet it is all one upon the matter, if the man be
guilty and really condemned by his judges. And so it is all one, if a Tyrant be
adjudged worthy of death or deposition, by a Parliament the Representatives of
the People, and accordingly cut off from government, or out of the land of the
living, whether it be done by a public Messenger, with sound of Trumpet, and
by the hand of a public lictor and executioner, on a public scaffold; or by
force of arms, when the former means cannot be saifly used, nor so securely.
And it was not the insurrection of nobles as such, but as proceres and
primores Regni that were instanced, and of lawful Parliaments (such as were
used in these days) sentenceing and condemning Kings for tyranny, and other
misdemeanors. Let him read the History of these times written by Buchannan and
Grafton, and he will find it so; particularly, let him see and consider how
Ferlegus was adjudged worthy of death, but for Fergusius his Father's sake, was
only imprisoned; and thereafter with the unanimous consent of all, being
suspected guilty of the death of Feritharis, put from the Crown: see why
Thereus, when he had filled the land with robberies, fled to the Britones? Was
it not because the Governors had a mind to punish him? Was not Even the 3.
put in prison? Was not Dardan, for his wickedness and blood, pursued by nobles
and People, his head cut off, his corpse thrown into a jacks? Luctatus at
length was apprehenped and executed. His sone Conarus in face of Parliment
accused, apprehended, and shut up into a hall, with some few attendants, his
ill counselors executed and a Viceroy chosen till the People should meet to
make a new King? Were not the Prim^res Regni about to have deposed Constantine
the first, for his vices, had not Douglasse dissuaded them, because of their
wars with the Britons and Saxons? Was not Ferquard the 52 King summoned to
compear before the Parliament, and because he refused was he not brought to
judgment against his will, and accused of many crimes, and not being able to
purge himself was he not cast into prison? This looks like an act and execution
of justice done in cold blood under form of process, So did the Primores
Regni intend to have punished Ferquard the second, had not Bishop Colman
dissuaded them. Was not Eugenius the VIII. for his filthy lusts and vices,
covetousness and cruelty, slain by the general consent of his Lords
assembled? By whom, and for what was Donald the 70. King cast into prison? Who
forced Ethus brother to Constantine the II. (and for what) to renunce the
Kingdom, and shut him up in prison? Was not Culenus summoned to compeare
before a Parliament at Scone?

Now the Surveyer is in his strength, and disdaining to meddle with the
libeller (as he calls him) he will go and reflect upon the magazine, (as he
speaks) to Lex Rex, who Quaest. 26. proves by unanswerable arguments, that
the King is not above the Law; but this Surveyer for all his big words dar not
meddle with that debate; but quarrelleth with a word Page 241. where that
worthy Author is answering the objection of that Apostate Prelate Maxwel the
Author of Sacrosancta Regum Majestas, stolen from Arnisaeus; which was this, [
Why might not the People of Israel, Peers or Sanhedrin, have conveened before
them, judged or punished David, for his Adultery and Murder.] Unto which he
answered thus, [ He takes it for confessed, that it had been treason in the
Sanhedrin and States of Israel to have taken on them to judge and punish David,
for his Adultery and Murder; but he gives no reason for this, nor any Word of
God; and truly though I will not presume to go before others in this, God's
Law, Genesis 9: ver. 6. compared with, Numb. 35: ver. 30, 31. seems to say
against them. Nor can I think that God's Law, or his Deputy the judges are to
accept the persons of the great, because they are great, Deuteronomy. 1: ver. 17. 2 Chronicles, 19: ver. 6, 7. and we say we cannot distinguish, where the Law
distinguishes not. The Lord speaks to under judges, Levit. 19: ver. 15. Thou
shall not respect the person of the poor, nor honor the person of the mighty,
or of the Prince, for we know what these names (...) and (...) means. I grant
it is not God's meaning, that the King should draw the sword against himself;
but yet, it follows not, that if we speak of the demerite of blood, that the
Law of God accepts any judge, great or small. And if the Estates be above the
King* as I conceive they are, though it be a humane politic constitution that
the King be free of all coaction of Law, because it conduces for the peace of
the commonwealth; yet if we make it a matter of conscience, for my part, I see
no exception, that God makes; if men make, I crave leave to say a facto adjus
non sequitur.] Thus that worthy Author; and could he have uttered his judgment
more spareingly and soberly, in a matter that was not of great Moment to the
question in hand, so that though he had forborne to have spoken any thing to
this at all, his cause had not been, in the least, weakened; and though we
should grant that the Sanhedrin could not have judged David for these facts
(which yet we can cannot do) what loss shall we have? Seeing we may easily
grant and Lex Rex with us Page 243. that Tyranny only must unking a Prince; and
these acts were not acts of Tyranny, and what shall this vain Surveyer gain
then? Why would he not examine other things which that worthy Author said, more
apposite to the cause? Will not wise men laugh at this dealing, and account him
a fool in the first magnitude, in handleing such a cause, which so nearly
concerns his Majesty's life, after such a manner, that a very schoolboy may
smile at? Then he adds, [ So Page 348, and 428, and 238. and often elsewhere,
he (that is Lex Rex) will have the Estates executing the moral Law (as he calls
it) on the King, and punishing him, and why? because he says most
thrasonically, Page 460. I have unanswerably proved that the Kingdom is
superior to the King, and the People may be their own judge in the tribunal of
necessity.] Answ. Lex Rex in two at least of these pages cited, speaks no
such thing, and if this Surveyer were not more windy and vain then ever Thraso
was, he would not speak so of that Author, till first he had discovered the
answereablenesse of these arguments, which neither he nor any of his accomplices
shall ever be able to do. But this, Epicompothrasibombomachides will force a
belief upon the world, that with this very adverb thrasonical, diffavit omnes
in Castris Gurgustodianis, and cry to his enchanted fraternity to sing Jo pan
at his invention. But what says he to all this? [1 (says he) what should he
mean to make it conduceable to the peace of the comm^nwealth, that the King be
free of the coaction of Law; and yet not so, if it be made a matter of
conscience; is the preservation of the peace of the commonwealth, no matter of
conscience to him? Or is not the constitution freeing the King from coaction of
Law (for that end) warrantable?] Ans. Does not this ignoramus know that a
question of this nature may be considered and answered politically and
theologically: And that many things may be tolerated or forborne in point of
policy, upon politic grounds and ends, which, if considered stricto Iure,
according to conscience, should not be forborne, nor tolerated. David in point
of policy, did forbear to execute the Law upon the Murderer Joab, whom yet in
point of conscience, he accounted a man of death, and therefore recommended the
execution of the Law of God, unto his Son Solomon: and this toleration or
forbearance may be lawful or unlawful, according to the weight of the matter
tolerated, or forborne, and the nature and weight of the grounds in policy,
upon which this forbearance is determined. So that though we should suppone it
lawful for a Commonwealth to enact and determine in Law, that their King should
not be questioned for one single act of Murder or Adultery, as other persons
are: Yet in point of conscience, if the question be stated in thesi, whether a
King may be questioned for one single act of Murder and Adultery, as another
private person, it may be answered affirmatively, because the Law of God, makes
no exception of persons. 2. It may be made a matter of conscience, to make the
King free of the coaction of Law, in some small and inconsiderable particulars,
because of the probable hazard into which the Commonwealth may be brought by
coercing of him, which all the value of the particular anent which the coaction
is exerced, will not countervaile. But it will never be allowed, in point of
conscience, to make him free of all coaction of Law, so as he may without
control, murder millions, destroy and waste Religion: For that were not
conduceable to the peace of the Commonwealth, but a ready way to destroy all:
So that a constitution freeing the King from all coaction of Law, how ever
pretended for the preservation of the peace of the Commonwealth, can never be
warrandable. For that were to make him actu primo, and in actu signato a Tiger,
a Lion, and a waster of the Commonwealth; and if his good Nature should
incline him to good and peaceable things; yet no thanks to the constitution.
Whereas he would make his reader believe that the Kings of the jews were under
no coertion let, him consider what Zuinglius says explan. art. 42. Tom. 1.
oper. where he expressly says. [ That the Kings of the jews and others, when
they dealt perfidiously, contrare to the law of God, might be lawfully deposed
by the people.] Yea he tells us, that whiles wicked princes and Kings were not
removed, all the people were punished of God, which he proves by Ier. 15: 1.
to ver. 6. and a little thereafter, tells us that [ if the children of Israel
had thus deposed Manasseh, they had not been so grievously punished with him.]
Yea Schikcardus in his jus regium hebraorum. Cap. 2. Theor. 7. tells us Page
56. 57. out of the Rabbines, that the Kings of the jews might have been called
to an account, and punished for transgressing of the law, by the Sanhedrin,
especially if they took more wives, and more horses then were allowed, and
heaped up riches; for these causes, he proves Page 60. out of Hal. melach. c.
3.. 4. Halach. Sanhedr. cap. 19. Talmud cap. Kohen gadol. Siphri pars: schoph.
That they were to be scourged. And histories show us, How this Sanhedrin, even
in their weak and declineing times, were loath to quite with this power, and
therefore did question Herod, who was set over Galilee by the Romans, for some
murder committed by him, see the history set forth by Josephus Antiq. lib. 14.
c. 17. And if any should object that Casaubon ad. annal Eccles. exerc. 13. n.
5. has proved the contrary out of the Talmud. The forecited learned
Shikchardus. Page 63. 64. shows out of the very places cited by Casaubon, how
he was mistaken, and how the Kings of David's line both did judge, and were
judged.

2. (Says he) It is good that this Metaphisical Statist was no Chief Priest or
member of the Sanhedrin in David's time; for he would have afforded a corrupt
exposition of the Law to cut off the King. What sots were the Priests and
Prophets at that time that did not instigate the Sanhedrin? This man could have
told them that they were above him, and they were bound to execute the Law upon
him.] Answ. It was good that this superlatively irrational parasite., and
infraphysical fooll was not breathing in these days; for he would have told
Kings, you may Kill, murder, massacre, destroy all the land, Man, Wife and
Child, without the least fear of resistance; and have told the People, the
Sanhedrin, and all the Elders of Israel, though your Kings turn butchers and
destroyers of the People of God, worse then ever Nimrod or any that ever
breathed since his days, you have no more to do, but hold up your throats, or
flee to the uncircumcised out of the inheritance of the Lord. But what says
all this to the thing? Does this pove that David or any King was excepted in
the Law of God? Where, In what chapter, or what verse shall we find this? Good
Master prelate tell us, or where we shall find it in your book of wisdom? 2.
We find not that any of the Priests or Prophets reproved David for spareing
Ioab that murderer, who shed the blood of war in peace, 2 King. 2: ver. 5. was
it therefore right in David to have spared him? Sure they might well have told
David, that though Ioab was a great man, yet he was above him, to punish him as
well as another Man, for his sin; and in point of conscience, and by God's Law
he was bound to do it. These sinful acts of Ioab were more notoure then what
David had done in secret: And because we find not that he was reproved upon
this account, shall we therefore use this Man's dialect; and say, What Is sots
or coldrife senseless Men were the Priests and the Prophets of that time, who
did not instigate David to execute the Moral Law on Ioab, that wrath might be
turned away from the Land?

3. He tells us, that the author of Lex Rex [Vtterly mistakes the meaning of the
Word of God, Genesis 9: 6. (as for the other texts they clearly concern
Magistrates only toward such over whom they have power, but does neither
instigate the inferior Magistrates against the Superior, nor the People
against any of them) where it is said, he that sheds man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed.] Ans. 1. The author of Lex Rex does not say that these
places do instigate the inferior Magistrates against the superior, nor the
people against both; but that they point forth the Magistrate's duty to judge
righteous judgment, and to accept no Man's person, be he a Prince, or be he a
poor Man. And if they concern Magistrates toward such over whom they have
power, The author of Lex Rex seeks no more; for he had proved, (and this
vain windy man has not the head, though he want not a heart and good will to
it, to answer his arguments) that the Estates and Representative of the
People, have power over the Prince. 2. It is a hard censure to say that he has
utterly mistaken the meaning of Genesis 9: ver. 6. Let us hear how? [ Concluding
hence, (says he) that there is here a precept that the blood of every man
(though he be in the supreme power) should be shed by his inferiors, if he
shed blood innocently and without cause.] Answ. But this is not the conclusion
that Lex Rex draws from the place, He only says. That in this place there
is no exception made of the Prince, though he be the Supreme power: And can
this Man for all his skill demonstrate the exception? Lex Rex said not that his
blood should be shed by his inferiors, but by the Estates of the land, who are
his superiors, what way then has he mistaken the meaning of this word? What
further [Supposeing (says he) this word not only to be predictional -- but also
diatactick and perceptive, there must be meet limitations of the sentence, both
in the subject and attribute] Grants all, what limitations will he have in the
subject, that sheds man's blood? [It is to be understood (says he) only of such
as have no authority, and do it out of private revenge; for we must not own
the fancies of Photinians and Anabaptists that condemn lawful wars, and
capital punishments.] Answ. This is good and granted, for we say that even the
King, when murdering unjustly, acts as a private person, and is prompted by
his revenge: did he suppose that Lex Rex was a Photinian or Anabaptist? If not,
why did he trouble himself with this? But what says he to that which he calls
the attribute? [Certanely (says he) taking the word as a precept, It is not
meant that it is the duty of every man or any man indifferently, to shed the
blood of the person who sheds innocent blood; but of the Magistrate who is
judge above him. All interpreters are agreed, that here is (if not the
institution yet) the approbation of the office of the civil magistrate.] Answ.
Did the author of Lex Rex say that it was the duty of any man indifferently, to
punish capitally shedders of innocent blood? said he any thing against
agreement of interpreters concerning the institution or approbation of the
office of the civil Magistrates? Sure when he said, and elsewhere proved, that
the Estates of the Realm were above the King, he fully agreed with these
authors, touching the meaning of that place; so that that Surveyer might have
spared his pains in reciteing their words, for he says nothing against what
either Pareus, Pet. Martyr, Musculus, Bezelius, Diodate, or the Chaldee
Paraphrase say. Let us hear how he applies this to the purpose? [ But (says
he) if the persons invested with Supreme power of the sword, abuseing their
power become guilty of shedding innocent hlood, who (in that society where of
they are heads) shall judge or punish them? who is superior over the supreme
to punish him? -- It is inexplicable how any in whom the Sovereign Majesty,
and Magistratical power resides, should, according to order, be punished by
subjects.] Answ. This is the knot of all, but it is nothing else than what we
have heard again and again, and has been spoken to already. But yet, because
it is to him inexplicable, and a Gordian Knot, let us see if we can loose it
without Alexander's sword. He will grant (or if he will not, but retract what
he has elsewhere granted, speaking of a legal resistance, all the lawyers in
Scotland will grant it) that if any in the King's name shall seek to
dispossess a Man of his inheritance, the man may defend his right by law, and
the King by his advocate must plead his cause before the ordinary judges; and
these ordinary judges, must judge righteous judgment according to law, and give
out a decree in favors of the subject against the King, and so condemn the
King of injury and oppression intended against the subject: Now who but the
ordinary judges, in civil Matters, are judge here to the Supreme? and yet these
judges, in another respect, are but subjects: does he not now see how such as
are mere subjects in one respect, may judge and punish him who is invested with
Sovereign Majesty and Magistratical power, and so in another respect are above
him. And what if I say, that as, in civil Matters, the ordinary judges may
judge the King, so the justice general or his deputy constitute ordinare judges
in criminals or capitals, may judge him when he commits a capital crime? let
him or any Man else show me a reason, why the one should be, and the other may
not be, in point of conscience. But if we speak of a Parliament the
Representatives of the People, the case is so clear that there is no
difficulty; for that is a judge always above him, and so even according to his
limitations, if the King shed innocent blood, by them may his blood be shed.

Then Page 81. he says [ When the Apostle Romans 13. says let every soul be
subject to Superior powers, that (every soul) does not comprehend the supreme
power it self (for how can the Man invested with it, be subject to a superior
power?) but it is meant that every soul under the superior power or supreme,
should be subject to it.] Answ. Yet again the same thing which we heard
before. Is he not able to understand this, how one who is supreme, in one
respect, may be inferior, in another respect? The father has a Supreme
paternal power over the Son, yet the sone, being a judge or Prince, may be over
him, as David was over Iesse, and Saul over Kish. But (says he) Let men (as
they will) indulge themselves in their seditious Notions, they must at last
sist in some supreme power on Earth which is not judge able or punishable by
any.] Answ. Be it so, what has he gained for the King his Master? Must either
he be the supreme power on earth which is not judgeable or punishable by any,
or must there be none? His adversaries will soon deny the consequence: And he,
let him indulge himself in his Tyrannical Notions, as much as he will, shall
never be able to confirm it. How then shall he defend the sacred person and
life of the King? What says he further? [ If sovereign Majesty be placed in
Parliament or People (who may be guilty of shedding innocent blood, as well as
the King) who shall shed their blood when they transgress? Shall this be
reserved to the sounder and smaller part of the People (as this Man speaks Page
240.] then there is ground enough laid for Eternal confusion] Answ. The
Surveyer either subtly or ignorantly confounds things here, which should be
considered distinctly, and leads his unwarry reader off the way: Wherefore we
would have the Reader (though all this is nothing to the purpose in hand to
prove the King uncontrollable, or unpunishable and unjudgeable for any of his
acts) take notice of these few things which will help to clear the matter. 1.
That there is a not-judgeablenesse (to speakso) and not-punisheablenesse de
facto, which may be said of some notorious rebels and out-Lawes, whom neither
Law nor power of authority can coerce, and there is a non-punishablenesse and
non-judgeablenesse de ^ure, when one is exeemed from Law-judgment and
Law-sentence, so that he is above all trial and sentence of Magistrates: Cases
may fall out wherein such as are punishable and judgeable de Iure, according to
an ordinary way laid down or allowed by God, may notwithstanding be
unpunishable and not-judgeable de facto, either through corruption prevailing
over all, or prevalency of power in the punishable person or persons: And this,
though in an ordinary way irremediable, yet speaks not against the Ordinance
and appointment of God and Nature. 2. That there is a difference betwixt
personal faults of Governors, or such as are invested with authority and
power, as was that act of Murder and Adultery in David; and public
miscarriages in point of governm. and in exerceing the power wherewith they are
invested: of personal faults, speaks Lex Rex in the place now under
consideration; and upon this, have we vindicated that worthy Author, from what
this perverter of all things has said. But here he mixeth these, and
confounds them, that according to his way, he may pervert the truth. 3.
There is a difference betwixt simple acts of maladministration in lesser
matters; and betwixt such acts of maladministration, as pervert the ends of
government. 4. There is a difference betwixt palpable, clear, and undeniable
miscarriages; and betwixt such as are not so clear nor unquestionable. 5.
There is a difference to be made betwixt ordinary standing cases; and an
extraordinary emergent: in an extraordinary case, while the disease is
desperate, a desperat-like and extraordinary remedy may be used without
overturning the ordinary way, which is to be used in ordinary cases, These
things will help us to nnravel his confused discourse. And so we Answer. 1. If
Parliament-members or private persons among the People shed innocent blood it is
no difficulty to know who should judge them. 2. If a Parliament as the Peoples
Representatives Murder the innocent, I see not why they may not be called to an
account by a posterior Parliament, as when a beanch of judges in civil matters,
conspire together to oppress, by their unlawful and unjust decreets, palpably
such and not our to all; when they are deposed and others put in their places,
the oppressed may get his cause righted, and reparation of damage of them: Or
when a justice general manifestly and palpably murdereth the innocent, he may
be made to answer before another put in his place: if this may be done (as I
judge in point of conscience it may) so may the other be done with Parliaments.
3. If Parliaments conspire to overturne Religion, Laws, Liberties, and thus
destroy the Republic, I judge with L. R. Page 240. that the sounder part, if
they be able, may resist and hinder, so far as they can, that destruction and
ruin of the Republic. Neither ever shall he prove that this is a ground for
Eternal confusion: O says he, [ Any lesser part, when they have or think they
have will and s^rengh enough to through their business, will undoubtedly call
themselves the sounder part, and labor to bear down the corrupt plurality.]
Answ. This remedy to prevent destruction and ruin to the Commonwealth, may be
of the Lord, though it should be abused by sinful men; for the best thing may
be abused: And it is not the mean allowed by God and Nature which lays a
ground for eternal confusion; but the abuse of the mean maintained, whereof we
are not guilty. But we have had abundance of such rotten consequences from him,
who knows better what it is to deceive the simple with sophistications, then
to satisfy the judicious with solid reasons. Then he adds, [But the Christian
Reader may easily see how hard this Author is put to it; and for all his saying
that according to God's Law, Kings must be punished as well as others, yet is
he forced to acknowledge a Supremacy of power in some, not punishable by any but
by God.] Ans: This is but what we heard just now, and whether true or false, it
helps him nothing: Have that Supremacy of power, which is not punishable by
any but by God, who will, if the King have it not, the King's life is not
secured: And if he say, if any have it the King must have it. True, if this
rotten malignant and parasitical ignoramus can make no bad inferences; but he
has already so often discovered vanity in this way of argueing, that we cannot
account him infallible: And therefore let him prove his consequence; for we
know him better then to take any thing from him upon trust. Well, what way does
he clear this, of Lex Rex? [For (says he) Page 389. when he has given all
power to the Parliament over the King, he objecteth to himself; who shall
punish and coerce the Parliament, in case of exorbitance: He answers,
posterior Parliaments, and Page 211. he says, by the people and conscience of
the people are they to be judged, let all our Nobles and Parliaments hearken to
this.] Answ. In the first place cited, Lex Rex is not speaking of Parliaments
power over the King (as this squint-eyed Surveyer thinks,) but is handling
that question whether or not Monarcy is the best of governments? And is
shevving in what respects it is best, and in what respects it is vvorste; and
shows how a mixed Monarchy is best; and then answers some objections: And
to that which some might object, That Parliaments might exceed their bounds,
and who should coerce them? He ansvvered, That posteriour Parliaments might do
it; and so there was a salvo in that mixture of governmemt 2. In the other
place he is shevving what relation the King has to the Law, and that he is
not the sole Law maker, nor sole supreme judge: And answers that objection,
That the three Estates as men and looking to their own ends, not to Law and
the public good, are not fundamentalls, and are to be judged by the King. viz.
That they are to be judged by the people and the conscience of the people. Why
calls ^e the Nobles and Parliaments to hearken to this? What abs^^dity inn
reason is here? [Who ever head of this ( says he) that one Parliament
posteriour should punish the prior? Their acts they may retract indeed, but to
punish them for their acts, is most absurd, because the prior Parliament in the
capacity of that judicatory, had as much power as the posterior. States men
will vvonder at this doctrine, that Members of a Parliament should be punished
for their free votes, by a succeeding Parliament, and far more at the
subjecting them to the conscience of the People.] Answ. 1. It is no small
punishment and coercion to a Parliament, to have all their designs,
consultations, and conclusions overturned, which may be done by posteriour
Parliaments 2. If Parliaments, by their free votes, sell Religion, and the
Liberties of the land unto the Turk, and so destroy the same, and betray their
Trust, I see not why they ought not be punished for their pains. If they
should enact and put to execution the act, when made; That all who will not
bovv and burn incense to an idol should be brunt quick, I see not, why they
may not by a posteriour Parliament be questioned and punished for that innocent
blood which they have shed. 3. His reason to the contrary, is not good; for
they never had power or commission for overturning the ends of government, and
destroying the Commonwealth: if the Magistrates of a Brugh betray their trust,
dilapidate the rents and revenues of the city, sell and dispone the rights and
privileges thereof, may not the succeeding Magistrates call them to an account
for that, notvvithstanding that in the capacity of that judicatory, they had as
much power (if any) as the posteriour 4. Wonder at it who vvil, that which
is right is right: and it is consonant to equity, that the consciences of the
People be so far judges of what is done by their Representatives, as not to
suffer them, in their name, and by any power borrowed from them, to destory
the Commonwealth and to overturne the fundations of Religion and Liberty, etc.
[ But then ( says he) another objection he makes posteriour Parliaments and
People both may err. He answers, All that is true: God only must remede
that.] What can he make of this? [ Well then ( says he) if Parliaments or
People destroy or murder persons innocently, God only must remeed that; there
is no power on Earth to call them to an account: Who sees not that at length
the author is driven to acknowledge a power, which if it deviate cannot be
judged by any on earth.] Answ. Lex Rex is not there speaking of particular acts
of injustice Or iniquity; but of the whole ends of government: And so if
Parliaments and People concur and join together to overturne all, the world
sees that there is no remedy on Earth: Neither needed he to say that he was
driven to this, seeing it was so obvious to all who have eyes in their head.
Though God has appointed means and ordinary rules to help abuses that are
ordinary; yet when corruption is universal the ordinary means cannot avail,
God himself must help that: and who knows not that extraordinary supposeable
cases cannot infringe, or invalidate the ordinary rules for ordinary cases. Now
all this is but vain idle work, and of no advantage to his cause; for he
shall never hence prove though he should argue till his eyestrings break, that
this Sovereign uncontrolable power, which is not censureable nor punishable,
is only in the King: And if he do not this, how stops he the Mouth of his
adversaries? How salves he his Majesty's life, or the King from all hazard of
censure? But then he adds to as little purpose, That [ It may be seen that his
principles lead him to own a mere democracy (which is the worst of
governments) as the only lawful government: he places and fixes the
unpunishable soveraignity there.] Answ. This is a gross mistake: For this Man
understands not what a democracy is. He takes democracy to be where all
govern: But that is no government, where there is none to be governed, but all
are governors. Democracy is where some are chosen out of all the People by
turns, without respect had to birth, means or other privileges, to govern
the rest. And Lex Rex will not say that these governors have an uncontrollable
soveveraignity, but may be opposed and resisted, by the body of the People who
choose them, as well as the King in a Monarchy, or the Primores Regni in an
Aristocracy; because under all speces of governments, the fountain power and
Majesty abides in the People, and is resumeable, in cases of necessity.

Thus we have seen how poorly and weakly this vain man has maintained the
King's life and sacred person, and how by his foolish sophistications, and his
weak and impertinent answers and assertions, he has put the King's life in
greater hazard then it was; for these poor people never had a thought of
wronging his Majesty's person, or of spoiling him of his life, but now when
he has started the question without any provocation or just ground and
occasion given; and can say no more then he here has said for that cause, has
he not invited people to think of what they might do? And I am sure if they
have no other restraint to bind up their hands, all which he has said, will
be but like the new ropes to Sampson. That which follows in his third Chapter
touching the Covenants betwixt King and People, is impertinent to his present
purpose: For Naphtaly makes use of these to prove the lawfulness of
resistance, as may be seen Page 19, and 30. and for that end, we have
vindicated them in our former discourse from all his corrupt glosses and
evasions. And wise Men will think him so far from deserving a reward, for what
he has done, that they will think he rather deserves to be whipped, for his
mismanageing this question of so great consequence, which he undertook to
defend; and particularly for bringing the arguments, which are adduced to
evince the lawfulness of resistance, as if they did with equal force strick
against his Majesty's life and person; whereas many will be clear for
resisting, that will not be so clear for punishing or executing the Prince:
and since by his folly, and imprudent impertinency, making the same arguments
prove both, people shall see that by what right they may resist, by the same
right they may capitally punish the Prince, they will be so far from being
scarred form resistance, which natures light does so evidentlly demonstrate to
be lawful and necessary; that they will be more emboldened thereunto,
perceiving how they may do more, which possibly would never else have come into
their mind: and sure all which Naphtaly has said, could not have suggested
such a thing unto them, or occasioned their thoughts thereabout, as impartial
Readers will judge.

If any ask what he has left undone for secueing his Majesty's person and
life? I am sure to name no more he has forgotten one thing, and that is, the
pressing of the Solemn League and Covenant on the People; but knowing what he
has both said and done against this, he thought he could not fairly retract
and condemn his own tongue and actions; yet if he think himself obliged to
venture his life for the life of his Majesty, he might have also thought it his
duty, to take shame to himself, to repent of what he had done, and recant what
he had said, for the secureing of his Majesty's life and person. Now that the
pressing of this Covenant upon the People, would be a sovereign remedy to
preserve his Majesty's life, his Majesty's Royal father knew it, when being
in the isle of Wight, and fearing that violence should have been done unto him
by these in whose custody he was, he sent for Mr. Jeremiah French minister of
that place to which Carisbrook castle belonged, and desired him to preach the
Covenant and press it upon the People, that thereby they might be engaged to
rescue him, in case any such thing should be attempted by that part of the
army: See for this the postscript to the Covenanters Plea. And sure I am, if
his Majesty would (as I said before) faithfully mind this Covenant, and cause
the People stand to it, form the highest to the lowest, he would find, that
there could not be a more effectual mean imagined, for secureing his person,
then that would be. If he would faithfully own, and according to his power lay
out himself, for settling and secureing the maine things contained in that
Covenant, and walk in that due subordination unto the Supreme governor of
heaven and earth; The very conscience of these great and maine things, would
press a conscientious respect to, and a faithful care of his Majesty's
person, in reference to these great Ends. Which would prove more effectual for
this end, then volumes of railing sophistications, which this perjured,
Profane and malignant Prelate and anticovenanter could write and send abroad.

CAP. XX.
The Surveyer's discourse concerning the fact of Phineas examined.
THE Surveyer being good at weaving Spiders webs, whereby he would catch flees,
but is not able to hold stronger bodies, spends a whole Chapter on a discourse
in Naphtaly, obiter cast in, rather to prevent an objection, by showing what
difficultyes such behoved to meet with and roll our of his way, who would
assert the utter unimitablenesse of the fact of Phineas, in executing judgm. on
the Israelitish Prince and his Midianitish whore, to stay the plague and
Judgment of God, which was broken out on the whole congregation, because of
their defection to Midianitish whoredom and idolatry; then to assert any thing
positively thereanent: and because any who considers the place, and sees how
little is there positively asserted, and how much is set forth rather
problematickly, and by way of doubt, will easily perceive that the Author's
scope* was not such as this perverse scribler gives it out to be, we might let
it pass, especially seeing our cause does not hang thereupon, but may stand,
whatever be said of that passage; yet lest this Surveyer should glory Without
ground, and become too too wise in his own eyes, we must discover his folly in
this his interprise.

Though he has been at much Pains in this business, probably because it was
his own particular, to prevent, if he could, another shot, Which might come as
near to his heart, as the last came to his hand, though not intentionally, but
per accidens because of ill company; yet, lest he should think that we Were
stiring up any to the like interprise, whether against him, or any of his
perjured fraternity, whom we look upon as far below the indignation of any
heroik person, we shall not insist on this, as we have done on what he has
said in the foregoing Chapters, but shall cursorily run over what he says to
this purpose.

We grant that every man should walk in his own calling with God, 1 Cor 7:
ver. 20. and study to be quiet and do his own business, 1 Thessalonians 4: ver. 11.
But when He and his Party have perfidiously forsaken their calling, and have
not loved the honor to be quiet to do their own business, but have
ambitiously usurped the honor and dignity of abjured prelacy, and become Lords
and Councellers and Parliamentmen, and thereby brought the wrath of God upon
the land, for our defection and Apostasy, and are persecuting all who will not
hold them in their saddle, and bear up their rideing mantles, to the wronging
of their own souls and consciences; other persons must mind their general
calling as Christians and good Countrymen, and endeavor an averting of the
wrath of God, and a setting on foot again a work of reformation according to
their power: Ay but says he, [ Satan can drive men under several colors of
extreme necessity, lawfulness of the matter of actions, the goodness of ends
and intentions, the want of others to do the work, and men's own probable
capacity to do it? to act such things, whereof God will say I never required
them at your hands.] Answ. This is true, but what will he hence prove? Will he
hence conclude that God may not animate some, to some rare enterprises, in a
time of real extreme necessity, the matter of the action being unquestionably
lawful, their ends and intentions really good and commendable, there being also
a deficiency of others to do the work, and themselves in some probable capacity
for it? His consequence will be denied. [ This vain Orator Naphtaly (says he)
will have the instance of Phineas a precedent for any private persons, (such as
lately did rise) under color of high pitches of zeal and fortitude, to execute
justice on al powers and people of the land, as being fallen in such a fearful
Apostasy, as (keeping the true Protestant Religion,) do vary from them, in the
external ordering of the Ministry of the Church, and imbraceing that way and
order, against which there is no command of Christ, yea for the consonancy
whereof to his word, much and very much may be said, and has been.] Ans. He
would fain mince the defection, whereof he and the rest are guilty, and tell
us that they keep the true protestant Religion; but how we have heard before:
and that all the difference is about an external ordering of the ministry of
the Church, against which there is no command of Christ, and for which much may
be said, and has been said. But this is not the place to speak of the abjured
prelacy, occasion may given further in his following part: only we would say
that much more has been said against it, to shovv it utterly unlawful, then
he or all his fraternity will be able to answer: And unless he prove it
absolutely necessary, and no other form lavvful, which he dar not so much as
undertake to prove, he shall never clear the land of fearful Apostasy and
defection, in renunceing a Covenant sworn by all ranks of people. And because
his fears are most about himself and other Apostates, he supposes that that
discourse in Naphtaly is brought in of purpose to incite some to execute
justice on him, and such as he is; whereas any may see that it is cast in
among other things adduced to justify our first Reformers: And so timorous is
he, that because that fact of Phineas is not simply and positively declared not
imitable, he thinks it is held forth as a precedent to incite: Whereby we see
what an ill conscience is. Ay but (says he) [ Though he turn himself
Proteus. like into many shapes -- he cannot put a sufficient bar against
confusions under such pretexts.] And who such a Proteus as this Surveyer, and
his fraternity, a company of base changelings: But thinks he it possible that
any doctrine can be so clearly and distinctly asserted as none will ever abuse
to error and confusion? The Scripture is plain enough against Lordly
Prelates, and Covenant breaking, and yet we know how some can abuse these
truths of Scripture, to defend defectiion, and the overturning of the work of
God in his Church, and so confound and overturne all. Thereafter he tells us, [
That when this discourse was first looked upon -- men of judgment considered
that as the former bloody insurrections, were endeavored to be justified by
him, So he was laying down grounds for some mercylesse Massacre, and horrid
assassinations, on persons in power and others -- for now no man can have
security of his life.] What these men of judgment could be, who could either
suppose the former, if they considered the place where that discourse stood; or
could fear the later, if they considered the discourse it self, I cannot tell:
But it is like, he and the rest of the Apostates, are accounted the Men of
judgment; and indeed as these might have fancyed the former, so they might have
feared the later: for were this fact of Phineas asserted to be as much imitable
as any other uncontrollable example in scripture, all persons, notwithstanding
thereof, would have sufficient security of their life, except such as were
guilty of dreadful apostasy, causing, the plague of God to break out upon the
land: And we know the best examples may be abused. And therefore that which he
says page 106: and 107. concerning Munster madness, and the Murderers of
the two Henry's of France the 3. and 4. and the gunpouder Traitors, and
Arthington Coppinger and Hacket in Queen Elizabeth's days, is nothing to the
point: for neither hear we that any of these founded their actions upon
Phineas's fact: and though they had done so, It would not have proved that it
was not imitable, in any cases: for why? Wicked Magistrates have persecuted
innocents, in all ages, shall therefore the examples of good Magistrates
executing justice on wicked apostates, and flagitious persons and idolaters,
be declared altogether un-imitable, because some corrupt Magistrates under that
pretext abuse that power, and persecute such as they should rather honor and
highly reward? would not any body smile at such a consequence? And yet such is
his here. Let him make it to appear, that the matter of the actions of these
persons was lawful, and the necessity extreme, and the case was the same as to
the deficiency of others to do the work, and that they were in a probable
capacity to do it, and then he shall speak more home to the case. He needs not
tell his readers, Page 107. [That such abominable courses carried on under
pretext of heroic motions, and rare exitations of the spirit, should make the
fearers of God very cautelous against the principles of this Man, which lead
this way.] For that man neither approves these courses, nor any such like, nor
does his principles lead that way, whatever he imagine; nor does he assert (as
he alleges,) [that there needs no standing upon an external call, if men
think they have his internal call to use the sword for vengeance against
Apostate Magistrates -- and Reform an Apostate Church, their zeal is a
sufficient call to rise up in a Phineas like fortitude, without further,] as
any will see who reads over that discourse. Nor needs he to say, [that if
people be so principled, it were better living under the great Turk, where no
man is to loss his life but by Law, then in Scotland,] For he does not expose
any to the fury of private persons, who can pretend rare and heroic
excitations of the Spirit to execute justice on men, when they think there is
cause (as he supposes in the following words) nor could he rationally be
supposed to do so, though he had clearly and positively asserted that that fact
of Phineas was, in all points and always, imitable; far less when he is loath
to assert so much, as this Surveyer himself acknowledges in the following
words, Page 108. confessing that he said, we hold no such instances as regular
precedents for all times and persons universally. What displeases him then?
[But where is (says he) the caution that is put in against any that will
pretend heroical excitations by the spirit, as a sufficient call: he has opened
a door but how will he close it again? Answ. What could himself say more to
bar a heady People from such pretensions of Phineas-like motions, then that it
was not a regular precedent for all times and Persons? Is it not possible (as
has been said) yea and often seen, that the most clear and approved examples
have been abused? And what can be said to this, but that such must run their
own hazard and bear their own guilt? God only can prevent all confusion in
all cases. It is false which he adds that [This man has proclaimed this
libertinisme to private persons, upon pretense of heroic excitations of Zeal
etc. to rise up against all powers above them; for they are made judges in
their own private discretion, when it is fit to fall in hand with such
irregular practices; and when it is that such heroic excitations are upon
their spirits, and when it is that matters are so far out of order that they
cannot be amended without their violent interposeing, and pulling down of
powers: All this is referred to private persons discretion.] Ans. No such thing
is there said, and Phineas instance will give ground for no such thing, though
it were pressed as a most regular precedent. As we grant with him, that Quakers
and Ranters, etc. may start up, and plead their impulses, and that People (when
they mind changes) will not want pretexts: But what says that against the
thing, seeing the best things may be abused? Ay but Naphtaly (says he) holds
[That Magistrates when patronisers of abominations ought without doubt be
suppressed by all means; so that if there be not probable capacity for arms,
a dag or a dagger, a pistol or a poisoned poinard, a spanish fig or some secret
applications, may do the business with some great ones] Answ. Naphtaly in the
place cited Page 18. is speaking of open idolatry, blasphemy, perjury, venting
and spreading of heresy, and such like abominations, which being most
dishonorable to God, and pernicious to all Commonwealths, ought, says he, by
all means to be suppressed, that is by all fair and possible means, for
illud tantum possumus quod jure possumus, and so, had he not been too captious,
be reason of (it is like) his green wound, he might have spared the rest, and
to his liturgical prayer following [That the life our dread Sovereign may be
bound up with the Lord his God in the b^undle of life, and also that the same
great and good God may be a shield and buckler to his servants (who desire in
honoring of the King, to fear him the King of Kings above all) against the
generation of Men of blood and violence.] We shall desire him to add this
Letany: from perjury, pride, profanesse, blasphemy, impenitency, atheism, and
all manner of uncleanness, good Lord deliver us and our King. And to prevent
all these fears, let is Majesty and other Magistrates, reform their ways,
and turn to the Lord, and execute judgment on him and his accomplices, and all
the rest, who now pretend to honor the King, and to fear God, but in effect
to deifie a creature and renunce their homage to the King of Kings, and so
provoke him to destroy both them and their King, by their apostasy and wicked
defection, and that openly before men and Angels, as David hanged up the Sons
of Saul before the sun; and then they need not fear either dag or dagger,
pistol or poisoned poinard, a spanish fig, nor any such secret applications.

Thereafter Page 109. he comes more particularly to consider that discourse,
and gives us there and in the following Pages 7. or 8. Answers The first is [
That it is much doubted if Phineas was a mere private person, being the high
Priests son, and a chief priest, and a Prince in his tribe Numb. 31: 6. Jos.
22: 31, 32. one of the great Council Number. 1: 16. and 16: 2. who did in that
dismaltime, Numb. 25: 6, meet with Moses the chief Magistrate to lament the ab
hominable idolatry, and bodyly filthiness committed at that time, and to
consult and advise, about the authoritative restraining of this wickedness: In
the mean time when the great council are humbled before the Lord, Zimri with
his Midianitish woman, are in their very sight going in to the tent, and
Josephus says, that before Moses and the Council, he justified the fact, and
pleaded frowardly to have and retain her. In this case of so effronted
wickedness, Phineas then one of the congregation or great Council v. 6. rose
from among the congregation (or great Council which shows he was sitting
amongst them) and under the eye and knowledge and approbation of Moses the
supreme Magistrate, pursued them both to the tent, and thrust them through.]
Answ. 1. Then it seems this fact of Phineas was a laudable act of judice in a
Magistrate, and so must be a precedent example for judges and Magistrates in
all time coming, and by this example, any member of the Council might lawfully
rise up, and execute judgment on this wicked wreatch and his cursed fraternity,
who have brought, by their apostasy and defection from the Covenant and cause
of God, the wrath and curse of God upon the land. 2. That Phineas was the High
Priest's sone, we know; and that he was afterward High priest himself, is
truth; but that he was at this time a public Magistrate, or a member of the
great Sanhedrin, we see not. It is true there were some Princes of the tribes,
men of renown Numb. 1. ver. 16. but he is not mentioned among those; neither
were these the great Sanhedrin. So these princes of the assembly Numb. 16: 2.
were not the Sanhedrin, which did consist but of 70 Members, Numb. 11. Nor was
Phineas one of them. And that congregation of the children of Israel mentioned,
Numb. 25: 6. amongst whom Phineas was ver. 7. was not the Sanhedrin, which we
never find (as I remember) so called; but the whole body of the People, who
were then mourning partly for the sin committed, and partly for the execution,
when the heads of the People were hanged up, and a thousand more killed by the
judges, at Moses his command: for Paul 1 Cor. 10: ver. 8. says there died of
the plague twenty three thousand, and here we find there fell in all twenty
four thousand. Again it is remarkable that this single act of Phineas in
killing two persons is so much rewarded and taken notice of by the Lord, yea
more then the many who were killed by the judges ver. 5. So that it seems he
was no public Magistrate: and that he did it with the approbation of Moses, is
probable; but that Moses did command him, we see not; only we find that the
Zeal of God moved him, and therefore is he highly rewarded, though he was but
the son of Eleazar the son of Aaron. Yea that which the Surveryer cites out of
Deodat rather confirms this, for Deodat calls it an act of extraordinary
zeal and motion of God's Spirit, and he adds that Moses the Supreme
Magisstrate did approve it; but what needed this, if he had been a Magistrate,
seeing there was a command given to the Magistrates ver. 5. and a command is
more then an approbation, Aquinas and Gerhard call him, it is true, a judge,
but we see no proof, unless they could evince that he was a member of the
Sanhedrin of which Gillespy speaks in his Aarons rod. lib. I. c. I. The Dutch
Annotat. on Psalm. 106: 31. Suppose him to have been no Magistrate, but say that
this fact was beside his ordinary calling.

His 2. answer is Page III. That suppose he had been a mere private person,
yet it could prove nothing, because he did it with the approbation and good
liking of Moses, and so he is but the executor of that unanimous sentence.
Answ. But not only is this not written, but the scripture gives another ground
of his fact, then any warrant or command of Moses: And so his answer in rebus
facti, a non scripto ad non factum non valet consequentia is not to the
purpose. Now I say the scripture gives another ground viz. his zeal for his
God, which is not spoken of the other judges who ver. 5. were commanded of
Moses to execute judgment, yea that word Psalm. 106: 30. then stood up Phineas
and executed judgment clearly hinteth at more then his being a mere satelles
Magistratus, and the ample reward which was given him, and the Lord's counting
it to him for righteousness, speak some other thing, then that he had a call
of the Magistrate, and was his executioner.

In the 3 place, he says. [The cases are different; for then was horrible
idolatry and villainous whordome committed avowedly, and with a high hand, in
the sight of the Sun, and in way of open doing despite to God, but it is not so
now.] Answ. Prudence might have taught him to have concealed this, for it were
easy to draw such a parallel as would make him afraid, if any did intend to
follow that example: For I am sure what ever he account of the present
apostasy, and how ever he mince it, as no doubt zimri would have minced his
uncleanness, when he justified the fact before the Council, as he told us
Josephus said; yet the apostasy and perjury is open, avowed, abominable and
villainous, committed in the sight of the Sun, in despite of God, and maintained
as right and lawful, howbeit it be such as the very heavens may be astonished
at: For such open, avovved, malapert wickedness, defection and perjury (all
things considered) was never heard of in any generation. How our reformation,
and confession of faith is maintained, we have heard; and albeit he make all
the change to be only a change of the exterior form of Church government, yet
when he is before his judge, he shall find in the cup of this iniquity,
manifest and avowed perjury, overturning of the work of God, destroying of the
interest of Christ, blasphemy, near unto that unpardonable sin (if not the very
same,) in fathering the works of the right hand of the Most high, on Satan;
open and avowed persecution of godliness; opening of a gap to all
licentiousness, horrid iniquity, increase of idolatry; villainous and avowed
whordome, Sodomy, atheism and devilry, and more wickedness then tongue can
tell, or pen can paint out, but is on clear record before the Lord.

4. (Says he) [Let it be so, that he was a mere private man, and had no
warrant from the Supreme Magistrate to do what he did, his fact cannot warrant
Men to attempt the doing of such acts, unless they can show as good war and
and approbation from God as he could.] Answ. That he had God's warrant and
approbation we do not doubt; but that it was such an approbation as was
peculiar to extraordinary un-imitable acts, is the thing in question, we grant
with him. That God is the Lord of all Magistrates, and of all men's lives, can
(when it pleases him) cross ordinary rules, and apppoynt some to execute his
judgments extraordinariely, but the question is whether every thing, which the
Surv. accounts extraordinary, is so indeed. [He may (says he) send Moses to
kill the Egyptian Eglon to kill Ehud (he should say Ehud to kill Eglon) Elias
to destroy companyes of men with fire from heaven, or to kill Baal's Priests:
He may command Abraham to kill his sone Isaac: he may excite David to a bloody
dueel and Sampson to murder himself.] Ans. Will the Surveyer account these
instances alike extraordinary and unimitable? Sure Royalists will think that
Ehud's killing of Eglon may warrant any private person now, to kill a tyrant
without title. But I lay more weight upon John Knox his distinction in this
matter, in his debate with Lithingtoun, hist. of reformation, Page 390. (edit
in fol.) [And as touching (says Mr. Knox) that ye allege that the fact was
extraordinary, and is not to be imitated. I say That it had the ground of God's
ordinary judgment, which commands the Idolater to die the death: and
therefore I yet again affirm, that it is to be imitate of all these that
prefer the true honor of the true worshipe and glory of God, to the
affection of flesh, and wicked Princes.] and when Lithingtoun replied. That we
are not bound to follow extraordinary examples, unless we have the like
commandment and assurance (the same which this Surveyer says.) He answered [I
grant if the example repugne to the law, as if an avaricious and deceitful man
would borrow Silver; Raiment, or other Necessaryes from his Neighbor, and
withhold the same, alleging that so he might do, and not offend God, because
the Israelites, at their departure out of Egypt, did so to the Egyptians, The
example served to no purpose, unless that they could produce the like cause,
and the like commandment, that the Israelites had: And that because their fact
repugned to this commandment of God Thou shall not steal: But where the
example agrees with the law, and is, as it were, the execution of God's
judgment, expressed within the same, I say that the example approved of God
stands to us in place of a commandment; for as God, in his Nature is constant
and immutable, so can he not condemn in the ages subsequent, that which he
has approved in his servants before us; but in his servants before us, he in
his own word confounds all such as crave further approbation of Gods will,
then it already expressed within his scriptures; for Abraham said, They have
Moses and the Prophets etc. Even so I say, that such as will not be taught what
they ought to do by the commandment of God once given, and once put in
practice, will not believe nor obey, albeit that God should send Angles from
heaven to instruct that doctrine.] Now sure I am this fact of Phineas was
according to the law, and to the express mind of God, and why then might it
not be imitated in the like case? what warrant, command nor commisssion had
Phineas which none now can expect? 1. (says he) [He had the Motion and
direction of God's Spirit, which was loco specialis mandati.] Answ. We know men
must need the Motions and directions of God's spirit to ordinary and allowed
duties: How shall these make this fact altogether un-imitable? It is true
Calvin says it was singular and extraordinare motion, which may not be drawn
to a common rule, but notwithstanding thereof, I see not how it should be
altogether un-imitable or useless. But grant it were so, as Calvin says,
unless he say that it is never to be imitated, in no case, and that no such
thing is ever to be expected, which I suppose he will not say, how will he
prevent confusions through the abuse of corrupt men, who can pretend as well
these singular and extraordinare Motions, as the examples of Phineas? As for
what he tells us Augustine and Bernard say of Samson's case, is not to the
point: Because according to that solid distinction of Mr. Knox, that was
contrare to an express law, Thou shall not kill, and such also is the example
of Abraham. 2. He tells us, That [Phineas had not only a large reward of his
fact, Numb. 25: ver. 12, 13. but an ample approbation of it. Psalm. 106: sver.
31: it was accounted to him for righteousness. i. e. as a righteous action,
both as to the intention of it (God's honor) and as to the ground and warrant
of it (God's direction) God does not approve or remuner at any action, which
one way or other he does not command.] Ausw. This is all granted; and as it
says that Phineas was no public person or Magistrate, otherwise there had
been no doubt anent its being accounted to him for righteousness, though it
had not been expressly mentioned by the Spirit of God, for it says that
sometimes private persons are allowed of God, to do what he requires in
ordinary to be done by Magistrates. [ There are none of these extraordinary
actions (says he) mentioned in Scripture, but either God's stirring up men to
the same, or his approbation of the same, one way or other is noted: See Judge.
3: ver 10. and 5: ver. 7. and 10: ver. 23. and 3: ver. 9, 15. and 2: 16, 18.]
Answ. Will he say that all these instances were extraordinary and not imitable?
Whence will Royalists then prove, that privaate persons may kill a Tyrant
without title? And if they be not altogether unimitable, then the cause is here
yielded; for God may be said to raise up, and to stir up Men's Spritis even to
imitable actions; and so he has given us no reason as yet to prove Phineas
fact altogether unimitable; nor will the real rebukes, which he says God gave
the late risers, proclaim that they had not his approbation, unless he say
that God's approbation of actions must always be interpreted by the event,
which is not consonant to true Divinity.

In the 5. place he tells us, [ That if once men come to press the imitation
of this instance, they must say, first, that even when the Magistrate is godly
and zealous and willing to execute judgment, (as Moses was) private perssons
may do it, and without any legal process, 2. go to men's tents and chambers
and stob them, and 3. that though such things be done inconsulto pio
Magistratu, yet the doer must not be challenged.] Answ. It will be sufficient
if it be granted, when the case is every way the like, or whose: It is true,
Moses was not unwilling, but it is like at present in capacitated, through the
want of assistence of inferior Magistrates, many of whom were guilty, and many
had been executed; and through grief, while lying mourning before the Lord. 2.
There needed no legal process; for both the law and the sentence was written
with characters of blood upon the carcases of thousands; and this Man's fact was
notour and avowed, to all the Congregation. 3. He had the interpretative
consent of that pious Magistrate: why then may not the like be done in the like
case, where the Ius, and the factum is as clear and undeniable as here, and the
Magistrate, who should execute the sentence is out of a present capacity, and
the matter admits of no delay as here, (for till this was done, the plague
was never stayed,) much more if he will not, and wrath is still poured out from
the Lord; and the Magistrate by his place is bound to assent, and approve of
the thing. If such a fact were done in the like case, would any think that the
person should be challenged and not rather approved by the Magistrate?

In the 6. Place he gives us, the distinction betwixt extraordinary and
heroical acts, telling us that a heroic act does not deviat from the rule of a
common virtue, but only proceeds from a more intense disposition to a high
pitch of virtue and of the acts thereof: But an extraordinary action goes
beyond any ordinary rule of common reason or divine word, as that Abraham
should kill his Sone Isaac.] Answ. We shall not contend with him much about
this, since he will grant that heroic actions are imitable, as not being
contrary to a rule of common virtue; though extraordinary actions, which are
rather contrary to the rule of common virtue, may not be imitated: And he has
not yet proved, neither can he prove that Phineas's fact was so far beyond any
ordinary rule of common reason or divine word, as was that of Abraham, and the
like. We shall grant with him. That [ Extraordinary actions, are such as are
done upon special mandate of God, and are not within the compass of ordinary
acts of obedience according to the rule, that is set.] And that [ men may have
heroic motions and actions within the bounds of an ordinary calling, as Luther
had; as sometimes, though they have an extraordinary calling, they may want
heroical motions, as Peeter when he dissembled. [But what says this to Phine
as his fact? [Phineas (says he) had not only excitations of zeal and heroical
motions, but (supposeing him a mere private person) he is to be looked upon as
having extraordinary calling from God.] Answer. Does this man give a distinct
sound? He complained of the Author of that discourse concerning Phineas, that
he turned himself Proteus.-like into many shapes, and we find himself doing
little better here: He dar not say positively whether he was a mere private
person or not, but if he was such, then the action was extraordinary; but what
if he was not? Then the action was neither extraordinary nor heroical, and thus
we are no wiser then we were; for we know not what to make of the action; nor
what to make of the person, but we must judge of the person by the action; And
of the action by the person. That is to say, if he was a Magistrate then the
action was ordinare, but if he was a private person then the action was
extraordinary: and e contra, if the action was extraordinary, he was a private
person, and if it was ordinare and imitable, Then he was a public person. Is
not this a singularly satisfactory way of answereing? But it is observable that
he dar not here say that Phineas's fact was extraordinary, but that he is to be
looked upon as having an extraordinary call, now a man may have an
extraordinary call to an action imitable, as the Apostles had an extraordinary
call to preach the Gospel, and yet that action of theirs is imitable. But how
proves he this extraordinary call? [It is ( says he) fully enough insinuated
both by God's approving and rewarding him Numb. 25. (and he rewards not our will
- service, nor approves it, but what he has enjoined himself) and also by P
sal. 106. where it is said Emphatically it was imputed to him for
righteousness: though judging according to ordinary Rules, it might be imputed
to him for sin (supposeing him for a mere private man) yet, having God's
warrant, whose will is the rule of righteousness, the deed was imputed to him
for righteousnesse] Answ. It is true, God rewards not, nor approves not
vvil-service, yet he approves and rewards other actions, then such as are
extraordinary and not imitable. 2. God's imputing it unto him for
rightoeusnesse, says clearly he was a private person, and that God accepted
of his service as a noble act of holy zeal for God and his glory, and rather
speaks out an encouragement to all, to do the like in the like case, then any
extraordinary call he had, which none now can expect.

Then in the 7 place he speaks of Callings and says that [Every calling a man
has to any work Must be either Mediate or immediate (there is no mids betwixt
these two, as there is not between contradictories) if they be not called by
the intervention of men, and their allowance, they must plead an immediate
calling from God.] Ans. Beacause I mind not to enter into a Logomachy, or
debate about words, and terms; I would desre him to tell me, what call men
have to run together to extinguish a fire in a city, when the Magistrates
through wickedness or negligence will not, or do not, call People forth unto
that work. They have not Man's call, nor have they an immediate call from
heaven, and yet they have a lawful call from God, Nature and necessity, to save
the city, their houses, goods and little ones, from being burnt into ashes. And
what ever name he give to this call, we will allow it to private persons to
defend Religion and a land form ruin and destruction, when Magistrates do not
nor will not do their duty. And when men, whether out of secret impulses,
heroical motions, or out of mere sense and conscience of duty, do this, they do
not desert their own calling and state, like these spirits lud. ver. 6. Nor do
they intrude upon the Magistrate's office, though they do materially that work
for that exigent, which Magistrates by office were bound to do, being called
thereto by God, by Nature, and the call of inevitable necessity, which knows
no humane law, and to which some divine positive laws will cede. But then he
says Page 115. [Why is not also sufficient for the office of the Ministry
without a call from men externally?] Answ. And does he think that necessity
will not allow a man sufficiently gifted and qualified to exerce that office
without an external call from men, in some cases? What if a company of Men be
cast out on an island, having no correspondence nor possibility of
correspondence with other places, whence they might have some lawfully called
Minister; and there be one among them qualified for the work, might not he in
that case think himself called of God to exerce that function? And when we
grant this, we need not yield unto Anabaptists, Enthusiasts photinians, or the
like, who are against an external call at any time, alleging that gifts are
sufficient [ And (says he) how shall be refuse to admit women to Baptize
Children in case of necessity?] Answ. He shall not refuse providing he show the
necessity, which he shall not be able to do unless he turn Papist, and then
he will embrace the consequent also, without our admission.

In the 8 place he comes to tell us that [ It is in vain to say that God's
hand is not shortened, etc. for our question is not of that, but if now after
the Canon of holy Scripture is perfected sealed and consigned, we have warrant
to look for any extraordinary persosones, having Gods secret and special
Mandates, to do works which any ordinary calling does not interest them in?]
Answ. Prophecyes and predictions of future events, are not works, which any
ordinary calling men have, by allowance and approbation of Men, according to
the rules of common reason and the word, does interest them in; and does he
think God's sealing and perfecting the Canon of Scripture has so bound him up,
as that he will not, or cannot now give such a Spirit unto any? 2. The question
rather is; Whether now when the Canon is sealed and perfected, examples of Zeal
and valiant acting for God and his glory, in times of corruption and wicknesse,
in actions not contrary to the Law of God, registrated in Scripture, be not for
our use and instruction, and imitable?

When Naphtaly wished that all God's People were as Phineas He concurreth with
him [ In wishing that they may be filled with zeal to his glory as Phineas was;
but not that they should have the same exercise of zeal, unless they could be
certified of their warrant and calling to do so, as he was.] Ans. That he was
certified of his calling and warrant we doubt not, but that he had such a call
as no man now is capable of, is the question; and he has not yet cleared it. [
The Apostles of Christ (says he) are to us examples of zeal for God in their
Ministry; but who will say that the acts which they Zealously did, by virtue
of their extraordinary calling, as Peter's killing Ananias, are for our
imitation.] Answ. Peter killed Ananias and Sapphira by a power of miracles,
which none now have. Phineas did not kill the Prince and his whore, by a power
of miracles. Their examples are imitable according to our power and the
exigence of the like necessity; and therefore Ministers should now out of
zeal, use Church censures, against such dissemblers when discovered: And so we
grant that to follow at the facts of them who have been truly Zealous for God,
were indeed an evil Zeal, like the zeal of the Disciples Luke 9: ver. 54. and
we shall willingly hearken to Peter Martyr's his words Loc. Com. Class. 2. Cap.
9. and grant-that We must beware to confirm any thing which we vehemently and
extraordinarily desire by the exemple of predecessors. And that, when we
attempt the doing of any thing contrary to ordinary commands of God, it is not
enough to produce the example of others, but we must search by what Spirit we
are led, lest under a specious pretext we follow carnal affection and prudence.
And yet say, that in some cases private persons may execute judgment on
Malefactors, after the example of the Prophet Elias killing Baals Priests, 1
King. 18. Which fact Peter Martyr in the same place, n. 4. defends thus [ I
say it was done by the Law of God: for Deuteronomy. 18. God decerned that the false
Prophet should die, and Cap. 17. the same is said of private Men and Women who
would worshipe idols. But Cap. 13. not only is death threatened against a
seduceing Prophet, but a command is added, that no man should spare his
brethren, the Son of his Mother, nor his son or daughter, nor his dearest or
most intimate friends: Thirdly it is commanded that the whole city, when it
becomes idolatrous should be cut off by fire and sword: And Lev. 24. it is
statuted, that the blasphemer should not live; to which we may add the Law or
equity of Taliation; for these Prophets of Baal caused Iezebel and Ahab kill
the servants of the Lord.] He says (it is true) that King Ahab being present
did consent, and did not withstand; but we see nothing in the text showing that
the Prophet founded his fact upon that consent. It is true, the King might have
been so astonished by that prodigious sight, that he durst not spurn against
the Prophet, and all the People: But that for all this, he gave any express
command, either through fear, or desire to have rain; or that the Prophet
either sought, or had his warrant and command for what he did, we see no ground
for it in the text, More then Samuel had warrant of Saul when he killed Agag
before his eyes, whom he should have killed himself according to the command of
God.

Thus have I answered all which this pamphleter has said concerning Phineas
his fact: for what follows to the end of his pamplet, is not much to this
matter, and has been spoken to formerly: and though I have done so, I would
not have the Reader to think, that I do look upon that example of Phineas as a
binding precedent in all times to all persons, unless it be every way so
circumstantiated as it was then. And further I suppose it will fully satisfy
this Surveyer and stope his Mouth abundantly, if I shall secure him from any
such dag or dagger. To which End, because I can do no more, I do heartily wish,
That none of God's People do in that manner defile their fingers on him or on
any of his cursed fraternity, to whom God is reserving (if they repent not) the
vengeance of hell fire, and possibly a visible stroke of justice on Earth, in a
way which will be more to the glory of God, and to the satisfaction of all such
as love his cause and his comeing.

CAP. XXI.
Some Animadversions upon the Surveyer's Virulent preface and Title Page.
WHen thus we have fully examined and confuted what this Enemy has said, in
this part of his Survey. It will not be amiss, till we see what he says
further in the following part or parts of this infamous work of his, to touch a
little upon his Title Page and his most bitter, and satirick preface, which is
a perfect proof of the man's Spirit: for he comes forth in his own colors,
and with his tongue speaks no flattering words, nor words of butter, but both
heart and tongue are full of gall and worm word; So that his Name should not be
Honeyman but Wormwood-Man or Man of gall.

1. He calls his work a Survey. Or rather a Superficial view: For No man, who
ever put pen to paper, took such an overly look, of the books which he
pretended to answer, as this Man does of these books which he mentions in
the title page of his scurril pamphlet, as has been abundantly already showed:
And if he do no more in the following part or parts, then he has done in this
first part, he may deservedly bear the name of a Superficial prelate
superficially viewing his adversaryes forces, and superficially managing the
tottering cause; for which he should have been superficially rewarded.

2. A Survey of what? Of the insolent and infamous libel, Entitled, Naphtali
etc. But whether his railing pamphlet, or Naphtali do best deserve the title of
an insolent and Infamous lybel, let the Reader judge when he has considered,
first, that as Naphtali came forth without the author's or printer's name
prefixed, (for which every one may be convinced there was sufficient reason,
seeing such has been and is the wickedness and cruelty of corrupted tyrannical
Courts, and of none more then our Court now in being, that none durst without
manifest hazard openly rebuke in the gate, or in printe show the iniquity of
their vvayes. Yea Or vindicate such as oppose their tyranny and cruelty. So
does this Survey, whose author could be under no rational fear from the
powers now in being, for his advocating their cause; seeing he has been so
richly revvarded for the same, as is sufficiently known: And therefore, his
Survey deserves much more to be termed Libellus Famosus; seeing
notwithstanding of the warrant, Yea and reward of the Magistrates, he dar not
own it, by prefixing his name to it; Nor dar the very printer prefix his name.
Next the nature of Naphtali's discourse is but an historical deduction of the
troubles, the Church of Scotland, in her reformation, has met with at the
hands of a popish, prelatical and Malignant faction, with a necessary
vindication of the truth, which is allowed to all historians, that thereby,
truth may be the more cleared, and the Readers more edifyed by the history. And
who ever heard such a fair and clear deduction of Matters of Fact, together
with a few reasons here and there cast in for the Readers further ^atisfaction;
called an Infamous lybel, till this impudent ignoramus arose? And as for his
pamphlet, do not all see, who consider either its scope, or its method, or the
whole strain of the discourse, that it can be termed nothing else, then a
most impudent, insolent and infamous libel, being not only larded, with bitter
invectives against the Cause and People of God, and railing speeches more
suitable (if suitable for any rational creature) for open scolds and brawling
wives, then for a man, (unless he except such a man, as has by perjury and
more then feminine levity, declared himself, by his own grant, to be one of a
debauched conscience) but also tending most falsely to father on the honest
people of God such things as never came into their minds: Whereby this railing
Rabshakeh proves himself, to all sober judicious persons, to be an impudent
lying calumniator; and his pamphlet, a more then ordinarily insolent, base,
lying, and infamous libel.

3. He tells us, that in his Survey, several things falling in debate in these
times are considered. But by what we have said, we have seen, that such
things as he has in the preceding chapters considered, for the most part, are
either such things as should be put beyond debate, by all who have not renunced
Humanity, Reason, and Religion; or such things concerning which himself has
needlessly and foolishly (as it may be his rewarders will find) moved the
debate; unless he bring some other things above board, in the next part or
parts, then we see in this?

4. Moreover, he tells us, that [ here some doctrines in Lex Rex and Apol.
Narration (he should have said relation) are brought to the touch stone.] But
if in what he has further to say, he mention not some other doctrines, then
what we see in (...) every rational Man will see that he has rather brought
some drops then doctrines of these books to any touch stone, yea even to the
touch stone of his own unsolid and buttery fancy, for his Reason has no
pallat to taste truth aright.

5. In this 1. part he tells us that [ He Represents the dreadful aspect of
Naphtali's principles upon the powers Ordained of God, and detects the horrid
consequences in practice, necessarily resulting from such principles. But more
truly, the dreadful state of his own distempered brain, both in his
judgment, misunderstanding what Naphtaly says, and in his ratiocinative
faculty, giving us nothing but non-sequitur's for clear consequences, And the
manifestly dreadful aspect, which his own principles have on all
Commonwealthes, and on all Rational and Religious persons, together with the
affected style of a base and ignorant gnatho, Time serving parasite and Royally
rewarded court flatterer, who having a latitudinarian's conscience, or rather a
conscience utterly (I wish, not irrecoverably) debauched, makes no conscience
what he says, if he can please King and Court: And how pernicious such
Sycophants have been to Kings in all ages, histories sufficiently declare.

6. Then he praefixeth, Job 13: ver. 7, 9, 11. will you speak wickedly for God,
etc. A passage which most fitly quadrats with him (unless he say he intends
not to plead for God, but for a creature, yea and upon the matter, for the
devil) who, as Job's Friends conspired against Job, and maintained a wrong
thesis, and erred no less in the hypothesis or in the application to Job; so
he conspireth with other Royalists to defend erroneous and long-since decarded
theses, and makes as evil applications to our present case, as has been
showed. His discourse shows to all that he is an accepter of persons, not
secretly indeed, but openly; and so this forger of lies speaks wickedly for the
King, who is (very like) all his God: But we are confident, God shall search
him out and reprove him. Then he prefixeth, Psalm. 144: ver. 10. It is he that
gives Salvation unto Kings, who delivers David his Servant from the hurtful
sword. A noble truth, which all Kings would look to, and if they expected any
good of this good word, would ^ay out themselves for this God and this (...),
and not stand in opposition against him, lest they fince that he who is
terrible to the Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 76: ver. 12. And Made higher then the
Kings of the Earth, Psalm. 89: ver. 27. Shall not spare but strick through Kings
in the day of his wrath, Ps. 110: 5. And find a way to make good that, Psalm.
149: v. 5, -- 9. [For the Lord ^aketh pleasure in his people, he will beautify
the meek with salvation, let the saints be joyful in glory, let them sing aloud
upon their beds, let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two edged
sword in their hand, to execute vengeance upon the heathen, and punishments
upon the people. To bind their Kings with chains, and their Nobles with
fetters of iron. To execute upon them the judgment written: This honor have
all the saints, praise ye the Lord.] But it is to be observed, that by his
bringing forth of this place of scripture, he world make the would believe,
that the party he opposes is thirsting for the life of the King, which is but
this false calumniator's fiction: and we shall make use of the very next words
of that same Psalm. 144. v. 11. andsay [ Rid us and deliver us from the hand of
strange Children whose mouth speaks vanity, and their right hand is a right
hand of falsehood.] And in the last place prefixeth Proverb. cap. 24: ver. 21,
22. My Son fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are
given to change, etc. And does he account himself and his party, fearers of
God, who have so Apostatized, and palpably perjured themselves? and does he
think, that such as fear not God can ever fear the King aright? If he do, he
is mistaken. And who are most given to changes, They or we, let the World
judge. What was this impudent man's brazen face doing while he wrote down this
passage? What was his debauched conscience doing? Was there no blushing? Was
there no conviction? Did not this text flee in his face? If not, sure his
conscience must be extremely debauched, and I fear fea^ed with a hot iron. And
therefore let us take notice of this, and meddle not with such as are given to
change, knowing that the following word shall be made good. (...) calamity
shall rise suddenly and who knows their ruin? Our King lives, and he shall
come. Even so come Lord Jesus, and let all thine Enemies perish.

But now let us come to his preface, that master piece of verulency.

1. He tells us it has been, and is the lot of the ^ilitant Church to be as it
were grinded betwixt the two milstones of a (...) and Atheistical world, and
of a party pretending highly for truth and piety. And amongst the last (by whom
he means the Sect of the Anabaptists) he would reckon the faithful of the
land, who adhere to their Covenants, and are constantly set against that
abjured hierarchy. But when we mark his scope, we see what he would say in
plain terms, if he durst for shame, viz. That they are now the only militant
Church of the Lord in Scotland. This is a great change, I confess, when Christ
shall have no other Church in Scotland, but the perjured, apostatical, popish,
prelatical and malignant faction, that has been from the beginning, an heart
and avowed enemy to the Church and People of God, and never more wicked and
debauched then it is this day: And yet so holy is it, that it must arrogate to
itself alone, the name of the Church. But what Church? Be-like the Synagoge of
Satan which call themselves jews but are not, or that coetus malignantium (as
the vulgar has it) Psalm. 26: v. 4. The congregation of evil deors which should
be hated and not joynd with. They the Church, who have banished Christ out of
the Church, abjured his interests, persecuted to the death his brethren and
followers? Must they be the Church, who are a company of perjured Apostats,
profane ranters, Men of debauched consciences, wicked lives, corrupt
principles, prodigiously licentious, and running to all excess of riot and
iniquity? They the only Church, whose chief Fathers are Apostate Prelates,
sensual, brutish, latitudinarian Epicures, void of the faith, Enemies to piety,
carnal worldings, whose God is their belly, who mind earthly things, and whose
end shall be destruction, dogs, evil workers, and the concision, of which we
should b^^are? Phil. 2: ver 2. Are these Prelate Bite-sheeps, rather then
Bishops, blameless, the husbands of one wife? Are they Vigilant, unless when
they have much wine to devour, or a feast to hold to Bacchus? Are they sober,
who glutt themselves in sensuality? Are they of good beheaviour, whose carriage
is abominable to all sober persons? Are they given to hospitality, who, if
they could effectuat it, would not suffer a godly person to have the benefit
of one nights Lodging in all the land? Are they apt to teach, who have rejected
Christ and his truth, and cry up and commend Socinian brats and impoisoned
books? Are not they given to wine? Witness all who converse with some of them.
Are they no strickers, who are ringleaders in persecution, and stir up the
powers to spew out their venom, against the small remnant of the honest
covenanters in the land? are not they greedy of filthy Lucre, who oppress all
under them, and for a Bishop's benefice have made shipewrack of their faith,
soul and conscience? Are they patient who are so soon sadled; are not they
Brawlers? Witness this pamphleting prelate? Are not they Covetous? Witness
all who have to do with them. Do they rule well their own house, having their
Children in Subjection with all gravity; when all see that their families are
nurseries of pride, vanity, pomp prodigality, idleness, profanity and
sensuality? And as for their Underling-curats, the scumme of Mankind, who
sees not their nakedness? Is this the Church, when they who say they sit in
Moses seat, are such patrons of profanity, and patronizers of wickedness, and
unworthy to be accounted Members in any tolerably reformed Church? Are they the
militant Church, who triumph in their silks and velvets, rideing with foot
mantels in Parliaments, sitting in Councils and Sessions? I fear many, of them
shall never see another triumphant Church. If they be the corn grinded betwixt
two milstones, where is the professedly profane, and atheistical world which
trouble them? Sure, seeing these are the only members of their Church, they must
be nothing else but the Nether millstone: Nay the poor afflicted people of God
find them the upper millstone too: for by them and at their instigation, are
they brocken in pieces, persecuted to the death, scattered into corners; and
banished to other nations. And as he cannot give us the professedly profane
and atheistical world distinct from themselves, So he shall never be able to
rank the truly godly, who are persecuted this day for righteousness sake,
among the wild seck of Anabaptists. As shall be showed afterward. Ay but Page
5. he says [ As Whitgift and Hooker these godly, sage, and sagacious persons
(forsooth) considering the tendency and consequence of some of their
principles, who were vehement for Discipline, feared the breaking out of that
evil; so now they see it is come to pass for that Mystery of iniquity which
works to the confusion of humane societies, to the bringing of divine
ordinances into contempt, and to the introduceing of Libertinisme, Quakerisme,
Rantisme, and Atheism, can shroud itself under diverse external forms of
Church government.] But sure if we may judge of the cause by the effect, there
being more Libertinisme, Quakerisme, Rantisme and Atheism. this day in
Scotland, then was all the while that presbyterian government was in vigor,
we must say that Prelates and Prelatical principles usher in these evils,
which shroud more under their lap, then under presbyterians: Anabaptists: he
tells us out of Ames Fresh Suit Page 93. had their own Bishops, but where
finds he that they had Presbyterian government? It seems then that prelacy
can comply better with Anabaptisme, then presbytery; and so it will indeed:
For they being two of Satan's devices must not discord. It would appear that
neither Whitgift nor Hooker have been so sage or sagacious, nor himself so
sharpsighted, as to see such furious Spirits lurking under our lap; we and all
see them rather svvarming under his own lap.

2. This instrument of Satan comes next to sow some tares, Page 5, 6. and
pretending much tenderness to some moderat men (as he calls them) of our
way, he advises them for God's glory, the honor of his reformed Churches,
compassion to seduced souls, and true interest of their own reputation, to
disclaim by some public deed, what Naphtaly says, left they be accounted
partakers of the guilt. But wise and sagacious persons will easily see this
snare, and will not lay much weight upon all this perjured wretches fair
pretensions, and will readily be convinced that there is no such vile things
issueing from Naphtaly (when what he says is rightly understood, and not
wiredrawne and miserably thrown with prejudice) nor such doctrines or
practices, there asserted or maintained, How ever this railer call them
scandalous and shameful, as they need to be ashamed of, and that it will
neither be for the glory of God, the honor of his Churches, the good of souls,
nor their own credit, to dance to this man's pipe, to follovv divisive
motions, contrare to our Covenants, to joyne-in with malignant Apostates,
constant and sworn enemies to the work of reformation, to make the heart of
the people of God sad whom the Lord would not have made sad; and to fortify and
strengthen the hands of the wicked. Verbum sapienti fas est, we know the
proverb, it is not good for the lambs, when the fox preaches.

3. This meek man tells us next, That it is not his design to offend the
generation of the humble, meek, self denied seekers of God's face, partakers
with him of the same precious faith, and running to obtain the same prize of
the inheritance. O! who can decyphere unto us these persons; who are these
humble meek, self-denyed seekers of God's face, whom this man will not grieve?
Are these the latitudinarian Atheists, the Gallioes, the coldrife Laodiceans,
who care not what Religion be professed? It is like men of that principle, will
not be much grieved by any thing which he has said O! but he means some of
those who differ from him in judgment in some particulars: but what are these
particulars? Meum and tuum? I fear he take not such for meek humble or self
denied persons, and they will have as little reason to take him for such an
one. Are these particulars, Church Government? And who are these who differ
from him in that point, whom he accounts humble meek and self denied? Possibly
the few honest public resolutioners. But I suppose these faithful Men desire
none of his commendations. Neither will they look upon themselves as partakers
of the same precious faith with him and his fraternity, who have made shipewrak
of their faith. Nor do they mind to run to obtain the same prize with him and
his perjured fraternity* which will be the broad roll, the long and broad
curse, which will enter into the house of him that swears falsely, and the
heavy wrath and vengeance of God due to apostates; as they like not to turn
Prelates, and swallow down bishopriks which, is all the prize, and all the
inheritance, which some run over light and conscience and all, to obtain. Does
this wicked Man still intend to sow sedition, and to widen that difference?
Is he ignorant of the original of that sad contest? Is he yet to be informed
that the rational fears and foresight of not a few of these Ministers and
Professors who obtained mercy to be jealous for the Lord, did impose a
necessity upon them (in order to the preventing of a re-establishing and
re-introduceing of these abjured abominations) to Dissent from, and protest
against, the course which was at that time taken, in public judicatories: And
upon the other hand these godly men (whom, with much sorrow of heart, and the
greatest of reluctancies, they did oppose, as knoweing how really dear the
precious interests of Christ were to them) being Conscious of their own
integrity and straightness, in the matters of God, and measureing others by
themselves, (or thinking it hardly possible; yea rather morally impossible;
that the very same men, who had joined with them in so solemn an engagement to
God, and by whom, the souls of his People thorovv the Land, had been brought
under the bond of the Covenant, could, while pretending to their former
straightness be such miscreants and monsters, that neither any Conscience
toward God, nor shame before the world, could bind them to the good behavior,
and tie them up from returneing to their former vomit) did mistake their
brethren in that opposition, and became jealous of them; and did likewise by a
sad overplus of ill grounded Charity, mistake the enemies of the work of God
for friends; and because they had once with them engaged to pluk up that
unhallowed plant of prelacy, as none of Gods planteing, under an Anathema
Maranatha, they were not suspicious that this accursed thing was still with
them, or that after they had joined with them, in commending the good ways of
God, and crying Grace Grace upon the building, they should with the same
breath, cry out Crucify Crucify all the friends of the work of God; and by an
unparalleled dissimulation, only be watching for an opportunity of bursting
his bonds asunder, and casting away his cords from them: He cannot be
ignorant, I say, that this gave the rise to all these sad debats; and
therefore, I am hopeful and confident, that when that mystery of iniquity
which was then vvorking, is now manifest; and when that Conspiracy against
God; which did then lurk and lay hide under the veil of friendship to the
work of God, is now broke forth to the hight of rebellion against him who is
King in Zion, that all the Controversies which henceforth shall be betvveen
these brethren, shall be buried in this one blessed contest, who shall love
God most, and one another best; who shall most earnestly and eagerly contend
for the faith once delivered to the saints, who shall be most forward in
following the Lord fully, and peremptory in adhereing to the least hove of the
precious truths of Christ, now trampled upon by these overturners and
supplanters: Yea, I am confident, that these godly men who have been most
deceived and cheated into a credulity of the honesty and integrity of them, who
are now gone out from them, because they were never of them, will judge that
they are more particularly and especially concerned to set themselves in
opposition to these dissembling Apostats, and use all lavvful means to
overturne these treacherous overturners, and put the Church of Sotland in Statu
quo prius, since by the intrusting of the cause to these men of perfidy, the
cause has been lost, and themselves are Lorded over, together with the rest
of the inheritance of the Lord: Let me once more say that, I hope, this shall
be the effect, which his second attempt to a further division amongst the
remnant, who stand in opposition to the way of these wicked men, shall have
amongst his Servants, and that the divider shall live to see his disigne mis
give and hear a sweet harmony (after all former jarring discords) amongst the
servants of the Lord, in singing a Higgajon selah because this wicked man
with his accomplices are ensnared in this and other works of their own hands.

4. He goes on in his fascination (but in vain is the net spread in the sight
of any bird) and would persuade us, that he can not take these humble, meek,
self denied seekers of God, as partakers with Naphtaly and his adherents: For
why? [ who can imagine (says he) that a meek people, who has the promise of
God's teaching, should be so far transported, as to take the circumstantials of
Religion, for the greater and weighty matters of Law and Gospel, without which
known and believed, none can come to God?] Can we think, or can any but this
wretch, who fears not God, think, that the observing of sacred Covenants,
made about the life and substantials of Religion, as well as more external
things, is no great and weighty matter of the Law? No humble understanding
seeker of God, but, though he knows there is a difference betwixt the
circumstantialls of Religion, and the weightier matters of Law and Gospel, yet,
as He will not account every thing circumstantial, which this circumstantially
substantial Prelat, vvil call so; so, He will have a tender regard to every
thing, which Christ has appointed in his house. But, I pray, who can take
his Man for one of these meek people who has the promise of God's teaching,
who to obtain a bishopric, a circumstantial in his account, (but really to
him and his colleagues a substantial sappy thing, and to sensual carnal
Epicures and bellygods, and to such as care for no other portion, but one in
this life) has sold and given away the most weighty matters of Law and Gospel
both? And how he shall then come to God, unless he repent, I see not; It may
be the needle headed casuist has found out a new way, and (if not sure and
saife, yet) to his experience easy and honorable, viz. by ascending from a
Presbyter to a Prelate: But whither next? Exitus acta probat, either backward,
or headlong down the precipice. Again [ Who can think (says he) that an
intelligent people should account, that the concerns of Christ's Kingdom and
their own salvation, do lie with so much stresse upon this point, that the
weakest and most ignorant Minister shall have a potestative parity, with the
Man of greatest gifts, learning, and knowledge; that the minister weakest in
his prudentialls, should have equal authority in the managing of the matters of
God's house, with the wisest and one of the most noted prudence; that the
youngest, rawest and most unexperienced Minister should have as much power in
ruleing the house of God, as the Man fullest of years, whose judgment is
consolidated and ripened for government, and who has for a long time given
such documents of good and wise behavior, that makes him fitter to rule the
younger sort, then to be ruled by them?] Answ. No doubt but ye are the people
and wisdom shall die with you, ye are the Men of greatest gifts, learning and
knowledge, viz. to devour cups, loose the knots of Govenants, and to lead
people the broad way to hell; you are the wisest and most noted for prudence,
in that carnal wisdom, which is enmity to God, and in that worldly way of
selling soul and conscience, to purchase, greetings in the high ways, high
places, honors, revenues, Court stations, Court rewards, and Court
complements, etc. You are the Men fullest of years, whose judgment is
consolidated and ripened for government, giving for along time documents of
good and wise behavior, having not only your judgments stupidly blinded, but
consciences seared and ripened for a dreadful plague; and of this, have you for
a long time given sufficient documents, by showing how chamelion-like you can
change all colors, and how wittily you can turn with all tides, and have a
behavior suitable for all companyes, but the company of God's people. O ye
Seraphical Divines, or or rather Dunces! O ye sufficiently qualified for a
bacchus barrel! O ye sublime Doctors of the blake art of perjury! O ye learned
Clerks in the mysteries of the Kingdom of Darkness! O ye whose prudence is to
sail with all winds! O ye Men of judgment consolidated into a stone, having
no conscience, and far less piety? Doubtless you are the Men, the only Men
fit for the sole possessing of that potestative power and authority, to manage
the matters of God's house, and to rule the young stirplings* But every tree is
known by its fruit, and whether your singular Antichristian supereminency, or
the Apostolic parity, has best managed the matters of Christ's house, the
present overflowing and abounding of Idolatry, Superstition, Sodomy, Adultery,
Uncleanesse, Drunkenesse, Atheism, Ignorance, Profanity, malignancy, hatred of
piety, persecution of godliness, and such like abominations, and the
villannies of these debauched creatures the Curates, will, to all serious and
sober^ onlookers, determine: And by the present face of affairs, together with
all that, which what is already come does presage, compared with what was seen
while Presbyterian government was in any vigor and integrity, will make all
that fear the Lord, see that more of the concerns of Christ's Kingdom and
their own salvation, lies upon that very point of the discipline of Christ's
house, then by many has been thought, and will be a sufficient confirmation,
that this parity, and not their domineering superiority, was the only form of
government established by Christ and his Apostles. Moreover he says, [ Or who
can see the prejudice to Christ's Kingdom, and precious souls, if such a
worthy person (as is described) be entrusted with inspection over other
Brethren and Churches, in a reasonable bounds, not with a dominative or lordly
power, but paternal and fatherly; not to do after his own arbitrament, and as
one unchallengeable in his actions, but to be regulated by acts of the Church
and Land, and to be responsible to his Super tours in case of maleversation;
not to rule solely, but with the consent and Counsel of Presbysers;] Answ. By
this Tyranny in the Church, all may see what prejudice does daily come to
Christ's Kingdom, and to precious souls, who will but open their eyes. By what
authority should any clame that power of inspection over others, and that in a
most unreasonable bounds? Is the power of the present Lordly Lord Prelates
paternal? Sure they must be step Fathers then, and that of the cruelest kind?
Have not the present Lordly Prelates, as much dominative and Lordly power, as
ever they had in Scotland? And do they not rule and domineer in the Church
after their own arbitrament? Who is to control them, unless the good King
but a gentle curb in some or their jaws to make way for greater rage and
Tyranny? What acts of the Church are these which regulate them? Be-like the
laws and acts which their own lusts make, within their own breasts; for they
are the Church, the holy Clergy, and who but they? Who are over them as
Superiors? Sure none but the King, in their account; and to him must they be
responsible; and if they forget not the Court-art, but labor to keep some
chief courtiers on their side, they know all will be well, and they will hear
no rebukes, but well done good and faithful Servant; but no Church judicatory
is over them. But Zion's King is above them and their Superior also, and he
will call them to an account for their usurpation and Tyranny. He tells us,
they rule with the consent and Counsel of Presbyters; but when? And where? And
how? What? Will they walk by the consent and Counsel of the weakest and most
ignorant of Presbyters, weakest in their prudentialls, Youngest, rawest, and
most unexperienced stirplings? Sure they being men of greatest gifts, learning
and knowleldge, the wisest, and most noted for purdence, Men fullest of years,
whose judgment is consolidated and ripened for government, will think it below
them to rule with the consent and counsel of those; And experience does prove
it.

5. This noble disputant will come in the follovving words Page 7. and prove
the Ius divinum of prelacy, not only against us, who hold it to be jure
Antichristi; but against King, Parliament and all the Malignant cabal, who hold
it only Iure Caroli: But the man's judgment is so consolidated, and he is so
well read in his prudentials, that he must dravv bridle, and speak spareingly,
and only whisper out what he would feign be at, and say. [ Can this way be
disrelished by sober Christians, being so strongly pleaded by the light of
sound reason.] Nay rather, by the light of ambition, vanity, vain glory, love
of money, luxury, covetousness, love of this present world more then the love
of God, and the edification of his Church; As all who are not sworn slaves to
the perjured prelates will confidently aver sub rosa. [Making so much (says
he) for the comeliness and order of Chrisi's Church.] Rather so much for the
deformity, confusion and destruction of the Church, and of all true
Church Order, as not only all who have eyes in their heads will grant, but the
present fruits and effects cry out to all the world. [ Being (he adds) so
suitable and correspondent to the ancient government of the Church of Israel
wherein there we Priests, and chief Priests, and several ranks of Ministers,
an order which was neither typical nor temporal; but has a standing reason
reaching us.] O so bravely as this advocat pleads for the Pope! has he got
the promise of a Cardinal's cap for his pains? Because there was one high
Priest over all the Church, must we have also one Pope? Good Master Prelate
prove your consequence, for we see no such standing reason reaching us, as to
this; nor as to what you would conclude, the case being the same. [ Being
(says he) so conform to the beginnings of Christ's ordering the New Testament
Ministry, where there were Apostles above the seventy disciples.] Nay rather so
conform to Antichrist's ordering of his Church; for, as the seventy Disciples
were to be no standing officers in Christ's house, so the Apostles had no
superiority of order or jurisdiction over them, they were entrusted with no
inspection over these. Let our Master Bishope with all his gifts, learning, and
knowledge show this if he can? Being (says he further) so agreeable to the
Apostles constitution of the government of the Churches of the New Testament,
which was in an imparity of power in Ministers, as is luculently exemplified in
the power of Timothy, and Titus, who were not Evangelists, nor ever accounted
so by the spirit of God.] It seems then Paul was not acted by the spirit of
God, when he said to Timothy 2 Timothy 4: 5. do the work of an Evangelist: and
since all the proof which he can bring of this, is this example of Timothy and
Titus, let his consolidated and ripened judgment, taking to help, the greatest
of his gifts, learning and knowledge, answer what Prinne has said in his
Unbishoping of Timothy and Titus: and let him not thus stope our mouth with his
raw and blunt assertions, lest wise men think he has neither gifts, learning,
knowledge, prudence, nor judgment, but a rarifyed vvindy brain, swelled to a
great bulk with vanity and conceit, as who but he, who can confute all books
how full soever of unansvverable reasons, with his bare I say otherwise. [And
finally, (says he) our ascended glorious Savior having honored persons with
that precedence by letters, written by his secretary John unto them Revel 2,
and 3. Chapt, wherein he shows the approbation of their office and power,
reproving their neglects, yet honoring them with the style of Angels to the
Churches, or his Messengers in special manner, which cannot, without notable
pervers^on of the Scripture, be otherwise understood, but of single persons
presideing over presbyters.] Can no single person preside over prebyters,
except my Lord Prelate? Or are all presidents or moderators of presbyteries
Prelates? Nay he will be loath to say so. And what can he prove from thence
(though it were granted to him that this Angel was once single person, which
cannot be till Holy and profound Mr Durham's arguments be confuted, which will
be ad c^lendas Graecas) but at most, that this Angel was a moderator of the
meeting? Was he therefore the Lord Prelate? No, master Bishop; your wit and
learning both will not prove this. And has your new Order and dignity, to
which you are advance, O Lordly Prelate, infused no new gifts into you, that
you might fasten your chair with some new nails or arguments; or are you so
consolidated into the old temper of your predecessors, that you must rest
satisfied with what they said, as having neither gifts, learning, knowledge nor
wit, to invent new things? But could your lordly brain think of no reply to
the solidanswers, which poor, weak, ignorant and unexperienced presbyters gave
long ago unto these arguments? Why then did you chant over the old song
again, to make yourselfe but ridiculous? Did you think that your word would
have more weight, then the solid reasons of that solid and Eminent divine Holy
Mr Durham in his exposition of that place? If so, you must have a wonderful
high esteem of yourselfe, which will make all wise Men to esteem the less of
you. [ And this order ( says he) Christ's Church and dear spouse, having since
that time retained in all places, where Churches were constitute, without
exception, in all times without interruption, until this last age, wherein,
through hatred of corruptions adhereing thereto under Popery, and because of
the enmity of the Popish Bishops to the reformation, some have utterly without
any reason rejected the office it self.] O irrefragable dictator! Ex tripode he
dictats like another uncontrollable Master. What better is this out of your
Mouth, then it was out of old Bishop Hall'^ the Remonstrator, and confuted by
Smectymnuus? is this man able to answer al which Blondel has said against
this, or learned Calderwood in his Altar. Damasc. or yet to answer what his
dearer friend Stilling fleet has said to this purpose, in this Irenicum? Why
has he not once noticed that which the author of Apologetical Relation has
said Sect. 1. Where he showed out of History and by reason, that Palladius was
the first prelate that ever Scotland saw? And this solifidian gives us non
causam pro causa, when he says that it was only the corruptions of the
Prelates, that made some without reason reject them, whereas it was their want
of an institution of Christ, that made all, with the irrefragability of reason,
reject them as no officers of Christ: And we shall willingly conclude this with
his words following [ Who can think that a Christian People will not readyly
follow the footsteps of the flock in former generations.] Provideing he will
suffer us to add this [ In so far, and so long, as they walked after their
master Christ, and followed his institutions.]

6. Then Page 8. He says it is not [ His intention Either to provock any
fearers of God, who have been perhaps, in an hour of tentation, miscarryed to
irregular courses, following too readyly, in the simplicity of their hearts,
cunning leaders, who have had too much dominion over their faith; these we
judge worthy of greatest tenderness in dealing with them.] But who are those?
Sure, by the carriage of the present powers, enraged and animated by the
perfidious Prelates, we hear of none who meet with any tenderness, though he
judge them worthy of greatnest tenderness, And what are these irregular
courses? Is it an irregular course to refuse to run with this perjured Prelate
and his fraternity, to the same excess of apostasy, and as far from their
sworn allegiance to God, as his debauched conscience has carried him? What
was the tentation which made them stand fast? He knows better what tentations
(and whether they lasted for a day or for an hour) they were, which drew him
off; sure they had none such to move them to stand fast, but the fear of God
(which he stoke off) made them mindeful of their Covenants. What are these
cunning leaders which he says had dominion over their faith? They follow no
leader but their Master Christ. But because he has hung his faith at the
King's girdle, and has no other principles to walk by, he supposes all others
to be of his stamp, and must needs hang on some body: But he will find them to
be persons of conscience, and not so ready to follow any man in the simplicity
of their hearts, as he suppo^eth. Then being in a good mood he lets out a flash
of hope, saying [ Nor are we without hope that God who stills the noise of the
seas, etc. Psalm. 65: ver. 7. will in time allay their animosities, and rebuke
the stormy wind and seas of their passions, that they may be still; and that
he will bring them to consider their ways, wherein they have exceeded, and
give them to know how ill and bitter a thing it is to forsake their own
mercies, in the ordinances of God, for the want or having of this or that form
of external government.] Now we see that the tender mercyes of the wicked are
cruel, when we see the tendency of the best of the wishes and hopes of this
Man, when he is in his best mood. But we are confident, his hopes shall perish,
as does the hope of the Hypocrite, because it is not bottomed on faith, and he
has no ground to believe that such as have hitherto keept themselves pure,
shall at length turn in with them to the swineish pudle. We believe That that
God who stills the noise of the seas, the noise of the waves, and the tumult of
the People, shall in due time make this true of them, when he shall show
himself the hearer of prayers, and when he shall have purged away our
transgressions, and shall satisfy us with the goodness of his house, and even
of his holy temple, and so prove himself to be the God of our Salvation Psalm.
65: ver. 2, 3, 4, 5. We hope also he shall bring us to consider these ways,
wherein indeed we have exceeded; and make us know how ill and bitter a thing
it is to forsake our own Mercyes, in not adhereing to all the ordinances of
God, so faithfully, as we vowed in our Covenants to do, even to that external
form of government, which Christ has instituted, and has so signally owned
as his ordinance, by his rich blessing follovving thereupon, amongst us,
whatever this indifferent-laodicean-latitudinarian think of the matter.

7. To whom then would this Man reach a blovv [ These we aim at (says he)
in this parallel with Anabaptists, are the Naphtalian party, i e* the furious
sort of these who under the conduct of this teacher and his like, make sport of
rebellions murders, assassinations.] Now the man is in his element, dipping
his pen in gall, and spevving out the venom of his heart against the zealous
maintainers of the interests of Christ; and therefore his tongue is ready to
utter his mischievous calumnies, and his anile rhetoric flovveth over all its
banks: for (says he) they are [ a fur^ous sort that make sport of rebellions
murders assassinations (we know what this aims at; but he might say vvoe to
ill company) that they have hardened and harnessed their heart (O rare
thetorick!) ( as appears by their writtings and deeds) that they have become
stout in a ded^lent greediness (O soaring elequence!) to commit any
wickedness, which they account meet to serve their design, as if their
supposed good cause could legitimate the worst course (all which he must
confirm with lies, and say) who make no reckoning, as their Doctor here
professes, of overturning thrones, of making the land drunk with the blood of
the inhabitants, multiplying fatherless and widows in the midst thereof and
introduceing greatest confusion and calamites (because forsooth they would have
the order which Christ has established in his Church introduced, and
Antichristian confusion, with all the calamities that attend it and support it,
ejected and extirpated) that may make all faces gather blackness, and all to
smite on the thigh, crying alas for the day.] (No: he needs not fear that any
face should gather blackness, or that any should have cause to cry alas for
the day, but the cursed crew of apostat perjured prelates, with their
underlings, supporters and adherents.) Then he proceeds like himself [ If so be
(says he) they may upon the ruins of all, erect the idol of pretended parity
of Ministers, which when they have set up, the imperious agitators will (as*
they have done formerly) baffle, if any offer be, to level them to other: and
howsoever the weaker brethren must be Enterteaned with fair words and
noddified with notional disputs anent their parity with the best, that they may
think themselves some what; Yet how disdainfully was it, and yet would be
taken, if these low shrubs should assay a practical parity with the tall
cedars in the government of affairs.] We see at what this wormwood man
aims: It is a wonder what peace he has now, seeing he looks on himself as
Lord prelate, as well as the best, that he is not advanced to be a member of
Council and Lord of the Session with others. It seems he is content now to be
noddified with a notional disput anent his parity, seeing he has gotten the fat
portion he gaped for, the only desirable thing, viz. his bishopric. Be like
the thing that moves his spleen now to write thus, is because his
quonda^^brethren baffled him down among the weak, and did not so entrust him as
they did that Arch-deceiver, his late companion in fear and perplexity: And so
it would seem, he is only grieved, that he had not an equal hand with that
Arch-traitour sharp, in cutting his Mothers throat: O strange! But, to his
sorrow let him know, God will take the desire for the dead. Then he closes
that paragraph with a quirck, saying, [ Imparity was then without tittle now it
is with it, and there is our change and great defection, and surely, that which
has been, will be, and there is no new thing under the Sun.] And so may the
Pope say, There was an imparity among the Apostles, (for Peter and some others
were pillars) without a title, but now it is with a title: Is not this well
pleaded O Prelatical Advocat? But whence is your title Mr Prelate? Or who gave
you than name? The King your God Father? Well, then by that right you must
enjoy it. but whence comes the blessing and ratification? Not from above, but
from --. He has forgotten one great change; but that possibly he will account
no great defection, viz. that, by which he from Mr Presbyter, wherein he was in
no great account, yet noddyfied by some, is turned my Lord Prelate; And now
labors to noddi^y all into a consent and congratulatory acquiescence in his
advancement and dignity. But Ca^aphas comes to tell us, that surely that which
has been will be; and so, as formerly perjured and abjured Prelates, have been
cast out of Church and Commonwealth with abomination, they shall be yet again
cast out with more abhorrence then ever* Esto. The Lord hasten it in his time.

8. Then he tells us Page 9. [That this furious Napht. coming ^n upon the back
of the Apology, another invenomed egg, hatched (be like) by one and the same
cockatrice; the second justifying the rebellion to which the first did
instigate, and inflaming to more, may let them who will not shut their own
eyes, see the mystery of Anabaptistical confusion working and spreading.] This
man measures others by his own foot, thinking that the labors of others,
for the justifying of the people of God, in defending themselves against not
only invenomed principles, but also invenomed practices, of such as look rather
like cockatrices then any other thing* being good for nothing but to destroy,
to be invenomed eggs hatched by cockatrices, because his pamphlet hatched by a
cock-prelate, has undisputably the ve^ome of such an egg in it. The Apology
did instigate to no rebellion* Nor does Napht. justify any action truly so
chargeable: As has been showed. But his egg (now sufficiently crushed, and
put beyond the hazard of endangering any who are wise andrational) if brought
to perfection, had brocken forth into a cockatrice, and had endangered King and
Kingdoms, and all Commonwealths: And because it was full of this venom,
should be condemned to the fire, by all who love their own welfare and the
welfare of Societies, and of the Church of God. But how can any see here the
mystery of Anabaptistical confusion working? [ for(adds he) although the
author pretends highly for presbytery, which he and his accomplices (hauks of
the right nest) have long ago hewed down in this Church, as to the practice
of it.] We know what this lying calumniator means, and these with whom,
unworthily, he was sometimes reckoned (being as is now apparent, a bird of
another nest) who have found grace to be faithful hithertil, will now
acknowledge (I suppose) that such as were opposite to them in that debate, did
strengthen and fortify the pillars of presbyterian government. [Yet (says he)
eviden^ it is that his pretenses for presbytery, are but prefaces to some
further great design of michief to Church and State.] To whom is this evident?
Sure, I think, to none but to himself and his accomplices, whose plague is (and
as yet but in part) to be in fear where no fear is: How can he make this out? [
For (says he) having sold himself to work confusion and rebellion, he goes
about to overthrow all powers ordained of God, in a most cyclopick boldness
displaying a banner against all invested lawfully with any degree of civil or
Church Power.] This author is like the Tinkers dog, which (according to our
country proverb) would gladly be among good company. He foists in his
Antichristian usurped tyrannical power and dominion over the Church, among the
lawful powers ordained of God. But when he says that Naphtali displayeth a
banner against the powers ordained of God, he but shows his cyclopick
boldness in averring untruths, or his astrangement to cyclopedeja, in drawing
such inferences; but both suitable to that execrated order of abjured Prelacy,
in which there uses to be but few either civil or learned, as this day puts
beyond debate. Then he would make us believe that [ The Author does not behave
himself like Naphtaly, the hind let loose which gives goodly Words, etc.
Genes. 49: ver. 21. Deuteronomy. 33: ver. 23. But as in his heart there are evil
treasures of wickedness, so in his lips and pen there is a burning fire, he
strives to inflame all with the rage of his tongue, and runs upon all sorts of
authorities, from the highest to the lowest, like a savage Beast or wild
Bear, let loose to waste and confound miserably both the visible Kingdom of
Christ in the Land, and the civil Kingdom thereof settled upon the best
foundations.] The Book answered its name: for it was a hind let loose and gave
goodly words, for God, his Cause, and people; and it is not to give goodly
words, to flatter Princes or Prelates, howbeit he who judges like a sensualist
would account such, words of goodlinesse, fairness and pleasantness. Naphtaly
was satisfied with favor, and full of the blessing of the Lord: And so was
this book though condemned to a fire, by such as would care little to cast the
Bible into a fire too: But their favor or blessing in never expected. And when
he says that in the Author's heart, there were evil treasures, etc. He still
measures others by himself, Naphtaly runeth not upon all sorts of authorities
or any sort of authorities truly so called: He was so far from wasting and
confounding the visible Kingdom of Christ in the Land, that he was pleading
for the same against all adversaries, and defending it, especially from these
savage Beasts and Bears, who have already laid it waste and desolate; and if
the Lord prevent it not, shall make it the visible Kingdom of Antichrist. He
was so far from troubling the civil Kingdom settled upon the best foundations,
that it was that, at which he was driving, to have the Kingdom settled upon
its old, sure, and best basis, the Covenants, and Religion reformed in worshipe
doctrine discipline and government. Then he must tell us that the book wants
nothing of the compleatnesse of an infamous lybel, and why? Because [ it falls
upon particular persons by name, to asperse then credit, the constant integrity
of whose conversation will easily stop his foul lying mouth, in the
Consciences of God's people who know them.] If these persons get no other
Orator to set forth their praises, then this man (who is a black raven of the
same nest.) I fear their conversation shall never stop all men's mouths. For
my part I shall, and I suppose that author will be content, to refer the
determination of this, to the consciences of all God's people who know them:
And let such judge whether they be men of integrity, or men of constant
integrity: we could tell stories of some, but we shall for bear; it may be a
volum will be made of their profane practices, when such as know them best,
and observe their ways, shall help us to a legend of their ways and courses:
And when the world sees this, It will judge of the integrity of their
conversation: but enough of this trash here.

9. In the follovving paragraph, beginning Page 10. he is at some demurre, not
knovving well what course to take with that book, which this true Cretian
calls a bundle of impudent lies and falsehoods, gross slanders and
revileings, not one of which has he as yet discovered. But where lay the
difficulty? [Upon the one hand says he) it was thought best to neglect the
rage of this man (if one that has so much renunced humanity, as he is here
seen to do, may be so termed) lest by being noticed he might think himself
some what.] A very hard censure, to make a supposition, if one who speaks
with so much weight of reason, as transcendeth the reach of this animal, may be
termed a man, If the supposer were not known, to be no acute judge, being
animal amphibion bipes a double face'd gentle man, who has turned his coat
and his tongue too. But why would he grudge poor Naphtali this? Or does he
think that his taking notice of him, will make him esteem the more highly of
himself? Not one white: a stout man will never think himfelf the more valiant,
(...) a foolish child set upon him with a straw. Was there no other reason.
[Especially ( says he) lest People (who as they affect are ordinarily
opinionated) might have too much matter (...) ^eed their humor, to fournish
their light discourses, (...) to ensnare their souls, by representing to them
the matters of this libel (worthy to be buried in oblivion) they being too apt
(whatever Salvo might be added) to receive the poison without the antidote,
according to their prejudices.] This was a good consideration, and if the Man
had been as tender as he pretends to be, hes hold not have dug up what
deserved to be buried, especially since he might have known he was not able to
prepare a sufficient antidote: But thought he that his silence would have
hindered any to have pondered that book? I believe indeed his silence had done
more good to the King and his cause, then all his hot work is like to do; and
he has done more to ensnare souls (if it be to ensnare them) then Naphtaly
did, I do not mean by representing some other things to the consideration of
people; but by his adding so weak and inconsiderable a Salvo, that he fixed
what Naphtaly said more deeply in their hearts, if judicious Readers did not
account it unanswerable before they did see his weak and non-answereing Reply.
What further, [It seemed also ( Says he) a matter full of tediousness to a
well composed heart, to enter into a fire of endless strife and continual
reciprocation of altercations, wherein a Man is not likely to find more truth
then he has already (truth in the most important matters in the book having
been of old fully vindicated by learned hands, and nothing now opposed, but old
songs chanted over and over again) although like enough to lose much of that
charity and calm and composed temper of heart which he had before.] Then it
seems his heart was not a well composed heart; for it did not seem tedious
unto him, to enter into this fire of endless strife and continual
reciprocation of altercation, and to spend so much time, and paper, and pains
in vain: And we must pity his case now, who has lost much of that charity and
calm and composed temper of heart, which he had formetly, Sed qui nihil habet,
nihil amittit, a little stok is soon wasted. By whom to this day was Lex Rex
answered? And does not himself say that Naphtaly out stripes his Masters, even
as to the most important matters of the book? How is it then that he says
there is nothing but old songs chanted over and over again? This Man is sui
similis, As yet as inconsistent with himself in his words, as in his walk. But
seeing he had the help of so many old Vindicators, how comes it that he has
acted his part so childishly, and vindicated the King's cause worse then any
Man that ever put pen to paper; as is showed? Why did not this pigmay set
himself upon their shoulders that he might have seemed something? What was
there more on this hand? [ What Man is he ( says he) that knowing how much
more important work he has upon his hand for his own salvation, and honoring
God in his station in the World, would willingly engadge in endless contests
with persons, whose idleness gives them too great opportunity of evil doing,
and who having cast by the Lord's work in building his Church, are too much set
to do Satan's work in dissipating the same.] Then this Man thinks it is
inconsistent with one to mind the work of his wne salvation, and to defend
the King's cause, which is very true, Let the King and his party notice this.
But it is strange, that seeing he thought the work of his opposers Satan's, he
should not think it incumbent to a tender soul to do what he can to destroy
the works of the Devil: we see also that the love of money is the root of all
evil, and has caused him run greedily after the error of Balaam for revvard,
for to purchase the hire, he has cast by the important work of his salvation,
and laid aside the honoring of God in his station. This is the Man's constant
integrity. As for those Men whose idleness he talks of, if he mean
Ministers, he knows who hinders them from doing the work of the Lord in
building his Church, and they will answer for it, and he also for his share
in that, and for this work of Satan which a little money has prompted him
to: and when they are wrestling and pleading for Zion and the cause of her
King, God will not account them idle nor evil doers nor setters up of Satan's
work: What further! [It seemed honorable enough ( says he) to decline this
contention and strife, which is like the letting out of watters, in expectation
that either Mansconscience (if it be not infinitely corrupted) may the confute
him in most of his assertions, and standers, or that his manifest unchristian
dealing, may help to open the eyes of such as he labors to delude, and bring
them to abhor his way; or that the really Religious and righteous dealings of
Church and State, may more forcibly put him to silence then words or writings
can.] It had been indeed more advantageous to the King's cause, (and less
dishonorable to himself) to have been silent, then thus to have letten out
waters to the King's great prejudice, and his own discredit. If he had any
expectation that the Man's conscience would have confuted him in most of his
assertions, why did he hinder that work, by confirming him in the truth of his
assertions by his weak and foolish replies? Praestat otiari quam nihil agere:
and why did he not more manfully discover these unchristian dealings, the
better to undeceive such as he supposes were deluded? What are these manifest
unchristian dealings of his? Sure the event has and shall further, we hope,
declare that his own dealing has been much more manifestly unchristian* by
laboring to blind the eyes of such as savv before. But I suppose he may talk
at leisure of his proselyts. When the really religious and righteous dealings
of Church and State shall forcibly confute what is there said, we know not.
Sure, when ever their actions become really Religious, and righteous, they will
condemn his pamphlet to the fire, and himself to the correction-house, and
approve of all which is said in Naphtaly, [Sometimes (says he) keeping silence
is seasonable, the Man according to God's own heart would not suffer Shimei's
revileings to be repayed upon the head of that dead dog; Hezekiah discharged to
answer a word to railing Rabshakeh; Jeremiah the Prophet, contradicted by the
false Prophet Hananiah, went his way and said nothing: The wise Solomon forbids
to take heed to all words, that are spoken, and to answer a fool according to
to his folly; The Lord of Kings and Prophets sometimes answered not his
accusers a word] True, sometimes silence is not only seasonable but (...); and
so would the Kings cause have found it now and by his answering, not
withstanding of what he here says, it would seem that Naphtaly is no Shimes,
Rabshakeh, Hananiah, nor fool, nor an enemy to Christ. Or that the King is not
like the Man according to God's heart, nor like good Hezekiah: Nor is this
Pamphleter like Jeremiah, nor has follovved either Solomon's advice, or
Christ's example. But I see not why both may not be true. Yet further: [So it
seemed fit to let alone an insolent and forward railer and mocker, and not to
lavish out precious time, which might be better bestowed, upon one that gives
such visible evidences both of a reasonlesse and unchristian Spirit, whose
libel may be reckoned amongst the things, quae spreta exolescunt, and worthy to
be answered with nothing but silence and contempt,] Then it seems he
expects a reward also from the Author of Naphtaly, for lavishing out so much
of his precious time to keep in memory such a book, which if he had miskend,
would have dyed out of mind, and which he has honored with another answer
then silence; but all the reward he can expect will be but par pari refer,
payment without putting any thing in his purse, and yet a payment in his own
coin. Then, to him it is a lavishing of precious time to maintain the King's
cause: it seems also that he has lavished out much time upon it, and what
will not money do? The gredy gapeing after which, will make a Man, not only
lavish out precious time needlessly, But also put honor and respect on what he
accounts worthy of contempt.

10. Let us see what did preponderat and bring this tossed Man to a firm
resolution, and determine him to bring this brate to light, this product of his
ill composed heart, and not well tempered brain. [Upon the other hand ( says
he) it seemed something hard (especially in such a distempered time) to suffer
an insolent person, in whose mouth is a rode of pride, to cast the truth down
to the ground, without control, and to tread upon, and triumph over a holy and
righteous cause, and upon honorable persons of all ranks, engaged in the
maintenance thereof in so abusive, despiteful and intolerable a way, and not
give him any check. Not to put some stop to this furious driver, who again and
again assaults this Church with vile lies and reproaches, looked like the
betraying and deserting of an honest and honoruable cause, or like the
hirelings seeing the Wolf, and flying and leaving the flock to be destroyed
with delusion, fugisti quia tacuisti. There is an evil silence that leaves Men
in sin, as well as an evil speaking that leads Men to sin; and we are not only
to give an account pro atio so verbo, but pro otioso silentio, for idle
silence; when God, and the public necessity of the Church, or Society whereof
we are members, Calls for a valiant (not brutishly violent and forcible way,
such as this man's pleads for) and rational contending for the truth. It is
sinful pusillanimity, and not warrantable prudence to see truth fall in the
streets and not lift it up. And verily this man seems to be amongst these of
Whom Solomon says Prove. 26: v. 5. who must be answered lest he seem wise in
his own conceit, and to be amongst these Tit. 1: v. 10, 11. unruly and vain
talkers and deceivers, whose mouths must be stopped that the gangrene of his
words may not creep further to the consumption and subversion of Church and
State.] Fair words ad faciendum populum, qui si decipi vult, decipiatur. But
he has this disadvantage, that few that know him will believe, that these or
any of these are the true cause of this undertaking: But that rather which he
thought good to conceal, viz. The Three hundereth pound sterling brought to
him by the greater rogue and the better rewarded, Ia: Sharp deceiver of that
ilke: for if these things here mentioned had been his end, and motive, why was
he feared that this should have wronged a well composed heart, and Should not
have been a honoring of God in his station, but a needless lavishing out of
precious time, which might be better bestowed? Nay there was reason for all
this; for whether he saw it or not, he (who together with his accomplices
distempered the times and all things) in whose mouth there being a rode of
pride, did insolently cast the truth down to the ground, as they could, and
endeavored to tread upon and triumph over a holy righteous cause, and all the
maintainers thereof, in an abusive, despiteful, and intolerable way, and
labored to lift up an exploded, depised and cursed falsehood, once dethroned
with shoutings and great exclamations of joy (but we have seen his horns have
been but short) He is truly (as the sober will judge) the furious driver who
again and again does assault the true Church and cause of God with lies and
reproaches. He (whether he had meddled with this work or not) and the rest with
their underlings, are the true hirelings and wolves, destroying the flock of
God: and in this work, thought there be not otio sum silentium, there are otio
sa verba and worse and praetereanihil, and an unvaliant, impudent, affronted
pleading for untruth, tyranny and wickedness, which is neither a product of
prudence, nor magnanimity. And when he has cited Prove. 26: 5. and Tit. 1: 10,
11. he has adduced his own Doom, and accordingly he is ansvvered, and his
mouth (let it be is vvide as it will) gaged and stopped, not with butter
(which is unfit to stop a breathing mouth) but vviht more solid stuff, so
that we are confident the gangraene of his words shall not creep far, not
infect such as are clean; and as for such as are unclean, they owe their
infection to some other, not so innocent in vvi^ and parts as he is.

11. Now the dye being cast, and he resolved to say something, he is as much
perplexed anent the way of handling this business. Yea he says, [ There is a
greater difficulty in dealing with this Man of no forehead (or if he have any,
it is of the hardest metal) of little conscience, but of infinite loquacity,
and of a most unbridled tongue, which is a treasure of all revileing
language.] Yet he finds him and will possibly yet more find him, a man whose
forehead is of harder metal, (though not in impudency and shameless
audacity) then he is able to stand against; and a man of more conscience then
to contradict himself either in words or deeds, (as this verlumnus, a man of a
debauched conscience, does) a man not of infinite loquacity or of an unbridled
tongue, who repeateth not the same thing over and over again ad nauseam us
que nor one who speaks nonsense at random (as this poor pamphleter does)
but a man of more solid reason, and nervous succinct expressions, then he was
able to comprehend: And who so shall compare the two together shall find he
has put the saddle on the vvrong horse. But where did the difficulty lie? [
The great difficulty was ( says he) how to moderate and temper a style of
vvriting tovvard such an one, difficile est satyram non scribere contra
satyrum; for hardly can a man meet in any book, with more bitter invectives
against all authorities and dignities appointed and approven of God, then are
here to be found; all that have gone that way before him, seem but Children in
wickedness, in comparison of him: he deserves to be in the first class of
these Jude v. 8. Who despise dominion and speak evil of dignities.] Answ.
Naphtaly, it is true, is no base sycophant nor slatterer; nor is he, because of
free and faithful holding forth of the wicked and sinful carriage of these in
authority, and of these who have usurped authority, to be accounted a writter
of Satyrs or of invectives, else the Prophets writings shall not escape that
sharp censure. Nor is he upon this account to be reckoned among, far less to
be put into, the first class of these who despise dominions, etc. unless by
this ignoramus who knows no medium betwixt base flattering of dignities, and
speaking evil of them. Yet in the following part of that Paragraph, he says he
deserves well, because of his plainness; though it be but his sancy to think
that Either King or Nobles are in hazard to be dispossessed by private persons
in a Phine as like Spirit, yet he is truly and especially afraid of the
ministry; and mainly of the Bishops, because such strokes approach near to
himself, and the burnt Child fears the fire, And his fear blinds his eyes,
so that he cannot see to read Naphtaly a right. And I think no heroik person,
will desire to imbrew their hands in their blood, who are far below the wrath
of a man, far more, the indignation of an Heroik person, though they shall
never be found innocent, be pursued when they will. He but lies when he says
in the following words [ That Naphtaly with his tragical oh's awakeneth the
rage of the rudest multitude (which becals Zeal of God) to execute judgment on
them, that the fierce angco of God may be turned away.] Nor does he tell them
if they do not so they are plagued with. s^upidity and blindness. It is true
which he says that [ All soris of Rulers in the land may see their dittay and
their doom drawn in that book.] But no otehrwise then as the word of God
gives warrant, and there they would read it, and repent in time, lest they
sinde it verified. He is but like himself a false liar when he says that
Naphtaly [ Discovers the malicious cruel and bloody designs of his party.]
For they have no malicious cruel nor bloody designs, their only designs being
to maintain their integrity and their reformed Religion, which Enemies
combined against Christ are seeking to destory. This man imagines a snare
where there is none; but sees not the snare which Satan and his own hands are
setting for his soul, neither will he and the rest take warning, though the
word of the Lord do clearly discover wrath and vengeance at hand, and whether
then they be worthy of a fair hood and bells, Let any judge: but sure I am,
they shall one day see their folly and madness, and write Abner's Epitaph over
themselves. But we wish them rather repentance and to be wise in time, not
against their will, but willingly.

12. And further ibid Page 13. he tells us [ It were irksome and unsuteable to
one who desires to keep the constant compsure of a Christian Spirit to indulge
an humor of retaliating.] And that he is at a great disadvant age, because it
almost transcends (in his apprehension) humane patience to treat mildly with
such an insolent one. O! Who would not pity this man who is put off the
constant composure of a Christian Spirit? But can he be in the composure of a
Christian Spirit, who is so easily moved off it, by that which should rather
settle him in it? Can his patience be good, which is so stirred by hearing of
truth told? And who can think that he has been of any composure of a Christian
spirit, who has not indeed indulged an humor of retaliating but of brawleing
in a transcendently insolent manner without ground given, being transported
beyond the bounds of humanity, let be humane patience? Then Page 14. he Shows
what reason he has to use, a more then ordinary vehemence of a keen style,
saying [ Shall Masters of consusi^n (as if he were not a Davus) Indulging
themselves in their proud moro suy, ^unworthyly demean themselves toward the
sober defenders of the truth, (but who are these?) And will not this be a
sufficient Apology for them to put forth some sting?] But good Sir I fear your
sting be gone long since, because you are become a drone: We have seen your
good will to shoot your sting but it wanted its point, as for your sting in
your tail it will not hurt much, and we know who is King over such locusts,
even the angel of the bottomless pit, Rev. 9: ver. 11. Now this stinging
locust comes to compare Naphtaly to Hecuba, but any who reads Naphtaly find
him not barking as a mad bitch, but speaking the words of truth and soberness,
with such strengh of reason as transcendeth this distempered man's capacity to
understand, otherwise he had never made such a comparison. Then he tells us
that [ A toothlesse defense might possibly tend to harden him and his
accomplices, and breed suspicion of some signs of diffedence, distrust and
timorousness in owning of the cause against him.] I believe this defense has
as many teeth as he could put in it; but for all that, it can be called nothing
else then a toothlesse defense, because it is nothing but a bundle of sharp
toothed words without any reason; and because we see now all that he and his
party can say, against the truth which we maintain, we are indeed thereby, the
more confirmed therein; and we do not suspect him of diffidence, distrust and
timorousness, that his cause is not better defended, knowing how bold and
audacious he is: but we know that an ill cause cannot be well defended, though
never man has defended it worse then he has done, though better rewarded then
many.

13. The good man turns Neptune at length saying, Sed motos praestat componere
fluctiu; and then says, [It will be fitter to consider what becomes us to
utter then what he is worthy to hear.] Then it seems we should exspect a very
calm sea; but the waves of his passions have not been settled for all his
Neptun authority. [ Therelyes (says he) a tentation in these name less
writtings (which therefore it is to be wished, were not in use) to exceed in
passions, and to utter words (incognito) that will not be stood to.] The
iniquity of the times, and the rage of princes who will not hear the truth,
is a just, cause why some should speak and write against them incognito, which
likewise was the cause moveing Elisha to suspende the sending of his free and
faithful letter to Iehoram a bloody Tyrant, till after his own death: but why
this man should send out a namelesse writting, none can tell, unless because
either he was ashamed of the cause, or of his weak managing of it; or else
because he has a mind to exceed in passion, and nons-sense, and none should
know that it was, A. H. P. O. who spoke so. But he tells us that he has not so
learned Christ, as to render revileing for revileing knowing that man's wrath
works not the righteousness of God. The contrary whereof every reader of his
pamphlet will see, and therefore he does well, to add [ some times it is for
peoples edification, to see the due characters of such as lead them out of the
way.] But why should he then be offended, if any should show his characters,
who is a manifest perverter of the right vvayes of the Lord, and labors
what he can to lead people out of the good old way, wherein our fathers and we
have formerly walked with peace comfort and joy? But this is our advantage that
he and his fraternity are already so well known, and their characters so
legible, that few or none are in great hazard to be led away with them. Then he
tells us that [ so far as kumane infirmity permits, the truth shall be
searched after and spoken to in love; all bitterness, wrath, anger and clam
^nr with all malice being put away.] But sure we are then, his humane infirmity
is very great and strong, which carries him to search rather after error, and
to speak it in hatred; all bitterness, wrath, anger, clamor, with all malice,
being returned and that in their strength; of which, the man's conscience was
in part convinced, when he adds. [ But if any thing (he should have said a
most every thing) aculeat and pungent (he should have said bitter and
invective) do escape (or rather of choice be affirmed) It not being used in any
private cause or quarrel, but in the public concerns of truth, (rather error)
of the Church of God, (really of the coetus Malignantium, the apostate crew of
the popish prelatical and malignant faction) and of the sat of the
commonwealth (rather against the commonwealth, and for tyranny the bane of all
commonwealths) nor proceeding from any private revenge (if not from this, which
many will doubt of, yet certanely from the love of gold or Balaam's reward) it
will at least be excused by the judidicious and wise.] Sure we are, excuse it
who will, the righteous judge, will call him to an account for it, and we are
persuaded that none either truly judicious or wise, will think him excuse
worthy. But to show that he has no private reveinge, he adds in a
parenthesis, [ That there is room enough in his fraternal affection for any who
will leave their unchristian sanguinary and inhumane ways.] But his affection
is like the devils, who would have all damned with himself; and we are sure
come to his way who will, they shall leave their Christian peacable and humane
ways, and choice unchristian, sanguinary, and inhumane vvayes. Then the
falls a vvishing that his aculeat sayings may prick the libeller to
repentance for these things. But he should know that charity begins at
home, and he should rather vvish that himself were brought to repentance for
him shameful apostasy and perjury, and his thus studying to maintain a corrupt
course, whereby he has indeed exposed himself to shame, though the hardness
of his heart be such as that the knows not what it is to blush.

14. In his following discourse he labors to show how palpably and closely
Naphtaly trades in the footsteps of the old Anabaptists, though [ He will not
say that he and his accomplices are arrived to the owneing of the highest
mysieries of that sect in the point of Enthusiasme, and Libertinisme, nor that
they are so cruel as to exclude Christian infants from their birthright
privilege of Baptism.] Yet he says [It is worthy to be considered how far the
common demand of express command or example in Scripture for Episcopacy, may
reach the Anabaptists conclusion concerning infants.] And so with him, all who
require either command or example for any new ordinance of Christ so alleged,
must be Anabaptists. This man is of very lax principles certanely, and more
then a latitudinarian, that will not suffer us to enquire after a command or
example of Episcopacy, when he and his party allege that it is an ordinance of
Christ: must we take all things for ordinances of Christ, which he and his old
father the Pope of Rome say are ordinances of Christ? But why does he call from
us for any express command or example in Scripture for resistance of
Magistrates? Does not this also reach the Anabaptists conclusion? But his eyes
sees not it self. Further he tells us That Naphtaly [Doth let fall such tenets
as smell too rankly of the foul scum of the high flown Anabaptistical and
Enthusiastical way, while he says, Page 21. etc. That mere private men may now
a days take their impulses of Zeal, as a sufficient call to pull down all
Magistrates from their seats, which they abuse; to execure judgment upon them,
and to place themselves in their rooms.] But of what spirit this man, who is
of his father the devil who was a liar from the beginning, is, we have seen;
And this particular will abundantly discover to such as look the place and
consider what we have said. And no better is the next particular which he
cites out of Page 105. Where the author is opposeing, that notion of an
external call, not unto lawful ordination, which presupposes it; but unto such
a mock ordination, whereby such are put into the ministry, who have no visible
evidence of the call of Jesus Christ, as in reason or charity can oblige any to
receive such as truly sent. Thereafter he draws the parallel in five
particulars. The first is this, That the Anabaptists labored to overthrow
Magistracy, and deny them to have any power in Church matters. But can he, or
dar he, say that we do so? do we say, with them, that the office of the
Magistrate is not necessary among Christians? Do we say that Magistracy is not
the ordinance of God? Do we say that Kingly government is unlawful, as they
said, abuseing that place, 1 Samuel 8:7. Do we say that a Christian may not
exerce the office of a Magistrate? Do we say that a heathen may not be a
Magistrate? Do we say that an ungodly Magistrate is no Magistrate? Do we press
that place Luke 22. The Kings of the gentiles, etc. Any otherwise then against
superiority among Church men? With what face then can be draw a parallel here?
The next is That they studied to overthrow the ordinance of the ministry
declaiming most bitterly against all in that function as Hirelings Thieves
Wolves, etc. But can he say that we cry down a ministry, as no ordinance of
Christ, or as not necessary? can he say that we affirm an external call to the
ministry needless? Is it our work to exclude faithful ministers from the
esteem of Gods people? How can the impudent man allege this of us? Be like
because we cry out against him and his fraternity and their reptilia, profane
wretches of the second-order, as no lawful ministers of Chriist, being perjured
profane apostates, never called of God to that functction, nor duly and
orderly called of Man? But in this he and his party come nearer to the
Anabaptists, then we, The. 3. Is that they work division in the Church of God;
and move people to forsake Church meetings, and to follow them in private
conventicles? But then it seems all protestants Who press Papists to forsake
their Mass Assemblies and Mass Priests, and rather meet with the Orthodox and
that in conventicles are Anabaptists: And it seems this man would not press
Heathens to leave their public idol worshipe, and serve God in secret
conventicles, such a publik and peacable Man is he, lest he should be accounted
an Anabaptist. But we see no connection betwixt our being Anabaptists, and
pressing People to forsake Their assemblies, and to hear the true and faithful
servants of Christ in private, who cannot have liberty to preach in public.
The 4 is That they were above all men arrogant and proud, dispisers of such as
were not of their way, as being men without God in the world, reprobate and
wicked denying to them even common civilities. But does not he and his party,
the most proud and arrogant persons imaginable, deal with us all, as cursed
fanatics knipperdolians? etc. What is the 5. When any of theirs were punished
for errors, felony or rebellion, they cried them up for martyrs, and
complained tragically that truth and godliness was oppressed, and that men who
would have all things done according to Gods Word were persecuted? But might
not Heathens and Papists have objected so against the true Christians and
protestants, who said and did all this, when they were persecuted, and some of
them murdered and massacred? And were, or are, all who call and account such
as die for the Testimony of Jesus, martyrs persecuted to the death.
Anabaptists? I fear that in so saying he shall be found to befriend the
Anabaptist, more then we desire to do: If he has no more to say, He shall
never make it appear that either Naphtaly or the Apology, do approach unto the
manners of that odious sect, in any particular peculiar to that Sect, or
wherein that Sect deviateth from truth.

Then he adds Page 17. When the Spirit that stirs in these furious
writtings, (especialy in Naphtaly) is considered, how much confusion may be
seen to be portended to Church and State, if hearts be infected with the
doctrines therein held forth? By whom I pray, shall these evils be seen to be
portended, by any thing that is said in these writtings? Sure by no rational
sober understanding person, but only by such who consult the oracle at delphos,
and mind their belly and worm-eaten carcases, more then they consult the
oracle God and of sound reason, and mind the real good of either Church or
State. For there are no doctrines there of any malignant quality, but all of
them anti-Malignant, Solid, Plain, Sure and immovable truths, having a
direct tendency unto, and necessary influence upon, the solid and sure
establishing of Church and State, upon a firm and lasting basis. And
therefore, if it were right applied, his following wish were good. viz. That
the Lord would give his people such understanding, that they be not ignorant of
the wiles of Satan, who drives a deeper design against this poor Church and
Land, then the subversion of this or that exterior form of Church government,
For indeed the design that Satan has now on foot, reaches further, even to
the utter overturneing of all the precious interests of Christ in the Land; of
destroying not only the outward Libertyes and Privileges of the People, which
have cost them no small expense of blood; to the end they may be made perfect
slaves: But to the overturning of the whole work of God, of banishing the
Gospel, and of introduceing Atheism and all sort of profanity and wickedness,
that we should no more become the People of the Lord, but a visible Kingdom of
Satan; And all the People, Subjects, and Slaves to him. But we know what his
meaning is, and therefore he adds. The controversy rests not in matters
touching a Bishope or a Presbytery: But what thinks he of this controversy? He
says, If men's passions or prejudices might permit, it might be, for the
advantage of the gospel, well consolidated by their mutual paying of due
respects one to another; the Episcopal inspection not abrogating, but
strengthening the due right of presbyters, and presbyters not despiseing that
lawful inspection; but all concurring together in a kindly mutual
assistence, and amicable conjuction, for carrying on the real interests of
Christ's Kingdom, without imperiousness one the oneside, and without srowardly
disorderlynesse on the other. Now he turns a peace maker, and such a notable
reconciler is he that would cause fire and water agree: But he has sold his
Zeal and Conscience, for, he knows, what. He has forgote, that there is no
communion betwixt light and darkness, nor betwixt Christ and Belial. But he
must know that we will neither pack nor peel with him, nor his accursed
fraternity, but will come out from among them, and be separated from them, and
touch none of their unclean things, that God may receive us according to his
promise; 2 cor. 6: ver. 17. If the Men of that accused Hierarchy were not led
away with intolerable passion and prejudice, and acted by a fury of hell, to
destroy the gospel, they would consolidare this controversy by extirpating
themselves; For as long as they stand in that accursed order, they shall never
carry on the real interests of Christ's Kingdom, but effectually, so far as
lies in them, destroy the same; (as former and daily experience proves) what
by their imperious antichristian dominion, over the Church of God and the
Officers thereof, which were ordained of Christ; and what by their laying out
of themselves, according to their usurped power and places, to destroy and
banish piety, knowledge and the fear of God out of the land, and to bring all
the true seekers of God under the same guilt of manifest perjury and apostasy
with themselves. If it were a lawful inspection, presbyters would neither
despise it, nor carry themselves frowardly or disorderly under it; but it being
an unlawful dominion, so destructive to the Kingdom and interests of our Lord
Jesus Christ, it can neither alone nor in conjunction with any other, promove
the interest of Christ's Kingdom, and therefore must be abhorred as an
antichristian brate, and never submitted unto.

But whither now does the matter go? The design (says he) this libel runs
upon is to open a gap to endless rebellions, under what soever Church
government: And not only to bring all our Magistrates from the highest to the
lowest under disgrace, which is the nex^ step to destruction, and to make them
a sacrifice to the fury of th^^wicked people.) But to ruin Kingly Authority
and Magistracy, the ordainance of God.] This is but a frequently renewed
calumny we have oftentime met with in his first part, and have showed how
groundless, it is, and therefore we need say no more here. All who have not,
with this Man, willingly shut their eyes, may see That the design is only to
prevent intolerable Ty^anny, the ruin of humane Societyes and Kingdoms, and
to keep the true Divine Authority which God has clothed his own civil
officers with, from contempt and disgrace, which Magistrates degenerating into
Tyrants expose themselves unto, by changeing the ordinance of God into the
ordinance of Satan, and in stead of acting and carrying as Ministers of God for
the good of the People, walk and act as Ministers of Satan, laying out
themselves to the utmost for the destruction of the People both in soul and
body. Who sees not then that when they thus forget themselves, and forget what
they are both bound, and have promised, to be, they do expose themselves to
disgrace, and to the contempt of these who otherwise would most willingly
honor them as God's vicegerents. But when they carry as avowed Servants of
Satan, as Tigers, and destroy the inheritance of the Lord, which they were to
nourish and protect, can they expect to be looked upon as God's Deputyes while
they do so? And sure, who ever maintains that such who have cast behind
their back all Vows, Promises, Compacts, Subscriptions, Oaths, and solemn
Engadgments; and break overall bonds of humanity and Christianity, that they
may satisfy their own cruel and base lusts; and so carry toward Subjects, as
if they were so many Slaves or Brutes, or Worse, may lawfully be resisted, is
very far from opening a gap to endless rebellions, under any Church
government; that he rather lays down a course to prevent rebellions: For if
Kings remembered that their Subjects might lawfully and would oppose them, when
they turned Tyrants, they would walk more soberly, and forbear to vent their
tyrannical cruelty, and so give less occasion to Subjects to think of
opposeing them. And However this Pamphleter may look upon himself as one who
has deserved well at the hands of the King: Yet the judicious who consider the
matter right, will find him really a greater Enemy to the throne, then either
Lex Rex the Apology or yet Naphtali were, or are. Seeing they must be greater
Enemies to the real welbeing of Kings, and to the Establishing of thrones, who
would have them settled upon the alone basis of blood, tyranny, opprossion, or
proclaim an impunity unto Tyrants to do what they will, which is but to blow
at a fire which burns fast enough of it is own accord; then such as would have
them settled on equity and righteousness and not suffered to go without their
due bounds.

There is a great noise (says he) ( it may be it is not causeless, and it
were to be wished Rulers looked to it) of the increase of Popery. Does he think
there is a noise made about this matter, and a great noise, and that without
ground? Or can he arrive at no more certanety, but of a may be that it is not
causeless? Sure the Representatives (as he calls them) several years ago were
beyond a may be, that it was increased above what ever it had been, either in
the days of King James, or of King Charles the first: And has their mock-act
never executed, affrighted it so out of sight, that this Man who possibly would
be accounted no mean Father, and over seer in the Church, cannot perceive it,
at least so clearly, as positively to say that there is just ground for that
noise? But where dwells this Man? or what way does he stope his ears? Is he
one of those who see and perceive not, who know and yet carry as if they knew
not? What is he and his fraternity doing to day? What are the men with the
Episcopal inspection doing? Are they so occupied in persecuteing the truly
godly, the faithful Ministers and People of the Land, and in stirring up the
Council to be more cruel then they are, and severely to execute the unjust and
most iniquous Laws made to banish all piety and fear of God out of the Land,
that they have no Leisure to look about them to mark what Papists, Seminary
Priests and Jesuits (who are swarmning up and down the Land) are doing? When
did He or They advise the Council to take such an effectual course for
suppressing mass meetings, as they have done for suppressing of conventicles,
or meetings of better reformed and founder Protestants then ever he or they
were? Was there any mass monger fined to this day? Yet we know that precious
and worthy Christians, have been rigidly and inhumanely handled and mulcted,
for hearing an honest and worthy Minister of the Gospel preaching the Gospel in
a private place. Ay, but now he thinks, he has exonered himself, and discharged
a piece of duty both for himself and all his fraternity, by saying, It were to
be wished Rulers looked to it. And is this all the remedy he prescribes? What
will He do? May he not, dar he not, grieve or vex his Elder Brethren? What
shall we then say of his inspection? Is it lawful, or is it of Gold, which is
wholly employed and exercised in persecuteing of the honest seekers of God's
face, and countenanceth and encourages Papists? No certanely, That power whose
proper work is, to root out piety, as having that only in commission, and
which fostereth and incourageth profanity and Idolatry, is a power of Satan,
tending to advance his work and interest in the Earth, and to establish and
enlarge his Kingdom. What further? But truly (says he) when she Spirit of
such writeings as this, is considered, it will be found there is cause to fear
(unless the wisdom and goodness of Cod; and the prudence of the King and
Governors under him prevent it,) That as one way the Roman Antichrist may come
in; So some furious Successor of John of Leyden, under pretense of a Phineas
-- like Spirit, come in another way, upon our Church and Land to lay it waste,
and to make it a field of confusion and blood. Answ. Were there no Papists in
Scotland, or was there no appearance of the approaching of the Roman Antichrist
before these books came abroad? What a Spirit, I pray, is that which is in
these books, which can give any cause of fear, that the Roman Antichrist may
come in upon that account? What tendency, I pray, has any thing that is
asserted in these books, to the introduceing of Popery? His needle head shall
never be able to point this forth. Yea let the true design of these books be
once obtained, and I promise him, that ere few weeks pass, there shall be few
or none in all Scotland, who shall be so bold as to profess either Popery or
Prelacy. These must be strange books which open two contrary doors at once,
upon the one hand a door for the Roman Antichrist, and upon the other hand, a
door for some furious Successor of John of Leyden, but both are alike true,
that is, both are manifestly false Though his fear for the coming in of the
Roman Antichrist be first named, yet it is the least of the two with him; for
the thing which most affrighteth him, is this last; but he needs not fear it,
let King and inferior Governors join piety; and true divine Zeal for God and
his glory, with their prudence, and set themselves to establish the covenanted
Religion, as it was reformed in Doctrine, Worshipe, Discipline and Government
and purge out such things as offend, especially that bitter root of Prelacy,
which we abjured, and prosecute the ends of the Covenants, and the vvisdome and
goodness of God shall preserve both Church and State. But so long as there is
no repentance of the horrible Apostasy and defection, whereof King and all
ranks are guilty: And particularly that Apostate pack which care neither for
Church or State, King or Coun^rey, but in subordination to their own bellies
and bese lusts, is not extirpated vvithall their adherents, we have no ground
to expect that God shall preserve either Church or State from destruction and
ruin: Because we have forsaken the Lord God of our Fathers, we can not but
fear that he shall forsake us, and cast our carcases upon the carcases of our
idols, and his soul shall abhor us, and he shall lay our cities waste, bring
our Sanctuaryes into desolation, and shall not smell the Savor of our sweet
odours, yea and shall scatter us among the heathen, and draw out a sword after
us, and our Land shall be desolate, and our Cities waste etc. Though we had all
the security imaginable that never one of the furious brood of John of Leyde,
should arise to lay the Land waste; as indeed nothing asserted in these books,
may put rational Men in fears thereof, from that hand, though his lieing mouth
adds, that the seeds of future miseries, being too visibly sown, by this Man
and his Accomplices, whose mouths are full of blasphemies, as their hearts and
^ands are full of blood and in so saying is like the whore in the common
proverb, who calls her honest Neighbor whose first whole mouths are more
full of blasphemies, their or ours, all may judge who either read their
writeings, or hear their speeches in public or in private: And whose hearts
and hands are more full of blood, theirs or ours, daily experience will suffer
no Man of common sense who marketh both, once to put it to a question.

At length he apologizeth for his slowensse in comeing forth with his Survey,
telling us, That this libel and like are not more quickly followed, with meet
animad vertsions, is not to be marvelled at by any, who knows they are like
the pestilence, that walks in darkensse, and that hardly do they come to the
hands of any, but such as are willing to be deceived by them, being intended
for the blinding of these, not for the opening of the eyes of others. But
truly, He might have for borne to have made such an Apology: For it may be,
some who have most employed him, and rewarded him too, for his pains, will
think that he has but too quickly followed with his animadversions, and
possibly shall wish, that they had never seen the light, since he has done so
little good by them to the cause, which he becomes a Patron unto, both in
starting needless and dangerous debates, for the Kings Throne and Kingdoms,
yea and for his Life; and in managing these debates so poorly as he has done,
to speak nothing of his weak defending of the maine cause controverted, which
is abundantly discovered by this vindication: Whereby also he has occasioned
the more accurate ripeing up of that debate touching defensive arms, and
laying it open and naked unto the judgment and capacity of the meanest, so that
the truths which he endeavored to shake, and overturne, are now more firmly
then ever, riveted in the hearts of all who search after truth: Yet sure, had
be been able, he ^ight have brought forth this brood of his brain, sooner to
light, for he had time enough, after the public Proclamation was made, that
such a book was come forth, by the fire prepared of purpose, at the cross of
Edenbr^ugh to consume it into asses, before which time, I suppose, very fevv
knevv of such a thing: And by this solemn fiery Proclamation, the curiosity of
some was kindled to enquire after the book, who othewise would have used no
great diligence, to have obtained one of them, yea possibly would never have
learned that there was such a book in the World, and so could have been in no
hazard to have been infected thereby: And before this time that they met with
this solemn recaption, there was not (as is sufficiently known) many of them
abroad; for it came but too soon into the hands of such as put that honor on
it, which was expected, and thereby helped forvvard the Authors design. Is
it, any wonder that such pieces must keep themselves as long as they can, out
of such fiery hands. Seeing the first salutation they meet with is a brief
sentence of condemnation by the Council, and a (...), or execution rather by
the hand of the Hangman, in the ^^repared of purpose for that solemn Disput?
Let him, if he ^ar or can procure a free imprimatur for such necessary and
useful books, and liberty for stationers to expose them to open sale, and then
it will be seen, whether they or his shall hide themselves longest in the
corner of shopes, and be at lengh laid aside for other uses, then at first they
were intended for. He says they were intended for the blinding of these into
whose hands they come, not for the opening of the eyes of others. But he speaks
like himself. They were really intended for the opening of the eyes of all who
would but read and seriously consider what is said, and would not willingly
shote out their own eyes. And as for his Pamphlet, I verily believe what ever
was his intention, it shall deceive none, but such as are already deceived, or
very willing to be deceived, and shall open the eyes of none, unless per
accidens, by making them to apprehend more clearly, then formerly they would,
truth upon the other side, by discovering the childish, frivolous and weak
evasions and exceptions, which he is necessitated to make use of.

In the last Page He gives us a short hint of what he minds to do in the
following part of this his elaborate work, where we are like to find him as
impudent and shameless a Patron of perjury, as here we have found him a
pleader for Tyranny. But we, shall forbear to say more at this time, till God
offer an opportunity of considering and answering what he shall say further
upon these heads and digressions.

The Lord establish truth in the Earth and visit his own inheritance, and
send a plentiful rain to confirm the same when it is weary, for his own
names sake. AMEN.

FINIS.

