Imprimatur, Guliel. Wigan R mo in Christo Patri ac Dno, Dno Humphredo, Episc.
Land. a sac. dom.

Nov 14. 1674.

AN ANSWER TO Mr. CRESSY'S Epistle Apologetical TO A Person of Honor Touching
his VINDICATION OF Dr. Stillingfleet. By Edw. Stillingfleet D. D. Chaplain in
Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by R. White, for Hen. Mortlock at the Phoenix in S. Paul's
Churchyard, and the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1675.

TO THE SUPERIORS OF THE BENEDICTINS IN ENGLAND.
Gentlemen,
I Find it disputed among your Casuists, whether a Book written by a Member of
Your Order, does belong to the Author or to the Society; the Arguments I
confess are very weighty on both sides; For in behalf of the Society it is
pleaded with great reason, that by the Rules of your Order, no particular
Member is to have property in any thing; and in behalf of the Author, that a
Book being the proper issue of his own Brain, cannot belong to any one else:
Caramuel, Caramuel. Commentar. in Regul. S. Bened. n. 831.
finding the difficulties so great, undertakes to resolve the Case by a very
subtle distinction of the Paper and Ink of which the Book is composed, and the
Conceptions of the mind contained therein; the former he gives to the Society,
and the latter to the Author, which he proves ver^ substantially; for, says
he, the conceptions of the Book being the outward images of what was only in
the mind of the Author can belong to no other than to him that formed them; but
against this arises a shrewd objection, that by this means every man has
right to the Picture that is made of him, and the Painter only to the Canvas
and Colors. To which he answers very gravely, that the Picture is not properly
the immediate representation of the Person, but of that Idea of him which was
in the fancy of the Painter. But upon this another Controversy arises (as we
find every day that one does beget another) whether that propriety which the
Author has in the Conceptions of his Book, can be disposed of by way of
Legacy, or no; and all the resolution I can meet with is, that it is probable
he may; but on the other side, the Superiors of the Order may make use of the
contrary probability, and challenge the Book for their own.

It is very well known to You, that Mr. Cressy was lately a Member of Your
Order, who was the Author of the Book, to which this following Answer is made;
What Right You have challenged in it I know not, but I think it not likely he
should dispose of it to any but to Your selves; since he says, his first
writing against me was by his Superiors command, and in this Book he declares,
that what he writes was not his own opinion alone; and therefore it is probable
you may have (...) right to the conceptions, (...) as to the Paper and In^ (...)

Since his death (which I knew not of till I had undertaken this Service and
Duty in behalf of a Person of Honor to whose Kindness I am so extremely
obliged) I know not to whom so properly to address my self, as to You, who were
his Superiors; especially since there are so many things in it wherein the
Honor of Your Order is concerned; to which I assure you I bear no malice, no
more than I do to Your Persons, or to Mr. Cressy's memory. If I am guilty of
mistakes, I beseech you to correct them with the same civility that I writ
them. I have of late been somewhat used to writing, but I am yet to learn the
Art and terms of Railing, and I hope I shall not find that any such Legacies
are bequeathed to you by any of your Order. I am

Gentlemen, Your humble Servant, Edw. Stillingfleet.
London, Nov. 14. 1674.
THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. OF Mr. Cressy's Apology for the sharpness of his Style. page 1.
CHAP. II. Of the Charge of Fanaticism and Mystical Divinity. p. 19. CHAP. III
Of the Monastic Orders, in the Roman Church, and particularly of the
Benedictin. 136. CHAP. IV. Of the Conversion of England, and the difference
between the British and Saxon Christians. p. 257. CHAP. V. Of the Poenal Laws
against Papists. p. 327.
To my LD. C.
My Lord,
SInce Your Lordships going from London, Mr. Cressy's Epistle Apologetical to a
Person of Honor touching his Vindication of Dr. Stillingfleet came to my
hands; and bears date, from his Cell, March 21. A. D. 1674. being the
Anniversary day of S. Benedict. And he is not only thus punctual in the date of
his Epistle, but he begins it with a very particular account, in what manner
the Person of Honor's Book was sent to him; viz. by the Letter-Post, but
partly to abate charges and likewise to disguise the shape of a Book, it was
folded up in loose sheets with all the Margins close pared to the very quick.
After I had observed so much niceness in these, not very material
circumstances, I could hardly expect that the least line of the Book should
escape without numbering the words, syllables, and letters in it, and giving
every one a distinct and punctual confutation. But I soon found several
considerable parts gently passed over, and indeed by the very bulk of his Book,
I presently perceived, that he was more curious to give the World an account,
how the other came to him, than careful to answer it. For if he had treated
every thing that was of like moment with equal exactness, it might very well
have passed for the Second Tome of his Ecclesiastical History. And in truth,
the matter of some part of it, is not much unlike, for he tells so long a story
in the middle of it of the Kindness of some and the unkindness of others in
England to him, and of the Books he had written, that it looked very like a
Legend of himself; only I do not find any Miracles he had done in any of them.

Before he comes to his Apology for himself, he takes great care to make me
understand the mighty obligation laid upon me, by that Person of Honor, who
was pleased with so much Kindness to undertake my Vindication from the
impetuous assaults of an enraged Adversary. Which I was so justly sensible of
before, that Mr. Cressy might have spared his pains; for surely it was no small
Favor to be delivered from the paws of so fierce a Creature, as he appeared to
be in his former Book; but to have it done in so obliging a manner, by a Person
of so great Honor and Abilities, was as much beyond my presumption to hope
for, as it is now above my Power to requite. I with I were a Person of that
Credit and Interest to be able to express my Gratitude in that very way Mr.
Cressy directs me to; for of all things I desire to avoid the odious character
and brand of Ingratitude. But since I make so small a Figure in public
affairs, the utmost I can do, is to save that Honorable Person the farther
trouble of making Animadversions on this Epistle Apologetical. Which is written
with that show of humility and respect, that those who look only on the
appearance, would imagine him strangely come off from the rage and fury he was
in, when he writ his former Book; but if we observe more carefully his sly
reflections and crafty insinuations, we shall find that he has only learnt to
dissemble his passion, and to do the same mischief with a fawning Countenance.

The first part of his Epistle is wholly spent in Vindication of himself as to
the sharpness of Style and bitter Invectives he had used against me, which I
shall briefly consider before I come to the more material parts of his Book.

CHAP. I.
Of Mr. Cressy's Apology for the sharpness of his Style.
. 1. MR. Cressy in his Preface Prefa^e n. 33. p. 23.
to Sancta Sophia finding it necessary to put some show of difference between
the pretenses to extraordinary illuminations in F. Bakers way, and those of the
Fanatic Sectaries among us, has unhappily pitched upon this for one of them;
That the lights here desired and prayed for, are such as do expel all Images
of Creatures, and do calm all manner of passions, to the end that the soul
being in a vacuity, may be more capable of receiving and entertaining God in
the pure fund of the Spirit. Could any one after these words, have expected to
have found this recommender of Mystical Divinity, foaming and raging with the
violence of passion, and so tormented with the creatures of his own
imagination; that he could not forbear expressing it to that degree in his
Book, as deserved rather the pity, than the answer of his Adversary? This the
Person of Honor took just notice of, in the beginning of his excellent
Discourse, P. 7.
and wondered what insupportable provocation was given to him, that he could
not restrain so free a vent of his unmanly passions: but upon an impartial view
of the places in my Book at which Mr. Cressy was so highly offended, he did at
first rather think he was not the Author of the Book he answers, P. 17, 19, ^0.
than that he should be guilty of so much bitterness and unreasonable passion:
but when the reasons were so many to convince him, that he was the Author, he
had rather still lay the fault of his manner of writing upon the commands of
his Superiors, than his own temper and inclination. Upon this Mr. Cressy makes
many Apologies for the sharpness of his style against me; Epistle Apologet^cal
sect. 1, 2, 3. from p. 6. to p. 39.
and spins out a great part of his Epistle on this subject; which he needed not
to have done, with any regard to me, as though I were concerned at it; for I
assure him, if I would wish an Adversary to write so, as to do the least
prejudice to me, and the greatest to himself and his Cause, I would wish him to
write just after that Copy; and I cannot easily think of a provocation great
enough to make me follow his example. But he pleads for himself, that Charity
it self sometimes requires sharpness of style and even bitter (that is,
uncharitable) Invectives. I suppose he means such a sort of Catholic Charity,
P. 6.
as first damns us, and then brings railing accusations against us: and I do
not question, but he that pleads for bitter Invectives out of mere Charity,
could make as fine an harangue to show not only the admirable Charity, but even
the Mercy of Fire and ^aggot: and he knows the charitable method of the
Inquisition is, first to put on the Sanbenits, representing the Persons with
Pictures of Devils upon them, and then to carry them to execution. I remember I
have read that Machiavils Son being summoned to appear before the Court of
Inquisition, to answer to some things laid to his Charge; the grave Inquisitors
asked him, Whether he believed as the Church believed; he answered yes, and a
great deal more; at which they were not a little pleased, hoping to get from
his own words enough to condemn him; and asking him, What that was which he
believed more than the Church believed, he gravely told them, it was, That
their Worships Informers were a pack of Knaves. So indeed I should think that I
believed more than their Church believed, should I believe that they damn us
out of mere charity, and write bitter Invectives for a demonstration of their
Kindness. Alas! how has the World been mistaken in them! Their cruelty, is
mere pity; their Invectives, Compassion; and their Railing, Charity.

. 2. But Mr. Cressy wants not great examples for this; for he brings in no
meaner than of Moses and the Prophets, P. 7.
St. John Baptist, Christ and his Apostles, and several Fathers of the Church
for it. It seems then, the practice of railing has Antiquity, Universality,
and Consent for it; which is much more than they can show for many other of
their practices; and which is the greatest wonder of all, they have Scripture
too: and that, not one single passage, like Hoe est corpus meum; but Moses and
the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles, nay, S. John Baptist too, do all bear
witness to it. Any one would think, if Mr. Cressy say true, the Bible were the
railingest Book in the World. What not Moses the meekest man upon earth forbear
such bitter Invectives? not our Blessed Savior, who when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
but committed himself to him that judges righteously! not he, who has
threatened Hellfire to him that uses contumelious expressions against his
Brother! such as Zani, Mat. 5. 22.
or Scarron, or the like. Not he, 11. 29.
who bids his Disciples learn meekness from him, and was the most incomparable
pattern of it, that ever appeared in humane nature! Not his holy Apostles! who
charge all Christians to put away all bitterness and wrath, Ephesians. 4. 31.
and anger, and clamor, and evil speaking! And would they indeed, do that
themselves, which they so severely forbid in others? Where is Mr. Cressy's
Charity for them the mean while? While he produces these examples to justify
his own bitterness, he makes the most bitter Invective not only against them,
but even Christianity it self. But what will not men do, or say, to justify
their violent passions? If he had stabbed me, he might as well have made
Phinehas his precedent; and if he had cursed me, have quoted some passages in
the Fsalms for it. If Moses was so angry that he brake the Tables of the Law;
Exodus 32. 19.
does Mr. Cressy think, it was at any that spoke against the Idolatry of the
Golden Calf? no; it was at those who committed it: and it is probable he might
have been so, at those who would have struck the second Commandment out of
those Tables, or eluded the force of it by vain and idle distinctions. The
great anger of the Prophets was against those who drew the people to Idolatry:
and Mr. Cressy is so pertinent in his proofs as to bring this to justify his
rage against me, for writing against the Idolatry of the Roman Church: P. 11,
12, 13, 15, 16.
for so much he expresses in several places. Our Savior and S. John Baptist do
express great zeal against the Scribes and Pharisees: but let Mr. Cressy
consider, they were a sort of sour, ill-natured hypocrites, that would allow
none a good word, nor so much as hopes of salvation that were not of their way;
that were full of malice, and envy, and all evil passions, and at the same time
pretended highly to mortification and more devotion than others. I find nothing
like Invectives in all the writings of the holy Apostles; unless it were
against the opposers, or corrupters of Christianity; and when Mr. Cressy proves
me to be guilty of either of those, I will lay my self open to the darts of the
most Venomous Tongue among them. But instead of that I know no other cause in
any Books I have written, that should expose me to the rage of these men,
beside the zeal I have therein discovered for the honor and purity of the
Christian Religion, against the fopperies and corruptions of the Roman Church.
And for such a Cause as this, I am prepared to suffer, whatever their fury and
malice can raise up against me. This, this is the Cause, which I hope I should
not be ashamed nor afraid to own and defend, although Mr. Cressy's Power were
as great as his Charity. The Church of England I do from my heart honor and
esteem, (notwithstanding all the base suggestions of Mr. Cressy to the
contrary, even in this Epistle Apologetical) but I do therefore so much esteem
it, because in it the Christian Religion is preserved free from the frantic
heats of Enthusiasm and the dotages of Superstition. If they will undertake to
convince me, that the things I condemn in the Church of Rome, were any parts of
the Christian Religion delivered by Christ or his Apostles, I shall diligently
weigh and consider what ever they have to say; but if they only give hard
words, and betray impotent passions; if they shuffle and show tricks instead of
reasoning; if all their charity toward me lies only in bitter invectives, they
will do but little good upon me, and I think not much to their own Cause.

. 3. But I am mistaken all this while, Mr. Cressy does not write this Apology
to give me satisfaction, P. 7.
but the Person of Honor, and the genuine Learned Protestant Clergy of the
English Church; and if these, he says, after impartial considering the motives
and grounds of his invectives shall determine, that in his late, to him (alas!)
unusual manner of treating with me he has offended against Christian Charity,
or purposely intended to fix any dishonorable brand on the English Protestant
Church or Discipline of it established by Law, he will be ready without any
reply to suffer whatsoever censure or punishment they shall think fit to
inflict upon him. Mr. Cr^s^. Ep. Dedicat.
What! no offense against Christian Charity to charge me with deriding and
blaspheming the Saints in glory; with having a hatred horribly poisonous
against the Catholic Church militant; and that will not spare the Church
Triumphant: P. 35.
no offense at all, to call me Theological Scarron, and to say, that I act the
Theological Zani; P. 52.
that all my Book except twenty or thirty pages consists of Scurrilous
Buffoonries, petulant revilings of Gods Saints; and in effect by his Epigram
out of Martial to charge me with downright Atheism; P. ^2.
and twice in the same passage with impiously and profanely employed wit: none
at all, to say, That I had a heart brimful of the Gall of bitterness,
Postscript. p. 1^1. P. 2. P. 3.
that I writ with Ink full of Gall and poison; that I gave free scope to all
unchristian and even inhumane passions! That my Book wholly composed of
malignant passions and new-invented Calumnies against Gods Church, Epist. ded^c.
was only the private design of a malicious brain on purpose to feed the
exulcerated minds of a malevolent party among us: Preface to the Rea^der.
that, all the weapons I make use of, pierce into the very bowels of the
persons, fortunes and condition of English Catholics, whose destruction I seem
to design. What! none at all, to charge me so often with prevaricating with the
Church of England, and designing to destroy her, under a pretense of defending
her! These are some of the flowers of Mr. Cressy' s Charity toward me, which I
have picked out of some few pages of his Book; and he has taken abundant care
to prevent any unlikeness in the parts of it. And does Mr. Cressy in good
earnest think, it is no breach of Christian Charity to charge me upon such
pitiful grounds, with no less than carrying on blasphemous, Atheistical,
treacherous and cruel designs? But if this be his Christian charity, what would
the effects of his malice be? Let now any indifferent person judge, whether the
Person of Honor had not reason to say, That he never observed so many personal
reflections and invectives, P. 63.
fuller of causless passions, and of bitterness and virulence in so little room
in any Book.

But whatever the Person of Honor thinks, Mr. Cressy makes his appeal to the
genuine Learned Protestant English Clergy. If he had been a Clergyman who had
done me that great kindness, then Mr. Cressy would have appealed to Persons of
Honor; and surely such are the most competent Judges in cases of affronts and
injuries: but herein lies Mr. Cressy's art which runs throughout his Epistle,
that he would fain separate me from the Church of England, and make my cause
distinct from hers: I do not wonder, that they would part me from my company,
and deprive me of my shelter, when they have such a mind to run me down. But
these arts are easily understood: and the design is too fine to hold, and too
apparent not to be seen through. Mr. Cressy knows very well, the Use that was
made at Athens of the Fable of the Dogs and the Sheep; and what good words and
fair promises the Wolf made to the Sheep; if they would but consent, that the
Dogs might be given up to be destroyed. And no doubt the crafty Wolf would have
made a very fine speech to the Sheep, to have persuaded them, that he had no
manner of ill will to them; for he had known them long and loved them well, and
always looked upon them as a company of very innocent and harmless creatures;
but for those Dogs that were set to watch them, he knew how different their
principles were, and how destructive to them, if occasion served; and for all
that he knew, these Dogs might have Covenanted together to worry them, upon a
fair opportunity; and therefore for his part, he could not but wonder at their
patience, that some of the stoutest Rams among them, did not set upon those
pestilent Currs; or at least, he hoped, they would not be so regardless of
their own safety, as not to suffer some well-wishers to the flock, to take them
quietly and destroy them. For alas! at the best, they do but make a noise, and
disturb the repose of the Sheep; and if they were gone, there would be nothing
but unity and love left. I need make no application of this to Mr. Cressy; and
I am far from the vanity of supposing this capable of being applied to my case,
any farther than as I am one of those, who are at present engaged in the
Defense of our Church against that of Rome. It is the happiness, and honor of
our Church of England, that it has in it at this day such store of persons
both able and willing to defend her Cause (as, it may be, no Church in the
World has ever had together more persons of excellent abilities, great
Learning, and unaffected Piety;) and I look on my self as one of the meanest of
them: but it has been my lot to be engaged more early and more frequently in
this Cause than others; which has drawn so great a hatred of my Adversaries
upon me; but I thank God, I have a good Cause and the testimony of a good
Conscience in the management of it, and so long I neither fear the waspishness
of some, nor the rage of others.

. 4. But this is their present design to represent me as one of different
principles from the Church of England, and not only different, but such as if
well understood, are destructive to it, and therefore they very gravely advise
our Reverend Bishops to have a care of me, if they hope to preserve the Church
of England. And can we think it is any thing else but mere kindness and good
will to our Church, that makes them so solicitous for its welfare? It is a sad
thing, Preface to Fa^at.
says Mr. Cressy, that not one Protestant will open his eyes and give warning
of the dangerous proceedings of their Champion? Nay, it is no doubt, a very sad
thing to them to see that we do not fall out among our selves? I am sure it is
no fault of theirs that we do not: for they make use of the most invidious and
reproachful terms together concerning me, that if they cannot fasten on one
passion they may upon another: but these poor designs have hitherto had but
little success, and I hope will never meet with greater. And yet if nothing
else will do, (...).
Mr. Cressy says, that it is a ^hame, that hitherto not one true Prelatical
Protestant has appeared as a Defender of the English Church and State against
me; but on the contrary even some English Prelates themselves have
congratulated and boasted of my supposed successful endeavors against the
Catholic Church, though ruinous only to themselves. Alas, good man! his heart
is even broke for grief, that our Bishops take no more care to preserve the
Church of England. The Church he has always so entirely loved, and ventured
as much for her as any body, while she was in prosperity, and there was no
danger; and only forsook her, when she was not able to reward his Love. The
truth was, he gave her for gone at that time; and then it was the late Church
of England with him; and no wonder when he thought her dead, that he made Court
to a richer Mistress; but it was but a swooning fit, she is come to her self
again, and I hope like to hold out much longer than that which he has chosen.
And although Mr. Cressy's hands be now tied, and he has entered into new Vows;
yet he cannot, for his heart, forget the kindness he had to her in her
flourishing condition, because she was then very kind to him; he remembers the
marks of her favor, and the rich presents she made him; and therefore
something of the old Love revives in him toward her, at least so far that he
cannot endure to see her ill used; when her Guardians neglect her, and her Sons
prevaricate with her. If Mr. Cressy's faith had been as great as his Charity,
to have made him believe that she would ever have come to her self again, I
cannot think he would have forsaken her so unhandsomely; and left her in a
dying Condition: but who could ever have thought that things would have come
about so strangely? But what if all this present show of kindness prove mere
collusion and prevarication in him? What if it be only to divide her Friends,
and thereby the more easily to expose her to the malice of her enemies? For as
long as the Church of England stands, she upbraids him, in his own words, with
malignant ingratitude: and it is the plausiblest way for him that was once a
Servant and a Lover, to compass her ruin with a pretense of Kindness.

. 5. But wherein is it, that I have prevaricated with the Church of England,
whilst I have pretended to defend her? The first thing he instances in, is, my
charging the Church of Rome with Idolatry. Epistle Apologetic. p. 12.
In very good time Mr. Cressy! and, is this prevaricating with the Church of
England? when I have already, Pr^face to Idolatry.
in two set Discourses, at large proved, Preface to the first part of the
Answer.
that by all the means we can come to know the sense of a Church, this Charge
has been made good against her, from the beginning of the Reformation to 1641.
and that even then the Convocation declared the same in the Canons then made.
But what must I do with such kind of Adversaries, that will never answer what I
say for my self; but do run on still with the same Charge, as though they had
nothing to do when they write, but to tell the same story over and over; Let
Mr. Cressy do with his Readers as he pleases; for my part, Epist. Apologet.
from ^. 16. to ^. 24.
I shall never follow him in that kind of impertinency: For there is not one
word there used by him, which I had not particularly answered, before he writ
it. The like I may say, of the second Charge, viz. that by the principles laid
down by me, I destroy the Authority of the Church of England; Answer, first
part from p. 260. to p. 291.
which I have already showed at large to be a very impertinent Cavil, and that
I do maintain as much Authority in the Church of England, as ever the Church of
England challenged to her self. And to that Discourse I refer Mr. Cressy for
satisfaction; If he will not read it, I cannot help that; but I can help the
not writing the same things over again: and so this other part of his Epistle
Apologetical is wholly impertinent; Epist. Apologet. from p. 72. to ^. 84.
unless he had taken off, what I had said for my self already in answer to the
very same Objections. But all the reason in the World shall never satisfy Mr.
Cressy, that I aim not at setting up a Church distinct from the Church of
England? If it be any, I assure him, it is a very invisible Church; for it is a
Church, without either Head or Members; I declare my self to be not only a
Member, but an affectionate hearty friend to the Church of England; I persuade
some to it; I endeavor, what in me lies, to keep others from revolting from
it. But where lies this Dr. Stillingfleet's Church, which Mr. Cressy makes such
a noise with? I know none but that of the many thousands in England that have
not bowed their knees to Baal: and to prevent any farther suspicion of my
meaning, I do declare I am for no other Church, than that Church of England
which is established by Law among us. But it must be allowed to those who plead
for seeing Visions, that sometimes they may dream Dreams.

Having therefore cut off so much impertinency, I shall reduce the matter yet
to a narrower compass, From n. 53. to n. 72.
by casting by the large account he gives of the several Books written by
himself, in all which tedious Discourse, the wisest thing he says is, That
Books relating to personal things are scarce ever so long-lived, as a yearly
^lmanack, and serve only to increase the uncharitableness and injustice of the
present Age, in which men will be sure to censure all Books and Persons, and
are indifferent whether they condemn the Plaintiff or Defendant or both. I
shall not therefore feed so bad a humor by meddling with any personal Disputes;
but come now, to the main things, which deserve any farther discussion, in the
passages between the Person of Honor and Mr. Cressy.

CHAP. II.
Of the Charge of Fanaticism and Mystical Divinity.
. 1. ANd the first thing is about the Charge of Fanaticism; which gave the
Title to that Book of Mr. Cressy' s, upon which the Person of Honor bestows
his Animadversions. Fanaticism sect. 2. n. 10.
This Mr. Cressy said he would begin with, and particularly that part of my
Book which concerns the life and prayer of Contemplation commended and
practiced only in the Catholic Church; it being a State, he says, which from
the Infancy of the Church has been esteemed the nearest approaching to that of
Glorified Saints: and this is that, from whence I took an occasion to vilify
him; but adds, that he is very well content to receive his proportion of scorn
with such companions, as Thaulerus, Suso, Rusbrochius, Blosius, etc. But to the
end I may not boast, he says, of the Novelty of my invention and profanely
employed wit, he does assure me, that he heard the same way much better acted a
long time since, but the Actor was obliged to make a Recantation Sermon for it.
I thank Mr. Cressy for more of his Charity still, in that he parallels the
representing the Fanaticism of their Church with the histrionical representing
the life of our Savior and his Att^ndants: it seems, there is no great
difference to be made between the Reverence due to the Founders of their
Monastic Orders, and to the Son of God himself. I do assure him if I had no
better opinion of our Blessed Savior as to his Wisdom and all manner of
Excellencies, than as yet I see ground to have of the Founders of their Orders,
I should be far from that esteem I now have of the Christian Religion: but
however, the Person of Honor has better informed Mr. Cressy' s memory, viz.
P. 23.
That the Recantation Sermon was made upon the account of State-matters; and
therefore Mr. Cressy very wisely passes it over in his Epistle Apologetical.

To this the Person of Honor adds, That Mr. Cressy had no such reason to be
enraged at me for this Charge, since the provocation was given me by my
Adversary, by whom the beginning of so many Sects and Fanaticisms was laid to
the charge of the Church of England: which unseasonable and untrue reproach,
A^madvers. p 26.
made it necessary for me to answer and refell that calumny, and as reasonable
to let them know that their own Church is much more liable to that accusation
than the other: and why this provocation should be so innocent an assault for
the one, and the defense by the other should prove so heinous an offense, will
require an impartial Judge to determine. To this Mr. Epist. Apologet. sect. 26
Cressy thus answers; That my Adversary chanced unhappily though innocently to
let drop out of his pen one line or two which has undone us all. I know no
design of undoing them that any of us have had; unless it be as some men think
they are undone, when they are kept from doing mischief: but I hope we may have
leave to take care of our own preservation, and of that Religion we ought to
value above our lives: but suppose it were so, whom may they thank for it? him
that gave the provocation, or him that did but his duty in Defense of his
Church and Religion? But come, come Mr. Cressy; let us not flatter our selves,
it is not the Fly upon the Wheel that raises the Dust; we Writers of
Controversies are no great Doers or Undoers of public business. But Mr. Cressy
denies, that my Adversary did lay the imputation on the Church of England; and
craves leave with all due respect to tell the Person of Honor, ^. 27.
that it was a great mistake in him to say so. Of that we may judge by the very
words produced by Mr. Cressy, viz. Whether the judgment of King Henry, viz. in
forbidding the Bible to be read in English, ought not to have been followed in
aftertimes, let the dire effects of so many new Sects and Fanaticisms as have
risen in England from the reading of the Scripture bear witness. In which words
the rise of Sects and Fanaticisms is plainly imputed to the reading the
Scripture, the reading of the Scripture in English is an effect of the
Reformation of the Church of England (for it is the Church of England as
reformed, that is only the subject of the dispute) And therefore I appeal to
any indifferent person, whether the Reformed Church of England does not in
their Opinion bear the blame of all the Sects and Fanaticisms? But this is too
plain a thing to be insisted upon: No, says Mr. Cressy, the very naming of
Fanaticism and England in the same line, was provocation enough for me; who
seemed with an impatient longing to have watched for such an advantageous
opportunity to empty my voluminous store of Collections. ib.
How strangely may some be deceived by an overweening imagination! I was so far
from having a Voluminous store of Collections, that I never thought of the
Subject, till it came in my way to answer it; and then I remembered some things
I had read to that purpose, which put me upon a farther search into the history
of those things. And since Mr. Cressy will have it out, this is the true
account of the birth of that terrible Mormo that has brought so many
reproaches and execrations upon me.

. 2. There are two parts of this Charge of Fanaticism, which Mr. Cressy thinks
himself particularly concerned in; and which I shall therefore handle
distinctly; the one concerns Mystical Divinity; and the other, the honor of S.
Benedict, and his Rule and Order; these two Mr. Cressy sets himself with all
his force to defend, and I hope before I have done to make Mr. Cressy repent
the heat, he has showed about them.

I begin with that concerning Mystical Divinity; of which Mr. Cressy still
speaks with the greatest Veneration imaginable; he had before called it,
Fanaticism p. 1.
The practice of Christian Virtues and Piety in the greatest perfection this
life is capable of; P. 11
the nearest approach to the state of glorified Saints; the most divine
exercise of contemplative Souls, P. 181.
more perfectly practiced only in Heaven: and now he makes a prayer for me,
that it would please God to give me and all my friends a holy ambition to
aspire to the practice of contemplative prayer, Epist. Apologet. n. 37.
though by me so much despised. But of the good effects he says it would have
upon me, I do the most wonder at that which he adds, viz. that it would
exceedingly better my style. I have hitherto thought the choice of clear and
proper expressions, such as most easily and naturally convey my thoughts to the
mind of another, to be one of the greatest excellencies of Style; but all
before Mr. Cressy, that have been the greatest Friends to Mystical Divinity
have endeavored to excuse the hard words of it. Surely never any Masters of
Style, before Mr. Cressy, thought obscure, strained, affected, unintelligible
phrases, were any Graces and Ornaments of speaking: Would it not add much
beauty to ones style, to bring in the state of Deiformity, the superessential
life, the union with God in the pure fund of the Spirit, and abundance of such
phrases; which are so very many that Maximilian Sandaeus the Jesuit, Maximil.
Sandaei Clavis Mystica c. 3^
has written a large Book only in explication of them: and this is the account
he gives of the Mystical Style; that it is obscure, involved, lofty,
abstracted, and flatulent, that it has frequent hyperbole's, excesses, and
improprieties. And he tells us, there were some, who (not unhappily) compared
them to Paracelsian Chemists, who think to make amends for the meanness of
their notions, by the obscurity of their terms. Carol H^r^^^nt. Comment in
Dio^ys^de Mysti^^ Theolog. Pr^^fat.
Carolus Hersentius has nothing to answer to this, but only, that the matter
cannot be plainer expressed in Mystical Divinity; which is so far from being an
argument to me that it can improve ones style, that it gives me very much
ground to suspect the very thing it self. For God would never require from men
the practice of that (as certainly he does the duty of Prayer and the greatest
Love of himself) which it is impossible for men to understand, when it is
proposed to them. What obligation can there be to practice no man knows what?
The Christian Religion is a very plain and intelligible thing; and if it had
not been so, I do not know, how men could be obliged to believe it? I do not
say, that men could form a distinct conception in their minds of the manner of
some of those things which are revealed in it; as how an infinite being could
be united to humane nature; but this I say, that the terms are very
intelligible, and the putting of those terms into a proposition, depends upon
Divine Revelation, viz. that the Son of God was incarnate; so that all the
difficulty in this case lies in the conception of the manner, which by reason
of the shortness of our conceptions, as to what relates to an infinite being,
ought to be no prejudice to the giving our assent to this Revelation; since we
acknowledge the union of a spiritual and material being in the frame of
mankind, and are as well puzzled in the conception of the manner of it. But in
Mystical Divinity, I say, the very terms are unintelligible; for it is
impossible for any man to make sense of that immediate Union with God in the
pure fund of the Spirit, wherein the Mystical Writers do place the perfection
of the Contemplative Life.

. 3. But because Mr. Cressy referrs the Person of Honor for the understanding
those Mystical phrases, which I had quarrelled with, to the Author of the Roman
Churches Devotions vindicated, which was purposely writ in answer to me upon
this subject; I shall therefore consider what light he gives us in this matter;
for I am very willing to be better informed. In the beginning he says, that
Prayer is the most Fundamental part of a Christians Duty; Rom^^ Churches
Devotions vindicated Sect. 1.
if this relates to the matter in hand, viz. of contemplative prayer, it must
be employed, that this is a part at least of that fundamental Duty, and if it be
so, I think my self obliged to understand it; and it must be a very culpable
ignorance, not to understand so fundamental a part of a Christians Duty.
Therefore I shall pass by all his excursions, and hold him close to the matter
in debate; I confess he prepares his way with some artifice, which makes me a
little jealous, for things plain and easy need none. He insinuates, 1. Sect. 6.
That those who have not these things, cannot well know what they mean; Sect. 7.
and then adds, 2. That the means for obtaining them, are (in his own words)
much frequent and continued vocal or mental prayer, much solitude and
mortifications of our flesh, and abstraction of our thoughts and affections
from any creature: much recollection, much meditation on selected subjects, and
the endeavoring a quiescence as much as we can from former discourse, (these
actions of the brain and intellect now hindering the heart and will) and the
bringing our selves rather to a simple contemplation (without any action of the
brain or intellect, or at least as little as may be) to exercise acts of love,
adhere to, sigh after and entertain the object thereof: and after this, come
passive unions, which are rather Gods acts in us than our own, and are
particular Favors to some, and those not constant. By this explication, I am
fallen into utter despair of understanding these things; for if the acts of the
brain and intellect prove such hindrances to the desired union, and the
quiescence in order to it be that of Discourse, viz. of all ratiocination; I am
utterly at a loss, how this should ever be understood by the persons
themselves, and much more how it should be explained to others: And I extremely
wonder at those, who go about to explain things which themselves confess are so
far from being understood, that the acts of the understanding are hindrances to
the enjoyment of them. But F. Baker speaks more plainly in this matter, (...).
when he describes this Mystic contemplation; by which, says he, a soul
without discoursings and curious speculations, without any perceptible use of
the internal senses, or sensible Images, by a pure, simple, and reposeful
operation of the mind, in the obscurity of faith simply regards God as Infinite
and Inco^prehensible Verity: and with the whole bent of the Will rests in him,
as her Infinite, Universal and Incomprehensible Good. This is true
Contemplation indeed. And afterward he adds, that as for the proper exercise
of active contemplation, ^ 16.
it consists not at all in speculation, but in blind elevations of the will,
and ingul^ing it more and more profoundly in God, with no other sight or
knowledge of him, but of an obscure Faith only. And toward the conclusion of
his Book he has these words, We mortify our passions to the end we may loose
them: c 6. ^. 11.
we exercise Discoursive prayer by sensible Images, to the end we may loose all
use of Images and Discourse: and we actuate immediately by operations of the
Will, to the end we may arrive to a state of stability in prayer above all
direct exercises of any of the souls faculties: A state wherein the soul being
often brought to the utmost of her workings, is forced to cease all workings to
the end that God may operate in her. So that till the soul be reduced to a
perfect denudation of Spirit, a deprivation of all things, God does not enjoy a
secure and perfect possession of it. Nay, he says elsewhere, Sect. 1. c. 4. n.
14.
that all use of meditation must be for a long space passed and relinquished,
before the soul will be brought to this good state of having a continual flux
of holy desires. I might produce much more to the same purpose out of him; but
this is enough to show, that they leave no use of ratiocination or memory, in
that which they call the perfect state of the Contemplative life; and how is it
then possible, that it should be either understood or explained? Nay, F. Baker
says, that there is a cessation of all Workings of the soul, which is a little
harder yet: But this is that otium mysticum, or divine state of quiescency
which the Mystical Divines magnify so much; and which it is impossible to give
any account of; either how the soul being of so active a nature can subsist
with a cessation of all her workings; or supposing that possible, how it can
ever give an account of that state wherein there was a cessation of all her
workings. It is altogether as possible to give an account of the state of
Not-being, as of such a state, wherein there were no operations of the soul; or
at least no use of ratiocination and memory. And of all things, methinks it is
most improper to call that the State of Contemplation; the State of
Nothingness, is much more agreeable to it. But O. N. defends this to be a State
of Contemplation; for although, says he, it be applied to the will, Sect. 61.
yet its act is not single, but accompanied with a simple intelligence or sight
of the object performed by the Intellect without any, or at least much
Discourse thereof; but this is not fair dealing, for F. Baker expressly excludes
all Discourse, he says not any, or at least not much; but if there be any,
Baker makes it not the state of pure contemplation; however does O. N. think
that which he calls simple intelligence, or the understanding things without
ratiocination, is a thing we are capable of, Sect. ^.
during the conjunction of Soul and Body? But O. N. acknowledges, That these
supernatural communications of the Divine Majesty to some of his choicest
servants in prayer are so sublime and high, as that they are described by them
not without great difficulty, and unusual expressions, which are not so well
understood but by such as have experienced such favors which also happen to
very few. Why then do they undertake to explain them? Why do they write of
them, and publish them to the World?

But commend me to Mr. Cressy himself, Epist. Apolog. n. 37^
who gives me a very plain reason why I do not understand these things; viz. in
the words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 2. 14
that, The sensual man neither does nor can possibly understand them, because
they are spiritually discerned, and therefore no wonder if they be esteemed
foolishness by him who has never experienced them. What, yet more of your
Charity Mr. Cressy? I pretend to no Mystical Unions; and should think it no
perfection, much less a state of pure contemplation, to have all operations of
my mind suspended; but what then? must I be a sensual man for this, and
incapable of understanding the things of the Spirit of God? This answer, I
should have expected from a Quaker; and it is the common place they run to,
when any tell them, that they talk Nonsense, or unintelligible Canting; and I
dare say, they speak nothing more unintelligible than this Mystical Divinity; I
might have expected this Answer from a follower of Jacob Behmen, who talks very
sublime things too in his way; and very much like Mystical Divinity. I might
have expected it from a Rosycrucian; for I find, that he who writ the Epistle
Apologetical for the Brethren of that Order, Tract. Apolog^t int^g. Societ. de
Ro^e^ Cruce d^fendens. A. 1617. P. 17.
produces the very same places of Scripture to justify them, that O. N. and
Mr. Cressy do for Mystical Divinity; and says, that theirs was a gift of
perfection, which God did not communicate to all, but only to his elect; and
therefore no wonder if others did not understand it. But what it Mr. Cressy
does not after all this understand S. Paul? and it is most evident he does not.
For S. Paul does not there speak of any that had embraced the Christian
Doctrine, and rejected any sublime pretense of devotion, as a thing not
intelligible or consonant to the Christian Religion (which are the reasons of
my rejecting Mystical Divinity) but he speaks of such, who rejected the
Doctrine of Christianity it self, because it depended upon Divine Revelation.
And so the (...) is not the sensual man, as Mr. Cressy out of mere charity to
me renders it; but the man that supposes such a natural sufficiency in the
humane soul in order to its own perfection and happiness, (as the Philosophers
did) that there was no necessity either of divine revelation to discover any
new doctrine, or of divine Grace to conduct us to our happiness. This I could
easily make appear to be S. Paul's meaning, from the consideration of the design
of his discourse, as well as the importance of the words, and the consent of
the best Interpreters of S. Paul; I mean S. Chrysostom, and his Disciples,
viz. Isidore Pelusiot, and the Greek Scholiasts; but I forbear, for fear Mr.
Cressy should think, I take another opportunity to empty my voluminous store of
Collections. But notwithstanding all the endeavors of Mr. Cressy and his
Friend N. O. to make the State of Contemplation as described by F. Baker, more
intelligible, it has yet so much of darkness and shadow in it, that the more
they pursue it, the farther it flies from them.

. 4. But that is not all the quarrel I have to this Mystical Divinity, that it
is unintelligible; but that it leads persons into strange illusions of fancy,
and when they think themselves freest from Images, they do then labor most
under the power of a strong imagination, embracing only the Clouds of their own
Fancies instead of such an immediate Union with the Divine Essence in the pure
fund of the Spirit. And this I take to be a great injury, not only to those
melancholy souls, that are led through this Valley of Shades and Darkness; but
to the Christian Religion it self, as though the way of perfection taught by it
were a low, mean, contemptible thing in comparison of the Mystical flights of
this Contemplative way. There are these two things therefore I shall endeavor
to show, 1. That this Mystical way has no foundation at all in the Christian
Doctrine, 2. The way and manner, how it came into the Christian Church, and
has obtained so much favor in it.

1. That it has no Foundation at all in the Christian Doctrine. It is the
great excellency of the Christian Religion, that it gives us such incomparable
directions in order to the complete Felicity of our immortal souls. That it
has not only discovered more plainly, and fully, the blessed state of another
life; but teaches men the most effectual way to prepare their minds for it;
viz. by sincere repentance, by inward purity, by subduing our passions, and due
government of our actions according to the Rules of temperance and justice, by
dependence on Divine Providence as to the affairs of this world, by patience
under afflictions, by doing good to others, although our enemies and
per^ecutors; by deep humility and mean thoughts of our selves; by a large
charity, thinking as well of, as doing well to others; by valuing the
concernments of another life, above the advantages of this, (which is called
self-denial;) and to that degree, that when our Religion calls for it, we
should willingly part with our lives for the sake of it. This, as far as I can
understand it, is the summary comprehension of a Christians Duty, in order to
his happiness; and by patient continuance in Well-doing he may with reason hope
for the enjoyment of that Blessed State which is reserved to another life. The
which being made known to the world by the Doctrine of Christ, therefore Faith
in our Lord Jesus Christ is made so necessary a part of a Christians Duty; and
because we want divine supplies, and assistance, to enable us to do our duty,
therefore we are so much commanded to be frequent and ^ervent in prayer; and
many promises and encouragements are given to the due performance of it, from
Gods readiness to hear the prayers of the Righteous, and to grant the requests
they make to him. All this, is not only excellent in it self, and most
reasonable to be done, but very easy to understand; but not a word in all this
tending to any immediate Union with God in the pure fund of the Spirit, or such
a State of Contemplation wherein the operations of the soul are suspended;
nothing of passive unions and visions and raptures, as such things which every
Christian who looks for perfection, may hope for. It is true, we are often
commanded to love God with all our hearts; but withal we are told, we must not
fancy this love to be a mere languishing passion toward an infinite object
(which we therefore love, because we do not understand; but see him only in
profound darkness, and clasp about him with the closest embraces, V. Ioh. a
Jesus Maria Th^olog. Mysti^. c. 6. p. 64.
being united to him in the most immediate manner: and being melted in the
fruition of him. Which are luscious Metaphors brought into the Christian
Doctrine from that ancient Family of Love, I mean the School of Plato; as I
shall show afterward.) But the love of Christians toward God is no fond
amorous passion; but a due apprehension and esteem of the divine excellencies;
a hearty sense of all his Kindness to us; and a constant readiness of mind to
do his Will; for this is the Love of God to keep his Commandments. 1 John 5. 3.
And if any man say I love God and hates his Brother, 4. 20.
he is a liar; for he that loves not his Brother, whom he has seen, how can
he love God whom he has not seen? No man has seen God at any time. 12.
If we love one another, God dwells in us, and his love is perfected in us.
Thus the beloved Disciple who understood the greatest mysteries of Divine Love
has expressed them to us: and thus the beloved Son of God has declared what
he means by the Love he expects from his Disciples, Joh. 14. 15.
If ye love me keep my commandments. And ye are my Friends, if ye do whatsoever
I command you. 15. 14.
Here is nothing of an abstracted life, or internal and external solitude, or
self-annihilation in order to an immediate active union with God in the supreme
point of the Spirit; nothing of blind elevations of the Will, without the use
of Reason and Discourse, ingulfing it more and more profoundly in God; all
these Mystical Notions and expressions had another spring and more impure
Fountain than the Christian Doctrine.

. 5. Not so; say O. N. and Mr. Cressy, for if they may be believed there is
ground in Scripture for all the most lofty mystical expressions. If so, I must
retract what I have said; but I never knew any men that needed more an
infallible Interpreter of Scripture than they do; they make such lamentable
expositions of it; if they can but hit upon a word or a phrase to their
purpose, away they run with that, and never consider the design or importance
of it. What work does O. N. make with his Cor altum, O. N. Roman De^votions
vindicated, sect. 7 -- sect. 51.
and Regnum Dei intra vos? whereas the first signifies nothing, but due
consideration, nor the other any thing, but that the Kingdom of the Messiah was
then come among them. And what are these to Mystical Divinity? Fanat^^sm, p. 49.
And Mr. Cressy 's accedite ad Deum and illuminamini, is altogether to as much
purpose; for is there no instruction to be had from God, or his Law, short of
passive unions? no enlightening our minds, but by immediate inspirations? But
Mr. Cressy thinks he has done the business and quite stopped my mouth with S.
Paul 's (...); P. 41.
who being in a wonderful Ecstasy, saw and heard God only knows what: which
although he was willing to communicate, yet he had not the power to do it.
A^imadv. p. 58.
But as the Person of Honor has already very well told Mr. Cressy, What is
this to those who go about to express what neither themselves nor any else can
understand? If they pretend to the same ecstasies, why do they not imitate his
Modesty? Why do they go about to help S. Paul to words to do it by, if himself
declared it could not be done by words? To which Mr. Cressy answers as much as
was to be answered, which is, just nothing. Roman Devotions vindicated sect. 9,
10, 11.
But his Author O. N. brings the same place; and not only that, but all those
which mention the Revelations of the Prophets or Apostles. To what purpose? Do
I deny any Divine Revelations? Do I give the least intimation that I
questioned, whether there were any true inspirations in the Writers of Holy
Scriptures? God forbid! But how does it follow, if God did inspire men to
declare his Will to mankind; therefore all the pretenses to Revelations and
Inspirations in the Roman Church are true? If S. Paul had once a true Rapture;
therefore all S. Teresa 's were such, and not the effects of a vehement
Imagination. Let us observe the difference, not only in the value and
excellency and judgment of the Persons; but in the very manner of relating
them. Her life written by her self (to which O. N. appeals in this matter,
Roman Devotions vindicated sect. 16.
as the great instance of the strictness and caution of the Roman Church in
examining and approving Visions and Revelations) consists almost wholly of a
very plentiful narration of her Raptures and Visions. She began, she says, to
be awakened about six or seven years old, S. Teresa 's Life, p 2. c. 1. E^i^.
16* 1. at A^^^p.
her Mother having made her to say her prayers and be devout to our blessed
Lady and some other Saints; wherein she very much outwent S. Paul, who never so
much as once mentions her in all his writings. After this, c. 4. p. 16.
she relates her very great sickness, so great that she says, it always
deprived her almost of her senses, and sometimes altogether: and after she had
read the third A, B, C (a Book of Mystical Divinity) she says, she came to
quiet prayer, and arrived to passive unions before she was twenty years old; P.
17.
and herein again she far outwent S. Paul. She confesses, that she was in so
great torment, that they were afraid who were about her, that she would have
gone mad; C. 5. p. 25.
that she was put into such a heat that her sinews began to shrink with such
intolerable pains that she could take no rest neither day nor night, but was
continually oppressed with a most profound Melancholy. These are the very words
written by her self as they are translated out of Spanish by an English Jesuit;
after this she says, she fell into a trance; so that she remained without
sense almost four days, P. 26.
after which she remained under violent Torments, C. 6. p. 28.
and her head exceedingly distempered; and was not perfectly recovered in three
years. P 32.
Then she took S. Joseph for her Patron; whom she called her Father and
Protector; and whereas other Saints help us in some one necessity, she had
experience that this Saint helps us in all; and that our Lord will give us to
understand, that as he was subject to him on earth, so likewise in Heaven he
obtains whatsoever he asks. (I am very much mistaken if this savor not of
other kind of Divinity than ever S. Paul preached) And she adds, that she had a
great zeal to persuade others to be devout to this glorious Saint: P 33.
because he helps those souls exceedingly which commend themselves to him;
especially those that desire a Master to teach them how to pray; (I suppo^e she
means this contemplative way). After such an account given of her self, I do
not at all wonder at the frequency of her Visions and Raptures; in one, P. 38.
she says, she saw Christ more plainly with the eyes of her soul, than she
could have seen him with the eyes of her body; and she looked upon it as a
temptation of the Devil, that she was ready to think, this was nothing but
Imagination. After this, C. 10, 11, 12, etc.
she relates at large how she came to be swallowed up in the depths of Mystical
Theology; and talks of Gods suspending the operations of the understanding; in
which, P ^0.
she says, it understands more in the space of a Creed without discoursing,
than we can understand with all our earthly diligences in many years: This she
calls, being wholly ingulfed in God; and distinguishes this State, P. 62.
wherein the soul seems to be altogether out of her self, from Visions; and she
describes the third degree of Prayer to be a glorious frenzy, an heavenly
folly; P. 111.
in which, she says, she had been as it were frantic and drunken in this
love, and could never understand how it was; and in this State, she says, they
speak many words in Gods praise without order, at least the understanding is
nothing worth here; P. 113.
for she adds, that then she speaks a thousand follies, and she knew one who,
being no Poet, chanced to compose very significant Verses extempore, declaring
his pain very well, not made by his own wit. But there is a degree beyond this,
which she calls, P. 122.
the State of not feeling, but enjoying without understanding what we enjoy;
but how this Union is, and what it is, she cannot give it to be understood, but
leaves it to the Mystical Theology. Afterward she distinguishes between Union
and Raptures: P. 140.
and says, that these exceed Union, which he that writes the Glosses in the
Margin says, that she means that the soul enjoys God more in raptures; but
she tells us, that Union seems beginning, midst and end; but our Lord must
declare this, i. e. she knew not what she meant herself. In some of her
raptures she speaks of Gods carrying away her soul, P. 141.
and almost ordinarily her head also after her, so that she could not detain
it, and sometimes her whole body lifting it up: P. 142.
in these she says, she undergoes great violence, and she was quite tired with
them: at other times she says, P. 148.
her body was so light in raptures, that all the heaviness of it was taken
away; or rather, that the body remains as it were dead, without doing any
thing, in which sometimes the senses are wholly lost; but ordinarily they are
troubled: and in the height of raptures, she says, they neither hear, P. 149.
nor see, nor feel in her opinion; no power has the use of it self, nor
knows what passes in this occasion; nor are we capable of understanding it.
In this state, she says, the soul is ingulfed; or to say better, our Lord is
ingulfed in her, and keeping her in himself for a little space, she remains
with her will alone: and sets forth the body as bound for many hours in it, P.
150.
and yet sometime the understanding and memory distracted; and after they
return to themselves. When the rapture is over, it happens sometimes that our
powers are so absorpt and as it were drowned for a day or two or three, that it
seems they are not in themselves. There are these circumstances more to be
observed concerning her: P. 42.
1. That she was under great bodily weakness all this while. 2. P. 18^.
That at this time when she had so many of these raptures, she confesses her
self, that she was very backward and in the beginnings of virtues and
mortifications. 3. P. 66. and 176. p. 236. P. 181.
That her great friends who had examined and considered her case, declared to
her, that they looked upon all these things as delusions of the Devil; P. 194.
p. 180.
upon which she applied her self to the Jesuits, P. 18^.
who encouraged her very much, P. 181.
and told her, it was the Spirit of God; P. 184.
and henceforward they were the great men who gave her directions, not to
resist those impulsions and elevations, as she had been advised before; and put
her upon greater perfection; then she fell into her raptures, and understood in
one of them, P. 185.
that hence forward she was not to converse with men, but Angels: and after
this, she had such kind of voices very frequent within her, P. 187.
which she says, are very formal words, but not heard with corporal ears, but
understood much more plainly, than if they were heard; and these speeches, P.
204.
she says afterward, were very continual with her; and she had visions very
frequently; in one of which she saw only the hands of Christ, P. 215.
and in another his divine Countenance, which seemed wholly to abstract her, P.
216.
and afterward she saw him altogether, but not with her corporal eyes, she
confesses: and she satisfied her self, it could not be her imagination only,
although her Confessor told her so, P. 221.
because the beauty was so great, as to exceed her imagination; yet he still
encouraged her, when as appears by her own confession, P. 224.
others about her whom she had a great opinion of, endeavored to convince her
it was only her imagination, to her great trouble; P. 225.
insomuch, that she says, the contradiction of the good were sufficient to
have put her out of her wits. This Vision of the Beauty of Christ continued
ordinarily with her for two years and an half, P. 226.
in which she had a great desire to see the color of his eyes, and what
bigness they were of, but never could obtain that favor. When the
Iesuit-Confessor was out of the way, others told her plainly, P. 228.
it was the Devil that deluded her; and they bid her cross her self when she
saw a Vision; P. 234.
she held a Cross in her hand to save her self the trouble, P. 229.
and Christ took it in his and gave it her again with four Precious Stones
which had the five wounds artificially engraven upon them, which no body could
see but her self. After this, she had a vision of Angels, and clearly discerned
the celestial Hierarchy; P. 232.
but she supposed one of those she saw to be one of the Seraphins, who pierced
her heart with a fiery dart, and when he pulled it out again, it left her
wholly inflamed with great love to God; but under excessive pain, which yet
caused so great pleasure, that she could not desire to (...) removed: in the
days that this (...) she says, she was like a Fool, P. 233.
she desired neither to see nor speak, but to embrace her pain. Not long after
she relates, how sometimes for three weeks together her imagination would be so
tormented with trifles and toys, P. 238.
that she could think of nothing else: then she fell into such a fit of dullness
and heaviness without any kind of sense or remembrance of her former Visions
and Raptures; P. 240.
or else no otherwise than as of a dream to afflict, and then she was full of
doubts and suspicions, that all was but imagination; P. 237.
and if she conversed with any, the Devil put her in such a distasteful spirit
of anger, P. 240.
that it seemed as if she would eat all, not being able to do otherwise. Then
again, she had comfort in an instant, P. 241.
sometimes with a word, sometimes with Visions; which continued for a time more
frequent than before; then she thought, P. 242.
that her bodily sickness was the cause of her former disturbance, and that her
understanding was so unruly, that it seemed like a furious fool, whom no body
could bind, neither was she able to keep it quiet for the space of a Creed: At
other times again she compares her self to an Ass, P. 244.
being in a manner without any feeling; and so it falls out oft-times, she
says, P. 245.
that one while she laughed at her self, and other times she was much
afflicted; and the inward motion provoked her to put posies and flowers upon
Images, and such kind of employments. After this, the scene of her imagination
was quite changed, for it represented nothing but Devils to her: P. 246.
in which state, she tried one pleasant experiment, viz. how much more the
Devils are afraid of Holy Water, than of the Sign of the Cross; P. 247.
from the Cross they fly, but so as to return presently, but from the Holy
Water, so as to return no more, ( Methinks then she should have used it but
once) and it was not more terrible to Devils, than she found it comfortable to
her soul; for she says, that she found a particular and very evident comfort
when she took it, and such a delight which strengthened her whole soul: which
she found very often, and considered it with great reflection: then she
relates, her being in Spirit in Hell, P. 261.
and what she endured there; and toward the conclusion, her being placed in
Heaven in a rapture, P. 323.
and seeing what was done there, where she saw her Father and Mother, etc.
after which she adds, that our Lordshewed her greater secrets ( What! than what
is done in Heaven?) for it is not possible, P. 324.
she says, to see more than was represented unto her; the least part of it was
sufficient to make her soul remain astonished; and found it impossible to
declare some little part of it. And now we find her at S. Paul's height, and
need go no farther in the account of her Visions, which continues to the end of
her Book; but let me ask O. N. who has particularly recommended this life to
the consideration of any sober Protestant, Roman Churches Devotions vindicated
p. 23.
whether he does in good earnest think that M. Teresa had the same kind of
Raptures that S. Paul had? I know he must not say otherwise, since the Roman
Church has Canonized her for a Saint; but I think, they had done her a greater
kindness, to have appointed her good Physicians in time, instead of her
Iesuitical Confessors. I could hardly have thought, that among Christians I
should have found S. Paul's Rapture paralleled by such as these; but we have
lived to see strange things. If S. Paul had discovered in his Writings so many
Symptoms of a disturbed fancy, such an oppression of Melancholy, such rovings
of Imagination, such an uncertainty of temper; could we ever think the world
would have believed that Ecstasie, which he expresses with so much Modesty,
and makes so many Apologies for himself, that he was forced to mention it; by
the false Apostles boasting of their Revelations? It is not expedient for me
doubtless to glory; 2 Cor. 12. 1, 2, 5, 6.
I will come to Visions and Revelations of the Lord. I knew a man in Christ
above fourteen years ago, etc. Of such a one will I glory, yet of my self I
will not glory, but in mine infirmities; -- but now I forbear lest any man
should think of me above that which he sees me to be, or that he hears of
me. Although he had many Revelations, he mentions but one; and that with the
greatest modesty that may be under a third person, and that above fourteen
years ago. He tells no long stories of a succession of Visions and Raptures,
and sights of Angels and Devils; mixed with many impertinencies and indications
of a disordered Imagination. But says O. N. that could not be in S. Teresa,
considering the diligence that was used for several years in the trial of her
Spirit, and her Visions were confirmed to be from God, by a general attestation
of them throughout the Christian World; even those who suspected and questioned
them at first afterward magnifying them. But I desire no other evidence in
this case, than what she gives her self; supposing the matters of fact to be
true according to her own relation; not that I would condemn her, according to
Mr. Cressy 's soft language, as a hypocritical Visionaire; nor as many of her
Friends did, as one deluded by the Devil; but I see nothing in her case but
what might be a natural effect of an overheated Imagination, in a Person of a
very melancholy devout temper, especially being beforehand possessed with the
Notions of Mystical Divinity. And for the approbations given to her Visions I
do not wonder at them, since there was a Design to Canonize her for a Saint,
and she was the Foundress of a new Order; and that there was something relating
to this, in the penning of her Visions, seems to be not obscurely intimated in
the last Page of her Book, where she desires him to whom she writ it, to make
haste to serve his Majesty, P. 364.
that he might do her a Favor; for it seems by her own relation, her Order met
with great contradiction at Court. P. 312.


And for the approbation of her Books, I do no more wonder at that, than I do
at others that proceed upon the same principles, viz. of Mystical Theology.
But I do exceedingly admire at those persons, who dare to bring the single
instance of S. Paul's Rapture, to justify all the pretenses to Visions and
Raptures, of the Melancholy and distempered Women of their Church. If we had
not so great reason to put such a mighty difference between them, as to the
Wisdom of the Persons, the reasonableness of their Doctrine, the Miracles
wrought to confirm the testimony of the Apostles; it would be, as Cardinal
Bessarion said of the Canonizations of new Saints, that it made men Question
the old; so these new Raptures and Visions would expose the credit and
Authority of undoubtedly Divine Revelations. Therefore let Mr. Cressy and O. N.
have a care, while they are so ready to charge me with blaspheming Gods Saints,
that by making the case so parallel between the Prophets and Apostles and their
new Saints, they do not lay in the way of all considering men of their Church,
one of the greatest temptations to Infidelity.

. 6. But O. N. has not yet done: O. N. sect. 13.
for he brings all those phrases of Scripture, that relate to the
sanctification of men's souls by divine Grace, and the comfort of Gods Spirit,
and the extraordinary Revelations which came by the pouring out of the Holy
Ghost upon the Apostles and their Disciples, to justify the expressions of
Mystical Divinity; which are all extremely impertinent, unless he can prove
from any of them such an Union with the Divine Essence, as excludes the use of
ratiocination in the soul; wherein the perfection of Contemplative prayer is
placed, and all the other phrases are to be understood with a respect to this.
O. N. ^^ct. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
And what though there be two Spirits working within us, and there be degrees
of spiritual persons, and the Spirit assists the souls of men with good motions
which ought not to be resisted; and what if some have a greater measure of this
Assistance than others; what if excellent minds may attain to an assurance that
they are under the conduct of the Divine Spirit, and may have great comfort and
satisfaction therein; nay, what if I should grant, that a State of Perfection
were attainable in this life; yet all this were nothing to his purpose; unless
he can prove, that the supposing the perfection of a Christian to be consistent
with laying aside the Use of all ratiocination, as it is in the Mystical Union,
does not expose men to the greatest Enthusiasm, and most Fanatic Delusions
imaginable. I mean that state, which himself expresses, O. N. sect. 29.
by those supernatural elevations wherein are communicated to the soul many
times Celestial Secrets, and Divine Mysteries, and future events by internal
words and Revelation; all which things are received by it with a great
tranquillity and attention, and cessation of the natural use of its Faculties
Sensitive or Intellectual: nor seems it in its own disposal while it has these
touches. And this is that, he tells us, which the Mystic Divines express by
the terms of a supernatural, or rather superessential life, a Deisormity, or
Deification; of a sense or fruition of Gods presence in the fund, depth, or
center, or innermost part of the soul, or also in the Apex or supreme point of
it; of Passive Unions, wherein is to be understood not an exclusion of all acts
whatsoever, but an exclusion of any discursive and laborious acts, and any
primary moving of it self to action. This explication I accept of; and
undertake to make it appear, that in it is contained the greatest height of
Fanaticism. For what can be imagined greater, than to exempt all pretenders to
Enthusiasm and Divine Inspiration from any trial by humane reason? For if no
persons are competent Judges of these supernatural elevations, but those which
have experience of them; as they assert; if by virtue of these elevations men
come to the knowledge of Divine Mysteries and Future Events by internal words
and Revelation; what is to be done with any Person who pretends to these
elevations? Must their Confessors judge of them? But why? for either they have
not experienced these things, and then they are no competent Judges; or they
have, and then they are pretenders to the same things, and ought as much to be
judged by others: but how? by the acts of reason, and the rules of it? how is
that possible, when they are supposed to be above all acts of Reason and
Discourse? and to do it without reason, will be as little honor to the Judges,
as it will be Vindication to the pretenders. But the Church is to be Judge: Why
so? since the Spirit can no more deceive one than a thousand; and they have
satisfaction in themselves, that it is the Spirit of God in them, as much as it
is possible for any to have that the Spirit of God directs the Church; nay,
much greater, for the other is only the certainty of reason and discourse; but
this is an inward Certainty of Experience, above all ratiocination. But how
again shall the Church judge of this? If the Church pretend to the same thing,
she is liable to the same accusation; if she does not, she can have no pretense
to judge of things that are to be known only by experience. So that if men
speak consequently and agreeably to themselves, there is no way of trial left
for pretenders to these things. And what should hinder every Enthusiast from
this pretense, or something very like it; viz. Divine Inspiration? Why should
the pretense to the Spirit be more liable to the trial of other men's reason or
Authority, than the pretense to Mystical Unions? Cannot they make use of the
very same places of Scripture to justify all the Fanatic pretenses to
immediate impulses and motions of the Divine Spirit? Cannot they tell men as
easily, that they that are unexperienced are no Judges in this case; and that
the sensual man cannot understand the things of the Spirit of God? Nay, these
have been the very pleas of all our Enthusiasts, and there is scarce one place
of Scripture mentioned by O. N. which they have not been beforehand with him,
in producing to the very same purpose. I cannot then find out the difference,
between the highest of our Enthusiasts and theirs; and the very same pleas
which serve for the one, will justify the other also. What have they ever
pretended to, but to understand celestial secrets, divine mysteries, or future
events by immediate Revelation? Now all these things are owned, defended and
justified by the Roman Church, and yet they not liable to the charge of
Fanaticism?

. 7. No, says O. N. Enthusiasm or Fanaticism does not lie in speaking things
hard to be understood, O N. sect. 13. p. 20.
nor yet the pretending high and mysterious effects, Visions, Revelations, etc.
for all these we believe may be and are often wrought in Gods Saints by the
Holy Spirit, and his special presence in their souls, and that we say in a much
higher and more admirable way, than any of Satan's infatuations can imitate or
ascend to; but Fanaticism is a false pretense of these, or the like, when
having no just ground to be credited, they pretend to them. So that the main
point is yielded up to the Fanatics, viz. Visions and immediate Revelations,
and unaccountable Impulses from the Spirit of God; all the dispute is, whether
the Popish Enthusiasts or those among us are only pretenders? If O. N. were to
convince a Quaker who pretends to such an immediate impulse of the Spirit, this
must be his method of proceeding with him.

Friend, I perceive thou talkest much of the Spirit of God moving thee and
revealing the hidden mysteries of his Kingdom to thee, but thy pretense is
vain, and thou art deceived by thy own fancy, if not by an evil Spirit.

No, says the Quaker, I know, I am not, for I have the testimony of the Spirit
within me that I am not deceived; but thou art deceived and lie against the
Holy Ghost, and blasphemest the Spirit of God working in his Saints.

Not I, says O. N. I grant that the Holy Ghost does work in his Saints such
supernatural elevations, whereby they understand divine Mysteries, and have
Visions and Raptures and Revelations more than any of you; but all ours are
true, and yours are false.

Thou lying Prophet, replies the Quaker, Gods speaks truth by thee, as he did
once by Balaams Ass and Caiaphas; but thou through the Wickedness of thy heart
do condemn the Generation of his Saints among us as hypocrites; and would
have the Spirit of God dwell only among you, that are the Sons of Mystical
Babylon and partake of all her defilements, that are the seed of the Beast and
the false Prophet, that commit adultery with Images, and set up the Man of Sin
in his Throne, that have covered the face of the earth with your abominations,
and still go about to deceive the Nations. You have the Spirit of God among
you! You pretend to the seeing hidden Mysteries, and immediate Revelations and
Mystical Unions with God! No, yours are the Mysteries of Iniquity, the
Revelations of Antichrist, and unions only with Mystical Babylon. You have the
Spirit of God among you! No, yours is the Spirit of Enchantment and Divination,
the Spirit of lying and deceit, the Spirit of Antichrist and not of God.

I say again, says O. N. that we have the Spirit, and you have not.

And I say by the Spirit, that you have not, says the Quaker.

And is not this a fair conclusion of this Dispute? O. N. sect. 14.
Has not O. N. extremely got the better of the Quaker? But O. N. pleads yet
farther, that they make use of Notes and Rules of discerning of the pretenses
to Inspiration; which I shall consider afterward: but that which O. N. and Mr.
Cressy do most insist upon, is this, that if such pretenders to Inspirations do
speak or do any thing against the Catholic Church (as they call it) then their
pretenses are to be rejected as Satanical illusions. Very good! This is a way
to preserve themselves, but what is this to the preventing the delusions of
such fanatic pretenders to Inspirations, who may be grossly deceived, and yet
never speak or do any thing against their Church; but it seems the least touch
that way presently marrs all. If Mother Teresa had but chanced to let fall a
word against the Power of Holy Water in driving away Devils, or chanced in one
of her Visions to have seen Bread upon the Altar, after consecration; away with
her, a mere hypocrite and Impostor, one deluded by the Devil: and it had been
well, if after all her Visions and Raptures, she had escaped the Inquisition.
For can it possibly be so certain, that she had Divine Visions, as that Holy
Water drives away Devils; or that she had Mystical Unions, as that no bread
remained upon the Altar after consecration? No, no. If melancholy Women once
offer to meddle in those matters, they must then be told of their weakness of
Judgment and strength of Imagination and delusions of the Devil; but if they
admire every superstitious foolery, and see strange effects of Holy Water, and
in some Visions can discern the very flesh and blood of Christ in the
E^charist, then O heavenly Visions! O Divine Saint! Then her Confessor must
sooth and flatter her, and suffer her to be deceived by her own imagination at
least, if not by something worse. So that this whole business of Visions and
Revelations among them is managed by Politic Rules; if they can serve to
strengthen their interest, they are encouraged, if not, the persons are
presently discountenanced, and if they persist in their pretenses, in great
hazard of the Inquisition. But may not weak and Melancholy Persons be deceived
in judging the effects of a strong Imagination to be the Inspirations of the
Spirit of God? What then, say they? these do no h^rt to the World. But is it no
injury to their souls, to suffer them to be so deluded? Is it no dishonor to
Christian Religion to make the Perfection of the Devotion of it to consist in
such strange unaccountable Unions and Raptures, which take away the use of all
Reason and Discourse? Is it nothing to have Persons Canonized for Saints, and
admired and worshipped, chiefly for the sake of these things? In which case,
not only the particular persons, while they lived, were suffered to be abused;
but the whole Christian World as much as lies in them, is imposed upon; and the
effects of a strong Imagination, and Mystical Unions, are recommended as the
perfection of the Christian State.

. 8. But whatever Rules they go by; I shall now show, that such kind of
Ecstasies and Revelations, as the Mystical Divinity pretends to, have been
condemned by the Christian Church in former Ages; which will yet farther
discover, how far it is from being a part of the Cristian doctrine; ^o far is
it from being the perfection of a Christian State. And the Instance I shall
produce, will be such a one, wherein the judgment of the whole Christian
Church was seen, viz. in the ecstatical Visions and Raptures and Revelations
which Montanus and his followers pretended to. Ba^on A. D. 173 n. 7. 25
Baronius proves from the testimonies of Philastrius, Epiphanius, Theodoret and
others, that Montanus and his companions were good Catholics, and great
practisers of fasting and mortifications, and were in great esteem in the
Church for a more than ordinary degree of sanctity; when they we in this
reputation they pretended to have extraordinary Visions and Ecstasies, wherein
they suffered such violences as Mother Teresa describes; and were under such a
force upon their minds, as they thought divine, which deprived them of the
present use of ratiocination, in which state, they said, they had many
Revelations from God. Now here we have the very case of Mystical Unions; and we
all know that this Spirit of Montanus was rejected in the Christian Church as a
Fanatic Enthusiastical Spirit; but, it will be worth our while, to show that
it was upon this very ground, because the Montanists pretended to such
Ecstasies and Revelations from God, which deprived men of the use of their
Reason. Claudius Apollinaris Bishop of Hierapolis apprehending the dangerous
consequences of these Enthusiastical pretenses to Ecstasies and Revelations
goes to Ancyra in Galatia to give himself full satisfaction as to the nature of
them; and being returned, he writes this account to his friend Marcellus, that
Montanus was wont to fall into sudden transports and ecstasies in which he
became Enthusiastical, Eusebius. Eccl. histor. l. 5. c. 16.
and uttered strange things, and prophecy; which, says he, is a thing
contrary to the constant tradition and practice of the Christian Church; the
same he says of the two female Enthusiasts, Prisca and Maximilla; and all the
account he gives of their separation from the communion of the Church was
because the Christian Church all over the world refused to give any
entertainment to their Enthusiastical Spirit, and that the Churches of Asia
having met together and examined this Spirit, they condemned it as impious,
whereupon they were cast out of the Church; upon which Maximilla cried out, I
am driven away as a Wolf from the Sheep, but I am no Wolf, but the Word, and
the Spirit, and the Power. Miltiades, as appears by Eusebius, C. 17.
writ a Book against the Montanists on this subject, that God did not
communicate Revelations in Ecstasies; wherein he showed, that Montanus was wont
to fall into his Ecstasies which ended in an involuntary Madness; and then
proves that none of the Prophets either of the Old or New Testament ever
prophesied in Ecstasies, or when they had no use of their Reason. But no one
speaks more punctually to this business, than Epiphanius, Epiphan. har^s. 48.
sect. 2.
who lays down this as a general Rule, that whatever Prophets spoke, they
delivered with the clear use of their Reason and Understanding; and afterward
says, that the Montanists were very much deceived in pretending to such
Visions and Revelations, because God had sealed up his Church, and put an end
to those extraordinary Gifts. While there was any need of Prophets, holy men of
God were sent by him with a true Spirit (...), Sect. 3.
with great steadiness of mind, and a clear understanding; and afterward makes
this the characteristical difference of a true and false Prophet; that a true
Prophet speaks (...), with a great consistency of ratiocination and
consequence. Thus Moses, thus Isaiah, says he, thus all the Prophets; Do not
you see, says he, that these are the words of men that understood themselves,
and not of men that were ecstatical: but these pretenders to Visions and
Revelations speak dark and perplexed and obscure things ( viz. much like to
Mystical Divinity) which neither they understood themselves nor those that hear
them. As any one may see in him by the fragments he has preserved both of
Montanus and Maximilla. But they pleaded Scripture too for their Ecstasies and
Raptures, viz. Sect. 4.
Gen^. 2. 21. Gods sending upon Adam a deep sleep, which was rendered (...); to
which Epiphanius answers, that that was only a binding of his senses by natural
rest; and not any force upon the mind; but they had another place too as
impertinent as this, (but as impertinent as it is, it is the very same phrase
that my Adversaries produce) Ego dixi in ^xcessu meo; Psalm. 115. 11
which Epiphanius proves cannot be understood of any such Ecstasie as the
Montanists pleaded for; and in Truth he needed not take much pains to do it:
But they could not follow the Montanists exactly, Di^inarum g^atiarum Cor ^atio
o^rium Re^^la^ion^m mat riam a eriens. Venet. 1626. p. 14.
unless they abused Scripture too to justify their Visions and Ecstasies: So
one Ferdinandus de Diano a Venetian Divine, writing a Book purposely in
Vindication of these things, on the occasion of the Ecstasies and Visions of a
Certain Nun, which were sent to Paul the fifth, and which were taken by her
Confessor for fourteen years together, makes use of the very same phrases of
Scripture as the Montanists did; but exceeds them in impertinency: for to prove
Raptures he produces all the places where the word raptus is used; raptus est,
ne malitia mutaret intellectum ejus, Sap. 4. Men's illius ad diversa rapitur,
Job 26. rapiemur cum illis in nubibus, 1 Thessalonians. 4. but above all, commend me to
Holofernes his Rapture to prove the Raptures of the Popish Saints; Holophernis
oculi a sandalibus Judith rapti sunt, P. 34.
and ejus cor and sensus cum illis rapta sunt, Jud. 16. Can any man be so hard
hearted to withstand such manifest proofs as these are? But to return to
Epiphanius; we are not to understand, says he, any Rapture or Ecstasie of the
Prophets, S^ct. 7.
so as to suppose them to be deprived of the use of their reason and them: So
he shows that S. Peter in his Ecstasie had still the free exercise of his
Reason; which he absolutely affirms of every Prophet both of the Old and New
Testament. Sect. 10.
What would Epiphanius have thought then of the glorious frenzies and heavenly
follies of M. Teresa, in which she spoke she knew not what? What of the
Mystical Unions wherein the operations of the understanding are suspended? What
of all the holy Violences she underwent wherein both understanding and memory
were distracted? No doubt, he would have declared them all to be downright
Montanism; and condemned by the whole Christian Church. Neither were these the
only Persons who delivered the sense of the Church in this matter; but S.
Hierom says the same thing; The Prophet, says he, speaks not in an Ecstasie
(as Montanus, Hiero^y^. prafat. in Nahu^.
and Prisca, and Maximilla fondly imagine) but what he prophesies is the Book
of the Vision of one who understands all he says. So of the Prophet Habakkuk,
Prafat. in Habac.
he understands what he sees (contrary to the perverse doctrine of Montanus)
and speaks not as a fool, nor gives (as distracted women do) a sound without
any signification. Whence it comes that the Apostle commands that if any thing
be revealed to another that sits by, the first should hold his peace, for, 1
Cor. 14. 30. V^ 33.
says he presently after, God is not the Author of confusion, but of peace;
whence it follows, that he who holds his peace to give way to another to speak,
he can either speak or hold his peace at his pleasure; but that he who speaks
in an Ecstasie, i. e. against his will, is not at liberty to speak or to be
silent. And to the same purpose he speaks in other places, P^afat. in Isai. l.
1. ^ 1. in Isai. 33.
in which, he says, that all the Visions and Revelations which came from God
were full of Wisdom and Reason; and not like the Extravagancies of Montanus.
Nay S. Chrysostom goes higher, S. (...). in Psa. 45. 1.
and imputes all Fanatic Ecstasies to the Devil, who breaks in upon the Soul,
and blinds the Understanding, and darkens the Reasoning Faculty; but the Spirit
of God does not so; but suffers the heart to know what it says. The Devil as
an enemy fights against the humane soul, but the holy Spirit as taking care of
it, and ready to do it good, communicates his Counsel to those who receive it,
and reveals unto them divine things with Understanding. In 1 Cor. 12. hom. 29.
And elsewhere, he makes this the great difference between Divination and
divine Revelation; that the one was done in Ecstasies and Rapture, with
violence to the mind; the other ^^dately and composedly, and understanding
whatever they spoke: for God did not press them by violence, nor darkened their
understandings; but did advise and teach them, leaving them still Masters of
themselves, whence Jonas fled, and Ezekiel put off, and Jeremiah excused
himself. S. Basil S. Basil in Isai. (...) 1. (...)
utterly denies that the humane understanding was ever suspended by divine
Revelation; or that men were by the Spirit of God deprived of the use of
Ratiocination. For how does it stana with Reason, that through the Wisdom of
the Spirit, a man should become as one besides himself? and that the Spirit of
knowledge should deliver things incoherent? for neither is light the cause of
blindness, nor does the Spirit Cause obscurity in men's minds, but raises the
understanding to the contemplation of things intelligible, cleansing it from
the stains of sin; nor is it improbable that through the design of the evil
Spirit, (who lays his Ambushes to ensnare humane Nature) the mind is
confounded; but to say, the same is done by the Spirit of God, is impious. From
all which testimonies, nothing can be more evident, than that the Visions and
Revelations, the Ecstasies and Raptures, which S. C. and O. N. do plead for,
were condemned by the whole Christian Church, and the most eminent Lights of
it, as the very height of Fanaticism.

But O. N. would have men believe, O. N. p. 16.
that the ancient Church did very much favor such Ecstasies and Visions; to
that end he produces the Testimony of Tertullian, T^rtull. de A^im^ ^9.
concerning the Sister that fell into an Ecstasie, and had the Vision of the
Corporeity of the Soul: as though Tertullian were not known to have taken the
part of Montanus in this matter; and in that very place (in the next words to
those cited by O N.) he pleads for the contin^ance of Visions and Ecstasies in
the Christian Church, and in several other places of the same B^ok. And I
desire O. N. O. N. sect. 6.
and his Brethren to consi^er a little better what they say, when they charge
me with making all Antiquity Fanatic, upon the same grounds that I charge
Fanaticism on their Church; for it is most evident by this Discourse, that I
have the best and purest Antiquity, and the full consent of the Christian
Church in the case of Montanus, clearly on my side. And I declare freely, that
I value this consent above all the Writers of the Lives of Saints, from S.
Antonies downwards; and it is the only considerable thing which Diano says on
this subject, Dia^o de Diano. ^ 24.
if we do not allow of Visions and Raptures and Revelations, what will become,
says he, of all the Lives of the Saints and the Legends which are full of
them? as may be seen in Lippoman, Surius, Baronius, and the Monastic Histories
of the Dominicans and Franciscans. What will become of the Speculum exemplorum,
of the Promptuaria, the Liber Apum, the Legends of the blessed Virgin, and a
thousand such excellent Books? Truly, it is the least part of my concernment
what becomes of them; and I think it had been much more for the honor of
Christianity, if they had never been writ.

And if as O. N. says it be now too late to cry such things down, O. N. p. 13.
I am very heartily sorry for it: and it is a plain discovery that the Spirit
of Montanus has too much possessed that which they call the Catholic Church.

But O. N. besides Tertullian produces several passages of S. Augustine to
justify these supernatural and extraordinary Graces and caresses received from
God; O N. from sect. 32. to sect. 40.
(for those of S. Gregory and S. Bernard are not of so great weight in this
matter, to deserve a particular consideration, where the consent of the
Christian Church is so fully proved already) S. Augustine is brought in by him,
as acknowledging his Conversion from Manichaism to have been from a divine
Revelation concerning Gods incorruptibility and immutability: but what were
this to the purpose, if the free use and exercise of his Reason were continued
therein? yet no such thing does appear by any thing said by S. Augustine. Aug.
^. Fortunat. Tom. 6.
In the dispute with Fortunatus, he does say, that he would answer that which
God would have him to know, that God could suffer no necessity, nor have any
violence put upon him, (which Fortunatus says, God had revealed to him) and in
the conclusion, making use of the force of that argument, he says, by that he
was divinely admonished to leave the Manichean doctrine. And what is all this
to Mystical Divinity? What immediate Revelation, or Vision, or Rapture was
this, for a man to acknowledge there was something divine in the force of a
particular argument to convince him? Do I ever call it Fanaticism, for men to
acknowledge the Grace of God in the illumination of their minds, when some
particular arguments may persuade them at some times, which at another might
not have done it? And to let us see that S. Augustine meant no such thing as any
particular Revelation in this case, in the seventh Book of Confessions he gives
an account by what steps and degrees he was brought off from Manichaism, and as
much by the exercise of Reason and understanding, as we shall easily meet with
in any person. And as to this particular argument, Confess. l. 7. c. 2.
as though he had a mind to prevent any such imagination, he says, he had it
from Nebridius at Carthage. But I cannot but wonder at the bringing in the
Nesciens unde and quomodo -- and hoc uno ictu in the foregoing Chapter, C. 1.
where he speaks expressly of the manner of his forming a Conception of God as a
Spiritual Being; upon which, he says, that although he could not tell whence,
or how, yet he was certain that a corruptible being was more imperfect than an
incorruptible; and therefore his heart did rise against his imaginations, and
with this one stroke he endeavors to expel all the flock of phantasms from
his conception of God. Was not this O. N. very hard put to it, to bring these
passages to prove Mystical Divinity? To as little purpose does he produce that
ejaculation, Age Domine and fac; L. ^ c. 4.
excita and revoca nos: accende ac rape, etc. for may not men pray for the
exciting, assisting, and comforting Grace of God, without supposing Ecstasies
and Raptures and immediate Revelations? But he was yet farther of, when he
brought that place to prove these extraordinary favors from God; Lux es tu
permanens quam de omnibus consulebam, etc. L. 10. c 40.
which if he had looked on the beginning of the Chapter he would have found to
be an Address to Truth; Ubi non mecum ambulasti veritas, docens quid caveam and
quid appetam, etc. And does O. N. think that there is such a Mystical Union
between the Soul and Truth, as to deprive men of the use of their Reason and
Understanding? but I am tired with these impertinencies; yet we must have more
of them. L. 7. c. 10.
For because S. Austin in describing the depth of his meditation concerning God
and himself, does mention, that by the eye of his mind he saw an immutable
light very far above it; and by this reflection he became as certain of what he
only understood, as if he had heard it in his heart; therefore this place
serves to prove no less than the fund of the soul, and Gods internal speech to
the soul, and what not? I expect next, that De's Carts his Method and
Metaphysical Meditations should be brought to justify Mystical Divinity; ^or
they altogether serve as well for it. L. 9 c. 10.
And cannot S. Austin express the profound meditation which he and his Mother
Monica had concerning the blessed state of souls in Heaven, and the ardent
desire they had of being there, and the Joy they found in the thoughts of it,
without falling into the unintelligible Canting of the Mystical Divines? God
forbid, that I should ever call the Discourses, or Desires, or joyful thoughts
of the happiness of Heaven, by the name of Canting: that were indeed to be
impious and profane; but what is all this to a perfect and immediate union
with God in the pure fund of the Spirit in this present state? a Union which
supposes a cessation of Reason and Discourse? No such thing was in the least
thought of by S. Austin, who was too great a Philosopher to suppose
Contemplation in this life without any act of Reasoning or Discourse. In his
Book de quantitate animae, De quantit. anim. c. 33.
he describes the several steps of the soul, and the highest of all he places
in the contemplation of God as the Supreme Truth, and declares that he could
not express the Joys which did attend the fruition of the true and chief Good.
But great and ^^^nparable minds have expressed these ^^ings as far as they
thought them fit to be expressed, which we believe to have seen, and still to
see those things. By which it is plain he speaks of the Ioys ^f another World,
and not of any Mystical and passive Unions in this: and afterward he speaks of
the imperfection of this contemplation here, and that therefore death will be
desirable, because those things will then be taken away, which now hinder the
whole Soul from fixing upon whole Truth. De M^rib. Eccles Cathol. c. 31.
In his Book de Moribus Ecclesiae Catholicae, he speaks of the Egyptian
Hermites spending their life in contemplation, without mentioning any Raptures
and Ecstasies they had; and although he does plead for their life supposing the
usefulness of their prayers to others, yet he does not dissemble that their
manner of living was displeasing to some; and afterward says himself, C. 32.
that the Virtue of those who conversed with mankind, deserved greater
admiration and praise, such as the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons of the
Christian Church. But although S. Austin does not, yet O. N. says, that
Cassian does mention the frequent raptures and ecstasies of these Egyptian
Hermits; but of all sorts of persons, those who lead an Eremitical life, are
least fit to be produced; because all those who have written on this subject in
the Roman Church do say, that the illusions of the Devil may be so like divine
Raptures, that there is a necessity of a great deal of Judgment and Skill, to
be able to put a difference between them; and that none ought to be allowed,
but such as have been approved by discreet Persons; but in the case of these
Hermites we may have just reason upon their own Rules, to suspect them, having
been never brought under a sufficient Rule of trial. If Persons may be deceived
themselves in judging natural distempers and Satanical illusions for divine
raptures and visions, then we have no reason to rely on the single Testimonies
of such Eremitical Persons, who have no witnesses of their actions. What know
we what sort of Persons Abbot John and Abbot Isaac were in the Deserts of
Egypt? we have only their single Testimonies in Cassian, and his single word
that they said such things to him.

. 9. But to take off the force of these and such like Instances, I shall
consider the Rules laid down by their own Writers, concerning these things, and
from thence show, what grounds we have not to rely on the Instances produced by
them, concerning Visions, and Raptures; and Ecstasies, and Revelations.

1. They consess that the natural force and power of Imagination will in some
tempers produce all the same symptoms and appearances both to themselves and
others, which there are in supernatural elevations. Ioh. Bo^a de discret.
Spirituum c. 14. n. 4. Lut. Paris. 1673.
So Cardinal Bona (who very lately, and with the best Judgment has collected
the Rules of their Writers upon this subject) freely acknowledges not only
that Ecstasies may be caused by natural diseases; (of which Galen gives an
instance in a Schoolfellow of his, and Fernelius and Sennertus many others) but
by the mere force of Imagination: by which the animal spirits flowing in
greater quantities to the brain, do thereby hinder the external operations of
the senses, so that the person under it continues without sense or motion, and
in that condition fancies an extraordinary presence of that object which the
imagination was fixed upon. And the more intense this imagination is, the
greater flux of Spirits is made to the brain, and so the Ecstasie continues so
much the longer, especially where the Spirits are more thick and melancholy,
and consequently not so easily dissipated. Paul. Zacch Quaest. M^dico-legal. l.
4. tit. 1. q. 6. n. 4.
So Paulus Zacchias says, that we are not to conclude an ecstasie to be
supernatural, because it arises from the contemplation of supernatural things;
for the Imagination being fixed upon divine things, will have the same effects,
that it would have upon other things. Thence, says he, such persons do really
think (as much as men do in dreams) that they are present at that time with
Angels, or Saints, and have conferences with them; or that they see and enjoy
God, or imagine themselves to be in Hell, or in Purgatory. And Persons seized
upon with this ecstasie will continue for a long time in the very same posture
it took them without any motion; so Plato reports of Socrates, Plato in Co^viv.
in orat. Al^ibiadis, p. 220. ed. Ser^.
that he stood a whole day without any alteration in the same Posture, his mind
being abstracted with pure contemplation, and at night some Ionian Soldiers
having observed him, lay down by him, and they found that he continued without
any motion till the next morning. A. G^ll. Noct. Att^. 1. c. 1.
Favorinus in A. Gellius says, that Socrates did this often: which Cajetan
imputes to the vehement intention of his mind; caj^ t. i^ ^. 2. 7. 175. a^t. 1.
but he says Aristotle lays it upon the disposition of his body; for he
thought him besides himself, says Cajetan; possessed, says Fortunatus
Scacchus; but neither the one nor the other appears by Aristotle, who only
says, Pro^l^^. c. 30.
that all extraordinary men in any way, had a deep tincture of Melancholy; for
which among the Philosophers he does instance in Empedocles, Socrates, and
Plato; which temper, he says, has much in it of the nature of Wine, which is
more apt to heighten and inflame men's spirits, than Honey, or Milk, or water, it
first makes men talkative, then eloquent and bold; then it stirs them to
action, then it puts them into a rage, and at last by custom makes them mere
Sots: all these several qualities some men have by their natural tempers: some,
says he, are much given to deep silence, as those whom Melancholy makes
ecstatical; which temper although naturally cold, is capable of a greater
degree of heat; as water being once heated, is hotter than the flame it self;
and Stones and Iron heated become hotter than the Coals: so, says he, it is
with Melancholy, if it be overheated, it fills them with joy and singing, and
makes them ecstatical; and because thus heat comes very near the seat of the
mind; it is apt to make men distracted or enthusiastical; thence the Sibylls
and the Bacchae and such Enthusiasts became such not by a disease, but by a
natural temper. And to that which is said in the Life of S. Teresa of one that
made verses in an Ecstasie, Aristotle has a very fit parallel of Maracus a
Syracusian Poet, that never made so good Verses, as when he was really
Ecstatical: and for the great inequality of the tempers of such Ecstatical
persons, Aristotle says, that Melancholy as it produces very odd and irregular
distempers, so it is very unequal of it self, sometimes very hot, and at other
times very cold; which the Mystical Divines call the State of Desolation: but
this temper being apt again to be inflamed of a sudden, it fills them with
strange pleasures, especially the Imagination being fixed upon an Object of
Love, which this temper, Aristotle observes, is more particularly disposed to:
but because whatever makes persons Ecstatical, deprives them of the use of
their Reason; therefore these Mystical Unions which have so much Joy and
Pleasure, are said to be with a suspension of all the Discoursive Acts of the
mind. Which things are not to be thought extraordinary, especially in Persons
not only of a Melancholy temper; but whose temper has been heightened by the
power of diseases, great severities, solemn silence and retirement: and whose
Imagination has been possessed with such Notions as do highly gratify an
Enthusiastical Disposition, viz. such as relate to a more immediate Union with
an Infinite Object of Love. So that there seems to be nothing in this State of
Pure Contemplation, of which a reasonable account cannot be given from a
natural Temper heightened and improved by the force of Imagination. And that
this may seem the less strange, I shall produce an instance of this kind, which
I believe will not be denied, to have been either effected merely by
Imagination, or at least, by something under a Divine Power: which is lately
reported by a very credible and intelligent Person, and one who lives in the
communion of the Roman Church. Monsieur Bernier, in his Letter to Monsieur
Chapelain dated October. 4. 1667. B^rniers Memoires, par. 2 p. 136
concerning the Gentiles of Indostan, gives an account of certain Orders of
Religious among them, who make vows of Chastity, Poverty and Obedience, living
in Convents under Superiors, who are commonly called Iauguis, i. e. united to
God, who used themselves to many hardships, and were looked on as so many
Eremites by the People; being accounted true Saints, illuminated and perfect
Iauguis; These are people that have entirely abandoned the world, and
sequestered themselves into some very remote corner, or garden like Eremites
without ever coming to the Town. If you carry them any meat, they receive it;
if they do not, it is believed that they can live without it, and subsist by the
sole Favor of God in perpetual fasting, prayer, and profound Meditations: for
they sink themselves so deep into these raptures, that they spend many hours
together in being insensible, and beholding in that time, as they give out, God
himself, like a very bright and ineffable light, with an unexpressible joy and
satisfaction, attended with an entire contempt and forsaking of the world. For
thus much one of them that pretended he could enter into this Rapture when he
pleased, and had been often in it, told me; and others that are about them
affirm the thing with so much seriousness, that they seem to believe in
earnest, that there is no imposture in it. Which therefore Bernier imputes to
an illusion of Imagination caused by Solitude and Fasting; and this he calls
the great Mystery of the Cabala of the Jauguis; and adds, that their extremity
of Poverty, and Fastings, and Austerities contribute much to it; wherein he
says, the European Friars or Eremites are but Novices in comparison with them.
I leave Mr. Cressy now to consider, whether the^e Mystical Unions and Raptures,
be such privileges of Saints? Whether Solitude, Abstraction from Worldly
cares, rigorous Abstinences, and such like things, which he admires the
contemplative life for, be so peculiar to their Church? When we find the very
same things among the Gentiles of Indostan. (...) c. 4.
And the Author of the Book De Sapientia divina secundum Aegyptios, who seems
to have been an Arabian Philosopher, sets down these as the words of Plato (and
not as his own experience, as Cardinal Bona relates them) Being often in the
depth of contemplation, my body being left behind, I seemed to enjoy the chief
Good with incredible Pleasure. Wherefore I stood as it were astonished, finding
my self to be a part of the upper world, and to have obtained immortality, with
the clearest light; which cannot be expressed with words, nor heard by ears,
nor understood by the thoughts of men: and then he describes the sadness he
felt at the decay of that glorious light; and the pleasure which returned with
his former Ecstasies. This Cardinal Bona thinks might either come by the
natural force of contemplation, or the illusion of evil Spirits; but herein are
all the same appearances that are pretended to in Mystical Unions. And to show
the Power of Imagination in causing Ecstasies; besides that of Socrates, Bona
mentions the like of Carneades related by Valerius Maximus, of Plotinus by
Porphyrius, of Iamblichus by Eunapius, and the common instance of Restitutus in
S. Austin, who fell into an ecstasie when he pleased. 2. 2. q. 175. art. 1.
corp. art.
Thomas Aquinas reckons up three causes of Raptures, Bodily distempers,
Diabolical, and Divine Power: but Cajetan says, there is a fourth cause
acknowledged elsewhere by him, viz. a vehement intention of the mind, which he
therefore omitted, because he spoke of causes extrinsecal to the mind it self.

. 10. 2. There can be no certainty by the Rules laid down by themselves, that
the Ecstasies and Raptures or Visions and Revelations of Persons, do come only
from divine and supernatural Causes. For they grant that in all these cases
there is reason to suspect Ecstasies and Raptures.

1. If the Persons natural temper be very melancholy. This is the first Rule in
Cardinal Bona; Card. Bona de d^ser. Spirit. c. 14. n. 5.
for, says he, those who are troubled with this, may easily fix their minds so
upon one object, as to suffer an alienation of their senses from any other.
Ioh. a Jesus Maria Theolog. Mist. c. 8.
Ioh. a Jesus Maria, a great Mystical Divine, makes this his fourth Rule, to
consider, whether the Person have a good understanding, or be troubled with any
distemper in the head, or with Melancholy, or be subject to any vehement
passions; which Cardinal Bona likewise adds; and therefore Cardinal Cajetan
well notes, Cajet. in 1. 2. q. 17. art. 7.
that the various motion of the heart, arising from some apprehension or
desire, moves the body, and alters it according to different qualities; which
alteration of the body does again affect the imagination and appetite; from
whence we may observe, that those accidents which often happen to persons under
Ecstasies are Originally caused from their own apprehension, although
afterward, custom being turned into nature, makes them fall under them
whether they will or no. which is seen by this, that if they turn their
imaginations with all their force quite another way, those accidents forsake
them, as, says he, I have found by certain experience: which is a plain
discovery that these things are produced by natural causes. Sanct. Sophia tr.
3. sect. 4. c. 3. n. 11.
F. Baker himself puts that down among his Rules, whether the persons be not
addicted to Melancholy? from which Rule, there is great reason to suspect those
who have complained of being oppressed with a most profound Melancholy, as M.
Teresa did: and we have reason to believe it of all those lovers of Solitude,
that forsake all conversation of mankind, as the Egyptian Eremites did.

2. If their proficiency in virtue be not very great. This is the first Rule
laid down by Fortunatus Scacchus, Fortunat. S^acch. de not and sign. Sanct.
sect. 8. c. 3.
Prefect of the Popes Chapel, in his Book of the Qualifications necessary to
Canonization; viz. that we examine the life and actions of the Persons who
pretend to Ecstasies and Raptures; if they have been such as have come up to an
Heroical degree of Perfection, it may be believed that they come from God; but
if not, they come either from a natural or Diabolical cause; especially, says
he, if they happen in women, who may seem to aim either at the fame of
Sanctity, or some advantage by it. Great Caution, says Cardinal Bona, (...)
is to be used in judging the Raptures of Young Beginners; for the very Novelty
and Sweetness of Divine Contemplation is apt to put such into Ecstasies: it is
like strong Wine, which they cannot bear without intoxication. Besides, says
he, it ought to be inquired into, whether their Souls be capable of such
favors, what purity and humility they have attained to, whether their lives be
as much above the world, as they pretend their souls are: if not, they are no
true raptures, but illusions of the Devil: to the same purpose the rest speak.
Sanct Soph. ^. 19.
What must we then think of those Raptures which M. Teresa had, when she said,
she was very backwards, and but in the beginnings of virtues and mortifications?

3. If they are not able to give any good account of what they speak in their
ecstasies: this Cardinal Bona lays down, Bo^a ib. p. 250.
That if when they come to themselves, they know not what they said in their
Ecstasies, but refer the hearers to what they spoke then; or if they speak
whether they will or no, there is great reason to suspect them. For this, says
Cardinal Cajetan, Caset. ^ 12 2. q. 173. art. 3.
is a condition of true Inspiration, that the Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets in this, that they do not speak with any disturbance of
mind, as though they were acted by another, but from their own sense with a
quiet mind, understanding what they speak; therefore, says he, they that speak
in alienation of mind, or after it, do not remember what they spoke in it, have
no true inspirations. From whence it appears, says he, that those who in their
Ecstasies speak in the Person of Christ, or of some Saint, as though they were
acted by them, are either seduced, or do seduce. And yet the foolish world is
astonished, and admires, and adores these words and actions. But this rule,
although as much grounded on Scripture and Reason, as any; is, as far as I can
find, very carefully omitted by the Mystical writers, for a very good Reason,
which they well know.

4. If they have weakened themselves by very long fastings: (...)
for so Cardinal Bona says, that very great weakness may bring them to
fainting sits and Ecstasies; and he tells us from S. Teresa, that she cured a
Nun of her Ecstasies by making her leave her Fasting, and bringing her to a
good habit of Body. It is great pity, the same experiment had not been tried
upon her self. Some, says Bona, have made that an argument that their
Ecstasies were supernatural, because they continued many days in them without
eating or drinking; whereas many have undergone long fasts without a Miracle;
Carol Cl^ not. in Ga^^ ab (...) c. 3.
and some of the Indian Priests have ^asted twenty days together; but because
in those parts the heat may take away their appetite, therefore Paulus Zacchias
Paul. Zac^h. qu^st Medico l^g. l. 4. (...) 1, qu. 7.
produces many instances of very long Fasts in these European parts without any
miracle; besides what Licetus, Horstius, Kornmannus and Sennertus and others
have related to the same purpose; and such Instances have been lately known
among us in England.

5. If they be very frequent and ordinary and happen upon any slight occasion.
For says Paulus Zacchias, Pa^l. Zacch. l. 4. t^t. 1. q. 6. n. 33.
since Divine Raptures have the nature of something miraculous in them, we are
not to suppose them to be very common, and as often as any one pleases;
therefore, says he, when we see a person fall frequently into Ecstasies, we
may justly presume that it is something natural, since God does not commonly
work miracles. Cardinal Bona says, that Sales thought, Bona de dis^ret.
Spirit. c. 20. p. 411.
the mere frequency of having Divine Revelations was enough to make them
suspected. And for persons to fall as often as they please into Ecstasies, is,
says Scacchus, Scacch. p. 612.
an evident sign of a Diabolical illusion: so the Maid of Saragoza and
Magdalena Crucia were discovered. And what shall we then think of the almost
continual raptures of S. Teresa? What of the Abbot Sisoi mentioned by Bona,
that fell into a rapture, unless he let fall his hands at prayers? What of Br.
Gyles, mentioned both by Bona and Scacchus, that thought it so easy to fall
into raptures, that if any one spoke the word Paradise, he fell into an
Ecstasie; insomuch that the Boys of Perusium, as Scacchus relates it, would
come behind him and cry Paradise, on purpose to make him immediately fall down
in a Trance: must we acknowledge this to be from God? But what shall we say to
Br. Roger, mentioned by F. Baker out of Harphius, Sa^cta. Sophia Tr. 3. sect 3.
c. 6. n. 22.
that had a hundred Raptures in a Mattins?

6. If they appear desirous of them, and are apt to report them to others, and
to have them made public. So Ioh. a Jesus Maria would have it observed, whether
they are apt to speak of them, without being asked, or upon an easy request;
whether they pray for them, or come to prayers in hopes of them. Cardinal Bona
would have it observed likewise, where they happen, if in public places where
they may be taken notice of? Bona ib. and p. 415.
This Rule may hold as to Satanical illusions; but where they arise from merely
natural causes, persons may not at all be desirous of them, nay, may strive
against them, and endeavor to keep them secret, and yet they may not be divine.

These are some of the most generally approved Rules among the Persons of
judgment and understanding in the Roman Church; and if we could proceed
according to these, in the examination of the Instances produced of Raptures
and Ecstasies, not one of a thousand would pass by their own Rules. But when
all is done, these Rules are very little observed, but they are approved or
condemned, according to the Rules of Policy, and not of Divinity.

But besides these, the Mystical Divines have some particular notes of their
own, which neither themselves nor any else can understand; as Father Bakers
first Rule; Sa^cta Sophia Tr. 3. sect. 4. c. 3. n. 10. 14.
viz. the Wills being moved without the ordinary precedent action of the
understanding or Imagination: the fifth rule, about the efficacy of internal
words, and the Souls conceiving more by them, than in themselves they signify;
and others as unintelligible as thee, viz. those delivered by M. Teresa, and
set down in order by Ioh. a Jesus Maria to distinguish divine Visions from the
effects of Imagination; as, Ioh. a Jesus Maria Theol. Mist. c. 8. p. 89, 90.
the not missing a syllable of internal words, the great secrecy of them, being
spoken in so close a place in the soul, that the Devil cannot come at them, (to
eves-drop them) and several other such senseless things. And I do suppose no
man will believe any thing to be from God, merely because it cannot be
understood by men; for then the greatest nonsense and contradictions might
pass for Divine Revelations.

. 11. And as there can be no certainty by their own Rules as to Raptures and
Ecstasies, so neither can there be as to Visions and Revelations. For,

1. They grant, that those that are of no use, are not to be allowed; as, If
the matter of Revelations be vain and curious, says Jesus Maria, or that which
may ^e known without Revelation; now, say I, if there be no Revelation at all
to be expected as to matter of doctrine, all the other things are vain and
curious, there being no other end suitable to divine Revelation besides this.
And Cardinal Bona makes a very ingenuous confession, that there is a great deal
of danger and no profit at all in Visions; De discret. Spirit. c. 19. n. 1.
and that by them a way is opened for many deceits and illusions of the Devil.
Can any man of common sense then believe that God should cause such
extraordinary Visions, which bring no profit but abundance of danger along with
them? We walk much more safely, says he, by faith, whose light far exceeds all
Visions and Revelations of Mysteries. And no argument of sanctity, De Not. and
sig^. Sanct. sect. 8. c. 4.
says Scacchus, can be drawn from them; because Christian perfecion does not
consist in them: and Revelations do not make us either more pleasing to God, or
more useful to our Neighbor, and he quotes Gerson with approbation, for
saying, that the ancient Fathers did fly from the curiosity of Visions and
Miracles, as the most deceitful and dangerous; and that S. Austin gave God
thanks that he was delivered from it, and that Bonaventure says, it is to be
abhorred and striven against with all our power. And Scacchus himself
concludes, that there is usually a secret pride and hypocrisy to be thought
Saints, which makes Persons desire Visions and Revelations, which are
inconsistent with true Sanctity; and if it be not pride, it is a vain
curiosity, wherefore God often suffers them to be deceived.

2. That it is a very hard matter in this case to distinguish the illusions of
the Devil, from Divine Visions and Revelations. For they do not pretend to the
only certain way which the Prophets and Apostles made use of, viz. the working
miracles to confirm the Truth of their Testimony: for among all the numbers of
Miracles they boast of, they pretend to none for the proper end of Miracles,
viz. to confirm Divine Revelation. And therefore, it is no wonder Scacchus
yields up this, as a very doubtful thing, considering how easy and common a
thing it is for the Devil to deceive men in this matter. De discret. Spirit. c.
19. n. 7.
And Cardinal Bona confesses, that the Devil does often assume the Person of
Christ and of the Blessed Virgin, with so much art and cunning as to deceive
very good men, as is evident from most certain experience, as well as the
Testimony of the Fathers. Nay, he denies, that ever the Person of Christ did
appear to any since S. Paul's Vision; N. 4.
and he says, that to assert otherwise, is against the unanimous consent of
the Fathers, and not agreeable to that article of our Faith, wherein we believe
that he sits at the right hand of the Father, and shall come again to judge the
Quick and the D^ad. Yet what abundance of Visions of Christ's Person do we meet
with in the Legends of Saints, and of his appearance with flesh and blood in
the Eucharist? but if the Person of Christ do never appear, it cannot be proved
from any of those Visions, that the very body of Christ is there.

3. That it were far better if a stop were put to all private Revelations among
them that are not confirmed by Miracles or Testimony of Scripture. This
Cardinal Bona wishes, c. 20. n. 2.
that the Confessors among them would at last take care of; which no man
certainly would do, if he believed them to be from God. Cardinal Cajetan says,
that we can have no certainty of private Revelations, although the Persons who
pretend to them, Cajet. in 2. 2. q. 174. art. 6.
should not only protest but swear to it, that they have them from God: and in
general concludes, that we are not bound to believe them. From which it
necessarily follows, that there are no certain Rules to know when they are from
God; for if there were, an obligation to believe them would lie upon those who
had tried them by those Rules.

4. If Revelations made to two several Persons do contradict each other, that
there is great Reason to suspect both. For although, says Cardinal Bona, De
discret. Spirit. c. 20. n. 4. p. 409.
it be possible that one may be true and the other false, and the Devil may
endeavor to take away the Authority of the True by the false, yet for the most
part they are both suspected and doubtful. And before he says, that it is
reasonable to believe those Women Saints were deceived, Ib. c. 17. p. 299.
in supposing their own Fancies to be divine Revelations, who have published
Revelations contradicting each other. Which it is plain he intended for the
famous case of the Revelations of S. Brigitt and S. Katharin, which
contradicted each other expressly about the immaculate conception; and which I
had produced as a plain instance of a false pretense to Inspiration in the
Roman Church, it being impossible God should contradict himself. Fanati^^^m. p.
67, 68.
Mr. Cressy in answer to this, first confesses that the public Office of their
Church testifies that each of them were favored with Divine Revelations, and
then produces the Testimony of S. Antonin, that those things may be supposed by
the Persons themselves to be divine Revelations, which are but humane dreams.
Thirdly, He cites Cardinal Baronius, who seems to reject the Revelations on
both sides. And yet he by no means will allow the honor of their Church to be
concerned herein, which has approved them both as Persons truly Inspired; when
Mr. Cressy confesses, they did not testify their Revelations by Miracles, and
that without it Divine Revelation cannot be known. I would not desire a greater
advantage from an Adversary, than Mr. Cressy here gives me against himself. For
by his own confession then, their Church approves those to have had divine
Revelations which never gave the proper evidence of it, viz. Miracles, and such
whose Revelations are questioned by the Wisest men among them. And what is all
this but to give Countenance, (for all that the Church can know) to a mere
pretense to Inspiration? which is the highest Fanaticism in the World. And if
as he says, notwithstanding the Councils approbation, P. 70.
there is scarce a Catholic alive that thinks he has an obligation to believe
either of them; this makes as much to my purpose as I desire; for if they have
no obligation to believe them, they may without sin believe them not to be
divine Revelations; and since they are given out to be such and approved by
their Church, all such Persons may without sin charge them with the highest
Fanaticism in a false pretense to Divine Revelation. And why then should I be
so much blamed for doing that, which Persons in their own Church may do without
sin? But I see Mr. Cressy is not acquainted with the common Doctrine of their
own Divines about the obligation that lies upon Persons to believe Private
Revelations; For they agree,

1. That those Persons to whom those Revelations are made are bound to believe
them before any approbation of the Church? For say they, the primary Reason of
assenting to a Divine Revelation is from the Divine Veracity; to which it is
wholly accidental whether it be public or private, and the Churches
proposition is only the common external condition of applying the object of
Faith to us; but there may be as great an obligation to believe a private
Revelation, supposing only sufficient motives to the mind of the Person that
this Revelation comes from God. This is the opinion of Vega, V^^a in Co^^i.
Trid. l. 9.
Catharinus, Catharin. de certit. great. c ult.
Suarez, Suarez de Fide disp. 3. sect. 10.
Lugo, Lugo de Fide disp. 1. sect. 11.
Ysambertus, Ysambert. de Fide disp. 12. art. 3.
and as they tell us, of most of their modern Divines. Indeed they mention
Cajetan, Sotus, Canus and some others as of another opinion; but Suarez says,
they seem to differ only in words, because they will not have that assent
called Catholic Faith; which the other are willing to yield to them, and call
it Theological Faith, but do make it as certain and infallible as the other.
Which they prove, not only from the obligation to faith in the private
Revelations mentioned in Scripture, but from invincible Reason, because the
ground of the assent of faith is not the publickness of the Revelation, but the
Divine Authority and Veracity; which being supposed, must equally oblige,
whether the Revelation be private or public. And if there be sufficient
motives to believe a private Revelation; to deny an obligation to believe it,
is a contempt of Divine Authority; and to suppose there cannot be sufficient
motives, is to say, that God cannot do as much by himself, as he can by the
Church. The force of which Reason I do not see how it is possible for those to
avoid who assert, that God does still communicate private Revelations to men's
Minds.

2. That supposing these Revelations to be proposed by the Church, all others
are bound to believe them to be divine Revelations. For then they have the same
reason, which they have to believe any Revelation. All the difficulty now is,
to understand what a sufficient proposal by the Church in this case is; Suarez
says, Suarez ib. n. 7.
that although private Revelations be chiefly intended for the persons to whom
they are made, yet a sufficient proposal of them being made to others, there
does arise from thence an obligation to believe them. Council. L^t^ran. sub
Leon. 10. sess 11.
For which says he, The general Rule is the approbation of the Church; as
appears by the Lateran Council under Leo 10. which forbad the Preaching private
Revelations without the examination and approbation of the Church; and then
says Suarez, the believing them becomes a part of Catholic Faith. Now I
desire to know, how it is possible for their Church to show greater care in the
examination and approbation of any private Revevelations, than it did in those
of S. Brigitt? they being frequently examined by the public Authority of their
Church, and after such examination declared by the Pope to have come from the
spirit of God; and at last approved, say their own writers, at the General
Council of Basil. How could they possibly express greater approbation of any
controverted Book in the Bible? But if after all this, these Revelations may
pass among them for Dreams and Fancies, and no men are obliged to believe them,
let them clear their Church from Fanaticism, if they can. For either those
Revelations were from God or not? if not, then they were Fanatical illusions
approved by their Church; if they were, then since they were approved by those
whom they are bound to believe, with what face can Mr. Cressy say, that there
is scarce a Catholic alive that thinks he has an obligation to believe them?
which I do the more wonder at, since they believe things as absurd already, and
with as little reason as any thing in S. Brigitts Revelations. And therefore
the Person of Honor had great Reason to say, A^^madvers. p. 68.
that Mr. Cressy has in truth not answered the Weight of my Instance from the
Revelations of S. Brigitt and S. Catharine.

5. They confess that some persons are very liable to be deceived in believing
themselves to have divine Revelations. Such, C^20. n. 3, 4
says Card. Bona, are those that have a bad habit of body, that have a
restless and vehement imagination, that have a great deal of Melancholy, which
is apt to corrupt the Imagination, so as they are apt to fancy that they see
and hear things which they neither see, nor hear. And likewise, says he, from
long fasting and immoderate watchings, vain phantasms may arise in the brain,
by which the mind being deceived, adheres to them as to divine Revelations. And
what are these else but the Fanatic heats of Enthusiasm? Besides, he says,
that regard ought to be had to the humor, disposition, condition,
conversation, and Age of the Persons; for old men are apt to dote, and young
men to be hot and credulous; but especially great caution must be used toward
Women, whose sex is the more to be suspected because of its weakness; for by
reason of the vehemence of their thoughts and affections they think they see
that which they desire, and that which arises from their own violent passions,
they believe to be true; and it is an easy matter for the Devil, (and no great
conquest he thinks) through their want of Reason and Judgment to deceive them.
Therefore he says peremptorily, that the Bishops and Guides of Souls should
oppose and despise their Revelations and severely rebuke them, for pretending
to things too high for them: and he at large discovers, the great mischiefs
which have come to the Church by W^^nens pretending to Revelations. I confess
after all these severe things, he does at last approve the Revelations of S.
Teresa, which I very much question whether he would have done or no, if he had
been her Confessor; but now she was Canonized for a Saint, and it would not
have been so agreeable for a Roman Cardinal to have exposed to the world the
self-delusions of a Roman Saint. But I desire no more in her Instance, or any
other among them than to compare the circumstances of them with these Rules
laid down by their own most approved Authors. From which it appears that
although Mr. Cressy declares that, E^istle Apolog^t. p. 30.
they are very well content with their Fanatics and Fanaticism, yet there are
some wise men among them, which are not.

. 12. Having thus far shown, that this way of Mystical Divinity with all its
raptures and Ecstasies and passive Unions, had no Foundation in the Christian
Doctrine, nor in the consent of the Christian Church of the purest Ages, I now
come to show whence it came into any Vogue and Reputation among Christians. It
is an easy matter to discover that the Foundation of it was laid by the
counterfeit Dionysius Areopagita, to whom Mr. Cressy and O. N. do referr me.
Who, says Mr. Cressy, Fa^a^icis^ p. ^9.
whatever his true name was, was questionless an Author of the second or at
least the third Age of the Church, and who describes the most sublime and most
purely divine prayer exercised by Hierotheus a Disciple of the Apostles. But if
he lived in the second or third Age, he must be a Counterfeit, (for Dionysius
dyed within the compass of the first Century, as Sirmondus has fully proved)
and if he were a Counterfeit, how came he to know the divine prayer of
Hierotheus? However I do acknowledge that this Author, whoever he was, was
justly pitched upon by Mr. Cr. For it is from him, they not only borrow the
Mystical Notions, but most of the Phrases too: And as soon as those Books,
written by him, came to be known and admired in the Eastern and Western
Churches, there were some so fond of this Mystical Divinity, as to cry it up as
the most perfect way of devotion, being especially accommodated to Persons of
an Enthusiastical temper; who were withal confined to Solitude and Retirement
from the World. It will not be amiss therefore to give a taste of his Mystical
Divinity, as far as it is possible to bring his affected Bombast within the
compass of our language. Thus he begins,

O thou superessential Trinity, Dionys. de Mystica Theol. cap. 1.
above all notion of Deity and Goodness; O thou Governor of the Divine Wisdom
of Christians, direct us to the most unknown, most clear, and most supreme
height of Mystical Oracles; in which the simple, absolute, and unchangeable
Mysteries of Divinity are hidden, by the over-shining darkness of a Teaching
Silence, discovering the most glorious light in the most profound obscurity,
and over-filling the blindest minds with the most beautiful beams, in that
which can neither be felt nor seen.

Let this Prayer be for my self: But Thou O friend Timothy by thy diligent
exercise in these Mystical Speculations, leave thy senses and the operations of
thy mind, and all things sensible and intelligible, and all things which are
not and which are; and after an unknown manner elevate thy self to that Union
which is above all essence and knowledge: and when by a pure and perfect
Abstraction of thy self, thou shall be free and loose from all things, thou
shall be raised to the superessential Ray of Divine Darkness.

Then after he has given caution to Timothy, that these divine Mysteries be
not communicated to those that would make use of their knowledge in these
things, any more, than to those, who followed their Imaginations; because the
superessential being dwells in darkness; and as to him, affirmations and
negations are not opposite, being above all; he shows, that the Cause of all
things is above all Reason and understanding, and is only truly and plainly
made known to those who ascend above all sensible and intellectual things, and
above all divine Lights, and heavenly Sounds and Words, and are swallowed up of
Darkness: which he expresses, by the Allegory of Moses going into the Cloud
upon the top of the Mount: then, says he, this Mystical Moses is carried up
above all visible and intellectual heights, being taken into the truly Mystical
Cloud of unknowing, in which he puts a stop to all knowing perceptions, and is
in that which can neither be seen nor felt, being altogether his who is above
all, and not of any one else, neither of himself nor any other; and being under
a cessation of all knowledge is in a firmer union to that which cannot be
known; and because he understands nothing, he understands more than his mind
can reach to.

This is certainly the very height of Mystical Union and the Perfection of the
Contemplative State: in the description of which, I have kept as near as I
could to his words, and as to the sense have followed Carolus Hersentius, a
late Mystical Divine, who has taken the greatest care and pains to explain the
meaning of this obscure Author upon this argument. To the same purpose he
speaks elsewhere, where he says, that the most Divine way of knowing God is by
not knowing him, D^ Di^ir. Nomi^. c. 7. ^. 3.
by an Union above understanding; when the Mind being abstracted from all
things and going out of it self is united to those overbright beams, by which
he is enlightened in the unsearchable depth of Wisdom.

Any one that ^asts an eye upon this kind of Discourse, will easily find it to
proceed upon very different g^ounds, in order to the per^ection of men's minds,
from what are delivered in the Christian Religion. For there it is said to be
eternal life, S. Joh. 17. 3.
to know God and his Son Jesus Christ; here we are told that we cannot come at
perfection in the way of knowledge, but of Ignorance and not knowing: 1 John 1.
5.
There it is said, that God is Light and in him is no darkness at all; here
that he is the most profound darkness and obscurity. Here we meet with no
difference at all as to the clearness of our apprehensions concerning the
Divine Nature, from what men had before the Christian Doctrine; whereas it is
one of the excellencies of Christianity that by it we come to know the true God
much better than mankind had done before, and are able to form a very true and
distinct conception of him in our minds, as of a Being of infinite Wisdom and
Goodness and Power. Although we cannot attain to a full comprehension of the
utmost extent of the Perfections of the Divine Nature; yet that does not hinder
our conceptions from being clear and True, though not adequate and perfect. And
if we could have no clearer knowledge and more steady conceptions of the Divine
Nature by the doctrine of Christ, to what end are we told by it, Joh. 1. 18.
that no man has seen God at any time, the only begotten Son which is in the
bosom of the Father he has revealed him; that now the vail of darkness is
taken away, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
and we all with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are
changed into the same image; not that our transformation is to come by darkness
and the cessation of intellectual operations, as this Mystical Union implies.
But besides, this Mystical way pretends to carry men above all external
Rev^^ation as well as intellectual knowledge, for so much is employed in the
raising the mind above all Divine Lights, Comment. in Mist. Theol. p. 135.
and heavenly Sounds and Words, i. e. says Hersentius, above all the
manifestations of God what soever which are made to the Mind. Which Mystical
way of Perfection, being supposed possible, I see no necessity at all of
Christ's coming into the World, nor of any influence his Death or Sufferings or
Doctrine could have upon the bringing men to a State of Happiness. For the
whole Hypothesis proceeds only upon these principles. 1. The obscurity of the
Divine Nature, and the impossibility of our attaining so clear a perception of
God in our minds, as for us ever to hope for a state of Perfection with the
exercise of our Reason and Understanding. 2. That the only possible way of
attaining it, is by the abstraction of our selves from all sensible and
intellectual operations, and thereby bringing our souls to an immediate Union
with the Divine Essence.

. 13. Having thus endeavored to bring these things out of the Clouds of the
sublime Nonsense and seeming contradictions which they were wrapped up in, we may
more easily discern from whence all these notions were taken and slyly conveyed
into the Christian doctrine as the highest way of Perfection. For which we are
to consider, that the Christian Religion growing very considerable,
notwithstanding all the endeavors used by the Roman Emperors and Governors
of Provinces to suppress it, and very Learned men having taken upon them the
profession of it in several parts of the Empire, but especially at Alexandria;
the Heathen Philosophers saw there was an absolute necessity of making the best
they could of the Pagan Theology. To this end they bestirred themselves to
gather together the most considerable parts of the Chaldaick, Egyptian, and
Platonic Theology, and putting them together to form such a method for the
Perfection of men's souls, as would appear more sublime, than the Christian
Institution. For this end Plotinus, Porphyrie, Iamblichus, Proclus and the rest
of them, did employ the utmost of their study and care: for they saw now it was
to no purpose for them to spend their time in idle curiosities, and the vain
disputes of the several Sects of Philosophers; therefore they endeavor to lay
aside these, ( Ammonius of Alexandria having showed them the way) and to bend
their studies chiefly about showing men such a way of Purifying their Souls as
might bring them to a State of Perfection, without embracing Christianity. For
they saw, that the common people were become Philosophers by the help of the
Christian Religion, and outwent them in the bearing Torments and all sorts of
Miseries, only in expectation of that Blessed State which the Christian
Religion did give men so great assurance of, and gave such excellent
directions, by the practice of all divine virtues, for men's attaining to it. We
know there was no greater enemy in the world to the Christian Religion than
Porphyrius was, against whom Eus^bius, Methodius and many others writ in
defense of Christianity. Yet it appears by what we have remaining of his
writings, that he had a very mean esteem of the common customs of sacrificing,
Iamblich. de Myster. Segm. 5. c. 11.
and of those Demons which were pleased with the smoke of flesh; and he looked
upon the Theurgick way, as liable to deceit and not capable of advancing the
soul to highest perfection. Which Th^urgick way, lay in the initiating of men
in some sacred mysteries, by partaking of certain rites and symbols, by which
they were admitted to the presence of some of their Deities; the end whereof,
as they pretended, was, reducing the souls of men to that state they were in
before they came into the Body: S. A^g^st. de Ci. it. Dei. l. 10. ^.c. 10.
So S. Augustine tel^s us from Porphyrie, that they who were purified after this
manner did converse with glorious appearances of Angels which they were fitted
to see; but Porphyrie himself, as he did not utterly reject this lower and
symbolical way; so he said, that the highest perfection of the soul was not
attainable by it; but it was useful for purifying the lower part of the soul
but not the intellectual. By the lower part he understood the irrational, which
by the Theurgical Rites might be fitted for conversation with Angels; but the
intellectual part could not be elevated by it to the Contemplation of God, and
the Vision of the Things that are True: and herein he placed the utmost
perfection of the soul in its return to and union with God in this upper part
or fund of the soul; for the utmost the other attained to, was only to live
among the Aetherial spirits, but the Contemplative Souls returned to the
Father, as he speaks; C. 27, 28. 29.
which as many other of his Notions, he borrowed from the Chaldaick Theology.
To show, what this Intellectual or Contemplative Life was, that should bring
men's souls to this state of Perfection, Porphyrie writ a Book on purpose, Of
the Return of the Soul, as S. Austin tells us, who quotes many passages out of
it: and this particular precept above all the rest, that the soul must fly from
all body if it would live happy with God; which is all one with Abstraction of
mind and pure contemplative life. In that Book he complains that there was no
perfect way yet known to the World for this end, not the Indian, Chaldaick or
any other. But what that was, which he meant, appears, by what he says near
the end of the Life of Plotinus, where he has these words, (...). The scope
and end of his Life was union and conjunction with God over all: and four
times, says he, when I was with him he attained to thus union, by an
unexpressible act of the Mind: which he before sets forth, by a Divine
illumination without any Image or Idea, being above the understanding and all
intelligible things. And he says of himself, that he was once in this state of
Union, when he was 68. years of Age: which Holstenius understands of an
Ecstasie he then fell into; De vita and Script. Porphyr. c. 6.
and imputes it to the depth of his Melancholy joined with his abstracted and
severe life, his frequent watchings and almost continual exercise of
contemplation. For all these things were remarkable in him; and Eunapius says
of him, (...). vit. Porp^yr.
that he was so little a lover of the body, that he hated his being a man, and
being in Sicily, he was almost famished by abstinence, and shunned all
conversation with mankind: as he begins the life of Plotinus, that he was like
one ashamed that his soul was in a Body. So that we find the Foundation here
laid not only for the Mystical Union, but the abstraction of mind necessary in
order to it: and that it does not lie in any intellectual operations, but
rather in a cessation of these acts, is likewise expressly affirmed by
Porphyrie. Many things, says he, Porphyrii (...)
are said of understanding things that are above the mind; but the
contemplation of those things is better performed (...) otio and vacatione
intellect^s* as Holstenius renders it, rather by the Rest and cessation of
operation in the understanding than by the exercise of it; as many things,
while a man wakes, are said of him that he does when he sleeps, but the
knowledge and perception of them is by sleep; for things are best understood by
Assimilation. And elsewhere he says, that our manner of understanding all
things is different according to their essence; those things that are above the
mind are to be known (...) N. 10.
in the way of unknowing, and after a superessential manner, where we see the
very Phrases of Dionysius used by him; and in many places he speaks of N. 7, 8,
29, 30
the minds abstracting and loosing it self from the Body, N. 31, 32.
and drawing it self nearer to the First Being; N. 34.
of the Souls Being in God; of the pure and clear light which follows the
abstraction of the mind; of the State and Life of Contemplation, and the
virtues necessary thereto, such as abstinence from the actions of the body and
from affections to it, which, says he, raise the mind to the superessential
Being; and he very much disparages the active and political life in comparison
with this, the end of one being only men's living according to nature; but of
the other Assimilation to God; he that lives according to practical virtues, is
only a good Man; but he that lives the life of Contemplation is a God; from
whence we understand the Deiformity of the Mystical Divines being attainable by
the life of Contemplation. The way laid down by him for purifying the Soul is
this. 1. The Foundation of it, is, for the soul to know it self, i. e. to
consider, that it is in a strange place and bound to a thing of another
substance. 2. Recollection, or gathering it self up from the body to be free
from the affections of it; in order to which he advises to deny the body in
its appetites and pleasures; and to show as little care of it and concernment
for it as may be; by degrees to lessen all sense both of pleasure, and pain;
and so to come at last to a freedom from the passions of the Body. Then he
describes the superessential being, and says, N. 36.
that it is neither great nor little, but above both; and is neither greatest
nor least but above all; and that his presence is not Topical, N. 37.
but Assimilative; and that the only way for our souls to recover themselves is
to bring them into themselves, N. 41.
by which means the True Being ^s present with them, and we become united to
God. Which union of the Soul with God, Holstenius De s^ript. Po^phyr. c. 9.
thinks it very probable, that Porphyrie understood by the Book which he
mentions in the life of Plotinus, called (...) the Sacred Nuptials, because
both Plotinus and he supposed this union to be wrought by the power of Divine;
Love, as well as the Mystical Divines; and Porphyrie says, upon the reading of
it, some thought him mad, because there were several things spoken in it after
a Mystical and Enthusiastical manner; for which he was highly applauded by
Plotinus. And Porphyrie was so much in his Favor, that he committed the
ordering and publishing of his Books entirely to his care; which no doubt he
was the more willing to do, because by delivering these Mystical notions in
such a Philosophical manner, he might hope to put a stop to the spreading of
Christianity, especially among men of Contemplative minds. For it appears by S.
Augustine that Porphyrie despised Christianity chiefly on the account of the
Incarnation of the Son of God: Aug. de Civit. De^. l. 10. ^. 29.
which they thought to be bringing God down to the body, whereas their design
was to elevate the Soul from the body to God.

. 14. The short account of Plotinus his hypothesis is this, Pl^^^* E^nea^. 1.
l. 2. c. 3, 4, 5, 6.
That the soul of man being immersed in the body suffers very much by reason of
its union with it, by which means it is drawn down to the affections of the
body, and to a conversation with sensible things, and so becomes evil and
miserable: that its good and happy condition lies in being like to God, not in
regard of understanding, but a state of quiescency; that the practice of the
virtues of the active life is insufficient for assimilation to God; but in
order to it, those which are properly intellectual are most necessary, whereby
the soul draws it self off from the body. Thus for the soul to act by it self,
is wisdom; introversion is temperance; abstraction from matter, is fortitude;
to follow reason, is justice: that, by the practice of these, the soul purifies
it self, i. e. casts off the things without it self, and so recovers its
purity, by bringing those things into light again, which lay ^id under the
rubbish of sensible things before, so that the soul did not know them to be
there; but for the discovery of them, it was necessary for the soul to come
near a greater Light than it self: and to bring the Images which are in it to
the true Originals. The way of purifying the Soul he calls by the names of
Abstraction and Recollection: which he elsewhere expresses, E^^^ad 3. l. 6. ^.
5.
by awakening the soul out of sleep, wherein it was disturbed by sensible
Images; not as though the Soul had need of any other way of purifying but only
restoring it to it self by taking away that load of matter which oppressed it,
and then it naturally endeavors after the nearest union with the First Being:
which he calls the True Being, and the Superessential Being. And, he says,
when the soul endeavors after this Union, Enn^ad. 6. l. 9. c. 3.
it must lay aside all sensible and intellectual Images of things, and make use
only of the purest and supreme part of the mind (or the fund of the Spirit)
that God then is not to be considered under the Notion of Being, but as
something above Being; and that we are not either to affirm or deny any thing
of him; that, our contemplation of him is not by knowledge or any intellectual
operation, but by a divine presence, which far exceeds any knowledge: for
knowledge he says, C. 4.
hinders union: therefore we must go beyond knowledge, and be abstracted from
all other objects; and be united to him only by the power of Divine Love, C. 9.
from whence follows a clearer light in the Soul; and in this state, C. 11.
says he, there is not only a cessation of passion, but of reason and
understanding too; neither is the person, himself, (...), like one in a rapture
or an Ecstasie he enjoys God in that state of Quiescency as in a silent
Wilderness: which he calls, being in God; and in other places, Enncad 5. l. 8.
c 10, 11.
seeing God in themselves, being the same with God, being one with God, and
which is the highest of all, Enncad. 1. l. 2. c. 5, 6.
being God: which is the perfect State of Deiformity. By this we see there is
not one of the sublimest notions of Mystical Divinity, which has not been
borrowed from these Philosophers, who were the most dangerous enemies to
Christianity. For although Plotinus does not speak so openly against it, as
Porphyrie did, who was his beloved Disciple and Confident; yet he lets fall
many insinuations against it, and particularly against the doctrine of the
resurrection of the Body upon the account of this Mystical Doctrine; for, says
he, the true awakening of the Soul, Enncad. 3. l. 6. c. 6.
is an awakening from the body, and not a Resurrection with the body; for that
change which is together with the body, is but passing from sleep to sleep, as
it were from one bed to another; but the true awakening is from all bodies,
which are contrary to the soul; because the nature of one is opposite to the
other.

. 15. After these succeeded Iamblichus, who was Porphyries Disciple, and a
great Friend of Julian the Apostate, and pursued the same Mystical Notions; For
in his Book of the Egyptian Mysteries (which he writ in answer to an Epistle
of Porphyries to an Egyptian Priest, and wherein Proclus says, I^^bli ^. d^
Mist r. S^gm. 3. c. 4, 5, etc.
that he writ like a man inspired) he discourses at large concerning Divine
Ecstasies, and Visions and Inspirations, in which he describes the Persons just
after the Mystical way, as no longer leading a humane life, or having any
operations of their senses or understanding, but their mind and soul is only in
the Divine power and not their own; being acted and possessed wholly by it:
afterward, he sets down several degrees and kinds of these, in some they have
only participation, in others near communion, and in the highest of all, Union;
in some of these, he says, the body wholly rests, and sometimes breaks out
into singing and all expressions of Joy: sometimes the body is raised up from
the Ground, ( as M. Teresa thought hers) sometimes it swells into a greater
bulk and sometimes the contrary: then he lays down Rules to know divine
Inspirations by, viz. by enquiring in what manner God appears, whether an
appearance of fire come before him, whether ^e fills up and acts the whole
soul, so that there is a cessation of all its own acts? For this he makes the
main character of a Divine Inspiration, that the persons are wholly taken up
and possessed by the Deity, from whence follows an ecstasie and alienation of
the senses; but if either the soul acts, or the body moves, then, he says, it
may be a false inspiration. No man can express himself more emphatically
concerning the excellency of C^ntemplative Prayer than Iamblichus does: De
Myster. ^egm. 5. ^27.
this quickens the mind, enlarges its capacity, opens the secrets of the
Divinity, and fits it for conjunction and Union with God; and never leaves men
till it has carried them to a state of Perfection; and by degrees does so
alter and change men, that it makes them put off humane nature, and bring them
into such a state of Deiformity that they become Gods. The first degree of
prayer, he says, brings to a state of recollection and has some divine
contact which helps our knowledge; the second carries the soul to a nearer
communion with God, and excites the divine bounty to freer communications to
it: but the third is the Seal of the ineffable Union which makes our mind and
soul to rest in God as a Divine Port or Haven. And he concludes his book with
saying, S^^^. 10. c. 6.
that this Union with God, is man's greatest perfection and the end of all
Religion among the Egyptians, whose Mysteries his Design was to explain and
vindicate. Many other pasiages might be produced out of him, Segm 1. c. 3. 2.
c. 11.
concerning the knowing God by divine conta ^, and the insufficiency of any act
of the mind for this ineffable union; but the^e are enough to show how well
acquainted Iamblichus, and (if we believe him) the Egyptian Idolaters, were,
with the profoundest secrets of Mystical Divinity.

Suidas tells us, that after Porphyrie there was no one appeared a more bitter
enemy to Christianity than Proclus, S^id. v. Proclus.
yet no one a greater Friend to Mystical Divinity than he. Of whom Marinus
gives this character, toward the conclusion of his life, Marin. de^vit.
Procli, ante Procl. Theolog.
that his Soul was so recollected and drawn into it self, that it seemed to be
separated from the body while it remained in it. In the beginning of his
Th^^logy, he distinguishes between that intellectual faculty in us whereby we
are capable of understanding the nature and difference of intelligible Ideas,
Procl. Theo^log. Plat. l. 1. c. 3.
and that which he calls (...) the summity, as the Mysticks speak, and pure
fund of the spirit, which he says, is alone capable of the Divine and Mystical
Union, so he calls it, (...). For, says he, though there be many intellectual
powers in us, yet it is by this only that we can be united to the Divinity, and
be made pa^t^kers of it. For we cannot reach the (...) Being either by our
senses, or by opinion, or by apprehension; no nor yet by ratiocination, (...)
it remains therefore that if the Divine Nature can any ways be known by us, it
must be by the essence of the Soul. For the soul being drawn into its own
unity, and removing from it self the multiplicity of its powers, it ascends to
the greatest height of true Contemplation. While the soul looks about on things
below it, it sees nothing but shadows and images of things, when it comes to a
state of Introversion, then it sees its own essence and operations of the
understanding; but when it searches deeper, then it finds the Mind within it
self and the several Orders of real Beings; when it goes yet farther into the
most secret closet of the Soul, there it contemplates, as it were blindfold,
the Divine Beings, and the first Ideas or Unities of Beings. And this, says
he, is the most excellent operation of the soul, in the rest or quie scency of
its powers, to stretch it self toward the Divine nature, and dance as it were
round it, and to raise up the whole Soul toward this Union with it; and
abstracting it self from all inferior beings, to rest upon and be conjoined
with that ineffable and superessential Being. And by this means the soul comes
to have the truest understanding of all things.

. 16. Many other passages might be produced out of him to the same purpose; but
this comprehends in it so much of the very Marrow of Mystical Divinity, that
Carolus Hersentius confesses, Carol. Her^sent. A^a^. ad Th^o^og* Mysti^. p. 4^.
either that Proclus borrowed from Dionysius, or Dionysius from Proclus; but he
is willing to believe that Proclus and the rest of the Modern Platonists did
borrow those notions out of Dionysius. Marsilius Ficinus indeed is of the same
opinion; Mars. Ficin: de^hristian. R^^ig. c 22.
for being a skilful Platonist, he saw such an agreement of notions and
expressions in Dionysius and the writings of Plotinus, Iamblichus and Proclus,
that either they must have taken from him, or he from them; but for the honor
of the Platonic notions, he believed the former. And S^ides, an Author of no
great judgment says, that some of the Philosophers and especially S^id. in
Dio^ys.
Proclus made use of his very expressions without any alteration, from whence
it might be suspected that the elder Philosophers at Athens, had hidden his
works that they might seem to be the Authors of those sublime notions contained
in them. A very likely story! why should Proclus take those things out of
Dionysius, which he might have found as well in the Books of Plotinus,
Porphyrie, or Iamblichus, whom he had a far greater esteem of, than of
Dionysius; and quotes every one of them very frequently and with great
Veneration, and mentions them together as a sort of inspired Persons, in the
very beginning of his Theology? And Proclus has nothing peculiar in him upon
this subject; the very same notions were delivered by Plotinus an Egyptian
Philosopher; and Proclus quotes him for the chief of them: viz. the two fold
operations of the mind, the one of it as the mind, viz. ratiocination; the
other of it as drunk with the Divine Nectar (thence comes the Mysticks Ebrietas
Spiritualis, Pr^ l. Theo^. Plat* c. 12. P. 36.
of which Rusbrochius has several Chapters, and which says Harphius makes
some sing and others cry, and others utter strange noises, R^sbro^^. de Nupt.
s^irit. l 2. c. 20, 21, 22.
as Fr. Masseus that cried V. V. V. and others tremble and quake, and others
run over Mountains and Valleys like Fr. Bernard, and others dance, and lastly
others ready to burst, H. (...) Theolo^. M^^t. l. 2. Part. 3. c. 41.
like a Vessel filled with new Wine) and that the Mind becomes Deified by its
Union with God, which being the Fundamental principles of Mystical Divinity,
Proclus does acknowledge that he had them from Plotinus; and if we believe
Iamblichus, they came from the ancient Mystical Theology of the Egyptians and
Chaldeans.

I expect that those who have not considered these things should be still ready
to believe, that all these notions among these Philosophers were taken from
some of the Christians at least, if not from this Dionysius. Which Plotinus his
education under Ammonius at Alexandria, seems to make probable, where he
continued 11. years; but whatever doctrine he heard from Ammonius, it is
certain Plotinus his opinion as to these matters, together with his followers,
was derived from other Oracles than those of the Sacred Scriptures: For Psellus
in his Commentary on the Chaldaick Oracles, Psell. in Orac. Chald. p. 120.
does say, that Plotinus, Iamblichus, Porphyrius and Proclus did wholly approve
of the Chaldaick Theology; and by what remainders there are still extant of it,
we may discover the Footsteps of these Mystical notions in it. If the Chaldaick
Oracles were still extant, which were frequently quoted by these Philosophers,
(and from them in a great measure the Fragments were preserved) we might more
fully manifest these things; yet as they are, they give us sufficient ground to
draw the Fundamentals of this Mystical Divinity from thence. For they speak of
Gods being united to the Soul, by the Souls clasping God to her self; Ora^ul.
Chaldaic. ed. Obsopaei P. 19, 20.
and that not by any act of the understanding, but by the slower of the mind,
(the very phrase used by Proclus, and the same which the Mysticks call the fund
of the Spirit,) of the Souls being inebriated from God, (which Plotinus calls,
being drunk with the divine Nectar,) and Psellus explains of divine
illuminations and Ecstasies: Psell. in orac. Chald. p. 85, 90.
of abstraction from the body, and extending the mind upwards, and hastening to
the Divine Light and the Beams of the Father; Nicep^. Gregor in Synes. de
inso^. p. 383.
with several other passages to the same purpose. But lest any should say, that
these Chaldaick Oracles were framed by some Christians at first in Greek, (as
it is supposed the Sibylline were) Ioh. Picus Mirandula says, Ioh. Pic. Mirand
cp. Marsil. Fici^. p. 249.
he had an entire copy of them in the Chaldee Language, with a Chaldee
Paraphrase upon them, which he valued as a great Treasure. But in truth all
these notions both among the Chaldeans and the Platonic Philosophers are built
upon a very ancient hypothesis, but very different from that of Christianity;
which hypothesis being granted, this Mystical Divinity appears with some face
of Reason, and color of probability; which I suppose will not be consented to
by Mr. Cr. or any of the Friends to Mystical Divinity: Which was this, that the
Souls of men did exist in another world long before they came into the body;
that in their descent to the body they had an Ethereal vehicle joined to them;
which upon the conjunction of the soul and body became the means of
communication between them, and takes up its chief seat in the brain, which is
the same which we call the Imagination; that the soul being in this state is
apt to be much inveigled with kindness to the body, and so forget its return
home; that the body is capable of doing the soul mischief no other way, being
it self under the power of Fate, than as it draws it downwards; that the mind
being the upper part of the soul is always acting, but we know not its
operations but only by the impressions they make upon the Fancy; that the
mind has the true Ideas of things within it self; but we are deceived by the
representations conveyed by our imagination; and therefore our ratiocination is
very short and uncertain; that our only way of recovering our souls, is by
drawing them off from the body, and retiring into themselves; and that upon
this, the mind has the divine Being so nearly conjoined to it, that it passes
into a divine nature, and recovers its former state, when it parts from the
body. But because it is not to return alone without the Ethereal vehicle i^
brought with it, therefore the Chaldeans and Egyptians had several sacred and
symbolical Rites for the purifying of the vchicle, as they called it; which
they made necessary for this end: and with them Iamblichus joins, but Porphyrie
thought them not necessary, but that Philosophy and mere contemplation would
purify enough without it. H^^^^. in ^^^^a C^^^. P^thag. Sy^^s. (...) insomn.
p. 136, etc.
This is the true account of their Hypothesis, as may be fully seen in
Hierocles and Synesius, without going farther; and was the first Foundation of
Mystical Divinity; which I will not deny to be well enough accommodated to it;
but it is as remote from Christianity, as the hypothesis it self is.

But the counterfeit Dionysius finding the notions sublime, and having found
out expressions, as he thought lofty enough to express them; and either being
not wholly brought off from the Philosophy then in request, or hoping by this
means to ensnare the Philosophers, when they found their sentiments entertained
among the Christians, makes it his business to patch together the sublimest
notions of the modern Platonists, and to make them pass for good Christian
Doctrine. And I think it may be made appear that there is not one notion
thought peculiar to this counterfeit Dionysius which we cannot trace the
footsteps of in these Writers; which few of the Christians ever looked into,
because of their known opposition to Christianity, and therefore he had no more
to do than only to fit them to the Christian doctrine, and they might easily
pass for new and sublime discoveries of his own. Not only the Principles of
Mystical Theology, but the very nine Orders of his Celestial Hierarchy are to
be seen in Iamblichus, Iamblich. de Myster. Segm. 2. c. 3.
and are reckoned up by Scutellius in the margin of his Translation: P^^cl. in
Timaeum Platon p. 47.
and Archangels are not only mentioned frequently by him, but Porclus upon the
Timaeus says that Prophyrie reckons them among the Celestial Orders; which
being denied by Iamblichus to have been ever mentioned by Plato, and yet
reckoned up by himself, may be supposed to be drawn either from the Chaldean or
Egyptian Theology; but that is not my business to search into. His book of the
Divine names, seems to have had its foundation as well as Title in a Book
written by Porphyrie with the same Title, as Suidas himself confesses, who
reckons that as the first of his books: but that being lost, we have only that
reason for our conjecture, because we find him so apparently guilty in his
Mystical Theology; To which he has added nothing but a more affected style,
and profound Nonsense: For it is not enough for him, to join Light and
darkness together; but that darkness must be overshining, and the Rays of it
must be superessential; he is not content, to express nothing almost without
Metaphors, but stretches them to Hyperbole's, and when he has by this means
set two things as far from each other as may be, then he claps them together,
as if one should say, the most glorious Sunshine of Egyptian darkness.

. 17. But if this Dionysius were the Person he pretends to be, viz. the
Areopagite, then we might have some reason to think that the Platonic
Philosophers had taken their notions out of him; and yet it would be very
improbable that such a Writer should have been so well known among the
Platonists, that was utterly unknown among the Christians. Did Dionysius leave
his Works to the Philosophers at Athens, or to the Christians? If they were
only among the Philosophers, how came they out of their hands at last? if they
had borrowed so much out of them, they would have done as they report Aristotle
did with his Creditors (I mean the ancient Philosophers) viz. suppressed them,
when they had gotten as much from them as they could? And it were an easy
matter to have done it, since they were writings never mentioned in those first
Ages by Christians. So Bellarmin himself grants, (after the consisideration of
all the Testimonies produced by Baronius and many others) Bellarm. de Script.
Ecchs. in Dio^^^.
that these books were not known in the five first Centuries. Which argument
together with other circumstances have made some of the most learned Persons of
the Roman Church that have been of late, to reject this Author as
supposititious; for notwithstanding all the pleas that have been made for him
by Baronius, Del-Rio, Halloix, Lessius, De Chaumont, Lansselius and others; his
Authority is very much suspected by Petavius, Petav. (...) I^d. ad Tom. d^
dogm. Theol. Sirmond. de 2. Dionys. c. 8.
Sirmondus, Labb^ de Script. Eccles.
and Labbe, La^^^v Di^cuss. discuss. c. 16.
all Jesuits; Godea^ hist. Eglis l. 1. A. D. 99. p. 125.
but rejected by Launoy, Godeau, Habertus, Habert. observe. 1. i^ Rit. Ord^^^.
Graec.
and Morinus, Morinus de Ordin. Sacr. p. 2. c. 2. (...) 8.
who proves at large that these Books. Petav. de I^carn. l. 4. c. 6. n. 6. l.
14. c. 13. ^. 9.
were never produced till the conference with Hypatius A. D. 532. and then they
were brought forth by the Severian heretics, and rejected by Hypatius, because
no Testimony was brought out of them, by former Eccle^ siastical Writers, when
there was sufficient occasion if they had been then extant. And in truth, it
seems most probable, that they came out of the School of Apollinaris, and so
might well be produced first by the Severians; for it is not only observed by
Petavius, that the heresy of Apollinaris came out of the Platonic School; but
(if I be not much mistaken) from that very notion of Plotinus of the difference
of the mind and Soul (for as appears by Epiphanius, Apollinaris granted, that
Christ had the Soul but not the mind of man, and Nemesius expressly charges
Apollinaris with following the doctrine of Plotinus) by which it is plain that
Apollinaris was sufficiently conversant in these writings to borrow his notions
from thence, and he was more than ordinarily remarkable for his conversation
with Philosophers; but besides this we find his School particularly charged
with this way of Forging Ecclesiastical Writers, as some pieces of Athanasius
and Greg. Thaumaturgus, Leo^t. de Sectis act. 8.
and an Epistle of Pope Julius and others. Phat. Cod. 230.
To which, another circumstance may be added, which shows the greater
probability of it, Fa and. l. 1. p 40.
viz. that among the Disciples of Apollinaris, Lib ^at. i^ Brev. c. 10.
there were both a Dionysius and Timotheus; a Dionysius to whom the counterfeit
epistle of Julius was directed; and a Timotheus mentioned together with
Apollinaris as his Disciple by Damasus, Theodor. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 10.
by Gennadius, and by S. Augustine, and others, so that if Apollinaris himself
were not the Author of them, G^a ad Catalog. c. 2. Au^^st. de (...) c. 90.
yet his disciple Dionysius might write them to his fellow-disciple Timotheus;
Auct. frag. c. Severi. ap^d Canis-Anti. Lect. To 4 p. 236.
and the names hitting so luckily, they might the easier pass under the more
venerable names of the Ancient Dionysius and Timothy. But this I only propose
as a conjecture, it being sufficient to my purpose to have given such plain
evidence, that the Fundamentals of mystical Theology, were first taken out of
those Philosophers who were the greatest enemies to Christianity, and who
seemed to set up this, in opposition to it, as a more sublime way to perfection.

It were an easy matter after this, to show how this Mystical Divinity by the
Authority of these c^unterfeit writings came into reputation, in the Western
Church, after the translation of them by Johannes Erigena and Anastasius; what
Authority it gained among some of the Schoolmen by its agreeableness with the
doctrine of some Arabian Philosophers about the Intellectus Agens; and other
principles of Enthusiasm among them; how it came into Germany among the Monks
there, and what pretenses to Visions and Revelations came in upon it; what
favor it has received from the Ies^itical Order, Max. Sand. I^bilum.
(Maximilian Sandaeus having published a Discourse on purpose to prove that
from the very Foundation of their Order, the Jesuits have been the greatest
admirers of and pretenders to Mystical Divinity,) Societ. Jesus ob Theolog.
but I must stop; Mystic. Colo^. A. D. 1640.
lest Mr. Cressy should tell me, that I take another opportunity to empty my
voluminous store of Collections; whereas all the pains I have taken in this
matter has been to give him full satisfaction that I have read and considered
what the Author of the Roman Churches Devotions vindicated, has said upon this
argument, which he so humbly beseeches the Person of Honor to peruse, hoping
by that means he would come to a better opinion of Sancta Sophia, and Mystical
Divinity, and Mr. Cressy: and I dare leave any Person of Honor and
Understanding, to judge, whether notwithstanding what he has said for it Mr.
Cr. had reason to account, this Mystical Divinity, the perfection of Christian
Prayer and Devotion.

CHAP. III.
Of the Monastic Orders, in the Roman Church, and particularly of the
Benedictin.
. 1. THe second thing to which the charge of Fanaticis^n relates, is the
Foundation of their Religious Orders in the Roman Church, which I said were
first instituted among them by Enthusiastic Persons, upon the credit of their
Visions and Revelations. For which I instanced, in all their most celebrated
Orders, viz. the Benedictins, Carthusians, Dominicans, Franciscans and Jesuits;
and gave a particular account of this, from the authentic Histories among
themselves of the several Founders of them: and besides, I produced the
Testimony of Bellarmin, that their Religious Orders were instituted by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost. In answer to this, Mr. Cressy (declining the
dispute, about the personal qualities of the Founders of Religious Orders;)
says, the most commodious way to make a true judgment of them will be to
examine their Fruits. Fanati^ism. p. 21.
For by their Fruits, says our Savior, they will be known. Therefore to
determine, whether it was by Gods inspiration, that they instituted their
Respective Orders, he proposes these two ways, 1. To examine their several
Rules, according to which their Disciples oblige themselves to conform their
lives and actions. 2. Whether God has acknowledged them for his servants by
making use of them to the great benefit of his Church and dilation of his
honor. By these ways he desires it may be judged whether there were not
sufficient ground for Bellarmin to say, that such Orders were instituted by the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost, and so do I. Which cannot be done without a
particular enquiry into the Rules and history of their several Religious
Orders, that by them we may see what evidence appears of any Divine Inspiration.

And according to Mr. Cressy's particular zeal and concernment for the
Benedictin Order, I begin with that: The Person of Honor having given that
Character of S. Benedict that he believed him to have been a devout man in a
dark time, Anima^vers. p. 28.
according to his talent of understanding; but that he might have been deluded
by the effects of a distempered Fancy, as many well meaning men have been; P.
39.
and that he could di^cern nothing like Divine Inspiration in his Rule; but
presently met with an impertinent allegation of Scripture chapter 2. applying that
place, P. 42.
Romans 8. crying Abba Father, to the person of the Abbot as representing Christ;
he proceeds farther, to say, that neither the reading of his Rule, nor any of
the rest, will oblige any man to be of Bellarmins opinion, that those Orders
were instituted by the inspiration of the Holy Ghost; and because of Mr.
Cressy's great rage against me upon this subject of Visions and Revelations, he
desires to know his opinion particularly concerning the Revelation of S. P. 53,
54.
Francis on the Mount Palombo concerning the literal observation of his Rule
without any Gloss; which is Printed with his Rule, and with the Popes Bulls,
and the Testimony of S. Bonaventure. Mr. Cressy in answer to this, takes no
manner of notice of S. Francis his Rule, or Revelation; but leaves that to
shift for it self; but something he must say for the honor of S. Benedict, and
it all amounts to as little as could be wished. For he does not produce any one
thing, to make it appear more probable that S. Benedict writ his Rule by divine
Inspiration, which had been indeed to his purpose; but only answers to the
place of Scripture mentioned Chapter 2. of his Rule; and then brings several
testimon^es of the great reputation the Benedictin Rule has been in among
Popes, E^^^^ A olog. ^. 29. to ^. 35.
and Saints and Councils and Kings and Princes in after ages. And what of all
this? Must this Rule therefore be written by divine Inspiration? Is it not
possible for men to think them good Rules, without believing them to have been
inspired? Suppose this were approved, as the best Monastic Rule in these
Western parts, by Popes, and Princes and Councils, does it hence follow that it
was immediately endited by the Spirit of God? If it were, it must be of equal
authority with the Bible; if it were not, the charge remains good, that it was
only an Enthusiastical pretense to Inspiration.

. 2. But to take off the force of all that Mr. Cressy says in behalf of the
Benedictin Rule, and to make good the first charge; (although Mr. Cr. has
evidently declined the proof of the Affirmative which lay upon him) I shall
give these^ Reasons to prove that this Rule was never written by divine
Inspiration. 1. Because the main parts of it were borrowed out of former Rules.
2. Because what is of S. Benedicts own, has manifest signs of humane weakness;
particularly misapplication of Scripture, mentioned by the Person of Honor. 3.
Because it was never received in the Roman Church as written by divine
Inspiration.

1. Because the main parts of it were borrowed out of former Rules. Where we
can with so much ease and certainty, trace the footsteps of humane industry in
any writing, it is very unreasonable to attribute it to divine inspiration: And
there is not one considerable part in the Benedictin Rule, which we cannot even
at this distance of time show from whence it was taken. Hugo Menardus a French
Benedictin has published the Concordia Regularum written by Benedict Abbot of
Aniane, (not by the English Benedict, as Reynerus would have it) who was
appointed by Ludovicus Pius to bring all the Monasteries within his Empire to
one uniform Rule, Hugo Menard, concord. Regularum, p. 52.
(which it seems they had not before) he therefore in pursuit of this design
made it his business to search all the former Rules, A^^tol. Benedict. p. 190.
which having done, he published them together; with this Preface to them; that
sometimes he met with the very same words, at other times with the same sense
which was in the Benedictin Rule; and a little after he says expressly, P. 70.
that S. Benedict took his Rule from those who were before, and gathered it as
one handful out of many: and Menardus there confesses, that it was taken out
of the Rules of Pachomius, S. Basil, Cassian and others, who lived before him;
which will very easily appear to any one who will take the pains to compare
them. The Benedictin Rule begins with an account of the several sorts of Monks,
viz. the Coenobitae Regul. Benedict. c. 1.
who lived together under a Rule or Abbot; the Eremitae who lived by themselves
in the Desert; the Sarabaitae, who lived two or three together without any
certain Rule or Governor; and the Wandering Monks, who never remained in any
certain place. Cassian. Collat. 18. c. 4, 7, 8.
To the very same purpose Piammon the Egyptian Anchoret in Cassian speaks, and
reckons up the several kinds of Monks with the very same descriptions of the
three first, and Alardus Gazaeus says, Gazae not^ in Cassian. col^. 18. c. 8.
the fourth sort in Cassian, is the same with the fourth in S. Benedict. The
12. degrees of humility mentioned in the Benedictin Rule are, (except the two
last, and the pleasant passage of Jacobs ladder, the two sides whereof he makes
to be the Soul and Body,) to be found in Cassian, Cassian. de i^stitut.
re^^^ciant. l. 4. c. 39.
and some of them as Gaz^us confesses, in the very same words, but there more
properly called signs. But there are two things especially Mr. Cr. seems to
admire the Benedictin Rule for, viz. the ordering the Ecclesiastical office,
and the decent assignation of duties proper to all offices both of superiors
and inferiors; Fanaticism. p. 23.
by these two therefore, let us judge whether S. Benedict deserved any other
admiration than that of a bare Collector. Regul. Be^ed. c. 8.
The first thing remarkable in his Ecclesiastical Office, is, that after the
nocturnal office the Monks should not go to sleep again, but spend that time
between that and Mattins in reading and getting by heart the Psalter and
Lessons; which passage the Commentators upon the Benedictin Rule are extremely
puzzled with, as may be seen in Caramuel; Cara^. Theolog. Regularis. n. 1102.
but if they would have looked into the old Egyptian Rules in Cassian; they
might have easily understood both the meaning and the design of it. Abbot Isaac
in Cassian highly commends the use of that Versicle upon every occasion,
Cassian. de. ^act. orat. l. 2. c. 13. l. 3. c. 5.
Deus in adjutorium me^m intend; Cassian. Collat. 10. c. 10
Domine ad a^juvandum me festina; Me^a d. not. in Concord. R^g. p. 341.
from hence S. Benedict took it to begin the divine office; Menardus thinks,
that the application of it to the office, was the invention of S. Benedict;
(surely not such a one which could not proceed, St^ab^ de ^ bus Es^^ef. c. 23.
Cassian. de no^t. o^at. l. 2. c. 5, 6.
but from divine inspiration) and yet Walafridus Strabo says, the Egyptians
did begin their Canonical hours with it. The Egyptian Monks, as Cassian
relates, had a great dispute among them, what number of Psalms was to be used
in the daily Office, some were for 50. some for 60. and some for more, till an
Angel appeared in the midst of them, and repeated twelve Psalms, upon which the
whole Senate of the Fathers, understanding this number to be by divine
inspiration, made a Canon, that this number should be constantly observed, both
at Vespers and in the nocturnal office; from hence S. Benedict, as both
Menardus and Gazaeus confess, took the number of 12. Psalms for the nocturnal
Office; Reg. (...). c. 10. c. 18.
but he allowed a much less number, viz. four or five for Vespers. Which I
cannot but wonder at, since the Angel did appoint both alike: and Palladius
says expressly, Pillad. hist. L^^s. de Tab^^^sio^s.
that the Angel revealed it to Pachomius that 12. Psalms should be used at
Vespers. Had S. Benedict a Revelation against this? If not, surely he was bound
to follow the former; if he had, we have great reason to question both. It is a
poor excuse the Benedictins use to bring their Founder off, viz. that he added
the Completorium after Vespers, and therefore shortened the service; for, what
Authority had he to make new alterations, when the order was settled by a
general consent of the Egyptian Fathers, and that upon the appearance of an
Angel? But it seems the Council at Tours, rather adhered to the Egyptian
Revelation than S. Benedicts; for they appoint 12. Psalms at Vespers, Synod.
Turo^. 2. c. 18.
which they say was first learnt by the appearance of an Angel. It seems very
strange to me that S. Benedict who so punctually followed the Egyptian customs
in other things, should presume to alter them in that which they pretended to
have more immediately from divine Revelation; as it happened not only in this,
but in the number of Canonical hours, Pallud. ib.
for Palladius says, that the Tabennesian Monks had it from an Angel, that
they were to observe but three Canonical hours, viz. the nocturnal, Vespers,
and Nones, all the rest of the time to be spent in work and secret Prayers. But
Cassian says, that the Egyptian Monks had but two Canonical hours wherein they
met to celebrate the divine office, Cassian. de diu^a. orat. l. 3. c. 2.
viz. their nocturnal Vigils and Vespers; unless it were on the Saturday, or
Sunday; on both which days they met for the holy communion at the third hour
of the day; (for not only the Egyptian Monks, but most of the Eastern
Christians kept both those days holy for the solemn performance of divine
offices, which was the reason of their difference with the Western Church about
the Saturday Fast); but the Monks of Palestin and Mesopotamia and of the whole
Orient, added more hours for the Diurnal Office, and Cassian adds that in his
time, in the Monastery of Bethlehem they added another hour C. 3.
after Mattins, since called the Prime, to keep the Monks from laziness; C. 4.
and withal by this means they might say with David, Seven times a day will I
praise thee; which he says may be accommodated to this, although it might have
a mystical, i. e. says Gazaeus, a figurative meaning, for, often; but the
other, Cassian says, was the true reason of appointing it; and he grants, that
the most ancient Eastern Monasteries would not admit of that alteration. Regul.
Bened. c. 16.
But S. Benedict makes no doubt, that was the Psalmists meaning, and therefore
appoints the seven Canonical hours agreeable to the Monks of Bethlehem, and
because it is said Septies in die, he will have them all to be parts of the
diurnal office; for he had another place for the nocturnal, media nocte
surgebam: But was it by Revelation that he knew the former place was not
understood of a natural day? By these two instances we see, that S. Benedict
did most unhappily differ from the Egyptian Monks in those things, which they
pre^^^^ the most to have from divine Revelation: but in other things he
followed their example: as Menardus says he did in the short ejaculatory
prayers at the end of every Psalm instead of the Gloria Patri; Regul. Bened. c.
20.
but he adds, Menard. in Concord. Regul. p. 404.
that place in the Rule is thought more difficult, because the practice of them
is di^used, either through laziness, or the multiplicity and length of their
offices; but he says, S. Benedict observed this custom in the making of his
Rule, that those things which were more short in the former writers, especially
in Cassian, ^e enlarged, as about the Abbot, the Praepositus, the Decani, etc.
but what were more diffuse in them he contracted, as about these short prayers
at the end of the Psalms. Cassian. de noct. o^at. l. 2. c. 7, 8. c. 10, 11.
For Cassian expressly says that the Gloria Patri was used in the East at the
end of the Antiphona, and not at the end of every Psalm; but then both there,
and in Egypt they had very short prayers; of which Menardus understands that
clause of the Benedictin Rule about short prayers; but I rather think it is to
be understood of the concluding prayer. For Cassian mentions only two sorts of
common prayers used by the Egyptian Monks in their divine offices; viz. the
short mental prayers made at the end of every Psalm; and at every solemn stop
in the reading of them, of which it was usual to make two or three on purpose
in a long Psalm; and the Collect at the end (so called because then they did
orationem colligere as Cassian speaks) which being pronounced either by Priest,
or Abbot, or Prior, he giving the sign, they all did immediately arise from
prayers together; and so the Benedictin Rule expresses it, and facto signo ^
Priore, omnes pariter surgant; by which it seems most probable that the Rule is
to be understood of the short concluding Collect. And it is observable, that
the Benedictin Office consists almost wholly of Psalms, Antiphona's, Hymns, and
a few Lessons; very little care being taken about Prayers, for the Litania
mentioned c. 13. 17. was only the Kyrie el^eson; only S. R^g Bened. c. 13.
Benedict appoints the Prior to say at Mattins and Vespers the Lords prayer
aloud, for which he gives this very good reason, because the Monks were so apt
to quarrel (propter scandalorum spinas qu^e oriri s^lent in Monasterio) that it
was fit they should all say together, dimitte nobis sicut and nos dimittimus;
but ^ other hours it was sufficient to say it to themselves, only the Prior was
to lift up his voice, and ne nos inducas, etc, and all the rest to answer, sed
libera nos a malo. And what is there now in the Benedictin Office which looks
like divine inspiration? What is there, that a man who had never pretended to
Visions and Revelations could not have done, by the help of Cassian, and a very
little Mother-wit? Nay, what is there that was his own? Was it the adding the
Completorium? so some say, but others show plainly he had that from the Rule of
S. Basil: was it, S. Basil. inter. 37.
the first adding To Deum to the Mattins? or the placing the Antiphona's
between the Psalms, whereas the Egyptians had them before them? Gabr. (...).
M^^^olng. Bened. l. 3. Hugo Menard. Concord. Reg. p. 355.
These are things insisted on, and gloried in, as the proper inventions of S.
Benedict; great things I confess; but such as I hope mere human wit may reach
to without divine inspiration. But beyond all these the Benedictins say, the
order of Reading the Psalter was his own: very well: and was this it which came
to him by inspiration? when himself says, C. 18.
that if his disposition of the Psalms does not please, they may make use of
another, so they hold to the main point, viz. going through the Psalter once a
week; which I perceive he laid great weight upon, but yet he never pretends to
have had it by divine Inspiration. For he seems by his Rule to have been more
humble and modest, and I am thereby inclined to believe those stories of his
Visions and Revelations to have been made by some idle Monks after his death,
who hoped by this means to recommend their Order more effectually to the World;
especially, after they had imposed upon the credulity of a well-meaning Pope,
and made him their instrument to publish them to the World.

. 3. But if the pretense of Divine Inspiration must be submitted to in these
Directors of Religious Orders; why might not one serve for them all? why not
that, which was more ancient than any of these pretenses in the Roman Church,
viz. that of S. Pachomius? For, not only Palladius, and Sozomen, Pallad. hist.
(...) de Tabean^ns. Sozom. l. 3. C. 14.
and Nicephorus Nic^ph l. 9. c. 14.
and others among the Greeks do affirm that he received the Monastic Rules in
a Table of Brass from an Angel, but Gennadi^s, Vincentius, Ge^^ad. de Script.
E^cl^ s. i^ Pachom. Vincent. S^ec. l. 18. c. 82.
and others among the Latins, and which is far more, the Roman Martyrologie
Martyrolog. Romans Maii 14.
confesses it, and Rosweyd Rosweyd. No^. in vit. Patr. p. 141.
from thence calls him a second Moses. Who could imagine otherwise, after such
acknowledgements as these, than to have seen Pachomius his Table in as much
veneration among the Monks, as those of Moses were among the People of Israel?
But no such matter; although the latter Monks love to practice by some of his
Rules, yet it would not cover their hypocrisy enough, to pretend to live by
them. For the first of them is, to give the Monks free liberty to eat or drink,
or work or fast as they pleased; only they that eat most were to do ^^ost work,
and they that fast, to have less imposed upon them. It is to no purpose to
mention the rest of his Cassian. l. 4. c. ^
Rules, since no sort of Monks except the Tabenn^sians, (...)
who increased to several thousands, thought themselves obliged to observe
them; and yet all Authors that I have met with of the Roman Church, that
mention this Rule of Pach^^^us, do allow it to have been received from an
Angel. What do they mean by these things? can they have better rules than what
an Angel from Heaven has given? or do they think the Angel only intended them
for the Monks of Tabennesus? The Angel, as Sozomen says, appeared on purpose
to Pachomius in his cave to draw him out from his retirement, and commanded him
to gather Monks and to take that brass Table for their Rule? Could anything be
mo^e solemn than this? But, if after such confessions, they think it lawful not
to believe the truth of this story; I hope we have much more reason to question
the pretense to Inspiration either in S. Benedict, S. Francis, or Ignatius
Loyola. For this is averred by much more credible Authors, and received by the
consent of both Eastern and Western historians, and the Roman Church allows it
in her Martyrology: And yet, after all this, if there be no reason to believe
it, what becomes of the credit of all the Visions and Revelations of the
Egyptian Monks, which are not near so well attested as this is? And if there be
any reason to believe it, how comes that rule not to be universally embraced?
do they think S. Benedict, or S. Francis, or Ignatius wi^er than an Angel from
Heaven? Nay, how came so many other Rules to be received in Egypt after this
rule of Pachomius was known? as the Rule translated by S. Hierome composed by
Pachomius, Theodorus, and Orsiesius; which is said likewise to be received from
an Angel; which Gazaeus Gazae* in Regul. Pachom.
would have to be only an enlargement of the former; but they were bold men
that durst mend the defects of an Angel; another Rule of Orsiesius, out of
which Benedictus of Anian has taken several passages; the Rules of the two
Macarii both famous Egyptian Monks, and of Serapion and Paphnutius; the
fragments of which are extant in the Concordia Regularum. What do all these
things mean? But it seems the pretense of Inspiration among these Founders of
Religious Orders, is just contrary to what the Apostle says of Miracles, for
this is not for those that believe not, but for those that believe.

. 4. But to return to the Rule of S. Benedict; the other thing Mr. Cressy
magnifies it for, is, the Rules of Government and Discipline; which, he says,
are so excellent that Cosmo de Medicis collected instructions from thence for
the Government of his People. ^pistle Apologet. n. 35.
Great men love to be singular; and take a pride in seeming to find that which
no body else can. I dare say, if it be true, he was the only Prince in the
World ever learnt to govern his People by Monastic Rules. This is so great a
discovery, that it is pity we have no more of it; for who can tell what
maxims of policy might be drawn from thence by a subtle head? What use the
chapter of the choice of the Abbot might be of in choosing Ministers of State,
or it may be, the Officers of an Army? And what influence it might have upon a
Prince to do nothing without the advice of his wise Council, because the Abbot
was to call the Monks together in all matters of Importance? Reg. Be^ed. C. 1.
The Monks lying in their clothes all night, C. 2.
girt up, and the measure of their wine, and the pound of bread a day, C. 22.
and the two Messes for all the Monks, are seasonable Items for Soldiers: C.
39.
The burning of the Candle all night in the Dortor, C. 40.
a good Memento for Sentinels: The Monks laying aside their Knives when they
sleep, C. 22.
a Caveat against Self-murder: Every Monk's being obliged to be Cook in his
turn, affords that useful instruction, C. 35.
that no man is born only for himself; but that every man ought to serve his
Country: C. 32.
The Abbots care in looking to the Utensils and Habits, to take an account of
them and to trust them in safe hands, will easily put a Prince in mind of
looking after his Revenues. But I am afraid so subtle a Prince as Cosmo de
Medicis, would like no chapter so well, as that which says, the Monks are to
have no propriety in any thing; no, not so much as in their own Wills. C. 33.
And I confess that would be the very height of Policy, for a Prince to get
away the very Wills of his Subjects from them. I am a little to seek what
instructions he could gather from the Monks Cowles, C. 55.
and Scapular, and Boots, and Breeches when they travel, which are to be safely
delivered back at their return; with several other useful Rules for the choice
of the Cellerar, Porter, and such Officers of State; but although these things
are above my reach; yet who knows what use so wise a Prince as Cosmo de Medicis
might make of them? nay, who can tell whether Machiavil himself did not take
his Politics out of the Benedictin Rules? I see Mr. Cressy himself is grown a
Politician by being a Benedictin; for if he could persuade men to believe the
Benedictin Rule to be so useful for governing of people, it were the only way
to make Persons of Honor to love their Rules, and to bring Monks to the
Council Table.

But to leave this pleasant passage, and to return to what is more grave and
serious: there is not any thing of moment in the Benedictin Rule about the
Government or Discipline of the Monastery, which is not likewise taken out of
former Rules: Reg B^^ed. c. 65.
as will appear about the Praepositus or Prior, if we compare it with what the
Oriental Rule, and the Rules of Pachomius, and Orsiesus do say upon the same
subject: C. 21.
the choice of the Decani out of Cassian, and the Regula Orientalis; about
excommunication of the refractory, C. 23.
from the Rules of Pachomius, S. Basil, and the Oriental and Cassian and
Macarius: about the Cellerar from S. Basil, C. 31.
and the Oriental rule: C. 32.
about the Utensils, out of the Regula Patrum, Pachomius, and S. Basil; about
having all things in common, C. 33.
out of Orsiesus, Pachomius, C. 35.
S. Basil, and others; about serving their turns for a week in the Kitchen, C.
36.
out of Cassian; about the Infirmary, out of Pachomius and S. Basil; C. 38.
about the Weekly Reader while they sit at Table out of Cassian; and the
silence to be used at meals, out of him and the Oriental Rule, and Pachomius.
It would be too tedious to insist upon the rest, about their work, hospitality,
gifts, artificers, travelers, novices, garments, nay the very Porters; but
whosoever will take the pains to compare the Benedictin Rule with the former,
as to all these, will easily be convinced, that there needed no di^ine
Inspiration for the Writing of his Rule: unless the Apostles wanted as much the
assistance of the Holy Ghost to gather up the fragments and put them into a
basket, as when they were to preach on the day of Pentec^st.

. 5. But although this takes off from the Divinity of their Rule, does it not
add as much to it another way, by showing the greater antiquity of it; in that
it was taken out of the Eastern and Egyptian Rules? I do not deny, that the
Monastic state came into the Western parts out of the East, and began much
later, and was entertained much colder a long time here, than it was there. For
after that Antony the Eremite had gained a mighty reputation by the severity
and solitariness of his life, not only with the Emperor Constantine, but with
the Governors of Provinces, Sozo^. l. 1. c. 13.
it is hardly conceivable what numbers, from all parts, the Novelty and Fame of
this way, drew to be his disciples; and how many were encouraged by his example
to set up this new way of Christian Philosophy, as the Greeks call it; C. 12.
which although it were advanced with a contempt of humane learning, yet the
p^etence of greater severity of life and a more easy way of subduing the
passions of humane nature by withdrawing the occasions of them, made many
understan^ing men, at first, to cry it up as a most divine and perfect state of
life. C. 14.
From h^nce in Egypt, Ammon began the same way in the desert of Scetis and upon
mount Nitria; (...). l. 4. c. 23.
which in a little time were filled with the mu^^^tudes of his disciples, among
whom the most famous were Didymus, Arsenius, ^^^r, Isidorus, Pambos and others.
Then Pac^^mius went a way by himself in Tabennesus, Soz. l. 3. c. 14.
and had in a little time 7000. Disciples, (...)
which spread themselves over The bais and Egypt: besides these there were
Apollonius, Pitherus, Anuphi; and after them, many others mentioned by Cassian,
Palladius, Ru^finus, Sozomen and others. Soz. l. 6. c. 28, 29, 30, 31. v.
Rosw^^d. vi^. Patr. Hi^^^ vit. (...).
The fame of these persons was spread so far in the Roman Empire, that
multitudes flocked to them, to see their way of living, and to hear their
discourses; thence we read of Melania and Ru^finus going on purpose into Egypt,
S. Gregory Nazianzen, and Evagrius, Cassian and Germanus; and the same
curiosity in others made the Deserts become no great places of retirement to
them. From hence Hilarion one of Antonies disciples, impatient of so much
company as flocked continually to him, withdraws into Palestine, carrying some
Monks with him, and settles himself in a Desert, not far from Gaza, where he in
time gathered great numbers of Disciples: and S. Hierom expressly says, that
before the time of Hilarion there was neither Monk, nor Monastery known in
Syria; by which it is plain he does not speak of the Eremitical life only, but
of the Coenobitical too: whatever some pretend of the constant succession of
the Coenobitical state from the Apostles times, which it seems S. Hierome was
utterly anacquainted with; and he was not so little a Friend to the Monastic
state, to have concealed it, if he had thought otherwise. In the further parts
of Syria, Aones brought the same way of living into request, which was unknown
there before; and Iulianus at Edessa; and Eutychianus upon Mount Olympus; Soz.
l. 6. C. 33, 34.
and Eustathius Sebastenus in Armenia, Pontus, and Paphlagonia. So far was this
Monastic life spread in the East, while the same Ecclesiastical Historians
tell us it was not known in Thracia, L. 3. c. 14.
Illyricum, or the parts of Europe; although they were not wholly destitute of
men that did affect that way, for which Sozomen only instances in Martin and
Hilary. It seems by S. Hierome that when the first notice of this way of living
was brought to Rome, Hiero^. ad Princi^i^m.
it met with no kind acception there, because of the novelty of it; but when
the Bishops of Alexandria, Athanasius and Peter, fled thither upon their
banishment, they recommended it so effectually to some of the devout women;
that first Marcella, then Paula, then Sophronia, then Eustochium, were all for
embra^ing this kind of life; and by degrees brought it into reputation at Rome;
after this, Ruffinus (...) S. Basils Rule for the direction of the Western
Christians, who had a mind to embrace the Monastic state, with such additions
and alterations as he thought fit; and the Egyptian Rules were brought (if not
by Eusebius of Vercelles as some think) yet it was certainly by Cassian, and
Monasteries settled both in Italy, and Gaul, and Britain, before S. Benedict
went into his Cave.

. 6. But, the Monastic state had lost very much of its first reputation in the
Eastern parts, before it began to spread considerably in these Western. That
which first brought it into so great an esteem, was the mighty opinion of the
extraordinary sanctity of the beginners of it, the severity of their lives, the
strictness of their discipline, the frequency of their devotions, the diligence
of their labors, and a retirement in good earnest from the world. But this
hear was too great to continue long; S. Hi^rom in his time complains very much
of the declension of the Monks; Hieron. ad (...).
of those who made it only an art of living and a holy cheat; of their fasting
for wagers, and victory; and their living without order and discipline; these
were those who were called Sarabaitae, and by S. Hierom Remoboth; and although
they are commonly thought to be only a few degenerate Monks, yet the Abbot
Piammon in Cassian has this severe passage, Cassian. collat. 18. c. 7
that scarce any others were to be found out of Egypt, as, he says, he found
by experience, when he was banished with his Brethren in the time of the
Emperor Valens. S. Basil did his endeavor to bring them into better order by
the making of his Rule; for his design was, not to found any new Order of
Monks, Greg. Na^ia^z. i^ Mo^od.
but to bring those who were scattered up and down without rule and Government,
under some kind of Discipline, which was well designed by him, but was far from
being effectual for the end he aimed at. For by bringing them nearer to Cities,
they soon grew so troublesome in them, that the Emperor Theodosius was forced
to publish an Edict, Cod. Th^od. 16. tit. 6.
commanding all that had taken upon them the profession of Monks to retire from
the Cities into Desert places, Baron. A. D. 390. n. 48.
and to inhabit there (which Baronius, without any reason in the world, would
have to be understood only of the Manichees, and Iovinian, and Apostate Monks)
but by the Favor they obtained in the Emperors Court, this Edict was repealed
within two years after; but his son Arcadius found them so busy, that he
published another Edict against their rescuing Persons from the Tribunals of
Justice; Cod. Th^od. 9. tit. 40, 16.
which it seems was a common practice with them: and S. Chrysostom mentions
their coming down in Troops to Antioch to rescue those who were seized upon for
palling down the Empresses statue: Chrysostom or. 17. ad pop. A^och.
for which although he highly applauds them, yet he found the ill effect of
their busy and factious humor in his own case at Constantinople: for by
reproving them for gadding up and down the streets, as unsuitable to their
profession, Sozom. l. 8. c. 9.
he made most of the Monks his implacable enemies, who thereupon endeavored to
bring him into disgrace among the people: and when Chrysostom fell into
disgrace with the Emperor, they kept possession of the Church, and would not
suffer the people to come in to prayers, upon which they were so enraged that
they killed all the Monks they could meet with. Zosin. l. 5^. p. 800.


For now the first heat of their zeal was over, they began to interest
themselves in Ecclesiastical affairs, and to make parties, and Factions in the
Church. And he that had a mind to set up for a new opinion, and to make a
party, went a great way in his business, if he could get the Monks of his side:
upon this occasion they were first brought to Constantinople, by the interest
of Macedonius, who with the help of Marathonius a great friend of his, erected
Monasteries for them there, and by the assistance of the Monks he very much
strengthened his party. Sozom. l. ^4^ c. 2. c. 27.
The Eutychian heresy as well as the Pelagian and Macedonian had its beginning
and support from the faction of the Monks; for Eutyches himself was the Abbot
at Constantinople, and with him joined Barsumas a famous Syrian Abbot, who was
the occasion of the death of Flavianus, as Diogenes Cyzicenus charges him in
the Council of Chalcedon; Council. Chalced. act. 4. p. 524.
and upon his return home he and his Monks of Syria persecuted the Bishops of
the other party, having a thousand Monks with him, and almost ruined the Syrian
Churches. Leo 1. charges the Monks of Palestin (upon their great zeal, some for
Nestorius, and others for Eutyches) that they caused many seditions in Cities,
and great disturbances in Churches, and had been the murderers of many Bishops
and Priests; and through their rage and cruelty had quite forgot their
Profession. Leo ^p. 83.
These were the men that had renounced the world, and had mortified their
passions, by the rigours and severities of a Monastic life. But here the
Reader must take notice that in the late Edition of Leo by Theophilus Raynaudus
the Jesuit, the Title of this Epistle is, ad Palaestinos Episcopos, instead of
Monachos: So much more are the Jesuits concerned for the honor of Monks than
of the Bishops; and care not what reproaches are cast upon them, so the other
escape: but it ^alls out happily that Baronius has fully proved, that all
those disturbances were made by the Monks; Ba^o^. ad A. 452. n. 10. ad. 15.
and that this Epistle was written to them: by which we see what trust is to be
given to their correct Editions of Fathers. And notwithstanding the great
strictness and discipline of the Egyptian Monks we do not find them, after the
first fervor was spent, much freer from faction and disturbance of the
Churches peace; for they very early joined with Meletius against the Bishop of
Alexandria, E^iph. haer. 68. s. 3.
as Epiphanius confesses; they complotted the business of Arsenius against
Athanasius, and gave out he was killed by Athanasius when they had concealed
him; and one John a Monk was employed to accuse Athanasius for killing Arsenius
who lay hid with Prines a Monk of Thebais. In the time of Theophilus Bishop of
Alexandria, the illiterate Monks of Egypt were such zealous Anthropomorphites,
So^r. l. 6. c. 7. Soz. l. 8. c. 11.
that upon Theophilus his opposing their opinion in his Paschal Epistle, they
forsook their Monasteries, and came in Troops to Alexandria with a resolution
to destroy him; but Theophilus knowing their simplicity, avoided their fury by
a subtle answer, telling them he beheld their face as the face of God: with
which they were very well satisfied, only desiring him to condemn Origens
Books: which he told them he was ready to do. Upon this occasion a mighty
quarrel happened among the Monks themselves, the more learned among them
opposed the Anthropomorphites, but the more ignorant and zealous were furious
defenders of their doctrine, and charged all that opposed them with being
Origenists; Theophilus finding out this, and having a particular pique at four
learned Monks, Dioscorus, Ammonius, Eusebius and Euthymius, who were called the
Long Brothers, he sends letters to the Monks, to bid them have a care of them,
for they believed God to be incorporeal, and therein were Origenists; for they
did not believe that God had either eyes, or ears, or hands or feet:
notwithstanding this, a very few, who had more learning, discerning the malice
and craft of this suggestion adhered still to them; but the far greater number
who were very simple and furious, most vehemently opposed them, by which means
an irreconcilable war brake forth among them; and things, by Theophilus his
means, were inflamed to that height, that Dioscorus and his Brethren had much
ado to escape with their lives, and fled to Constantinople, where being
receceived by S. Chrysostom, this widened the breach between Theophilus and
him, and proved one occasion of his following troubles.

The Monks of Egypt having been thus heated, it was a hard matter to keep them
quiet afterward, for in the time of Cyril of Alexandria, So^r. l. 7. c. 14.
who was Theophilus his Sisters Son, and immediate Successor, the Monks of
Nitria, hearing of the difference between Cyril and Orestes the Governor, came
to Alexandria, 500. in a body, with a resolution to kill the Governor, and one
of them called Ammonius, wounded him in the head with a stone, so that he
hardly escaped with his life. Soz. l. 2. c. 23.
After this, Timotheus Aelurus, who had been one of the Egyptian Monks, was the
occasion of the death of Proterius Bishop of Alexandria, Evag^. l. 2. c. 28.
and caused himself to be chosen in his place. T^eod. Lect. l. 1.
Theodorus Lector says, that he disguised himself in the night and went about
the several Cells of the Monks, and called every one by his name, and when they
asked who called them, he told them he was an Angel sent to them to tell them
they ought not to communicate with Proterius, but they should choose Timotheus
for their Bishop. By which story we have a true account some of the Monkish
Revelations: and some Historians report another as good as this at Rome, (...)
viz. of Boniface suborning one to speak under the appearance of an Angel to
that Monkish Pope Celestin 5. that he ought to leave the Papacy, and retire
again to the Wilderness; which succeeded so well with the credulous Pope, that
he soon made way for Boniface to succeed him; who afterward secured him from
giving any further disturbance to his Popedom.

. 7. By this we may see what mighty advantage the Christian Church received in
the Infancy of the Monastic state, in those very places where it began, by the
greatest pretense of piety and retirement from the world in those that embraced
it. I do not wonder so many great men of the Church should magnify it so
highly, before they had seen the trial and experience of it; for extraordinary
things in the way of piety and abstraction of the world, are very apt to move
men of devout minds at the first appearance; but the best judgment of things
is to be made by their continuance. And therefore it is observable that
although the Apostles began at first with a community of goods, while the
Christians were few; yet this did not last among them; nor was it required in
the Churches planted by them; because it could not be convenient for all; and
for some to do it and others not, would be apt to beget breaches and mutual
suspicions among them. And I do not find but that the Church of Corinth, 1 Cor.
16. 2.
where every one was to lay aside of his own for relief of the Church of
Jerusalem, was in that respect as pleasing to Christ, as that state of the
Church of Jerusalem, wherein they had all things in common. And in matters of
this nature, where the first appearance is very fair and plausible, (as it was
in the pretended devotion and retirement from the world in the Egyptian Monks)
we are not so much to regard the judgment of those persons concerning it, who
lived in the first heat and beginnings of it, which was the case of S.
Athanasius, S. Hierome, S. Basil, and others; as of those who lived to see the
effects of it, after it came into a settlement. For they found after the first
running so much of the lees still remaining, as put them into frequent and
vehement fermentations, which plainly discovered notwithstanding all the
pretenses they made, they were ^ar from being clearly drawn off from the World.

Synesius was a man of excellent learning, and great judgment, an^ Bishop of
Ptolemais in Egypt (who lived between the Monks of Scetis and Nitria, and those
of Thebais and Tabennesus, and in a time when they flourished most as to number
Syn^s. D^on. p. 45, etc.
and zeal) in his Dion he gives an account of their way of living, of their
hymns and prayers, and separate Cells, and abstinence, and force they offer to
nature, and the very kinds of their works, which cannot be understood of any
other than the Egyptian Monks; Petav. not. in Sy^. (...)
and so Petavius and Holstenius confess. And after he has thus described them,
he gives this character of their way, that it was barbarous and contrary to
human nature; for, says he, we are not pure and unmixed minds, but joined
together with bodies, so that we cannot be wholly employed in contemplation of
divine things, but our minds must divert themselves to other matters; and this,
says he, they confess themselves, by the great necessity of working which they
lay upon all: I could wish that we were so framed that we could live wholly in
contemplation; but since that is impossible, I wish then, says he, sometimes
to be taken up with the best things, and at other times to partake something of
the delight and pleasure of life. For I know my self to be a man; and not a God
to be wholly above these pleasures, nor a beast to be under the power of them;
and therefore that state of life which is between these, (...) most agreeable
to human nature. And then falls upon them, for preferring manual labor, before
the exercise and improvement of the mind in knowledge and useful Learning:
which is both an employment and pleasure to the mind. But in their adamantin
way, as he calls it, there is no order, no gradual improvement, but all depends
upon motions and impulses, and strange heats and transports, whereby they hope
for the end without the means, and aim at things above reason without the
exercise of it. How do these things agree, to be now above the Heavens, and
presently to be twisting Reeds and making Baskets? But man's excellency lies in
his Reason, which they take the least care about: and those will attain man's
end the soonest that act most agreeably to his nature. He does not deny that
there have been some extraordinary minds, which without arts or improvements
can do as much as others with them; but these are as rare as the Phoenix in
Egypt; but the common sort of mankind are incapable of this; and all their
labor and pains is to no purpose that think to attain to the perfection of the
mind by any other way than by improvement of the mind it self. And it is not
safe or lawful for us to think, that God should dwell in any other part of us,
than in our mind, which is his proper Seat. They mightily cry up temperance and
continence, and admire themselves for those things which in themselves are the
least; any further than they serve to higher ends. And afterward he takes
notice of their confident pretenses to the knowledge of divine things; they,
says he, are Divines, like Cadmus his soldiers, sprung out of the earth; and
in good earnest, condemns them at last not only for their barbarous way of
living, but for a strange mixture of Pride and Ignorance; having very absurd
opinions, and yet very arrogantly assuming to themselves a greater measure of
divine knowledge than others had; for they had a particular way of improving
their minds by ignorance; which was a sort of Mystical Divinity among them too.
(...). 153.
By this, and his Epistle to Hyp^tia (wherein he describes them again by those
peculiar virtues of their ignorance and confidence) we may see, what opinion
this great man had of the Monastic way, when it was in its greatest height,
and it was not a mere matter of hypocrisy, as it has been for the greatest
part in the Western Church; but men did truly and honestly live in poverty, and
real abstinence, and continual labor, with Psalms and prayers, hoping by those
means to come to the greatest perfection of our Souls; but he saw through all
this, and found that when they labored only, or chiefly, to keep down the
inclinations of the body, spiritual pride and self-opinion were like to get the
better of their Souls. And S. Hierome who had some experience of this way,
Hi^r. ad ^^stic. p. 45.
describes the temptation of spiritual Pride, as the most common and dangerous
snare, which the most severe and mortified men were apt to fall into; nay, he
says, Vi^ Paul. (...). p. 238.
that Antony himself fell into this, by reflecting on the perfection of his
life, and that he was cured by an Angel, which revealed to him the greater
perfection of Paul the Eremite. One would wonder to meet with so many combats
with Devils as we find in the History of the old Monks; either it was as S.
Hierome intimates concerning some, Hi^^^^. a^ Rustic. p. 45.
that they feigned them for greater reputation among the people, or that state
could not be so much per^^cter than others, wherein the Devils were allowed to
converse so much more freely with men than in other places. Hieron. ad Eu^toch.
And if any one will read but S. Ieroms description of his own temptations in
the Deserts, or his life of Hilarion, he will easily find, it is not running
away from the world will make men more perfect, unless they could leave their
passions behind them; and that a constant care of our mind, and actions in the
midst of our employments, is not only more pleasing to God, but a more likely
way to subdue all disorderly passions, than the severest life of a Monk or an
Eremite. We have no reason then to believe, that either the Monastic state at
first, or the Benedictin Rule did come from any divine inspiration; but as this
was borrowed from the former Rules, so the former was taken up out of an
unreasonable opinion that God is better pleased by our running from the World
than by serving him in it.

. 8. 2. That the Benedictin Rule has manifest signs of human Weakness in it,
and therefore cannot be supposed to come from divine inspiration. Of which the
first is, misapplication of Scripture. To this purpose the Person of Honor
mentions the bringing of that place, (...). p. 42. R^g. S. Ben^d. c. 2.
We have not received the spirit of Bondage again to fear; but the spirit of
Adoption whereby we cry Abba Father, to prove that the Abbot does supply the
Room of Christ in the Monastery, Christ himself being the supreme Abbot. To
which Mr. Cr. Epistl^ Apolog^t. n. 30.
answers, by expressing his wonder how he could find the least defect,
incongruity, or want of prudence in that passage: and he spends very needless
pains to prove, that Abbots being lawful Superiors for the direction of Souls,
the most proper title that can be given them is that of Father, and that Abba
signifies Father. Very well! but what is this to the producing that place for
it? methinks Our Father which art in Heaven had been altogether as proper; for
that would have showed the title of the Abbot as well; and withal that the
Abbot was Gods Vicar upon earth; God himself being their Abbot in Heaven. And
if S. Benedict had thought upon this place, all that Mr. Cr. says, would have
held as well to prove there was not the least incongruity in producing it; and
it would have afforded altogether as useful an admonition to the Abbots to
govern as Fathers, and not to Tyrannize as Lords. But there is yet farther
incongruity in it, for as the Person of Honor observes, S. Benedict brings
this in, to prove that the Abbot supplies the Room of Christ in the Monastery
(Christienim agere vices in Monasterio creditur, quando ipsius vocatur
praenomine) whereas there is no such thing in the Text, Christ is not called
there by the name Abba, but God the Father, for after they are said, by the
spirit of Adoption to cry Abba Father; it is said, Romans 8. 15, 17.
And if Children, then heirs; heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ. So
that Christ here is not represented under the notion of Abba, but rather as a
Son and heir to him that is called Abba: therefore he that sustains the Person
of Christ, can only be the eldest Son, i. e. the Prior and not the Abbot; so
that it is impossible to clear S. Bennet from an impertinent allegation of this
place of Scripture. But this is far from being the only place so impertinently
produced by him; for in the preface of his Rule we have a whole Cluster of
them, wherein he puts together many places of Scripture expressing the
earnestness and sincerity of Gods calling men to repentance and sincere
obedience, to the Monastic life and observing the Rules of it. As though it
were impossible for men to repent and to do Gods will, unless they did
presently renounce their estates* and submit to the Monastic Rules. This, if
he speaks to the purpose, he must account, awakening out of sleep: not
hardening our hearts at Gods call; hearing what the spirit says unto the
Churches; running while we have light; entering into Gods Tabernacle; and what
not? As though all Religion were confined within the walls of Monasteries; and
the strait gate were no other, than that which gives men admission into them.
This indeed was the great and fundamental cheat of the Monastic Orders in the
Roman Church; they would be called the Religious Orders, and would have men
believe, that all piety and devotion was kept warm only under a Monks Cowle;
and that, if there were any such thing in the world (as they called all out of
their own precincts) it grew very cold, by taking too much air abroad. But
although they durst not openly defend this, for fear of giving too great
offense both to Clergy and Laity; yet their insinuations tended this way; for
they only were the Religious, and the rest were but the World. Which was a
horrible abuse of mankind, as well as of the Christian Religion; which does
never suppose men to be a jot nearer to Heaven for their nastiness, and lying
in their clothes, for abstaining certain days from flesh, for eating and
drinking upon a common stock, for having their garments of such a shape and
color, or whatever other observances were peculiar to the Monastic state. The
Christian Religion requires sincere humility, and not a Monkish affectation of
it; inward purity, and a chastity within the bounds which God has set us, and
not binding our selves by perpetual vows to abstain from what he has allowed
us; heavenly mindedness, and a mighty regard to the rewards of another life,
and not a needless renouncing what the bounty of Heaven, and the care of our
Ancestors have provided for us, as to the conveniences of this life: The
Obedience necessary to salvation is that to the commands of Christ, and not of
an Abbot. But this they would fain make people believe, that doing only what
their Superiors command them, is the self-denial and renouncing their own
wills, which the Gospel makes so necessary to salvation; which is a notorious
misapplication of our Saviors commands; but these things are common to other
Monastic Rules; Reg. S. Bened. C. 7.
S. Benedict has other faults of this kind peculiar to his own Rule: as when
he brings these places for the Monks confessing their sins to the Abbot, Revela
Domino viam tuam, and spera in illo: It is great pity the word Abba was not
there for Dominus; for then it had been a plain case: but as it stands, it is
somewhat hard to conceive how the Abbot comes to be concerned in our making
known (if that were the meaning) of our ways to the Lord; and to as little
purpose are the other places that follow, confitemini Domino, and several
others that speak of confessing our sins to God, but not one word of the Abbot,
no nor of Priest in them: yet this is not all, for in the same chapter he
brings something for Scripture, which was never there, as when he makes the
Publican to say Domine, non sum dignus ego peccator levare oculos meos ad
coelum; Menard. in conc. Regul. P. 312.
which makes Menardus cry out miror sane, quia nunquam in toto Evangelio
repereris haec verba dicta a publicano: he justly wond* ed at this quotation,
there being no such words to be found in the whole Gospel as spoken by the
Publican; but the fairest excuse he has to bring him off, is by saying that he
qu^ted the words without Book, by the help of his memory; which if it be
allowed will be certainly an argument to them, that he was not infallibly
assisted by the H^ly Ghost. But besides these, we have other arguments
sufficient of humane weakness in this Rule, if I should undertake to rifle and
examine the several constitutions of this Rule, R^g S. Ben. ^. 68.
particularly that, when the Abbot requires impossibilities, not merely moral
as they would now soften it, but things utterly impossible, or unlawful to be
done; C^ss. l. 4. c. 26, 27.
as when the Senior in Cassian required John the Egyptian Monk to remove a
stone, which multitudes of men could not stir, and another commanded Mucius to
take his Son and throw him into the river; which they thought themselves
obliged by virtue of Monastic obedience to perform; and in the case of such
impossibilities S. Bennet bids them, if the Abbot persist in them, to trust to
Gods help and obey. C. ^.
But the reason given for this, is, that they must look on the commands of
their Superiors, as if they were the commands of God himself: which is a most
senseless and unreasonable thing: but it seems by this, they give the Abbot the
Title belonging to God, not merely for name sake: but in case a man were
required as Mucius was, to destroy his own Child, they must say, they are bound
as much to obey as Abraham was, upon Gods command to sacrifice his Son. Nay we
read in Cassian, that God revealed to the Abbot that C. 28.
Mucius had perform^d the obedience of Abraham; and so they say of another,
(...)
who threw his Child into a fiery furnace upon the Abbots command in imitation
of Abraham. But to justify this blind obedience, to the commands of Superiors
S. Benedict brings other very impertinent places of Scripture; such as obauditu
auris, obedivit mihi; ^on veni facere voluntatem meam, sed ejus qui misit me,
etc. But I am sick of such idle and impertinent stuff, which yet must be cried
up, as the effects of divine inspiration. And although Mr. Cressy and his
Brethren, may admire and cry up the perfection of their Rule, it is plain by
the conclusion, their Founder himself had no such opinion of it, for he calls
it minimam inchoationis Regulam; a Rule for mere beginners; and Menardus
confesses, (...). i^ Co^^ord. R^g. p. 8^.
there are much more perfect rules to be found in Palladius, Cassian, Serverus
Sulpicius, S. Pachomius and others: but S. Benedict thought these high enough
for the lazy Monks of his time, as he expresses it: so that it is plain, he
followed no inspiration in the dictating of his Rule, but the old Rule of
humane prudence, when he gave them, not the best Rules he could give them, but
the best which they could bear. Which, I suppose, was S. Gregory's meaning when
he commended it, not for the perf^ction, or Divinity, but the discretion of it.
Yet as gentle, and easy, and discreet as this Rule was, it was hardly ever
observed in the Benedictin Order, according to the Letter of it; but they have
found so many evasions, and distinctions, and dispensations, that we are not to
judge of this, or any other Order among them, by their Rules, but by their
practices. For they have so many distinctions of the essentials and accidentals
of their Rules; of being sworn to observe their Rules, and to obey the Abbot
according to the Rule; about Rules that have custom going along with them, and
those which have not; about simple Rules of obedience, and purely penal and
mixed; about the ways of interpreting Rules and their obligation, from the
intrinsic natures of the things, from the extrinsick probability of opinions,
and the Power of the Pope to dispense, and their Superiors to interpret; that
it is a very hard case if by virtue of one, or other of these, they cannot find
some excuse for the neglect or violation of any of their common Rules. And
notwithstanding the great discretion of this Rule, so little has it been
observed by the Monks of this Order, (...)
that Caramuel cites this remarkable expression of Cardinal Turrecremata, that
if S. Benedict intended to oblige the consciences of the Monks by all his
Rules, as so many moral precepts; he would not have given them directions to
Heaven, but have laid so many sn^res for them to send them to Hell.

. 9. 3. If this Rule had been received in the Roman Church, as of divine
inspiration; how comes it to pass, that so many other Rules did come up after
this, and receive approbation and allowance in the same Church, and upon as
great and as high pretenses, as ever this was received? If this were believed
to have come from God, surely it would have been universally received as such,
and embraced, as soon as it was made known to them? How came this v^ry Rule to
be altered and improved so many times? How came very different Rules from this
to receive as public approbation? And it may be easily made out,

1. That this Rule was not generally received, where it was known In the
confirmation of the ^^bot of Cassino we read, (...). 15.
that the Pope (...) S. Benedicts's Rule to him, use these words, Accipe
Regulam Spiritu Sancto inspirante dictatam. Receive the Rule which was dictated
by the Holy Ghost; what could have been said more if he had delivered the Bible
to him? Who could imagine any thing less by this, than that the Roman Church
did universally believe, that God had raised up S. Benedict as a Prophet in his
Age, and had sent him on purpose to settle a new sort of life under certain
Rules to be delivered by him? So that as Moses gave Laws by divine app^intment
to the People of Israel, and Christ to all persons that live in the World, so
S. Benedict was to give Laws to such as did retire from the World, for whom
Christ had left no Rules at all; and taken no manner of notice of any such
persons, although there were such among the Jews then. But if this were S.
Benedicts Commission, where did he open it, what way did he take to satisfy
the world about it? how came all the Persons of that time and age who were for
the Monastic way, not immediately to yield themselves up to his Government?
But we find nothing like this, in the history of that Age wherein he lived;
Arnold. Wion de antiq. F. ^^ iii.i Anicia V^n. 1595.
no great notice was taken of him or his Rule then; there was one Benedict of
Nursi^, an obscure person (for even the wiser sort of the Roman Church laugh at
Arnoldus Wion. who has taken great pains to prove the Austrian Family and S.
Benedict to be descended from the same stock of the Anician Family) who after
some retirement from the conversation of the World gathered some Disciples to
him, who lived together after a Monastic way. And what was there extraordinary
in all this? Had not many others done the same before him? and even in that Age
more considerable persons than himse^f: among the rest, was Cassiodore, who had
been Consul and Minister of State to Theodoric; Cassiod de inst^tut. divi^ lic^
in his declining Age he founded a Monastery wherein he lived himself, and gave
directions to those under his care, and lived twenty years after S. Benedict,
but he takes not the least notice either of him or his Rule: which surely he
would have done, if they had been either of them thought of any consideration
in his time. In the same time S. Equitius in S. Gregory, (...)
is called the Father of many Monasteries in the Province Valeria, without any
notice of S. Benedicts Commission or Rule? I* 1. c. 3.
and S. Honoratus had two hundred Monks under him, and was so far from being S.
Benedicts Disciple, that Gregory affirms he had no Master at all but God.
Adeodatus had Monks under his Government, L. 2. c. 1.
when Benedict went into his Cave, for his good friend S. Romanus was one of
them* Many othe^s we find mentioned in Gregory's Dialogues; it being a common
thing in those distracted times for persons weary of the world to withdraw into
some solitary place with some ^ew companions, and there to live hardly, rather
than be continually exposed to the merciless fury of their enemies; which first
brought the Monastic life into any great reputation among the more
conside^able persons of these Western parts. Baronius confesses, A^^. tom. 7.
A. D. 519.
that at that time the Monastic profession had lost its reputation in the
East, through the heresy and licentiousness of the Monks, when it began to
spread it self in Italy and the adjacent parts: but there was no certain Rule
among them; every one who was the chief governed the rest according to his own
discretion, and in general made use of S. Basils Rule translated by Ruffinus,
or the Egyptian Rules translated by S. Hierom, or the Conferences of the
Fathers by Cassian as they thought fit themselves. And after the same way
Benedict himself governed those that were under him, disposing them into twelve
Cells, (...) l. 1. c. 1.
and placing in every one of them twelve Monks with a Superior over them;
which Gregory mentions long before he takes notice of any Rule made by him, and
Ang^lus de N^ce the present, or late Abb^t of Cassino, A^gelus de Nuce ad
Chro^. Cassi^. l. 3. c. 29. n. 13. 84.
consesies, that he did not make his Rule, till a little before his death; and
that at the beginning he had not the least thought of making any Rules for the
Order of Monks: but being grown old, by l^ng experience, and observation, and
comparing of former Rules, he drew up those which go under his name; which
received no Authority from him that made them, but depended upon the free
consent of those who submitted themselves unto them: and therefore he compares
them to the La^s of Solon or the Decemviri; than which nothing can be said more
d^structive to the pictence of divine inspiration; for supposing these Rules
were dictated by the Holy Ghost, their obligatory power would not depend upon
the consent of persons, but the Divine Authority of him that delivered them.
(...) c. 3.
Holsienius thinks that S. Benedict made his Rule only for his own Monastery at
Cass^^o, never intending it for any universal Rule; but whether he did or no,
it was very little known for some time, after his death: for in an ancient Copy
of it in the Vatican Library, (...) p. 50.
there is a short preface before it, wherein we find that it is called latens
^pus, a work that lay hid, and that it was first brought to light by
Simplicius; which is said likewise by Sigebert: Simplicius discipulus ejus
latens Magistri opus publicavit; (...) c. 31.
If this Rule came by divine inspiration as the Pope and Mr. Cr^ssy say (what
they believe I know not) how came it to be concealed by Ben^dict himself? was
that a thing befitting an inspi^ed person to wrap up such a divine Talent in a
napkin, and to hide it under ground? Angelus de Nuce, a man much concerned to
find out the truth in these things, says, that S. Benedict delivered his Rul^
but a few Months before his death to S. Maurus then going into France, and that
before this, there is not a word said of it; and that there were no copies then
extant at all of it, that being the Original given to S. Maurus written with
his own hand. This Simplicius accompanied Maurus into France, and there stayed
till his death, and two years after, (which was in all forty three years) and
then he together with Faustus returned to their Brethren in Italy: and then he
made known the Benedictin Rule, which had been hitherto concealed. So that in
the space of forty three years after Benedicts death, there was nothing like an
acknowledgement made even in the parts of Italy, of any such Rule at all as the
B^nedictin, much less, that it came by divine inspiration.

. 10. But to show the universal reception of this Rule Mr. Cressy produces the
confirmation of it extant in the Monastery of Sublac by Gregory, E^ist. Apo^*
n. 31.
wherein he mentions not only his reading, but confirming it in a holy Synod,
and commands the observation of it through several parts of Italy, and
wheresoever the Latin Tongue is spoken; and that whosoever shall come to the
Grace of co^version should most diligently observe it even to the end of the
World. This I confess is to the purpose, and so much that I think all that are
not of the Benedictin Order in the Roman Church are concerned to answer it. But
we need not take much pains to discover the fraud of this, (...) ad Mo^^ch.
(...). p. 103.
for Gallonius in his Vindication of Baronius against the Bendictins, has
given several proofs of the forgery of it; not only by the falseness of the
date by comparing it with Gregory's Epistles, but because therein Johannes
Albanensis Episcopus subscribes, whereas in the true Copies of the Roman Synod
at that time, it is Homobonus Albanensis; and because the custom of publishing
decrees by the Bishop who was the Bibliothecarius was much later than that
time; for Gregory made Use only of his Notary for for that purpose. And this is
so much more probable to be a mere forgery of the Monks, since that has been
always their particular knack in what concerns the honor of their Order, as
the same A^thor has showed in many examples relating to our present purpose.
For he has fully proved several of the pretended privileges of the
Ben^dictins to be gross forgeries, (...) and Re^p. p. 54, 57, 91, 94, 99, 100,
110.
as likewise the ample Donations of Gordianus and Tertullus, and the
confirmation of the Letter by Justinian; the Bull of Pope Zachary, and his
Epistle to Petronax; the Epistle of Gregory to Bonitus; and that they had rased
several words out of a Bull of B^niface the fourth on purpose that Gregory the
Great might appear to have been of the Benedictin Order, P. 64.
as he makes it evident by comparing several Copies of the said Bull. Have we
not then great reason to trust these men in what concerns the honor of their
Order, who make no conscience of forging donations, or privileges, or decrees
that make for them, or of rasing out what makes against them? and this con^e^ed
by men of their own Church; and the ^acts so notorious, that Gallonius says.
Cardinal Baronius was ashamed of them they were such gross impostures; and he
ad^s himself, that had it not been for their vehement provocations, he would
not have e^posed such things to the World. The like impostures to these have
been discovered by others of the Roman Church, who were men of more integrity,
than either to de^end or des^emble the shameless forgeries of the Monks; as any
one may easily satisfy himself by the very many Discourses published by Ioh.
Launoy to that purpose. But I need not go from my present business; the same
Gall^nius has proved the Epistle of the Abb^t of S. H^noratus to Simplicius
A^bot of Cassinum to be of the same stamp: P. 32.
where^n it is said, that all the Monasteries of I^^ly had then embraced the
Benedictin Rule; of which whosoever was the Author, Gall^nius says he,
deserved to be punished as one Ci^^arellus at Rome was, who was hanged and his
body burned for forging old Writings; it is pity that all who have been
equally guilty there, have not suffered in the same kind. We do not find then
any evidence great enough to show that the Benedictin Rule was either delivered
at first as from divine Inspiration, or believed to be so, in those parts of
Italy where it was first known, or that those of the Monastic Order did think
themselves obliged to embrace it.

S. Benedict a little before his death sent Maurus and his companions into
France to propagate his Rule there: and because Mr. Cressy quotes a Synod about
A. D. 874. acknowledging S. Benedict to be inspired by the Holy Ghost, Epist.
Apol. n. 32. Sy^od. Do^z. 2. c. 7.
I shall briefly give an account of the entertainment the Benedictin Rule met
with in those parts. Before the coming of Maurus into France, there were
several Monastic Rules ^ell known there; the Rule of S. Basil and the Egyptian
Rules are mentioned by their eldest Historians. Gr^g. T^ron. l. 10. c. 29.
The Monks under Honoratus at Lerins, as appears by Cassian, Cassian. praef. ad
Collat. 11. Eucher. de laud. Eremi*
followed the Egyptian Rule; and Eucherius Brother to Honoratus, says, that
those Monks brought the Egyptian Fathers among them. Those about Marseilles
followed Cassian; the Monastery of Reomaus was under the Rule of Macarius, as
appears by Clodoveus his Precept. Besides the^e, there was the Regula
Tarnatensis mentioned in the Concordia Regularum, Annal. Eccl. Fra^c. A. 496.
n. 111.
which was observed at Agaunum or S. Maurice, built A. D. 515. and of S.
Caesarius, which was observed in several parts of France; and all these before
the Benedictins were heard of there: and A. D. 570. the Bishops of France in a
Council at Tours commended the Rule of S. Gr^g. (...). l 9 c. 39.
Caesarius to Radegund^s; which they would hardly have done if the Benedictin
had been in such esteem there, as Mr. Cressy suggests. Nay, a good while after
the Benedictins coming into France, other Rules were embraced and followed much
more than that, as the Rule of S. Columbanus, which was not received there till
A. D. 590. yet though the other had so much the start, this gained ground very
much of it, in the esteem of the people and numbers of Proselytes. For as the
late French Annalist observes, most of the Monasterics in France followed the
Rule of Columbanus and very few the Benedictin; (...). F^a^c A. D. 667. ^. 20.
which the Benedictins finding to take much off from the Antiquity and
reputation of their Order in France, when they could not fairly expunge the
name of Columbanus, they have added the Rule of Benedict to it; and so would
incorporate both these Rules into one, without any pretense from Reason or
Antiquity. For the French Benedictins themselves cannot but confess, that the
Rule of Columbanus was at first very different from that of S. Benedict,
Pro^at. ad S^c. s^cundum B^nedict. n. 14.
(although before they say, that those of their Order had always believed them
to be the same) for in the Rule of Columbanus they cannot find any footsteps
almost of the Benedictin, and withal they grant, that Columbanus came from the
Monastery of Banchor into France, before the Benedictin Rule was brought into
Britain; but they say that afterward these two Rules were united together:
(although in the Preface to the first Tome they had said, (...)
they were united from the Beginning;) but they had as little reason for the
latter assertion, as they had for the ^ormer. For not only the Jesuits
Henschenius and Papebrochius have plainly asserted and proved the continuance
of the difference between these two Rules; (...)
but the French Annalist Le Cointe has fully answered all the Benedictins
pretenses, and charges those of their Order with frequent interpolations of
ancient Records on purpose to advance the credit of their Order, (...). Eccl.
F^an. A. D. 734. n. 32, etc* 751. n. 107, etc. 667. ^. 20.
and that no ill will to their Order, but mere love to Truth made him discover
this to the World, and at large shows that other Rules continued to be observed
to the eighth Century; in a^l which time the Benedictin Rule was in small
reputation, till Boniface's going into Germany: after which it began to be
settled by some Synods there; and so by degrees it was brought into those
Monasteries which before had been under other Rules, and those such as had not
only been embraced before the coming of Maurus; but several that were made
after it, as those of Aurelianus, Ferreolus, and Donatus; which are all
mentioned in the Concordia Regularum. I now leave the Reader to judge, whether
there be the least probability, that either in Italy or France, the Benedictin
Rule was looked upon as a Rule coming from Divine Inspiration; which met with
so little acceptance in those Ages, when they might the best judge concerning
it, and in those places where the Monastic State was in great esteem.

. 11. 2. After it did come to be generally received if it were really thought
to from God, how came so many alterations and improvements of it to be made,
and new Rules to be set forth by the consent and approbation of the Roman
Church? They could not certainly think that the Holy Ghost would raise up a
Person on purpose, and yet deliver by him an imperfect Rule; if it were
perfect, with what face or conscience could they think to amend it, or set up
others besides it? Yet both these are manifestly done, by the multitude of
additional or different Rules which came up afterward. The only pretense for
it, is the degeneracy of the Order by length of time and bad customs; but what
then? must the Rule be amended, or the lives of men? must we have a new Bible,
because this is not observed? Or can we hope that men will be reformed by
another, if not by this? But this was so frequently practiced in the Roman
Church as to the Monastic Rules, that the most charitable opinion we can have
of them, is that they looked on all of them only as humane constitutions which
might be altered, or amended at pleasure.

The first amendment and alteration of the Benedictin Rule was in the Monastery
of Clugny in Burgundy; the beginning of which is imputed to Odo the second
Abbot, who dyed A. D. 943. says Arnoldus Wion; A^^old. Wio^. Lig^ Vitae, l. 5.
c. 3.
944. says the Chronicon Cluniacense; Bibliotheca C^^niac. p. 1633.
Flodoardus and Ademarus call him the restorer of the Rule, and so do most
other Historians, who all agree in the universal decay of the Monastic
Discipline in that age; saying, that all the fervor was quite spent, and
nothing but the mere dregs of idleness and luxury were to be found among the
Monks; V. Bibloth^ Cl^nia^. p. 57, 58^ etc.
that Odo was singular in his endeavors to restore Discipline among them, and
therefore was cried up as a man of extraordinary sanctity. Petrus Cluniacensis
who succeeded him in the Government of Clugny A. D. 1157. says, that in almost
all the parts of Europe there was nothing of a Monk left, P^tr. Clunia^ E^ist.
l. 6. ^p. 17.
besides the tonsure and the habit; which was little enough of all conscience:
that Odo undertook the Reformation of it almost alone, and he calls him not
only the Reformer of the Order, but of the Rule too: but I find no great
alterations that he made in it, but only adding some Hymns of S. Martin,
Bi^lioth. Cl^^iac. p. 1354, etc
to whom he had a particular devotion: but the greatest Reformer of the Rule
was this Petrus Clu^iacensis, who first composed the Statutes of the
Congregation of Clugny, published out of MS. by Marrier and Du Chesne, in
seventy six Chapters: and it seems by a Bull of Innocent the second, bearing
date A. D. 1136. (extant among their Records) that the Pope gave him power to
correct and alter things for the good of the Order: (...). Romans Po^t. (...). 85.
and in his Preface he gives this reason of the alterations he made; because it
is one thing what God has appointed by an eternal Law, and another what is
appointed by men for the benefit of others; the first can never be changed, but
the latter may: and among these things which may be changed, he reckons
fastings, Vigils, bodily exercise and labor, about which so many Chapters of
the Benedictin Rule are spent: and in the Ecclesiastical Office which Mr.
Cressy admires the Benedictin Rule for, he makes several considerable
amendments and alterations; and the Reason he gives, why he would have the
abstinence from flesh observed, Statut. Clu^iac. c. 12.
is, because there was no reasonable Cause of changing it, as there was in
other parts of the Rule; which is a manifest proof, that he did not at all look
on the Rule as coming from God, but such as might be altered or amended, as
they thought fit. After him Henry the 29. Abbot of Clugny made a large
collection of all the alterations that had been made either by the Popes,
Biblioth. C^^niac. p. 1542, etc.
or their own Superiors in the statutes of their Order; which are so many as
are certainly enough to convince any man, they looked not on the Benedictin
Rule, as coming at first from any divine Inspiration. And among the
considerable alterations made by this Henry himself, Chron. Clunia^. p. 1670^
the Chronicon Cluniacense takes notice of one very remarkable, viz. that he
first appointed that Monks should be shaved by Secular Barbers; for which this
very good Reason is given, that when they shaved each other, it was not rasure
but excoriation; for which kindness, among many other good things which he did,
the Author of the Chronicon says of him, Anima ejus requiescat in pace. Amen.

These Reformations of the Benedictin Rule by the Monks of Clugny, were by no
means pleasing to those who began the Cistertian Order; for as appears by an
Epistle of Petrus Cluniacensis to S. Bernard the Cistertians objected to them,
that they had made new Rules of their own, P^t. (...). l. 1. ^p. 28.
and rejected the ancient Rules for their own customs, notwithstanding in their
vow they had promised to observe the Benedictin Rule; and they had made so
great alterations and corruptions in the Monastic state, that they had little
besides the name of Monks left: To this the Cluniacenses replied, by calling
the Cistertians a new race of Pharisees, that cry Touch me not, I am holier
than thou: and how could they call themselves such strict observers of the Rule
(for the Cistertian Order was begun upon this pretense of restoring the genuin
Benedictin Rule by keeping to the letter of it) when the Rule commanded them to
think better of others than of themselves; Exo^^. Ord^^. Cistere. c. 5. in
Biblioth. Cisterci^^. Sig^o. Chro^. ad A. D. 1098.
and You, say they, are the Saints; You are the rare men; You are the only
Monks in the world; You must have a new color of your own; You must be the
white Boys, when all the rest must Pass for black sheep. And no color, say
they, could have been worse chosen for such whining companions, since white is
the color of Joy and Feasting, and Black of Mourning and Sadness. Thus the
jolly Monks of Clugny replied to the new and severe Order of Cistertians. And
for the alterations of the Rule, Petrus Cluniacensis answers they had done
nothing amiss in it; for he appeals to a higher Rule, viz. that of Scripture;
and do you think, says he, that when we promised to observe the Benedictin
Rule, we renounced the Rule of Scripture? And from the practice of it in former
Ages, he pleads for the change of former Rules. The Cistertians charged the
Cluniacks with breaking their Rule in wearing of Furrs; the Cluniacks brought
not only the example of Adam for it, but which was more to their purpose of S.
Benedict too; For, say they, very subtly; if he did not wear the Skins of
Beasts, how came the Shepherds to take him for a Beast when they found him in
the Cave? And do you think, say they, that your number of Coats, is not as bad
as our Furrs? But the Cistertians were as angry with the Cluniacks, for their
wearing Breeches; but they pleaded a jus Divinum of Breeches from Aarons
Vestments, for although, they say, ceremonials do not oblige, yet the Apostle
says, those things happened to them in a figure; but they are somewhat
troubled that Aarons were linen drawers and represented the chastity of the
Priests; yet at last they best resolve the point into the ^postles prec^p^
about decency and modesty. For the matter of their bedstraw and matts, which
the Cistertians objected, Petrus (...) tells S. Bernard, they had plainly the
Rule of their side, which left those things to the care of the Abbot. But they
were somewhat more troubled about the pound of bread a day, which the
Benedict^n Rule is to exact in, that a third part of it is prescribed to be
reserved for supper; but suppose say they, it should be a little over or under
the third part of a pound which was left at noon; must we presently go to hell
for it? must men weigh their bread when they travel; and carry the Cellerar
with them? for the Rule says, it must be delivered into his hands. You indeed,
say they, are the men that strain at gnats and swallow Camels; and make our
Rule to lay traps and snares for us: and withal they call them the weighers of
syllables, the hunters of butterflies, that prefer the letter of the Rule
before discretion; and set up the Authority of that against the convenience of
alterations, which Petrus Cluniacensis at large pleads for toward the end of
that Epistle. S. B^^nard. ^p. 1. ad Rob. N^pot.
Notwithstanding all this, S. Bernard laments the going of his Nephew Robert
from the C^stertian Order to the Cluniack, as if he had turned out of the way
to Heaven into that which leads directly to hell; and that, not barely, for the
not performing his vow; but he calls the Cluniacks, Wolves in Sheeps clothing;
such as laughed at voluntary poverty, and fastting, and vigils, and silence,
and labor, and accounted them madness; and called idl^ness contemplation; and
eating, and talking, and all manner of jollity, discretion. How, say they, can
God ^e delighted by our tormenting our selves? where does the Scripture command
men to kill themselves? what Religion is it for men to dig the earth, to cut
wood, to carry dung? Wherefore has God made such provision if we may not taste
it? wherefore has be given us bodies if we may not preserve them? what wise
man ever hated his own flesh? By these arguments, says he, was the poor silly
sheep drawn to Clugny, and there he was washed and shorn; and had rich
vestments put on him instead of his former Rags. By this we see, that these
several Orders charge hypocrisy upon each other as freely, and as truly, as we
can do upon them all.

12. In Italy there was nothing of poverty left, to which they so much
pretended who began the Monastic way, save only the bare name of the vow of
Poverty. And what is this but great hypocrisy, to pretend their ^erfection to
lie in poverty, while they abound in Wealth? As though it were only possible
for men to be rich by themselves; but in case they lived upon a common stock
without any particular property, they must be poor and could not be otherwise:
although they had above the third part of the Lands in the Kingdom in their
hands, as it was the case here in England. Call you this poverty? Is this the
keeping a vow of poverty, solemnly made to God? or rather is it not a plain
mocking of God, and a horrible abuse of the Christian World? If such men did
mean honestly, they would speak as others do; and declare that the Monastic
state after the accession of so great riches, was quite another thing from what
it was first designed; that it now became a more easy and pleasant way of
living (only some kind of severities must be undergone to keep the world from
seeing through their pretenses) because that in it men were freed from all
manner of cares of Families or estates, and they lived together, without any
fear of the want of suitable company; and every one in hopes of having their
condition bettered by the remove or death of their Superiors, and no one in
fear of having it worse, as long as the riches of their community continue. If
some Philosophers had been to set down the way of life with the greatest
convenience and freedom from trouble, they would have pitched upon a rich
Monastery; where they were all rich in common, and yet no man had particular
property; but I think they would have had more honesty than to call this a
state of Poverty. But if ever any persons practi^ed Plato's Commonwealth, they
were the wealthy Monks, who had plenty of all things in common; but surely
never any Philosopher thought Plato meant to bring all men to Poverty by it; or
that men could swear to be always poor and yet enjoy an equal share with
others of all conveniences of life. Epicurus himself, would have been for a
temperate diet, and some healthful severities, and would have born a
confinement within pleasant walks, and Gardens, with good company. I know
nothing would have troubled him so much as to have been chosen Abbot; for the
necessity of giving entertainments, and treating strangers, and looking after
great revenues, might have robbed him something of his beloved tran^quillity.
But to call these things the keeping a vow of poverty, Epicurus himself would
have abhorred: Yet this was the way or none, which they had to observe it,
as soon as the kindness of Princes and others to the Monastic Life had brought
such mighty possessions to Monasteries. If we believe Arnoldus Wion, A^^old.
(...). vit. l. 1. c. 2.
who was himself of the Monastery of Cassino, that had under it 2
Principalities, 2 D^chies, 20 Earldoms, 36 Cities, 250 Castles, 440 Towns, 3^6
Manors, 33 Seaports, 33 Islands, 200 Mills, 300 Territories, 1^62 Churches;
and were not the Monks here in a good condition to keep the Vow of Poverty?
Volaterran might well say, Vo^at. Anthropo^og. ^. 21. p. 47^.
that S. Benedict left rather Kingdoms than Monasteries to his disciples; and
instead of receptacles for men really poor, places of idleness and luxury; the
same Arnoldus wion uses Volaterran's expression concerning the ancient
Benedictin Monasteries in France, that they were rather Kingdoms than
Monasteries; and that Charles 9. Lig^. V^tae l. 5. c. 1.
said, that S. Maurus had gotten more riches by his Breviary, than his
predecessors had done by their Swords. So that it is no wonder, to hear men
complain so early of the general decay of the Monastic state; as Iacobus de
V^triaco, and Petrus Damiani and others do, Iac. de V^tri^^o hist. O^^ident. c.
13.etc.
and say plainly that there was a necessity of a Reformation. And since the
Monastic state is accounted one of the most perfect in their Church, why may
not the rest need a Reformation too? Petrus Damiani confesses that there was
nothing of a Monastic state left, P^tr. D^mia^. opu^. 13. de ^erf^ct. (...).
c. 1.
besides the mere habit; that their Rules were forgotten, and their discipline
lost, and under the show of Religion they lived like other men. From hence men
that were in good earnest, forsook the Monasteries, and betook themselves to
the Deserts; and began to institute Orders upon new Foundations.

So S. Romualdus, having been 3. years in the Monastery of Class near Ravenna,
was forced to withdraw from thence; for, taking upon him to correct his
Brethren for breaking their Rule, P^t. Damia^. de ^it. S. Ro^^aldi. c. 3.
they endeavored to break his neck, when he was risen earlier than the rest to
his prayers; but having discovered their design, away he goes into the Desert,
(...). 15. c. 15. ^. 1.
where he led a very severe life, and endeavored to bring up others under him,
in the old Egyptian Discipline, keeping them to fasting and hard lodging, and
work, some making spoons, others spinning, others making nets and sackcloth; so
that the Mountain Sytria, Pet. Da^. c. 26. C. 64.
was, says Damianus, become another Nitria. The same Author describing the
Eremitical life which he and his Companions (about 20 in all) led in the place
called Fons Avellani, P^t. Dam. de Ord. Er^mit. Fo^tis Av^llani.
laments^ the degeneracy of the Monastic Order, and sets down the Rules they
were resolved to live by; which prescribed a far stricter course than the
Benedictin Rule does, both as to the Psalter, De vit. Dominici c. 5. etc.
and Fasting, and Penance, and Silence. They who have a mind to read the
perfection of their Discipline, may see it in the Life of Dominicus Loricatus,
one of his Disciples; who did for many years wear armor next his skin; (from
^^ence he had his name of Loricatus) he lathed himself with both hands every
day, while he said over the psalter twice, and thrice a day in Lent; in six
days he performed the penance of a hundred years; which was thus reckoned,
3000 lashes went for a years penance; after which proportion every Psalter made
up 5 years penance, 1000 lashes being accounted for every ten Psalms; and so 20
Psalters disciplined and set home with both hands would make up the penance of
100 years; one Lent, he says, he went through a thousand years penance in this
way. We must not expect to meet with many such examples; one such man by his
works of supererogation might be enough to expiate for all the Monks in Italy.
And I do not question they were glad to hear of such a stock coming in to the
Churches Treasury, out of which they hoped for a plentiful share.

But there was one of Romualdus his Disciples, Aub. Mirae. Origin. Mo^ast. l.
2. c. 5.
who endeavored to restore the Coenobitical Life, viz. Job. Gualbertus of
Florence, A^nold. W^o^. l. 1. c. 33.
to whom the Image bowed with so much kindness after the sparing the life of
his Brothers Murderer, A^to^in. tit. 15. c. 17.
that upon it he embraced the profession of a Monk near the Church where it was
done: after which he went into the Desert of Camaldoli to Romualdus; but not
liking the Eremitical way so well, he betakes himself to the Shady Valley,
thence his Order is called, Ordo Vallis Umbrosae, and there adding some
constitutions of his own to the Benedictin Rule, he begins a new Order which
was approved by Alexander ^. A. D. 1070. and he was Canonized says Wion, by
Greg. 7. by Celestine 3. says Miraeus. He seemed to have a great zeal to
restore their primitive poverty, which he showed in destroying two Monasteries
by a Miracle; the one by an inundation of water because it was too
magnificently built, and the other by fire, because it had received the whole
Patrimony of a Person who came into their Order; and out of his great zeal for
holy Poverty, says Antonine, he not only tore the writings asunder; but prayed
God to be revenged on that Monastery, which he was no sooner almost gone from,
but the greatest part of it was burnt to the Ground.

Long after these Ludovicus de Barbo, A. D. 1409. attempted the Reformation of
the Benedictin Order in Italy, (...). Wio^. l. 5. c. 6.
by restoring poverty, chastity and obedience; and this was called the
Congregation of S. Iustina de Padua, and since the Congregation of Cassino;
wherein many new Constitutions were added to the Benedictin Rule; several other
attempts of Reformations are mentioned by Antonine and others. But to how
little purpose all the former Reformations of the Monastic state were, we need
no other Testimony, than of S. Antonin, (...). tit. 16. c. 23. ^. 1, 2.
who reckoning up the original Benedictins, the Camaldul^nses, Vallis Umbrosae,
the Cluniacenses, Cistertians and Carthusians, he concludes with a passionate
lamentation of their monstrous degeneracy, in the words of S. Bernard; and
afterward adds, that it was scarce possible at first to believe, that an Order
begun with so much severity as that of Monks should fall into so great
looseness; when the old Monks met together in S. Antony 's time, their minds
were so taken up with divine things that they forgot their bodily refreshments;
but now, says he, it is quite otherwise, nothing of the Scriptures, nothing
that concerns men's souls, nothing but idle talk and laughing when the Monks do
meet together; and S. Bernard complains of them, as though there were nothing
but idleness, and luxury, and intemperance to be found among them. The
Cistertians whom S. Bernard magnified so much in his time, were declined, says
S. Antonin, so far from the steps of their Fathers, that they were become
unprofitable. The Cluniacenses he says, were as black within as without: the
Camaldule^ses were degenerated from the steps of Romualdus, and were all gone
backward, a very few excepted. Among those of the Vallis Umbrosa there was
scarce one to be found who did good: in a word, he says, all the Monkish and
Regular Orders, which began with so much fervor and zeal, had so far by
degrees fallen off from the Rules of their Fathers, that they had nothing left
among them but their mere vows; and how well those were kept in such a
degeneracy is easy to imagine.

The only order which he allows to have preserved to his time its first vigor,
was the Carthusian. Which began about the same time with the Cistertian: but
Bruno the first institutor of it was far from thinking the Benedictin Rule to
be perfect; Ioh* Brompton. ad A. 1103. n. 60. Robert. de Monte de Abbat. c. 11.
and therefore he endeavored as Romualdus had done in Italy, to revive the old
Egyptian discipline and severity; and with his companions he began a kind of
Eremitical life, living twelve together in distinct Cells, though within the
same walls, under the inspection of a Prior, with 18 Lay Brethren and a few
Mercenaries; their diet was the coursest bread, wine very much diluted with
water; eating no flesh sick or well, buying no fish but eating them when given;
Sundays and Thursdays they might eat cheese or eggs; Tuesdays and Saturdays
pulse or boiled herbs; the other days only bread and water; and they eat only
once a day except the great holy days, and then they eat together, and say
Mass, and keep their Canonical hours in public, which at other times,
(excepting only Mattins and Vespers) they observe in their Cells; where they
are obliged to perpetual silence and labor and reading and prayer. Their habit
is a short and strait garment, rough and sordid even to frightfulness; and they
wear sackcloth next their skin: This is the account given of their Order by
Guibert, (...).
Iacobus de Vitriaco, and by Petrus Cluniacensis, who commends it for the
sanctity and strictness of it; a very ^ood Rule says P^lydore V^rgil, if the
passions of the mind could be confined within Cells, and the flesh be tamed by
solitude and idleness; which S. Hierome sound it so hard to do with the
greatest pains. A most certain way to Heaven! if only ea^ing flesh, and cleanly
apparel, and conversing with our Friends, were the things that sent men to
hell. H^mbert. sermon. 25. a^ Ca^thus.
Humbertus complains that in his time A. D. 1264. a great deal of the severity
of their first discipline was abated by dispensations and relaxations; but
whatever agreeableness they may pretend in other things to the old Egyptian
L^^urae, they are as far beyond them in the point of riches as may be; for
although they began at first with the pretense of great poverty and restraining
their Goods and Cattle and Lands within certain bounds, yet for their number
they have attained to as great riches as any Order whatsoever, whereas Cassian
says, Cassian l. 4. c. 4.
The old Egyptian Monks had nothing at all to live upon but the fruit of their
own labor, Collat. 24. c. 1.
and refu^^^ to receive any thing to the advantage (...) Monastery, from any
who came (...) Although the Carthusians had no Rule given them at first, yet
they have been governed by certain customs of their own; among which one is,
(...). p. 952.
that it is not lawful for them, to observe the Discipline, or Vigils, or
Religious exercises, or Fasts of any other Religious Order; which had been a
very profane custom among them, if they had believed that their Rules were
from Divine Inspiration.

. 13. When all the former Monastic Orders had lost their reputation in the
world as to their pretense of Poverty, which they began with; then appeared
another sort who would not be called Monks but Friars; and to satisfy the
World as to their Poverty, they declared* they would have nothing appropriated
to them as a community, but would live upon the charity and benevolence of
others, and therefore would go under the name of Mendicant Friars; which grew
so numerous at first that the Council of Lions reduced them to four, viz. the
Dominicans, Augustinian Eremites, Carmelites, and Franciscans. But among these
the highest pretenders to poverty, were the last mentioned; who would be
contented with nothing short of the perfection of poverty: For this above all
things was S. Francis his Mistress, which he pretends almost to adore; and in
one of his Collations he calls Poverty the Queen of Virtues, Opuscul. S. Franc.
T^m. 3. Collat. 5.
a special way to felicity, the root of perfection: the hidden treasure
mentioned in the Gospel, for which a man parts with all that he has; to attain
the height of which, he says, a man must not only renounce worldly prudence,
but in some sort humane Learning too: for, says he, that man does not
perfectly renounce the world that retains the bag of his own sense within his
heart. Poverty, he calls, the Foundation of his Order upon which it would stand
or fall; nay, such a true lover of poverty he was, that they say of him, he
could never be reconciled to the Ants, because they provided for themselves so
long before hand. But for those of his Order, he charges them (as Solomon did
about Wisdom,) above all things, to follow Poverty; and especially in their
buildings; and therefore bids them build poor and mean lodgings for themselves;
which they ought not to dwell in as their own, but to lodge in them as
Travelers. And he makes it one of the inviolable Rules of his Order, that they
should have nothing appropriated to them, (...) c. 6.
neither house, nor place, nor any thing.

And as the Carthusians zeal was against flesh, so S. Francis his was against
Money; which he strictly enjoins those of his Order never to touch; as though
the soul were infected at the Fingers ends. As for working, he leaves it to
those to whom God has given the Grace of working; which he perceived to be not
near so common a Grace with them, as that of Idleness; if they did chance to
work hard, c. 5.
they might receive necessaries for it for themselves and their Brethren, but
by no means money; and the height of poverty, he tells his Disciples, would
certainly bring them to Heaven. c. 6.
This was to be their portion in this world, to which they must stick close.
Which was a portion easily left, and which they were very willing to part with;
although S. Francis took as much care to secure it to them as man could do: For
the Rule concludes with a heavy imprecation of the indignation of God and his
Saints against those who should presume to violate it. And in his Testament he
earnestly recommends to them, the strict observation of his Rule; and forbids
all Glosses upon it; and says, that as he had written it simply and plainly,
so he would have it understood by them without any Gloss. And to make this hard
lesson to go down the easier, it is evident by the whole management of it, that
S. Francis had a mind to have his Rule received as from divine Inspiration;
which we do not find S. Benedict himself ever pretended to, Wad^i^g. (...). A.
1223. n. 9, 10.
for he concealed his own Rule, and ingenuously con^esseth at the end of it,
whom he had profited by; but S. Francis very formally in imitation of Moses,
goes up to a Mountain, and there in the cleft of a Rock abides for forty days
together fasting, only with bread and water; there he pretends, to have his
Rule dictated to him by the Holy Ghost; after the forty days, down he comes to
Assisium and brings his Rule with him, and gives it to Br. Elias, to whom he
delivered it to be kept. Elias did not like the severity of it, and pretended
to have lost it; up goes S. Francis again to the Mountain, and brings it down
new made. Elias and his Brethren were hugely troubled, but knew not how to help
themselves, at last they agreed to go to him together, and tell him they could
not keep it (for Elias knowing his Spirit and Selfwill, told them plainly he
durst not go to him alone) S. Francis suspecting the matter, and seeing them
coming toward him, as soon as they had got to the top of the Mountain leaps out
of the Cleft of the Rock, and with a fierce countenance, asked Elias what the
matter was? he very submissively tells him, he came to him in the name of them
all to entreat some abatement of the severity of the Rule. S. Francis
immediately expresses a mighty passion against them, and calls them in a ^olemn
appeal to God, an unbelieving and disobedient Generation. Forthwith, says
their Annalist, a bright Cloud appeared, and upon it, Christ himself (O
horrible blasphemy!) saying, why art thou troubled Man, as though this were thy
work? Art thou the Lawgiver? Art thou the beginner of this Way? Are not all
the Precepts prescribed by my self? were not the Tables formed by me? thou were
only the instrument and pen of the Writer. I know what I dictated, and what I
would have observed; the strength of men is known to me, I know what they can
do, and what assistance I can give them: I will have this Rule observed to a
Tittle, to a tittle, to a tittle; without any Gloss, any Gloss, any Gloss. All
this while S. Francis was kneeling and they trembling; then he tells them,
Brethren, you see how you have resisted the will of God; if your ears do not
tingle yet, I will make the same Voice to be heard again; at which they were
confounded and affrigh^ed and fell upon their faces; and upon their promise of
obedience be descended, says Wadding, like another Moses carrying the Tables
of the Law, N. 11.
with his face fiery and shining; but according to the Vulgar Latin it should
have been horned too. Notwithstanding all this, they were at it again, and and
desired that at least they might have something in common, for their numbers
increased so fast, it would be impossible to keep strict poverty. S. Franc^s
goes up the Mountain once more, N. 13.
and returns with a promise only that God would provide for them if they would
keep to their Rule, then they all submitted to it. Wadding and De La Hay take
great pains to prove, that this Rule was immediately given by Christ himself,
not only from the Testimony of S. (...). 16.
Brigitt, but of several popes, viz. Gregory the ninth, Nicholas the third and
fourth, Clement the fifth, Julius the second. Upon this, away goes S. Francis
begging to Rome, when he comes there, the pope told him his Rule was too
strict; but upon his solemn affirmation, there was not a word in it of his own,
but it was all dictated by Christ himself; it was confirmed by Pope Honorius,
and he denounces a Curse on the breakers of it. Surely, if the pretense of
Divine Inspiration for the Monastic Rules be received in the Roman Church, S.
Francis bids much fairer for it than S. Ben^dict; for it is plain, he had a
mind to have it believed not only by his B^eth^en, b^t by the Pope and
Cardinals, who joined in the confirmation; and by the^r whole Church.

. 14. Let us now see what this per^ection of Poverty soon came to, and whether
any such respect has been shown to this Rule, as if they did believe it to
have been from God: Not long after S. Francis his death, Elias being made their
General, (...) A, 1230. ^. 8.
^btains privileges from the Pope for receiving of money by a third Person;
directly against the letter of the Rule; and soon after he lived splendidly and
fared well, kept Horses and a retinue, and told them, all this was necessary
for the support of his Government. But this was too gross, and would presently
have spoiled the Reputation of their Order, and therefore upon the complaint
made of it at Rome, he was discharged, and another chosen. Who was no sooner
in, but disputes arose among them about the sense of their Rule; and they
appeal to the Pope (although S. Francis had declared there should be no Glosses
made upon it; (...). 14.
and that they should not obtain Letters from the Pope) upon which Pop^ Gregery
the ninth published a Bull, declaring, that they were not bound to admit of no
Glosses (What! although Christ himself in person declared that none should be
made! From whence it is plain, that either the Pope in terms contrad^cts
Christ, or he must look on all that pretense of Christ's appearance, as an idle
story only made to amuse the Friars) and withal adds several Glosses for
explication of the said Rule. And the kind Pope adds, That, although he
believed S. Francis to have had a pious intention in his former command; yet,
without the least regard to any divine Inspiration, he declares that they were
not at all bound by it; and gives these substantial reasons for it, because his
Testament could not oblige, without the consent of the Superiors and Brethren
of the Order; neither had he power to oblige his Successor. What becomes of the
Divine Revelation all this while? But the main thing which troubled the
Franciscans was, that they found their Order could not subsist without having
some things belonging to them, as Utensils, Books and other movables, and some
among them said, the property of these things belonged to the Order in common;
the subtle Pope found out an excellent Gloss for this, viz. that they should
keep to their Rule, to have no property either in special or incommon; but they
should have the use of them; only the dominion and property should be reserved
to those to whom it did belong; and that nothing should be sold, exchanged, or
alienated without the Authority and Consent of the Cardinal Protector of the
Order. By which, the Pope (supposing the Donors not to reserve the property to
themselves) entitles himself and all his Successors to the Dominion and
property of all Houses and Goods belonging to the whole Order; which was not
only a Salvo for their consciences, but a su^e way to keep them always in
subjection to the Papal See. And from hence the Popes have taken upon them the
management of their affairs, by Syndics and Procurators empowered by them,
(...). Relig. p. 174
as appears by several Bulls of Martin the fourth, and fifth, Eugenius the
fourth, Sixtus the fourth, and others. And this same Pope Gregory the ninth
takes to the Apostolical See the Right and property of the Church of Assisium,
Regest. Pontif^cium ap^d ^^^^ing. p. 5.
which was magnificently built by the contributions procured by Elias while he
was General of the Order; and by virtue of his Apostolical Power declares the
Church to be wholly Free and subject immediately to the Roman See. This Favor
of the Popes, and sudden multiplication of this Order, and the manner of their
living, gave a very great Jealousy to the Secular Clergy in all parts; for
notwithstanding this high pretense to Poverty, they knew that so many men must
be maintained out of the Church, one way or other, and although it were under
the pretense of an Eleemosynarie maintenance, yet they undertaking the Office
of preaching, and hearing Confessions, and having no Titles, could not subsist
without manifest encroaching on the rights of the Clergy. And so it was found
and complained of in all parts, but to little purpose; the Popes for good ends
of their own, resolving to carry them through in spite of the Bishops and
Clergy. For this pu^pose they were forced to be still writing Bulls in their
behalf; ninety seven Bulls are printed together of this one Pope by their
Annalist with a respect to their Order, (besides many extant in the Annals
themselves) of which several of them are to the Bishops of Italy, Spain,
France, and other parts, not to molest this new Order. For as their Annalist
says, about this time their Fame spreading abroad, (...) Mi^orum A D. 1231. n.
55.
the People gave liberally to them, Martyrolog. Franc. ^n addit. Sect. 190.
and built them houses and stately Churches with rich ^rnaments (Only to show
the perfection of their poverty) and finished them with all manner of
conveniences for their subsistence; which drew the envy and hatred of the
Bishops and Parochial Clergy upon them: and the whole controversy between them
was, whether these independent Friars should gather congregations to themselves
or no, and therein perform all divine offices, and receive the oblations of the
people without any subjection to the Bishops? And in this dispute, the Pope
took part with the Friars, and published two Bulls in their behalf to all
Bishops, D^cr^tal. Greg. l. 5. tit. 31. c. 16, 17.
extant in the Decretals, enjoining them to forbear giving any disturbance to
the Friars in those matters. And now the sublimity of their Poverty began to
show it self in the height and stateliness of their Fabrics; if any one would
see the habitation of Poverty, he may read the description their Annalist gives
of their Convent at Paris and the Church belonging to it; (...). A. D. 1234.
a^. 19. ad ^. 29.
and he will imagine (so much is the World altered) that Poverty did vye with
Solomon himself, as to the glory both of his Temple and Palace. There were some
in those days who were not subtle enough to reconcile these things with perfect
poverty, and thought a lower degree of it might have served the Francisca^s as
it did other Friars; but notwithstanding these glorious Fabrics did not look
very like the poor Cottages S. Francis enjoined them, nothing would content
these men but the very sublimity of Poverty. Richardus Armachanus in his
Sermons at Paul's Cross against the Friars, Ric. A^mac. s^rm. 4. fol. 163.
says, they were so far from the Poverty they pretended to, that he thought
them bound in Con^cience to give in charity to others out of their
superfluiti^s. For, says he, these men who call themselves Beggars, have
houses like Kings Palaces, Fishponds larger than Earls have, Churches more
costly than Cathedrals, more rich and noble Ornaments than all the Bishops of
the World; his Holiness only excepted. But it cost him dear ^or not being able
to reconcile these things with perfect poverty: for after many years trouble
occasioned by the Friars he died at Avignon. The plain Countryman in Chaucer
asks the Friar a great many untoward Questions concerning their Order, which I
doubt the wisest of their Order will not easily answer; as

Freer, how many Orders be on earth, Cha^cer. ^. 348. last Edit.
and which is the perfectest Order? Is there any perfecter Rule than Christ
himself made? If Christ's Rule be most perfect, why rulest thou thee not
thereafter? Why shall a Freer be more punished for breaking the Rule that his
Patron made, than if he break the hests that God himself made?

If your Order be perfect why get you your Dispensations to make it easy?
Certes, either it seems, that ye be unperfect, or he that made it so hard
that he may not hold it. And siker if ye hold not the Rule of your Patrons, ye
be not then their Freers, and so ye lie upon your selves.

Why make you as deed men when ye be professed, and yet be not dead but more
quick beggars than you were before? and it seems evil a Deed man to go about
and beg.

Why make ye you so costly houses to dwell in? since Christ did not so, and
deed men should have but Graves, as falls it to deed men, and yet ye have
more Courts than many Lords of England: for ye now wenden through the Realm,
and each night will lig in your own Courts, and so mow but few right Lords do.

Why be not under your Bishops visitation, and leege men to our King?

Why make ye men believe that your golden Trental sung of you to take
therefore ten shillings, or at least five shillings, woll bring souls out of
Hell or out of Purgatory? if this be sooth, certes ye might bring all the
souls out of pain, and that woll ye naught, and then ye be out of charity.

Why make ye men believe, that he that is buried in your habit, shall never
come in Hell, and ye weet not of your self whether ye shall to Hell or no? if
this were sooth ye should sell your high houses to make many habits for to save
many men's souls.

Why covet ye shrift and burying of other men's Parishens, and none other
Sacrament that falls to Christian folk?

Why busy ye not to hear to shrift of poor folk as well as of Lords and
Ladies, since they may have more plenty of shrift fathers than poor folk mow?

Why covet you not to bury poor folk among you? since they been most holy, (as
ye sayn that ye been for your poverty.)

Freer, when thou receivest a penie for to say a Mass, whether sellest thou
Gods body for that penie, or thy prayer, or else thy travel? If thou say
thou will not travel for to say the Mass, but for the penie, that certes if
this be sooth, then thou love too little meed for thy soul: and if thou
sellest Gods body, other thy prayer, then it is very simonie, and art become a
chapman worse than Judas, that sold it for thirty pence.

Why bear thou God in hand and slanderst him that he begged for his meat?
since he was Lord over all, for then had he been unwise to have begged, and have
no need thereto.

Freer, after what Law rulest thou thee? where find thou in Gods Law, that
thou should thus beg? what manner men needs for to beg? for whom owes such
men to beg? Why beggest thou so for thy Brethren? If thou say, for they have
need, then thou do it for the more perfection, or else for the least, or else
for the mean. If it be the most perfection of all, then should all thy
Brethren do so, and then no man needed to beg but for himself, for so should no
man beg but him needed And if it be the least perfection, why love thou then
other men more than thy self? For so thou art not well in charity, since thou
should seek the more perfection after thy power living thy self most after
God. And thus leaving that imperfection thou should not so beg for them. And
if it is a good mean thus to ^eg as thou do, then should no man do so, but
they been this good mean, and yet such a mean granted by you can never be
grounded on Gods Law, for then both lerid and leard that been in mean degree of
this world should go about and beg as you do. And if all should do, certes well
nigh all the world should go about and heg as ye done, and so should there be
ten beggars against one Yever.

Why will thou not beg for poor bedred men, that been poorer than any of your
Sect, that liggen and mow not go about to help himselfes, since we be all
Brethren in God, and that Bretherhed passes any other that ye or any man could
make, and where most need were, there were most perfection, either else ye hold
them not your pure Brethren, but worse, but then ye he unperfect in your
begging? Whose ben all your rich Courts that ye han, and all your rich Jewels?
since ye seen that ye han naught ne in proper, ne in common. If ye sain they ben
the Popes, why gather ye then of poor men and Lords and so much out of the
Kings hand to make your Pope rich? And since ye sain that it is great perfection
to have naught in proper ne in common, why be ye so fast about to make the Pope
that is your Father rich, and put on him imperfection? sithen ye saine that
your goods ben all his, and ye should by reason be the most perfect man, it
seems openlich that ye ben cursid Children so to slander your Father and make
him imperfect. And if ye sain that the goods be yours then do ye against your
rule; and if it be not against your Rule, then might ye have both plow and cart
and labor as other good men done, and not so beg by Cosengery and idle as ye
done. If ye say that it is more perfection to beg, than to travel or to work
with your hand, why preach ye not openly and teach all men to do so? since it is
the best and most perfect life to the help of their fouls, as ye make Children
to beg that might have been rich heirs.

Why hold ye not S. Francis his Rule and his Testament? since Francis says,
that God showed him this living and this Rule; and certes if it were Gods Will,
the Pope might not fore do it; or else Francis was a lier that said in this
wise.

Why will ye not touch no coined money with the Cross, ne with the Kings head,
as ye done other Jewels both of Gold and Silver? certes, if ye despise the
Cross of the Kings head, then ye be worthy to be despised of God and the King:
and since ye will receive money in your hearts and not with your hands, it
seems that ye hold more holiness in your hands than in your hearts, and then
be false to God.

Why have ye exempt you from our King's Laws, and visiting of our Bishops,
more than other Christian men that liven in this Realm, if ye be not guilty of
traitorie to our Realm, or trespas^es to your Bishops?

Freer, what charity is this, to the people to lie, and say that ye follow
Christ in poverty more than other men done? and yet in curious and costly
housing, and fine and precious clothing, and delicious and liking feeding, and
in treasure and jewels, and rich ornaments, Freers passen Lords, and other rich
worldly men, and soonest they should bring their cause about (be it never so
costly) though Gods Law be put a back.

Freer, what charity is this to prease upon a rich man, and to entice him to be
buried among you from his parish Church, and to such rich men give letters of
Fraternity confirmed by your general Seal, and thereby to bear him in hand that
he shall have part of all your Masses, Mattens, Preachings, Fastings, Wakings,
and all other good deeds done by your Brethren of your Order (both whilst he
lives and after that he is dead) and yet ye witten never whether your deeds be
acceptable to God, ne whether that man that has that letter, be able by good
living to receive any part of your deeds; and yet a poor man (that ye wite well
or supposen in certain to have no good of) ye ne given to such letters, though
he be a better man to God than such a rich man; nevertheless this poor man does
not retch thereof. For as men supposen, such letters and many others that
Freers behoten to men, be full false deceits of Freers out of all reason, and
Gods Law and Christian men's faith.

Freer, what charity is this, to be Confessors of Lords and Ladies, and to
other mighty men and not amend hem in their living? but rather as it seems to
be bolder to pill their poor tenants and to live in lechery; and there to dwell
in your office of Confessor for winning of worldly goods, and to be bold great
by color of such ghostly offices? this seems rather pride of Freers, than
charity of God.

Freer, what charity is this, to sain that who so lives after your Order
lives most perfectly, and next follows the state of Apostles in poverty and
penance, and yet the wisest and greatest Clerks of you wend or send, or procure
to the Court of Rome to be made Cardinals, or Bishops, or the Popes Chapleins,
and to be assoiled of the vow of poverty, and obedience to your Ministers, in
which (as ye sain) stands most perfection and merit of your Orders, and thus
ye faren as Pharisees, that sain one and do another to the contrary.

Freer, was S. Francis in making that Rule he set thine Order in, a fool and a
liar or else wise and true? If ye sain that he was not a Fool but wise, ne a
liar but true: why show ye contrary to your doing, when by your suggestion to
the Pope ye said, that Your Rule that Francis made was so hard, that ye mow not
live to hold it without declaracion and dispensation of the Pope, and so by
your deed? Ne let your Patron a Fool that made a rule so hard that no man may
well keep, and eke your deed proves him a lier, where be says in his rule
that he took and learned it of the Holy Ghost. For how might ye for shame pray
the Pope undo that the Holy Ghost bit, as when ye prayed him to dispense with
the hardness of your Order?

Freer, is there any perfecter Rule of Religion than Christ Gods Son gave in
his Gospel to his Brethren? Or than that Religion that S. James in his Epistle
makes mention, of? If you say yes, then put thou on Christ (that is the
Wisdom of God the Father) unkunning, unpower, or evil will. For then he could
not make his Rule so good as another did his, and so he had be unkunning; or
that he might not make his Rule so good as another man might, and so were he
unmighty; or he would not make his Rule so perfect, as another did his, and so
he had been evil willed.

For if he might and could and would have made a Rule perfect without default
and did not, he was not Gods Son almighty. For if any other Rule be perfecter
than Christ's, then must Christ's Rule lack of that perfection, and so were
default and Christ had failed in making of his Rule, but to put any default or
failing in God is blasphemy. If thou say that Christ's Rule and that Religion
S. James makes mention of, is perfectest; why hold thou not thilk Rule
without more? And why clepest thou the rather of S. Francis, or S. Dominicks
Rule or Religion or Order, than of Christ's Rule, or Christ's Order?

Freer, can thou any default assign in Christ's Rule of the Gospel, with the
which he taught all men sickerly to be saded, if they kept it to their ending?
If thou say it was too hard, then say thou Christ lied, for he said of his
Rule, My yoke is soft and my burden light. If thou say Christ's Rule was too
light, that may be assigned for no default, for the better it may be kept. If
thou say, there is no default in Christ's Rule of the Gospel, since Christ
himself says it is light and easy: what need was it for Patrons of Friars to
add more thereto? and so make an harder Religion to save Freers, than was the
Religion of Christ's Apostles and his Disciples helden and were saved by? But if
they woulden that their Freers saten above the Apostles in Heaven for the
harder Religion that they keepen here, so would they sitten in Heaven above
Christ himself for their more and strict observations, then so should they be
better than Christ himself.

In these Questions, ( besides several others extant in Chauctr) we have the
hypocrisy and fraud of these Mendicant Friars fully set forth by a Person who
lived among them in the time of their greatest flourishing here in England:
which Hypocrisy of theirs in the pretense of Poverty is attested by our
Historians. Walsingham says, Walsingh. hist. p. 92. A. D. 1308.
that they offered the Pope at one time, for a dispensation to break their
Rule, as to the liberty of enjoying rents and Lands, 40000 florens of Gold and
much more money. The Pope asked them, where their money was? they told him, in
the Merchants hands; the cunning Pope pretended to take three days time to
consider of it, In the mean time he sends for the Merchants, absolves them from
their obligation to the Friars, and charges them under pain of an Anathema, to
pay the money into his Treasury; and then tells the Friars, he would not have
them to break their Rule; by which they were bound to touch no money. And so,
says he, what they had unjustly gotten, was justly taken away. I know no
reason they could have to complain of any injustice in the Pope, since they
declare the property and Dominion of what they enjoyed was in the Apostolical
See. And it were pity the Pope should have nothing but a mere name and title.
Mat. (...). A. 1299.
Matthew Westminster, from whom Walsingham took not only the story but most of
the very words of it, says it was quadringenta millia and not quadraginta as
it is in Walsingham, 400000 Florens of gold and much more, to have the liberty
to receive lands and revenews; expressly against their Rule and Solemn Vow of
perfect poverty. Mat. Paris ad A. D. 1235.
Matthew Paris describes their Frauds as to the Parochial Priests and other
Convents, their flatteries and insinuations into Great men; and adds, that they
were so excellently skilled in the arts of getting money, that the Pope made
choice of them above others to be his Collectors, both here and in other
Countries; in so much, he says, ad A. D. 1247.
that the Pope made them instead of Fishers of men, Fishers of money. So much
had they kept to their Rule in S. Francis his sense, i e. to the mere letter of
it; for no men were more skilful in the getting of money, than they were; if
they did but keep themselves from fingering of it, they thought, they observed
that part of his Rule at least, whatever became of their perfect poverty. Which
he sets forth, A. D. 12^3.
when he says, that within 24 years after their first coming into England,
their Mansion houses were like Royal Palaces, wherein they had unvaluable
Treasures, most impudently transgressing the Rules of Poverty, which was the
Foundation of their Profession. And then describes their hanging about great
and rich men's beds when they lay a dying, in hopes of a prey; their drawing
people to confess to them, their obtaining private Testaments, their commending
their own Order, and discommending all others to that degree, that the people
commonly believed they could not be saved unless they were ruled by the
Mendicant Friars. Nay they were so busy not only to get privileges, but to
insinuate themselves into Courts and great Families, that no businesses almost
were managed without them, either relating to money or marriages: with much
more to the same purpose in him; and if we believe the concurrent testimony of
these Historians, there were never greater Hypocrites known, since the
Pharisees, and before the Jesuits, than these pretenders to perfect Poverty:
who hated that in their hearts to which they made the greatest show of Love. We
may perceive by chaucer what ways they had of wheadling great persons into an
opinion how much better it was to be buried among them, than any where else;
the Bishops saw well enough what all this was designed for, viz. to have the
profits of burials; and therefore in behalf of the Parochial Clergy they
opposed it as long as they durst; A^nal^s Minor. ad A. 1252. n. 23.
but Pope Innocent 4. declared, their Churches to be Conventual, and then to
have liberty of burying in them; which they made good use of, both here and in
other places, to their great advantage. So that, what by the Favor of great
Persons, whom they flattered to become their Confessors; what by their Masses,
and extraordinary Offices; what by Burials, and the charitable benevolence of
well disposed persons to them; they made a good shift to keep themselves a good
way out of the reach of the Perfection of Poverty; while in the mean time they
pretended to nothing more than that. But they found more comfort in their own
purse-opening way, than the Parochial Clergy did in their settled maintenance;
they having found out the knack of pleasing those humors in persons that had
the greatest command of their purses: but besides these ways, when the charity
of particular persons began to cool toward them, they had a certain rate upon
houses which they lived upon, which Sancta Clara confesses, Histor. Minor.
Provinc. Angliae. s. 24.
and says, it was easy for the people, and abundantly sufficient for them. So
that laying all these ways together, although they had sworn so much affection
to perfect Poverty; and professed to love and admire it above all things; yet
they endeavored with all their care and diligence to keep it from coming
within their Doors.

. 15. But all this would not satisfy them, for the Conventual Friars were
never quiet, till, for the greater height of their poverty, they procured leave
from the Pope that they might enjoy Lands and possessions as well as others: so
much is confessed by their Martyrologist, Martyrolo^. Fra^c. addit. s. 208.
Nitela Fran^is^. Relig. p. 174. Bernard. Sen^ns. vit. c. 29.
and the defender of their Order against Bzovius: upon this a new Reformation
began among them, first by Paulutius* Fulginas, but very little regard was had
to it, till Bernardinus Senensis appeared in the head of it, and then it spread
very much; these were called Fratres de observantia from their strict
observance of S. Francis his Rule; and many and great differences happened
between them, which it has cost the Papal See some trouble to compose: which
were so high that Leo 10. in the Preface to the Bull of Union, Leo 10. Constit.
23.
declares that almost all the Princes in Christendom had interceded with him to
end the controversy between these two sorts of Beggars, viz. those who had
good Lands and revenues; and others, that had rich houses and furniture and
other conveniences, but had no endowments. For this same Pope declared, Leo 10.
Constit. 6.
that these strict Observantines might enjoy the most magnificent Houses and
costly furniture without any diminution to the perfection of their poverty,
because the right and property of them was not in themselves, but in the Papal
See: but I cannot understand why the same reason should not hold for Lands too,
supposing the same Right and property to be in the Popes; for it cannot enter
into my head, that a man is a jot the poorer because his estate lies in goods
and Jewels, and not in Lands; or why this may not be in Trustees hands as well
as the other. Indeed that was the solemn Cheat in all this affair, that how
rich soever really this Order of Mendicants was; yet, forsooth they had nothing
at all to live upon but the Alms of the people, for they had vowed the very
height of poverty. Why, says a plain Country man* that is not well skilled in
Metaphysics; the beggars in our Country do not live in such stately houses,
and have no such rich Ornaments nor feed so well, nor are so well provided for
as you are: we that have Land of our own, would be glad to have all things
found us at so cheap a rate. Do you think that riches lies only in trouble and
care and hard labor? if that be it I confess you are poor enough: but in no
other sense that I see.

Alas poor man, says the good Friar, we are as poor as Job for all this.

Now that cannot I understand for my heart, says the other; surely you call
things only by other names than we do: and make that poverty that we plain men
call riches.

Well, says the Friar, I will show my charity to your understanding in helping
of that, if you will show yours to us poor Friars; therefore you must know that
although we have the full use and possession for our benefit in the things you
see, yet Pope Nicholas 3. in the Bull Exiit, and Pope Clement 5. in the Bull
Exivi de Paradiso, has declared that we have no propriety and Dominion in
them, but that is reserved to the Papal See: So that we enjoy all things but
have right to nothing.

Say you so, says the Country man, Then I believe you come within the compass
of the Statutes against Vagabonds and sturdy Beggars, for you live upon that
which is none of your own, and refuse to Work.

Tush, says the Friar, that is an heretical Statute, and we defy Q. Elizabeth
and all her works; as long as the Pope has declared us to be poor, we are so
and will be so, although we had ten times as much as we have: For our holy
Father the Pope can change not only the names but the natures of things; nay I
will tell you farther, if we had as much wealth as the King of Spain in the
Indies, if we had only the possession, and the supreme right or Dominion were
declared to be in the Pope, we were in perfect poverty for all this.

I cry you mercy Sir, replies the Country man; I beseech you intercede with
his Holiness to make me one of his Beads-men; for I perceive poverty, as he
makes it, is better than all my Lands that I have the Fee-simple of: but I pray
think of a better way to keep me out of the reach of the Statute; for if I have
no manner of right to what I enjoy, I may be endited next Sessions for all that
I know; if I have any right to it, then I have a property; and if I have a
property, how can I swear that I have none, and will have none, neither in my
self, nor in common with others?

Come, come, says the Friar, these are things too high for you; it is enough
for us, that have had Scotus of our Order, to be able to explain these things.

And yet Pope John 22. could understand these subtilties no more than a plain
Country man; for he declares the distinction of property and use, as it was
applied by the Franciscans from the Bull of Nicolas 3. to be mere fraud and
hypocrisy. For which we are to consider, that among the articles objected
against one of the Beguini by the Dominican Inquisitor at Narbon, Extrav. ad
Condit. de ver^. signif.
A. D. 1321. this was one, that Christ and his Apostles following the way of
perfection, had no right of property and dominion in any thing either in
special or in common: which Berengarius a Franciscan being present, utterly
denied to contain any erroneous doctrine; but said, it was a very good
Catholic opinion, and expressly grounded on Pope Nich. 3. his Bull Exiit: upon
which an Appeal was made to the Pope and Cardinals; the Pope to proceed with
the greater satisfaction in this weighty affair, sends abroad to Universities
and Learned men to know their opinion herein; and because Nich. 3. had
pronounced an Anathema against those that should take upon them to interpret or
debate the Bull Exiit, he takes off this Anathema, and gives all men free leave
to deliver their judgments. In the mean time, the Franciscans finding the
Perfection of their Order called in Question* and suspecting the Popes ill will
toward them; they met together at Perusium; and published their sentence to
all Christian People, that the foresaid article was sound and Catholic,
because it had been approved be the Apostolical See. The Pope being thoroughly
netled at this and other carriages of theirs in the controversy between him
and the Emperor, and at the insolent behavior of Friar Bonagratias, who was
sent from the General Chapter to the Pope, declared their Letter to be
heretical, and their Order to be founded in Heresy; (...). A. D. 132^.* ^. 55.
as Raynaldus shows from a Letter of Michael Caesenas then General of the
Order, extant in the Vatican Library: and finding, says Raynaldus, that the
Franciscans under the pretense of Apostolical Poverty did heap up riches to
themselves, which they would have the world to believe did not contradict their
Vow and Rule, because the Dominion and property was reserved to the Papal See,
he published the Bull, Ad Conditorem; in which he fully sets forth the
hypocrisy of the Franciscans in pretending to the perfection of Poverty upon
this reservation of the right of property and Dominion to the Apostolical See:
For, says he, the perfection of a Christian life, lies principally in charity,
which the Apostle calls the bond of Perfection; which the contempt of worldly
things did only prepare men for, by taking off that solicitude which the care
of Worldly affairs did carry along with it: but where the same solicitude
continues, there expropriation, as he calls it, can add nothing to Perfection.
But, says he, it is notorious that the Franciscans, after the said Reservation
of Property to the Popes, were rather more than less solicitous about the
procuring and keeping of worldly things, both by suits at Law, and otherwise.
And under the pretense of this reservation, they have unreasonably boasted of
the perfection of their Poverty; because they have the bare Use of things
without property or Dominion. But if they would attend to things rather than
bare words, and submit to Truth; they would find, that they had much more than
the bare Use, having the liberty to sell, exchange or give away. And in things
consumed by Use, to separate the property from the use, is repugnant both to
Law and Reason: and such a reserved Dominion is not real but verbal, and a mere
fiction: but supposing there could be a bare use, yet it could not be given the
property reserved; because there can be no difference, between such a bare Use,
and the full dominion. This and much more is contained in the Popes Bull, which
fully manifests that all this pretense of Poverty was a mere Iuggle; and fit
only to deceive the simple. For in things necessary to life it is impossible to
part with the property and Dominion of them; and in other things, it is great
hypocrisy to pretend poverty under the greatest plenty, merely because a
titular Dominion is reserved to another Person. For as Augerius the Provincial
of the Carmelites said truly upon this occasion, Raynald. ^. 68.
the perfection of Poverty does not lie so much in the Title, as in the Use of
things; viz. such as tends to abate the motions of the flesh and swellings of
the mind; which he did not understand how it could be attained, by a plentiful
Use, supposing it could be without property or Dominion.

But notwithstanding this Bull of John 22. and the great Truth and Reason
contained in it, the Franciscans still went on with the same hypocrisy; and
they obtained that Favor of following ^opes to recall the Bull, Ad Conditorem,
(which surely needed not to have been done in case Nichol. 3. and he had not
differed, B^ll de Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 14.
as Bellarmin and others would fain make the world believe) which was expressly
done by Martin 5. in the Bull Amabilis Fructus, which was confirmed by Eugenius
4. Calixtus 3. Nicol. 5. Pius 2. Paul 2. Sixtus 4. Alexander 6. and Leo 10. Who
all proceed upon the same solemn Foppery, Annals Minor. A. 1322. ^ 61, 62, etc.
that the Franciscans had the perfection of Poverty, because the Dominion and
Property of their Houses, Goods and Estates was not in themselves but in the
Papal See. I might farther have shown the hypocrisy of this pretense of
Poverty, from the resolutions of their Casuists in this matter, and the
frivolous subtilty of their distinctions to salve men's consciences; but this is
sufficient to my present purpose, to show how vain and foolish the pretense to
perfection was in this Mendicant way, which is fully confuted (supposing it to
have been what it preten^ed) by that one saying of our Savior, Act. 20. 2^*
It is a more blessed thing to give, than to receive.

. 16. Hitherto the Perfection of a Christian Life, was sup^osed to lie in
abstraction from the World, and Poverty, and diligence in the public
performance of the Ecclesiastical office; but these latter Ages of the World
have produced an Order of a very different nature from all before it, but yet
pretending to Divine Inspiration in the settlement of it: and that is the Order
of Jesuits. (...) the Monks having lost their reputation by laziness, and the
Friars by their hypocrisy; and their Churches affairs requiring an Order busy
and active: it was necessary that a new one should be advanced upon other
pretenses than the foregoing. And the Jesuits very well understanding, how much
all the former pretenses were seen through; and yet how necessary it was in
some things to seem to comply with them, they pitched upon such a Model of
their own, which took in what seemed most for their advantage; and yet proposed
such an end of their Society as seemed to advance it above all before it. For
as Ribadineira well argues in their behalf, the perfection of any Society is to
be taken from the end of it; Vit. Ign^t. l. 3. c. 22.
now the end of their Society they pretended to be Charity and Edification,
which was in it self more excellent than any of the former Religious Orders.
And that which other Orders accounted their perfection, they expressed very
little regard to: which was either, 1. The constant performance of the
Ecclesiastical Office. 2. Corporal Austerities. 3. A Contemplative Life. 4. The
solemn Vows. As to every one of these the Jesuits have done our Work for us,
and have showed that the Perfection of a Christian state does not ^ye in any of
them.

1. Not, in attendance on the performance of the Ecclesiastical Office; for by
the Popes Bulls and Constitutions of their Society they are excused from having
any Choire, Literae Apostol. Bull. Paul. 3. p. 8. Iul^i 3. p. 58. 67.
or from saying their Canonical Office in public, although they be Priests;
and this is declared by the Popes at the same time, when they declare that this
Order was begun by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; as appears by the Bulls
of Paul 3. and Julius 3. And after the Council of Trent Gregory 13. confirmed
the same privilege to them, Greg. 13. p. 135.
that they might the better attend to their studying, reading and preaching;
which Ribadineira and Pallavacini show to have more excellency and perfection
in it, V^t. Ign. l. 3. c. 22. p. 347. Pallavac. vindi^. Soci^t. (...) 13. p. 65.
than attendance on the Choire: which they not only prove from a Council under
Gregory the Great, but from the practice of other Religious Orders, which
excuse their Professors and Preachers, as being employed about a nobler work.
And Thomas Hurtado Thom. Hurtado R^ olut. Morales p. 308.
quotes an expression of a Jesuit, wherein he commends their Order above any
other, because they have more regard to preaching and other duties, than the
Office of the Choire, which says he* is a public affront to all Orders both
of Monks and Friars: and another expression of Valentia, worse than the former,
viz. Chorus ad ineptos; viz. that such a constant attendance on the Offices of
the Choire so often day and night, wherein the Monastic Orders placed so much
of the perfection of their lives, was for those that were good for nothing
else: and Oliver Bonarte does imply, De i^stit. horar. Cano ^ic. l. 1. c. 13.
n. 18.
that the Canonical Offices were intended to keep the Monks from idleness. How
very much different is this from the opinion of those who place the perfection
of the Monastic Life in this constancy of their public devotion?

2. Not, in corporal Austerities. For they have no rule at all by the Bulls and
Constitutions of their Order, requiring any of these, as to Diet, or habit, or
chastising themselves; but they are left to the private discretion of
particular persons; yet Ribadineira says, they do not despise those that use
them; which I cannot easily believe, if any credit may be given to the Letter
of the Jesuit Barisonius which has been several times printed; bearing date
from Bononia April 21. 1608. wherein among other things, which he highly
commends their society for above any other Religious Order, this is one, that
they do not require those severities in Diet, habit, or lodging, which not only
afflict the body, but weaken men's spirits, and dull their understandings. And
Card. Pallavacini in his Defense of the Society, S^o^t. Pallavac. Viadicat.
Societ. (...). c. 13.
chiefly against the objections of other Orders, does not only confess, that
they do not require those rigours and severities either in Diet, or other
ways, which others pretend to, but that the moderate way they proceed in is
much more convenient and agreeable to the design of a Religious Society. And
because the chief employments of the Society require sharpness of wit, which
according to Aristotle is joined with a more delicate temper of body, which is
easily put out of order with hard usage, therefore he looks upon the use of
such hardships, as very contrary to their main intention, because they weaken
both the body and mind together. All the office of virtue as to these things,
he says, is to retrench all extravagancies, and such things which rather
provoke than satisfy the appetite; and an ability to endure hardships is
rather an effect of Nature than Grace: and the Perfection of a Porter, and not
of a Christian.

3. Not, in a contemplative Life. For they undertake to prove, that the Works
of Charity, which their Society is chiefly designed for, viz. Preaching,
administering Sacraments, Teaching Youth, etc. are more excellent than a life of
contemplation. On this account Julius Nigronus I^l. Nigro^. Comment in Regul.
Commun. societ. Ies part. 3. s. 13, 14, etc.
at large proves the greater excellency of their Order than of any other: which
the Franciscan Martyrologist Martyrolog. Franc. addit. s. 221.
will by no means allow to the Jesuits. And that, which the Jesuits boast the
most of, viz. their fourth vo^ of Obedience to the Pope, about Missions; he
contends that their Order was under that Vow in a more eminent manner long
before them, as he proves from Bonaventure, and others. Which is a thing I am
willing to leave them to contend about.

4. Not, in the solemn Vows. For the Jesuits have found out a notable device of
a simple Vow: by which they understand such a Vow as binds men no longer than
the Society thinks fit. Gregory 13. in his Bull of Confirmation, Literae
Apostol^c. p. 217.
declares, that after the two years Novitiate are over, those who will remain
in the society must take the three substantial vows, but only simple, and not
solemn, after which they are incorporated into the Society; notwithstanding
which the General of the Order upon a cause which he shall judge reasonable may
dismiss them; and absolve them from all obligation of their Vows. Whereas
before the perfection of the Monastic state was supposed to lie in the
perpetual Obligation of the three vows; and none were accounted of a Religious
Order, that had not taken upon them solemn vows, (notwithstanding which Gregory
13. immediately before this, mentions the divine instinct by which Ignatius did
make these Constitutions of his Order) and after adds, that those who are only
under these simple vows, are as much partakers of all the merits (which no
doubt are very great) and privileges of the Order, as those who are professed;
and as truly Religious as they, and liable to the punishment of Apostates, if
they depart without leave; P. 219, 220.
Which the same Pope confirms by another Constitution (this simple vow not
being so easily digested by other Orders, and being thought repugnant to the
very constitution of a Religious Order) But there was a Mystery in this simple
vow, not so easily apprehended by such whose brains were too much mortified by
Penances; For notwithstanding they had obtained so much favor from Pope Pius
5. to pass among the Mendicant Orders, (because their Domus professae have no
endowments, Literae Aposto^. p. 116.
though their Colleges have,) that they might enjoy the great privileges
belonging to them: yet they took as much care as could be taken to prevent any
such scandal as that of Poverty falling upon their Society. But this was not to
be done after the dull way of the hypocrisy of the Mendicant Friars; but they
found out finer and subtiler devices of their own: To this end, they made the
distinction of the Colleges and Domus Professae; the former were capable of the
richest endowments, wherein they took care for the education of Youth; in the
other were only Professed Jesuits who had taken the solemn vows; and were
employed in Preaching, Writing, Sacraments, etc. now these were to be without
endowments to excite the freer Benevolence of the People; but yet supposing
their Charity should cool, the endowments of the Colleges were to be in the
hands of the Praepositus and the Society; who would be sure not to suffer their
chief men to want. And they have so very few of these, that Card. Pallavacini
says, Pallavaci^. Vi^dicat. Societ. Jesus. c. 9 p 35. c. 13. p. 67.
that there are but about thirty of them belonging to the whole Society:
whereas he confesses, that there were about 18000 persons of their Society. But
besides many other artifices made use of by them to draw the kindness of the
Great ones to them (for they little regard any other; and Barisonius says,
some of the Mendicants had so exposed themselves by selling Masses at so low a
rate, that there was a necessity of reforming if not of utterly destroying the
whole Order) the Jesuits reserved this way of improving the stock of the
Society, by the Mystery of the simple Vows: viz. that those who are under them
may possess estates, which they cannot under the solemn vows; (notwithstanding
that one of these Vows is that of Poverty, and that in the first year of
Novitiate, they are to renounce all temporal goods not only which they have at
present, but may have hereafter) by this means, they can not only discharge
themselves of unprofitable members without any burden to the Society; but in
case any inheritance chance to fall to any under the simple vow, they put in a
fair claim to it; for he is declared capable to inherit, and yet he has parted
with his right to the Society when he became a Member of it: and if it cannot
be done any other way, they release him of his simple Vow, and leave the rest
to his ingenuity. This is a fetch somewhat above the fat hearts of the Monks,
or the more gross hypocrisy of the Friars; but I think is far enough from
persuading any man that the constitutions of this Order came from the
Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

. 17. The only Society remaining in the Roman Church, of any name, which puts
in claim to Divine Inspiration in the Founders of it, is that of the
Oratorians: so the Preface to the Constitutions of the Congregation of the
Oratory, says, that Philip Nerius was wont to say, that not he, but God
himself was the Author of it. The beginning of this Congregation was laid by
Nerius in Private Meetings in his Chamber A. D. 1551. which afterward proving
too little for his Company, Gallo^. vit. Phil. N^rii p 65.
he removed to a Room over the Church of S. Hierom; where Caesar Baronius,
Franciscus Taurusius, and others of his Disciples, Bar^abe. vit. Baron. c. 7.
though not in Orders, did hold forth to the people: by which means, so great a
number flocked to them, that Nerius was accused for keeping Conventicles before
the Ecclesiastical Judge; Gallot. p. 147.
but notwithstanding the severe rebukes he received from him, they did not give
over the Exercises of the Oratory; and at last obtained leave to continue them.
He was so used to Ecstasies and Raptures, that Gallonius says, P. 157.
it was easier for him to fall into one of them, than for another person to
think of worldly matters; and that to avoid them, he was forced to divert his
mind from divine thoughts. A. D. ^564. he laid the Foundation of his
Congregation, and made some Orders for the Government of it; and besides the
daily exercises at the Oratory, Baronius and Bordinus preached on Sundays in
the Florentines Church; P. 207.
every day of the Week, Saturday only excepted, four of the Fathers in their
course made plain Discourses to the people for half an hour a piece, the first
two were Moral, and the latter relating to Ecclesiastical History and the Lives
of the Saints; which part Nerius afterward allotted to Baronius, from whence
he took the occasion of writing his Annals; Barnabe. vit. Ba^o^. c. 18.
but Barnabeus says withal, that Nerius had much ado to keep Baronius from
embracing one of the severest Religious Orders, c. 8.
till Constantius Tassonus pretending divine inspiration, told him, God had not
called him to it. A. D. 1575. Gregory the thirteenth gave them his Bull for
settling the Congregation of the Oratory in the Church of S. Maria in
Vall^cell^; with the Parochial Charge belonging to it; and in imitation of
this, others were set up at Naples and several other places of Italy. Philip
Nerius being made President of the Congregation sets himself to the framing the
Constitutions of it; in the first place, he declared it to be his mind, that
none who were, or should be of that Order should enter into any Vows at all;
Gallon. vit. Nerii p* 313
and that if any had a mind to make solemn Vows, they should leave the
Congregation, and betake themselves to some Religious Orders; for be designed
those of his Society should be thought Religious only by the good example of
their lives, and their diligence in preaching: and that the manner of living
among them should be in a mean between the licentiousness of the World, and the
Austerities of the Religious Orders. Among the Constitutions of the Oratory,
Co^stitut. Congreg. O^atorii, c. 4.
this is one, that in case the Major part should consent to the bringing Vows,
Oaths, or Solemn Promises among them, they may have the liberty to go to what
Religious Order they please, but the lesser part is to enjoy all the endowments
of the Congregation, as long as they continue in that liberty wherein the
Congregation was first settled: which Constitution was approved by Paul the
fifth. And in his time in imitation of this at Rome a new Congregation of the
Oratory was set up at Paris without any Vows, Congreg. Oratorii Jesus Christ. c.
2.
and with a full liberty of the Members of it as to the disposal of their
estates; so as they obtain no right* they lose none by being of the
Congregation, and pretend to no privileges or exemptions from the jurisdiction
of the Bishops; but profess to live, as much as any other Clergymen, in
subjection to them; which Congregation by the encouragement of the Bishops has
spread very much in France in a little time, being brought in by Peter de
Berulle A. D. 1611. and before his death A. D. 1628. the Sammarthani say,
Gallia Christian. Tom. 4. p. 993.
that the Congregation of the Oratory was diffused almost over all France: and
I do not question it found the greater favor from the Bishops, because its
constitution is so repugnant to that of the Religious Orders; which place their
greatest perfection in those Solemn Vows, Aqu^n. 2. 2. q. 186. art. 7.
which the Oratorians make nothing of. And thus we have brought the pretense of
Divine Inspiration so far, that we have seen those things despised and rejected
by it in the Roman Church, wherein the perfection of the Monastic State was
placed by the first Founders of it; which is certainly sufficient to discover
that this pretense must be counterfeit in some or other of these; and according
to Cardinal Bona's Rule in such cases, we have reason enough from hence to
suspect them all.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Conversion of England, and the difference between the British and
Saxon Christians.
. 1. MR. Cressy in the heat of his Zeal for the honor of S. Benedict, would
make the Vindication of him to be not barely the duty of those of his own
Order, P. 15.
but the common concernment of the whole Nation: and I cannot blame him,
considering the weakness of his Cause, that he calls in so many to his
assistance. He had a mind to engage the whole Western Patriarchate against me,
but being somewhat fearful lest that should not obey his Command, and rise like
one man for the honor of the Founder of his Order, he summons the Arrierban of
the English Nation, as most especially concerned in the quarrel. If Mr.
Cressy's Rhetoric had been equal to his passion, and if his own rage could
have enflamed a Nation, what cause should I have had to repent the attempt of
Eclipsing the glory of his Order, by charging Fanaticism on the Founder of it?
But he comforts himself with the hopes that scarce any one hereafter will be
willing to imitate my malignant ingratitude: Malignant ingratitude! Me^hinks it
sounds very well; especially in the same Chapter, P. 17.
wherein he calls me Theological Scarron, a man of poisonous hatred not only
against the Church-Catholick Militant, but Tri^^phant too; than whom he does
not know any Adversasary, P 35.
that could with all his study, have showed himself more imp^tent in his
passions and less successful in Reasoning. And after such obliging Kindnesses
as these, had he not just reason to charge me with malignant Ingratitude? Which
being the utmost and most comprehensive terms of reproach, put me in some
^opes, that he has brought up all that which lay so uneasy at the very bottom
of his stomach: And now I shall reason the case with him; and in truth I do not
find the charge of Ingratitude laid upon me, any further than as I am a Native
of England, in which he says Christianity was established by the Disciples of
S. Benedict: which being expressed in such large and general terms, gave just
occasion to the Person of Honor to tell him, that Christianity was planted
with us many hundred years before the birth of S. Benedict; Ani^adver. p. 29.
and that we may reasonably believe that it was sooner planted in Britain, than
it was at Rome it self, since the last year of Tiberius was before S. Peter's
coming to Rome. Therefore Mr. Cressy craves leave to explain himself by saying,
(...). Apol^ sect. 35.
that he did not speak it of the planting Christianity in our Island; but he
says, that which he said was (not by his favor that which he said, for he
said no such thing; but that which he now tells us he meant by what he said,
was) that England, or the Country and Nation of the English Saxons who drove
the Christian Britains out of our part of the Island, was indeed converted by
the ^isciples of S. Benedict: and this, he says, truly he must stand to. Some
would be glad to meet with any thing, which a man of so uncertain a humor as
he has been, will at last stand to; but the only reason is, because he must;
i. e. because he is a Benedictin; and therefore must believe and defend any
thing that makes for the credit of his (...). It is very unhappy to Mr. Cressy
that when he had Truth and Reason on his side he could not stand to it then;
but there are some troublesome Insects, which fly up and down and make a great
noise buzzing in the air, and never stand to it till they at last fall into the
most filthy places.

But since Mr. Cressy thinks this a great aggravation of my crime, and is so
resolved to stand to it, I shall try whether he be not capable of being shocked
even in this fundamental point of the honor belonging to the English
Benedictin Order. If then, it cannot be proved, either that Christianity was
first brought among the English Saxons by the Benedictins; or if it were, that
it was established in England by their means, then all the reason Mr. Cressy
will have left to stand to this assertion will be only, because he must.

. 2. I begin with the first bringing of Christianity among the English Saxons;
and notwithstanding that the Ecclesiastical History of those times, is for the
most part delivered by Saxon Monks, who had always a kindness for the Roman
Missionaries, and very little for the British Bishops (as may be easily
discerned even in Bid himself) yet by laying several circumstances together,
we may make it appear that Augustine and his Companions were not the first who
brought the knowledge of Christianity among the English Saxons. The first
settlement we find the Saxons made in this Nation, (for no account of their
Religion is to be expected before) was after the famous Victory of Aurelius
Ambrosius, wherein Hengist was defeated; and afterward his Son Occa, Eosa and
the rest of the Saxons in those parts submitted themselves to mercy; upon which
Ambrosius gave them a Country near Scotland, and entered into a League with
them: which says Matthew Westminster happened A. D. 490. Matthew. Westmo^a^t. A.
D. 490.
wherein he followed the British Historians; for the Saxon generally omit any
Victories of the British forces, and this particularly: yet William of
Malmsbury, Wi^^iel. Mal^sburie. de ge^tis Reg. Angl. l. 1. c. 3.
who relates it somewhat differently, says, that Hengist sent Occa and Ebusa
into the Northern parts, who having conquered those which opposed them, they
brought the rest to a voluntary submission. So that here we find the Britains
and Saxons united together so early under the Saxon Government, which according
to the computation of Henry of Huntingdon, H^nrie. Hunti^gdon. Histor. l. 2.
was but forty years from the Saxons first coming in England; and that these
Britains continued a long time in these Northern parts, Ca^de^ in Cumberland.
p. 630 and 648.
appears not only by the name of Cumberland (for Camden shows, that the Cumbri
and Cambri were the same) but from the rising of Caedwalla the Prince of the
Britains in those parts against Edwin the King of the Northumbers, Bed^ l. 2.
c. 20.
who is said by Beda to have reigned both over the English and Britains: and
was killed A. D. 633. and the Britains in those parts are said to have enjoyed
their liberty for forty six years, L. 4. c. 26.
viz. to the time of Beda's writing his History; which was A. D. 731. and after
the coming in of the Saxons 285. L. 5. c. 24.
Now in this Kingdom of the Cambri John of Tinmouth, or Capgrave out of him,
says, that S. Kentigern came to preach Christianity, and particularly, he
showed that Woden the chief God of the Saxons was a mortal man and a King of
the Saxons, (...).
from whom several Nations were derived. Now I desire to know, whether this
were not preaching Christianity among the Saxons, (...)
and that long before she coming of Augustine, ^or Alford places it in A. D.
566. and the landing of Augustine A. D. 597. No; (...) 7.
says Mr. Cressy, he pre^ched only to the Picts who were revolted to the Saxon
Idolatry;: and to prove that, makes use of an excellent way by corrupting his
Author; for the words in Ca^grave are these, Woden vero quem principalem Deum
crediderunt and Angli, de quo originem duxerant, cui and quartam feriam
consecraverant, hominem fuisse mortalem asseruit, and Regem Saxonum a quo
plures nationes genus duxerant: which he thus renders; And as for Woden whom
(by the seduction of the Saxons) they esteemed their principal God, and to
whose h^nour they consecrated the fourth day of the week, etc. What pretense is
there to understand these words of the Picts and not of the Saxons themselves?
I know Alford brings that clause in by way of Parenthesis, and reads it thus
(and praecipue Angli de quo originem duxerant, etc.) but I have set the words
down exactly as they are published by Bollandus the Jesuit, (...)
who mentions his own care in the publishing of it: but says Mr. Cressy, it is
plain he meant the Picts, because it is said that by his doctrine he freed the
Nation of the Picts from Idolatry and heresy: Here again Mr. Cressy discovers
his admirable ingenuity; for the words in Capgrave are, (several things being
interposed) Pictorum patriam quae modo Galwedia dicitur ab Idololatria and
haeretica pravitate, doctrine sua purgavit: which he mentions as a distinct
thing from his former preaching in the Regnum Cambrense; of which the former
words are expressly spoken. And although Alford, Mr. Cressy's Author, will by no
means allow any Saxons to be converted by Kentigern, (for fear forsooth the
Saxons should not owe their entire Christianity to S. Gregory's Missionaries)
yet Bollandus ingenuously confesses, Bolland. Feb. 24. vit. S. Ethelbert.
Com^ent. praev. s. 1. n. 8.
that both Kentigern and Gildas did employ their zeal and charity toward the
conversion of the English Saxons. For in the life of Gildas published by Ioh. a
Bosco, Biblioth^c. Floriac. histor. vit S. Gildae c. 8.
it is said, that the Northern p^rts of Britain flocked to his preaching, and
for saking the errors of Gentilism they destroyed their Idols, and were
^aptized in the faith of the Holy Trinity. Mr. Cressy, although he allows the
next passages to be understood of Gildas Sapiens, who lived after the Saxons
had overrun the Island; yet, Church hi^t. l. 12. c. 10. n. 3. L. 11. c. 3. n.
4.
he applies the for^er passage to an elder Gildas called Gildas Albanius, that
it might with less probability be understood of the conversion of the Saxons;
but Bollandus Bolland. 29 Ian. praef. s. 2. Acta Sanctorum Ordi^is S.
has sufficiently proved that there was but one Gildas called by those several
titles, and so much is acknowledged by the French Benedictins, Bened. s. 1. p.
138.
so that no relief can be had from thence. Thus we see what ground we have to
believe that the Northern Saxons were acquained with Christianity, before the
Order of Benedictines was ever heard of. The next settlement we find, was of
the Western Saxons by Cerdic who landing with a great force after the death of
Hengist, A. D. 495. did so weary out the Britains, that Malmsbury says, Malms.
hist. Angl. l. 1. c. 2.
that they willingly yielded themselves to him, and lived quietly together
under his Government; and is it then reasonable to conceive that so many Saints
as lived in that Age by the Confession of our Adversaries, should not in all
that time acquaint their Neighbors with the Christian Doctrine, (especially if
it be true, Church hist. l. 11. c. 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
which Mr. Cressy reports of them, that they wrought so many miracles) such as
S. David, S. Justinian, S. Dubricius, S. Paternus, S. Theliau, S. Paulens, etc.
Certainly these men were in all respects better qualified than Augustine the
Monk, if one half of the Legends concerning them be true: and why should they
neglect so necessary a duty where they had such advantages of doing it, and
such an easy way of working miracles to convince the Saxons? Bed. hist.
Eccles. l. 1. c. 22.
Shall we say, as Bede* does, that the Britains wholly neglected it? but that
must certainly be understood of such wretched Britains as Gildas describes, not
of such Saints as these were: and Bollandus Bolland. vit. E^helb. (...) supra.
thinks those words of Bid do need a limitation, viz. that such Apostolical
men were but few in comparison of those afterward. Or shall we say, that,
these Saints had a great mind to do it, but because of the continual wars and
persecutions they were forced to retire to a Monastic life? No, Church hist.
l. 11. c. 14. ^. 3.
Mr. Cressy himself tells us, that Cerdic did permit the Inhabitants of
Cornwall, paying an annual tribute, to enjoy the exercise of the Christian
Religion; which, says he, appears by the great number of Saints, which in
these and the following times flourished there. If there were such a number of
Saints then, how came they never to employ themselves in the Conversion of
their Neighbor Inf^^els? I had thought those who glory so much and beyond all
reason in the Conversion of Remote Infidels, would have allowed their Saints to
have converted those that were so near at hand; especially considering how
successful they were, where they undertook it. For, S. Kentigern, they tell us,
for his share purged Galloway, converted Albania, and sent disciples to the
Orcades, Norway, and as far as Iseland. Methinks, a little charity would have
d^ne well nearer home; when the Saxons needed it so much, and they bred up such
numbers of Disciples under them, as is reported of Gildas, Iltutus, S. David,
and the rest of them. But if notwithstanding all this, Christianity was unknown
to the Saxons, what will become of the Saintship of these persons who were so
highly qualified, by the gift of Tongues, and all sorts of miracles, (if their
Writers say true) and yet utterly neglected to preach Christianity to the
Saxons? But for all that I can see, the reputation of these British Saints must
veil, when it stands in competition with the Apostolicalness of Augustine the
Monk.

. 3. But although in these rem^ter parts the Britains being mixed with the
Saxons might acquaint some of them with the Christian Religion; yet surely in
Kent and those parts to which Augustine came, he was the first who brought the
knowledge of Christianity among them. This is as far from being true as the
other: for to omit what Alford conf^sseth to be very probable, viz. that
Irmiric Father to Ethelbert did permit the Christian Religion to be professed
in his Kingdom; (...) (...) Eccles. a^l A. D. 561. n. 1. ^^d. hist. Eccles. l.
1. c. 25.
I shall insist upon what is more certain; viz. the confe^sion of Bid himself;
that the same of the Christian Religion was brought to Ethelbert before the
coming of Augustine, by the means of a Christian Wife which he had of the Royal
Family of the Franks named Bertha: whom he received from her Parents on that
condition, that he would suffer her to enjoy her Religion, and to have a Bishop
to attend her whose name was Luidhardus. What can be more plain from hence,
than that the first entertainment which Christianity met with in the Saxon
Court was by the means of Queen Bertha and her Bishop Luidhardus? This Queen
Bertha was the only daughter of Ch^ripertus King of Paris (one of the four sons
of Clotharius, among whom his Kingdom was divided) by Ingoberga; and her
marriage is mentioned by Gregorius Turonensis, Greg. Turo^ l. 4. c. 26. L. 9.
c. 26.
to the Son of the King of Kent; which marriage was in all probability
solemnized before the death of Charipertus; now Charipertus dyed A. D. 567. so
that Christianity had been known about thirty years in King Ethelberts Court
before ever Augustine set footing upon English ground. And is it conceivable
that when a Bishop had performed the exercises of the Christian Religion for
thirty years in a Church for that purpose, viz. S. Martins near Canterbury, the
English Saxons should know nothing of Christianity till Augustins arrival? But
this is not all; for we have great reason to believe that the Conversion of the
Saxons to Christianity is in a great measure owing to this Queen, and her
Bishop Luidhard, or Letardus; who had been Bishop of Senlis in France, Ch^oni.
W. Thorn. c. 2. ^. 2.
as Thorn tells us. I know herein how much I shall provoke the whole Generation
of Romish Missionaries; but I value not the displeasure of those whom Truth and
Reason will enrage. William of Malmsbury (himself a Benedictin Monk, and one of
the most judicious of our Monkish historians, Mal^sbur. de gestis Reg Angl. l.
1. c. 1.
) says, that by Ethelberts match to Queen Bertha, the Saxons began by degrees
to lay aside their barbarous customs, and by conversation with the Fr^nch
became more civilized: to which was added the holy and single life of Letardus
the Bishop, who came over with the Queen, by which without speaking he did
invite the King to the knowledge of Christ our Lord: by which means it came to
pass that the mind of the King being already softened, did so readily yield to
the preaching of Augustine. By which it appears that the main of the business as
to the Kings Conversion was effected before Augustins coming; only for the
greater solemnity of it, a Mission from Rome was obtained; and I am much
deceived, if Gregory himself does not imply that it was at the request of the
English Saxons themselves. I know very well what an idle story the Monks tell
of the occasion of the conversion of the English Nation, viz. S. Gregory's
seeing some pretty English boys to be sold for slaves at Rome, and having
luckily hit upon two or three pious quibbles in allusion to the names of their
Nation and Country and King, he was at last in good earnest moved to seek the
Conversion of the whole Nation. A very likely story for so grave a Saint! I do
not quarrel with it on the account of the custom of selling English slaves, but
for the Monkishness, i. e. the silliness of it. Beda histor. Eccles. l. 2. c. 1.
I know Bid reports it, but he brings it in after such a fashion, as though he
were afraid of the anger of his Brethren the Monks if he had left it out; for
he mentions it as a reverend tale with which the Monks used to entertain
themselves, that had come down to them, by that infallible method of
conveyance, viz. Oral Tradition, and quotes nothing else for it. Whereas in the
Preface to his History he tells his Readers, that in the matters relating to
Gregory he relied on Nothelmus who had been at Rome and had searched the
Register of the Roman Church; but we see as to this story he says, he had
nothing but an old Tradition for it. Church hist. l. 12. c. 16. L. 13. c. 1.
Ioh. Brom(...).
But since Mr. Cressy is so zealous in Vindication of this story, I desire the
other part of it may not be left out which is told by Bro^pton Abbot of Iorval;
viz. that S. Gregory and his companions were come three days journey toward
England; and then sitting down reading in a Meadow, a Grasshopper leapt upon his
Book and made him leave off reading; then S. Gregory thinking seriously upon
this little creatures name (for his wit lay much that way) he presently found
this mystery in it, Locusta, says he, quasi loco sta: which says Brompton he
spoke by a Prophetic Spirit, for messengers immediately came upon them from
Rome and stopped their journey. And surely he had been much to blame to
undertake such a journey upon the instigation of one quibble, if he had not
been as ready to turn back upon the admonition of another. But to set aside
these Monkish fopperies; the best Authority we can have in this case is of S.
Gregory himself: several of whose Letters are still ext^nt in the Register of
his Epistles* relating to this affair. In one sent to the Kings of France
Theodoric, and Theodebert, he expresses himself thus; Gregor. ^p. l. 5. (...).
58.
Atque ideo pervenit ad nos, Anglorum gentem ad fidem Christianam, Deo
miserante, desi^eranter velle converti, sed sacerdotes vestros e vicino
neglige^e^ and desideria eorum cessare sua aah^rtatione succendere. Ob hoc
igitur Augustinum serv^^m Dei praesentium portitorem, cujus zelus and studium
been nobis est cogn^tum, cum aliis servis Dei praevid^mus illuc dirigendum.
Quibus etiam injunximus ut aliquos secum e vicino debeant presbyteros* (...),
cum quibus eorum possint mentes agnoscere, and voluntatem admonitione sua,
quantam Deus donaverit adjuvare: and to the same purpose he writes to
Brunichildis their Mother. Indicamus ad nos pervenisse Anglorum gentem Deo
ann^ente velle fieri Christianam, Ep. 59.
etc. Which are the most remarkable testimonies we could desire to our purpose:
for these Letters were sent by Augustine the Monk, before ever he had been in
England; and therein the Pope expresses the desire of the English Nation to
embrace Christianity (not barely of Ethelbert and his Court) that this desire
was made known at Rome; that upon this the Pope sends Augustine and his
Companions; that the French who were their Neighbors had been too negligent in
this Work, and began to be more slack than formerly in it; that however now,
since he had taken so much care to send these on purpose for that work, he
entreats them to send over so many Priests as might serve for their
interpreters: which is a plain discovery, that there had been intercourse about
the Christian Religion between the French and the Saxons before; and that still
they understood their language so well, as to serve for interpreters to
Augustine and his Brethren. Mr. Cressy who pares and clips testimonies to make
them serve his purpose, renders those words, Church hist* l. 13. c. 1. n. 7.
Anglorum gentem desideranter velle converti, and velle fieri Christianam; only
thus, that the English Nation were in a willing disposition to receive the
Christian faith: but certainly not a bare disposition, but a desire too is
employed in them, and the latter words with the same ingenuity he thus expresses
the sense of; but that the French Clergy and Bishops their Neighb^urs were
negligent and void of all Pastoral solicitude toward them: whereas methinks
desideria eorum cessare sua adhortatione succendere, are words, which although
they do blame them for present negligence, do imply withal a former care; for
how could they cease to do that which they had never begun? And Pope Gregory in
his Letter to the Queen whom he calls Aldilberga attributes very much of the
success of his Missionaries to her kindness and prudence; Greg. E^. l. 9. ^p.
59.
although considering her zeal and learning, it was rather to be wondered that
the work was so long in doing: but, he says, God had reserved the glory of the
Conversion of the English Nation, as a reward to her virtue; and compares her
with Helena, v. Mez^r^y ad A. D. 570.
hoping that by her means the Conversion of the Whole Nation would be made much
more easy; and he adds that her Fame had already reached as far as
Constantinople. By which we see how much the knowledge and establishment of
Christianity in thus Nation, is owing to the care and devotion of this good
Queen: and that Hadrianus Valesius had some reason to say, (...). Tom. 2. p. 19.
that the Christianity of England was owing rather to the Franks, than the
Romans.

4. But supposing, we should yield that Augustine and his Brethren were the
first who brought Christianity among the English Saxons; how comes from thence
such a mighty obligation to the Benedictin Order? Is it so unquestionable that
they were all Benedictins who came over, or that any of them were such? By all
the search I can make, this may very well bear a dispute. For it is agreed on
all sides that Augustine followed the same rule and was of the same Order that
S. Gregory himself was of; (...). s. 1.
and no meaner a Person than Cardinal Baronius has utterly denied that S.
Gregory was of the Benedictin Order; Baron. Annal. ad A. D. 5^1. n 8, 9, 10,
11, 12, 13.
methinks his Authority might at least have made Mr. Cressy not so peremptory
in this matter, and not so resolved to stand to it: especially considering the
Reasons which he gives. For he plainly proves from S. Gregory's own words in
his Dialogues, that when he founded his Monastery in Rome, he did not take his
Abbot from the Benedictin Monks, who were then removed by the persecution of
the Lombards to the L^teran Church; but sent into the Province Valeria for one
Valentius, whom he called his own Abbot; and withal shows not only that the
Benedictin Monastery at Rome had a distinct succession of Abbots, but that the
Monasteries of that Province, from whence Valentius was taken, were not under
the Benedictin Rule: and that Joh. Diaconus was much to blame for making S.
Gregory a Monk under one Hilarion, when himself says expressly, he was under
Valentius. The freedom of this discourse of Baronius brought a swarm of
Benedictin Monks about him; Apolog^ti^t. cus li^^^r Antonii Gallonii advers.
Bellottus, Constable. Cajetanus, and others; but Antonius Gallonius undertook the
defense of Baronius; and at large shows, that the Benedictins produced nothing
but trifles, Constable. Bellottum. Romans 1604. Spondan. ad
forgeries and lies to defend themselves; and Spondanus confesses that
Gallonius had with great strength overthrown the Benedictins arguments. A. D.
581. n. 5.
But of late the French Benedictins have renewed the quarrel against Baronius,
Ioh. Mabillon pr^efat. ad Act^^ Sanctorum Ordin. Benedict. s. 7.
who yet make use only of the baffled arguments of the former Benedictins; and
after all confess, that they are but conjectures; and that the greatest
strength they have lies in Augustine the Monk and his companions being of that
Order. If therefore we desire them to prove Augustine to have been a Benedictin,
they presently fly to S. Gregory's being so; if we would have them prove
Gregory to have been a Benedictin, then they say he must be because Augustine
was so. So that the main proof of the point, is, that it must needs be so; and
it must needs be so and they are resolved to stand to it, because it is for the
honor and advantage of their Order. And therefore our English Benedictins have
thought themselves more than a little concerned in this Controversy: for what
would open the purses and hearts of the people more toward them, than for them
to be accounted the Apostolical Order of England? Alas! what have the merits of
the Jesuits been to theirs? They, an upstart Order, that have converted some in
these latter times to Treason and the Gallows; but the Benedictins, the ancient
Apostolical Benedictins, were the only Persons who Converted England to the
Christian faith; and therefore they deserve greater respect than the Jesuits;
however the others have been too cunning for them. Thus we see, upon what hinge
the Controversy turns: and I cannot say, the Benedictins have been wanting to
themselves; for Mr. Cressy has not been the only Person, who has resolved to
stand to it in this matter. Reynerius has published a voluminous Book to this
purpose, which he calls, (...). (...). A. D. 1626. S. 2. p. 7.
the Apostleship of the Benedictins in England; and he proves it chiefly from
the common Tradition of the English Nation. And what demonstration can be
greater, than the Infallibility of Oral Tradition? This is proving it in I. S.
his Scientifical way. As though it were possible for the people to be deceived
in a matter of such consequence; which Mothers would be sure to teach their
Children; viz that Augustine the Monk and his c^mpanions were by no means
Equitians, or of any other Order, but right and true Benedictins. I confess
Reyner has luckily hit on the right Mathematical way; the very same Mons.
Arnauld has taken for Transubstantiation: for, S. 3. p. 9.
says Reyner, I will instance in an Age wherein all the Monasteries and
Cathedral Churches possessed by Monks in England, were in the hands of the
Benedictins; viz. in the Age of William the Conqueror: for which he quotes
many Authors, as Mons. Arnauld does to prove Transubstantiation to have been
the faith of the same Age: Now since it is evident that the Benedictin Order
was then in possession, and no time can be instanced in wherein the Benedictin
Order was brought into England from the time of Augustine, it necessarily
follows that Augustine and his Companions brought it in. Here is a demonstration
in the case! which I grant to be altogether as good, as that which the men for
Oral Tradition do produce for their Articles of Faith. Thus he proves it, from
Testimonies of Authors, and the Foundations of Monasteries, and the particular
Histories of them; by which it appearing, that they were at such a time of the
Benedictin Order, and no account being given of any change of the Order, he
thinks it sufficiently proved that they were Originally Benedictins. But is it
not possible to suppose that the Histories being afterward written by
Benedictin Monks, they would for the honor of their Order conceal any such
alteration, if it had happened among them? We find in other Countries, the
Benedictins have done the same thing, and why should we wonder if they have
done it in England? Trithemius, who was no fool, Trithem. de viris illustribus
ordin S. Benedict. l. 3. c. 279.
for the greater honor of the Benedictins, reckons Caprasius among the famous
men of that Order; but the mischief of it is that Caprasius lived about a
hundred years before S. Benedict: as Vincentius Baralis observes. (...) ^. e.
(...). p. 193
So likewise he piaces S. C^^sarius among them, who dyed (after he had been
Bishop of Arles forty years) before S. Benedict, and therefore was somewhat
unlikely to be bred up a Monk in his Order: indeed in one of his Homilies he
calls S. Benedict our Father; T^ith. l. 3. c. 84.
but the same Vincentius observes, that the name Benedict was soisted in by the
Monks, no such name appearing in the ancient MS. Ba^ra^is, p. ^61.
And it appears by the foregoing Chapter, that this Demonstration will not hold
in France; and certainly there is as little reason it should in England.

. 5. For Mr. Broughton has taken a great deal of pains to prove, Bro^gh^o^s
(...), c. 13, 14, 18, 23, 24, 25, etc.
That there were other ancient Orders which continued after the coming of
Augustine, that neither Gregory nor Augustine, nor his Companions could be
Benedictins; that the Monastic Rules introduced by Augustine were very
different from those of Benedict; both in habit, customs, public service and
other particulars: c. 30.
and that not any one Monastery, till about an hundred years after Augustine 's
coming into England, was or could be of S. Benedicts Rule or Order: and in
answer to the former Demonstration, he says, That since it is evident there
was no such thing in Ethelbert and S. Austins time: the other latter times are
produced to no purpose; all men granting that both Benedictin Monks, and many
latter Orders were in England in those days. And what does meek Mr. Cressy
answer to angry Mr. Broughton, as he calls him? He produces the Testimony of
our four L^arned Antiquaries Sr. R. C. Sr. H. Sp. Mr. Seldom and Mr. Cambden;
which he produ^es falsely and to little purpose. Falsely, for he thus introduces
it; Epi^t. Apol. sect. 35.
that they expressly in opposition to Mr. Broug^ton test^fie, that whereas he
affirmed, that the fi^^t Converters of Saxons in England, were not Benedictins,
but Eq^itians, etc. Who affirmed this? Mr. Brought^n? I with Mr. Cressy would
learn to write either with more honesty, or more care. For M^. Broughton in the
very Title page of his Book says, That the Design of it is to prove, that in
the Primitive Church of the Saxons, there was no Rule, nor Order from Egypt,
nor of S. Benedict, nor of S. Equitius: and in the body of his Book he very
often disproves their opinion who made Augustine and his Companions to be of an
Equit^^n Order: and Mr. Broughton writ since their testimony and in con^utation
of it. Now their Testimony, as it is set down by Mr. Cressy, is thus, that they
having spent much time in searching the Antiquities of our Nation do affirm,
they could find only two sorts of Monks in the ancient Saxon Churches, the
first such as followed the Egyptian form of Monachism, before S. Austin 's
arrival (which plainly makes against Mr. Cressy, being an express
acknowledgement, that there was another Order of Monks among the Saxons, and
consequently that Christianity was entertained by them, before S. Austins
arrival in England) and the other Benedictins compantons of S. Austin. And as
for Equitians, no such name was extant in any ancient record. Moreover, that
whereas they could exactly discover the Original and entrance of all other
Religious Orders, and could name the very years, they could not do so of the
Benedictins, which firmly argues that S. Augustine and his associates were
Benedictins, etc. I could hardly believe that Persons of so much understanding
would ever draw up such a Testimony as this; which at least seems to contradict
it self; for whereas they say, they could not name the year when the
Benedictins came in; and yet say that S. Augustine and his companions did bring
the Benedictin Order hither; the time of whose coming they as certainly knew,
as of any other Orders, looks too much like a contradiction for such great men
to be guilty of. But we must suppose they meant any year after Augustins
coming; yet I can hardly think such knowing persons should not at least be able
to give a very probable conjecture concerning it. For in the MS. life of
wilfrid extant in the Library of one of those Learned Persons, and written by
one that lived in the same time with him, and whose name is mentioned by Bid
in his History, viz. Steph. Eddius or Heddius, we have this account of him;
that at fourteen years of Age, Vit. S^^ilfri^. c. 2. 3. MS. ^n Bio^oth Co^ton.
B^d. Hist. l. 4. c. 2.
he was sent by Queen Eanf^ed to attend upon a Noble man called Cudda in the
Monastery of Lindisfarn: After he had been there a while the Spirit moved him
(suggerente Spiritu Sancto) to go to Rome, to visit the Apostolical See; adhuc
inattritam viam gentinostrae temptare in cor adolescentis supradicti ascendit;
a road very little frequented by our Nation (it seems then Pilgrimages, and
Appeals to Rome were very little known in those days). Bed. Histor. Abbat^n
wirem^th, etc.
The Queen understanding his desire sends him to Erconbert King of Kent, who
found out a companion for him whom he calls Biscop-baducing; (but more commonly
known by the name of Benedict Biscop, whose life is written by Bid, Bed. Hist.
Eccles l 5. ^. 20.
and their going together is mentioned in his History) Wilfrid stays a while
behind in France; but afterward arrived at Rome, where by the help of Boniface
the Archdeacon he was well instructed in the Rules of Ecclesiastical
Discipline, Vit W^^frid. c. 5.
and admitted to the Popes Favor and Benediction: (after which he ever
continued the Popes most humble servant). In his return through France he
received the tonsure of S. Peter; (for it seems they were so cunning in those
days, to know exactly the different cuts of S. Peter and S. Paul, and of Simon
Magus, (as we may see afterward) and wilfrid was guilty of no malignant
ingratitude for this favor, for he stood to it with great zeal against the
Scots who liked S. Paul's Cut better) Upon his return he was entertained with
great kindness by Alchfrid the Son of Oswi, C. 7.
by whom he was drawn off from the customs of his Country to those of Rome,
from whom Wilfrid received the Monastery of Rippon; and soon after was made
Priest by Agilbertus. C. 10.
Then happened the famous conference between Wilfrid and Colman Archbishop of
York about the time of Easter, and the right Tonsure, wherein wilfrid showed a
more than ordinary zeal for the Roman Customs; insomuch that when upon the
cession of Colman he was chosen Bishop he refused to be consecrated by any of
them, C. 12.
as Schismatical Persons; and therefore in great humility he desired leave to
be consecrated in France. In the mean time Ceadda by King Oswi's consent was
made Bishop, and consecrated at home; Wilfrid upon his return finding the Sea
^ull, was employed by Vulpher King of the Mercians to settle Monasteries; C. 14.
and after the death of Deus-dedit he was sent for by E^bert King of Kent,
where he went up and down through his Country, and then adds, and cum Regula
Benedicti instituta Ecclesiarum been melioravit, he improved the Orders of
Churches by the Rule of S. Benedict: which is in effect to say, that he first
brought this Order among them; for how could he better their Orders by it, if
they had it among them before? And he presently adds, Tun^ ergo in illis
regionibus sancto Episcopo sicut Paulo Apostolo magnum estium fidei Deo
adjuvante apertum est: as though the ^eceiving the Order of S. Benedict were of
as much consequence as believing the Christian Faith. After three years by
Theodore's means then Archbishop of Canterbury, he was put into the
Archbishopric Of York and Ceadda deposed; he had not been long there, but
refusing to consent to the making of three Bishops under him, he was deprived
by Theodore: Wilfrid appeals to Rome, and hastens thither himself, where he was
kindly received (for Rome from its foundation has been an Asylum for fugitives
especially when their coming helps to increase its Grandeur) Pope Agatho with
his Council orders his restitution; C. 29.
and threatens deprivation and excommunication to those that refuse him:
Wilfrid returns laden with Relics, and the Popes Bull; the King and the
Bishops refuse to obey the Popes command; and instead of restoring him, C. 31.
the King commits him to Prison, and afterward banished him; and he returned
not home till the second year of Aldfrid, C. 41.
where he continued not long but he was banished again for refusing to submit
to the Synodical Constitutions at home. C. 42.
Then a Synod was called of all the Bishops of England to which Wilfrid was
summoned, where he upbraided the Bishops, C. 43.
that they had opposed the Popes command for twenty two years, and wondered
they durst prefer the Constitutions of Theodore before the Bull of the Pope.
(Was not England in great subjection to Rome at that time, when all the Bishops
(one factious person excepted) refused to obey the Pope upon an appeal for two
and twenty years together? and governed themselves by their own Constitutions
in opposition to the Popes express command?) Notwithstanding, the Bishops
persist in their resolution, and would hearken to no terms, C. 44.
unless Wilfrid would submit to their sentence, and oblige himself to run no
more beyond Sea; which he refuses to do, and appeals again to Rome, upon which
Wilfrid and all his adherents were solemnly excommunicated. But it is
observable, that where Wilfrid speaks the most in his own vindication, he
insists on these things as his great merits: that he had been the great
instrument of converting the Scots (and English following them) to the true
Easter and the right Tonsure; and that he had brought the Monks under the Rule
of S. Benedict; which no man had brought among them before. By which we see,
that Wilfrid (at least, in the Northern parts) was the first who brought in the
Benedictin Order. Which passage Ead^erus a Benedictin Monk in the li^e of
Wilfrid, (...). vit. Wilfrid. MS. in Biblioth. Cotto^.
tho^ght convenient to leave out, although he takes most of the rest out of
Heddius; and so does Fredegodus in the rumbling Verses of his life, V. Se^ul.
3. B^n^dict. p. 221.
published lately by the Benedictins of France: but William of Malmsbury has
the very same words in effect of Wilfrid, Malm^bur. de g^stis Po^tif. Angl. l.
3.
that ^e gloried that he had been the first who brought the Benedictin Order
into those parts. It is a strange objection of Reyner against this, that he
would not boast of doing it there, unless it had been every where else in
England before his time; Reyner. A^ ostolat. Ben^dict. tr. 1. sect. 1. S^ct. 8.
for we have no mention at all of this Rule here before his time; and he might
think he had cause to glory to begin that Order in the North, and to give an
example to others: and if our Historians say true, he brought it into the
Midland parts, for he had a great hand in the consecration of the Abbey of
Evesham, which Pope Constantin in his Bull, (...). l. sect. 11. p. 39.
Mo^astic. A^glican. Tom. 1. p. 144.
says it was to be under the Benedictin Rule, quae minus in illis partibus
adhuc habetur, which is yet very little known in those parts. So that the
coming in of the Benedictin Order into those parts of England is not a matter
of so great obscurity as those Learned Persons supposed; and that some time
after the death of Augustine and his Companions; but it has been therefore
thought so obscure, because only this Author, who was never yet printed, makes
so express mention of it; the Benedictins afterward thinking it made for their
honor to conceal it.

. 6. The greatest difficulty seems to be about our Church of Canterbury, of
which Mr. Seldom says, Seldom. Not. in Eadm^r. p. 215.
that it was always supposed to be of the Benedictin Order, from its first
Foundation by Augustine, For, says he, since there were always Monks there,
and no other Order named, we have reason to believe them to have been
Benedictins; for the name of Monk being set without addition of Family, he
supposes in the Western parts to have employed a Benedictin, as in the Eastern
one of S. Basils Order. Supposing this were granted of the latter times, after
that the Benedictin Order prevailed in the times of Duns^an; when the Concordia
Regularis Anglic^ Nationis was generally received after the Expu^sion of the
Canon^cal and Secular Clergy out of most Cathedrals; yet I can see no reason at
all for it before, when there were so many different Rules of Monks both here
and in Italy and France. All those who lived after the Monastic way, whether
they lived by Rule, or only un^er the Government of a Superior, had equally
the name of Monks given to them. But of all sorts of Monks of that time, those
whom Augustine brought with him, and were settled at Canterbury, seem to be the
farthest from the Benedictin Ru^e; for any one that looks into that, will
easily see that it was intended for illiterate persons, who were to employ
themselves in Work when the Office of the ^^oire was over; and for such who
lived at a distance from Cities, and consequently were to have all
conveniences within themselves, and all the Monks in their Course were to go
through the Office of the Kitchen and such like: But those whom S. Gregory sent
over with Augustine were Clergymen, and to be constantly employed in preaching
and other duties of their Function: and when Augustine sent to Gregory for
directions (after he was made Bishop) how he should live among them; Gregory
takes not the least notice of the Benedictin Rule, Bed. Hist. l. 1. c. 27.
which on such an occasion he would certainly have done, if they had been of
that Order; but only tells him, he ought to live with his Clergy after the
custom of the Primitive Church, which was to have all things in common. From
which it is very plain, that he considered them as Clergymen; who if they had
been tied to the Benedictin Rule, could have had very few hours of the day,
either for study, or their other employments. Only he advises them in the
beginning of this Church to follow the pattern of the Church of Jerusalem, to
live in a Community together: Much after the same way which S. Augustine had
brought into reputation in Africa among his Clergy, and who from thence in
latter times were called Canons Regular. And which is very observable to our
purpose, Eugenius the fourth in a Bull in behalf of the Canons of the Lateran
Church, Pe^^ot de Canon. l. 2. c. 14.
says expressly, that St. Gregory commanded Austin to establish this Order in
the English Church. And these Canons (without the first community) continued in
the Church of Canterbury, long after the Benedictin Monks were brought into it.
For I find as low as Thomas Beckets time, that Alexander the third writ to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, to make good his promise to one whom he had admitted
Canon of that Church, (...) l. 3. (...). 5. de P^^b. c. relat.
and promised him the first Prebend that feil; from whence the Gloss of the
Canon Law deduceth, that a man may be instituted Canon of a Church, and yet
expect the next vacancy, supposing that he receives some profits though but
small the mean while. And Thomas Becket mentions the Prebends of Canterbury
that were vacant in one of his MS. Codex. Epistol MS. l. 1. ^p. 62.
Epistles to Henry 2. And that Monks and Canons have both continued in the same
Church, is fully proved by Pennottus. (...) Hi^^^^. T^i(...). ^. C^^^^. R^g. l.
1. c. 61.
If therefore I should grant, that the Benedictin Monks came early into that
Church; yet that proves nothing as to the conversion of the Nation by them; for
those were of the Clergy who were employed in that work; the Monks by the
Benedictin Rule being so strictly tied to the service of the Choire, as made
them fit for very little besides. I shall not therefore disspute with Mal^sbury
or Mr. Seldom, (...). de^g^st. Po^is. l. 1.
whether Alfric were the first who brought in the Monks; or whether they were
not settled by Boniface in the time of Laurentius? but this I insist upon, that
whereas by that constitution of Boniface, the Clergy of that Church were
required to associate to them a Company of Monks; in all probability it was
intended for this purpose, that while the others were employed in other duties
of their Function, the Monks might be ready to attend the service of the
Choire: and yet neither Boniface nor Gregory ever call them by the name of
Benedictin Monks; or so much as once mention that Rule in all the affairs
relating to the Saxon Church: which will seem very strange, considering its
Novelty at that time, and what small reputation it was in, either in France, or
Italy. P (...) ad S. c 1. Benedict. p. 43.
And however Wilfrid, or Benedict Biscop might in some particular Monasteries
introduce the Benedictin Rule; yet as that Learned Gentleman Sr. John Marsham
has observed, Propulae. ad Monast. Anglican.
there is no General Constitution prescribing it, before the Council of
Winchester under Dunstan, A. D. 965. and then it was not the pure Benedictin
Rule, but a Collection of ancient Customs accommodated to that Rule; as will
easily appear to any that will compare the Rule and that Concordia Regularis
together; not as it was imperfectly published by Mr. Seldom, but as it is
extant entire in Reyners Appendix. R^y^^^. Append. part. 3. p. 77.
Methinks so great a zealot, as Dunstan was for the Benedictin Order, should
not have continued the old Customs together with that Rule, if he had been of
Mr. Cressy's mind, in believing it to have been written by Divine Inspiration:
nay, Wilfrid and Benedict Biscop, were not for the pure Benedictin Rule; for
the former, some say, joined the Gregorian Office with it, and the latter
declares expressly, P^^^^^. Ben^d. n. 89.
that he had gathered his Rule out of the Customs of seventeen Monasteries:
which was a very vain and fruitless labor, if he had thought S. Benedict writ
his Rule by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost.

The French Benedictins who have lately undertaken to prove that the
Benedictins converted England, do suppose, without reason, that since by the
Constitution of Boniface it appears that there were Monks very early in the
Church of Canterbury, Praefat. Bened. ad sec. 1. s. 8.
they must be either Equitian or Benedictin Monks; we meddle not with Equitian
Monks, which our learned Antiquaries upon good grounds say, they meet with no
footsteps of in our Records: that was a particular conceit of Baronius, and was
quitted by his defender Gallonius; but we say, that in Italy at that time,
there were several institutions of Monks different from those of S. Equitius
and S. Benedict. For every Person who affected that kind of Life, and was able
to found a Monastery, gave such Rules to it, as he thought fit. Some were first
instituted for devotion and labor, as it is plain the Benedictin Order was, by
the Rule of it; others for devotion and study, as it is evident those of
Cassiodore were, Cassiod. Divia. ^ect. p^^^at. etc. 32.
by the occasion of them, and the Counsel he gives them; others for those of
the Clergy to live together after a Monastic way; of which sort Penottus shows
there were many in Italy at that time, after the bringing over that Order from
Africa by Gelasius Son of Valerius a Bishop of Africa, Pennot. de Canonic.
Regular. l 2 c. 14, 15, etc.
who had been one of S. Augustins Disciples. Now there being so many several
ways and designs of a Monastic Life at that time, it can by no means be
sufficient to prove the ancient Monks of Canterbury mentioned by Boniface to
have been Benedictins, because they were not Equitians; and if we suppose them
to have been Monks joined to the Canonical Clergy at Canterbury for attendance
on the Choire, as the Benedictin Monks were to the Canons of the Lateran Church
after the destruction of the Monastery of Cassino; yet this is far enough from
proving that Augustine or the Preaching Monks were of that Order; which it is
their design to prove. And themselves suggest that concerning the Council of
Boniface when Mellitus was at Rome, which affords us a good argument against
them; viz. I^^ p^^t. 7. c. 22.
that when Mel^itus was sent to Rome, about the affairs of the English Church,
they confess that a dispute was raised about the Benedictin Monks whether they
were capable of Priesthood or no? But what likelihood was there that should
have been ever called in Question at Rome, if it had been a thing so notorious
that Gregory and Augustine and his Companions were of that Order, and had born
the office of Priesthood? Who durst have questioned it, after that S. Gregory
had declared it not only by his example, but by the Mission of Austin and his
Brethren hither to Preach and do all Priestly offic^s? But the ground of the
Question was not for the Monks bred up to Learning, as th^se of S. Gregory's
own Monastery were, out of which Austin and his Brethren came; but for those
who were bred up only to devotion and Labor, as those of the Benedictin Order
must be by their Rule; as to which it might very well bear a dispute, since
their time was to be otherwise employed; and all that Pope Boniface had to say
was, that S. Benedict does no where forbid it; but withal by his Rule he gives
such directions that no man can observe them, as every one swears to do, and
perform the necessary duties of the Priestly Office together. The testimony of
Johannes Diaconus has been long since answered by Gallonius, Gall^n. R^spo^s.
ad Mo^^^h. (...). p 108. 109. (...)
who has showed him to be a very incompetent witness in this matter. But they
have not at all taken notice of the Testimony of Malmsbury, who says, that the
Benedictin Order came into England from the Abbey of. Fleury; (...)
being brought hither by Oswald; who had been a Monk there, not long before the
Council of Winchester; which first made any establishment of it here. I do not
then deny, that this Order was introduced by a particular devotion of some
persons in some few places before; to which the testimonies of Wilfrid,
Benedict Biscop, and Aldelmus refer; but the general reception of it was not
before the times of Dunstan; and with what confusions and disorders, with what
severities, and injustice to the Canonical and Secular Clergy it was then
established, may be easily seen in our Histories. For Dunstan, Oswald, and
Ethelwald set themselves with all their power, (which was great by the Favor
of King Edgar) to drive out the Canons out of the Cathedral Churches belonging
to them, and to bring in the Monks in their Rooms: and other Bishops thought it
a good way to preferment to follow their example. And from hence forward the
Benedictin Monks kept the possession not only of the greater Monasteries, but
of several of the Cathedral Churches, contrary to the design of their Rule, if
the Cistertian Abbots may be believed, Exord. Coenob. Cist. c. 15. i^ Biblioth.
Cisterc. To. 1.
who declare their Resolution to keep to the Benedictin Rule, and therefore
would wholly withdraw from Cities, and have nothing to do in Churches, that so
they might live retired, not upon the profits of Churches, but upon their own
stock and industry, according to the intention of their Rule. And that this
Resolution of the Cistertians was most agreeable to the Benedictin Rule,
Regula, Constitut. and Privilegia Ordin. Cistert a Chrysostom. Heariquez.
is declared by the many Bulls of Popes which are extant for the confirmation
of the Cistertian Order, or rather Reformation of the Benedictin, according to
the first design and letter of their Rule.

. 7. Thus far Mr. Cressy's resolution to stand to it, that Christianity was
established in England by the Disciples of S. Benedict, has drawn me to the
Discourse of the means and Persons by which England was converted; but it may
be after all this he may find out a reserve to himself, viz. that he did not
mean it of the first knowledge of Christianity, but of the firm settlement of
it: But neither can this be his meaning, nor if it were, is it any truer than
the former. It cannot be his meaning, for his words are, that the English
Saxons were indeed converted by the Disciples of S. Benedict, by which it is
plain he speaks of the first Conversion; but suppose he did not, the
establishment or settlement of Christianity is no more owing to the Benedictins
than the first Conversion of the Nation. For which we are to consider, that a
sudden Apostasy soon happened to Paganism after the death of the first Princes
who professed Christianity. For Eadbald King of Kent, Bed. l 2. c. 6.
Son to Ethelbert revolted from it; but he soon repented his Apostasy and sent
for Mellitus and Iustus out of France again; but the state of Christianity
remained more desperate in the Eastern parts after the death of Sebert, and the
Apostasy of his Sons: and although some hopes appeared by the Conversion of
Erpenwald, L. 2. C. 15.
yet his death happening soon after, things were as bad as ever, L. 3. c. 18.
till the return of Sigebert out of France, who brought Felix a Burgundian
Priest with him, who was the great instrument of restoring Christianity in
those parts. L. 3. c. 7.
Among the West Saxons Birinus was the first Preacher of Christianity, but he
was so far from being a Benedictin, that Mr. Cressy himself confesses, Church
h^st. l. 15. c. 4. n. 9. Bed. l. 3. c. 1.
that he was not by profession a Monk. In the Northern parts, after the revolt
of the Sons of Edwin, Christianity was wholly restored in the time of King
Oswald by the Scottish Christians, among whom himself was Converted and
Baptized. C. 3.
Bid at large relates the coming of Aid^nus and his excellent piety, zeal, and
charity; whose good example many others followed, till by great diligence in
preaching and an excellent conversation, they had settled Christianity much
more firmly than ever: and from thence Christianity was conveyed into the
Middle parts of England in the time of Peada by Finanus; L. 3. c. 21.
who carried with him four P^iests, Cedda, and Adda, and Betti, and Diuma,
whereof the last was a Scot, and the other English: this Diuma was made Bishop
and consecrated by Finanus: after him succeeded Ceolla a Scot too: after him
Trum^ere, consecrated by the Scots; after him Iaruman, after him Ceadda. At the
same time, L. 3. C. 22.
says Bid, the East Saxons recovered the Christian faith by the endeavors of
King O^wi of Northumberland with their King Sigbert: who was likewise Baptized
by Finanus, and he consecrated Cedda, to be their Bishop. By which we see that
when Christianity was settled and established in England, how much more it was
owing to the piety and care of the Scottish Christians, than to the Roman
Missionaries; for all the Northern parts, the Midland and East Saxons were
thoroughly converted by them; the East Angles by Felix a Burgundian; the West
Saxons by Birinus one sent from Rome, but no Monk; and only the parts of Kent
by the Roman Monks, but not Benedictins. And has not Mr. Cr. now very great
reason to stand to this assertion, That the English Saxons were converted to
Christianity by Benedictin Monks?

. 8. But it may be yet, Mr. Cressy thinks they were never true Christians till
they had received the Roman customs: and that the honor of making them good
Catholic Christians belonged to the Benedictins, or at least to the Roman
Missionaries. For all that I can find, they were very good Christians in Mr.
Cressy's esteem, but only in the Customs wherein they differed from the Roman
Church. For Mr. Cressy confesses that the Scots, Picts, Church hist. l. 16. c.
18. n. 12.
and Britains in all matters of faith agreed with the Saxon, that is the Roman
Church: but it is plain withal that the great zealot for the Church of R^me,
Wilfrid, refused to receive Orders among them and gives this as the reason of
it, because the Apostolical See did not allow th^^ (...) on with it; for
speaking of the (...) Scottish Bishops, Steph. He^d. vit. S. ^il^rid. C. 12.
he says, (...) Apostolica seeds in communi^^ (...) neceos qui Schismat^cis
consen^^^^: it seems then the British and S^^^^^sh Churches stood
excommunicated at that time by the Church of Rome; and therefore he desires to
go into France, ut sine controversia Apostolicae sedis, licet indignus, gradum
Episcopalem merear accipere; so that the Pope would neither allow their
Churches nor their Ordinations. So William of Malmsbury says, Mamlsb^r. de
gestis Pontif. Angl. l. 3.
that he would neither be ordained by the Scottish Bishops, nor by any ordained
by them, because the Apostolical See had rejected their Communion. But what was
it I beseech Mr. Cressy, that unchurched the British and Scottish Christians,
and nulled their Ordinations, and made them deserve excommunication? Why,
forsooth, they had not the right tonsure among them, and they did not keep
Easter on the right Sunday; these are all the material differences Mr. Cressy
will allow, for the causes of so much severity. But does Mr. Cressy in good
earnest think, that these are of weight enough to unchurch whole Nations, and
null their Ordinations? Mr. Cressy has very learnedly set forth the state of
the Controversy about Tonsure; and he tells us, there were three several kinds
of Tonsure; the first was called S. Peter's, Church hist. l. 16 c. 18. n. 2, 3,
etc.
which was shaving the top of the head, leaving below toward the forehead and
ears a circle or Diadem representing the Crown of Thorns which our Lord bore:
the second was S. Paul's which was either a total shaving or at least close
polling of the whole head: the third was called Simon Magus his Tonsure, by
which only a half crown was formed on the lower part of the head before, from
one ear to the other, all the rest of the h^ir being left at full length: N. 6.
Now says Mr. Cressy, the present dispute was, whether S. Peter's manner of
Tonsure in use at Rome was to be only received in Brittany? A very weighty
Controversy I confess; and very fit for the Head of the Church to be so much
concerned in; N. 7.
for so Mr. C. tells us, that the Popes of this Age took care, that S. Peter's
Tonsure should be only received in Brittany. And was there not great reason for
it, since it was to be a mark of their slavery to the Roman See? Good Lord!
that ever men should pretend to take care of Souls and excommunicate whole
Churches for not having the right fashion of shaving their heads! Could they
ever believe that S. Peter and S. Paul were so concerned whether men's hair was
cut in the form of a Crown, or all off? No, they say, that Circumcision is
nothing and Uncircumcision is nothing; but it seems the fashion of shaving is a
very great matter.

But I suppose the weight of the business lay in the keeping of Easter on a
different Sunday from the Church of Rome: Mr. Cressy pretends to some skill in
this matter, and undertakes to correct many mistakes of Protestants about it:
and therefore to prevent any needless quarrels I will take the Controversy as
Mr. Cr. himself states it, and then see what can be made of it against the
British and Scottish Churches and the English which followed their example.
The error of the Britains says he, Church hist. l. 13. c. 18. n. 11.
(and consequently of the rest) consisted not as generally Protestant writers
conceive, in conforming to the Asiatick manner of the Quartodecimani, who kept
their Easter always the same day (...) whether it were Sunday or (...) they
made their computation from the fourteenth of the Moon to the one and twenty,
by which means it came to pass, that if the fourteenth of the Moon proved to be
a Sunday, the Jews and Britains once in seven years would observe their
Paschal solemnity together; which was contrary to the Universal practice of the
Church, and utterly forbidden by the first General Council of Nicea. ^. 10.
And a little before, he says, that to distinguish the Christian Pasch from
the shadow of a Jewish observation, they ordained that it should be solemnized
only on a Sunday, yet not that on which the fourteenth day of the Moon fell,
but the Sunday following, and therefore counted always from the 15 to the 21,
excluding the day of the Jewish Pasch; which, he says, was to be celebrated
exactly on the fourteenth day of the first Moon after the Vernal Aequinox on
what day of the week soever it fell. For Mr. Cressy's satisfaction, or rather
for the vindication of the British, and Scottish Churches and the English
which followed them, I shall enquire into two things. 1. The true state of the
Controversy. 2. Whether the Roman Emissaries either then had, or now have
reason to charge them with contradicting the Universal practice of the Church,
or the decree of the Council of Nice?

. 9. 1. For the state of the Controversy; we must consider, what they were
charged with by their enemies, and what they had to say for themselves. Bid,
where he first mentions it, gives this account of it; Bed. Hist. Eccles. l. 2.
c. 2.
that they did not keep the Sunday of Easter in its own time, for they reckoned
from the fourteenth of the Moon to the twentieth: which computation, says he,
is contained in a Cycle of eighty four years: Vit. S. Wilfrid. c. 10.
Stephanus Heddius says, from the fourteenth to the two and twentieth; but
that is a mistake. Bed. l. 2. c. 19.
Pope Honorius charges them, with contradicting the practice of the Universal
Church, and the decrees of general Councils. Pope John who succeeded Severinus
next after Honorius, charges them, with renewing an old heresy, and keeping
Easter with the Jews; and all was, says Bid, because they did not reckon the
Easter Sunday from the fifteenth to the one and twentieth, according to what
was approved in the Council of Nice. L. 3. C. 25.
Those that came out of Kent and Gaul, says Bid, charged the Scots that they
kept the Easter Sunday contrary to the practice of the Universal church: from
this different practice, says Bid, it sometimes happened, that two Easters
were kept in a year, and that which was Easter day to the one was Palm Sunday
to the other: And after Naiton King of the Picts had embraced the then Roman
custom of keeping Easter, L. 5. c. (...).
to show to all the people the change he had made, he removed the Cycle of
eighty four years, and set up that of nineteen. So that the true state of the
whole Controversy between them was no more but this, whether the old Roman
Cycle of eighty four should continue, or the Alexandrian Cycle of nineteen be
followed? But the Combatants on both sides talked like men that did not
understand the matter they were so hot about: however Colman pleaded, for their
adhering to the ancient Tradition of their Church in this matter, and that they
had no reason to hearken to any innovation by whomsoever introduced; for
supposing the greatest inconvenience that could happen, that they should
celebrate Easter on the fourteenth together with the Jews, yet herein they had
the example of the Apostle S. John, Steph. H^d. vit. Wilfrid. c. 10.
and those who were inspired by the Holy Ghost; and we, (as Polycarp and
others) are not ashamed to follow their example, and therefore we dare not and
will not change our custom. Fredegodus makes Colman add further, Fredeg^d. vit.
Wilfrid. p. 176.
that they had not only constant tradition for it, but that it was left in
charge by S. John and his Disciples that if the Sunday fell on the fourteenth,
they should keep their Easter on that day: and so much Heddius says too,
Patres nostri and antecessores eorum manifest Spiritu Sancto inspirati ut erat
Columcille 14 Luna die Dominica Pascha celebrandum sanxerunt. Eadmer. vit.
Wilfrid. n. 15.
Eadmerus makes the command to come from S. John himself in those Churches
which were under his care; which practice, says Colman, has been delivered
down to us by an uninterrupted succession of holy and prudent men, and has
been inviolably observed hitherto, and therefore ought to be so still. What
could those of the Church of Rome desire more, than they bring for this
practice? Nay, I. S. would have told them, the Popes infallibility was not to
be compared to that of Oral Tradition: what certainty, would he say, could they
have had of any thing if they rejected such evidence as this? But it seems this
kind of Tradition was not valued so much then, no nor any thing else when it
opposes their interests. It was not this or that day, was, in truth, the
occasion of the dispute, but the poor British and Scottish Christians must
submit to the present Roman Church, and do as they would have them. Bed. hist.
l. 3. c. 4.
Beda says expressly, that they did not comply with the Jews as to the day of
the Week; but ignorantly and by following uncertain Cycles they mistook in the
certain Sunday; being men of very great devotion and goodness, and learning
only what was contained in the Writings of the Prophets, Evangelists, and
Apostles; but, be that as it would, no favor was to be showed them without
present compliance; and for this purpose Wilfrid was an excellent instrument.
Who begins, in Bid, his answer to Colman by saying, L. 3. c. 2^.
the Easter we observe, we saw observed at Rome by all persons where Peter and
Paul lived, and taught, and suffered, and were buried; the same, says he, is
observed in Italy, and Gaul, in Africa, Asia, Egypt and Greece, and all the
World over, except these obstinate Britains and Picts. Very confidently said!
how truly will be seen afterward. However he confesses, that S. John's practice
was agreeable to theirs: but S. Peter when he Preached at Rome (there is the
Emphasis of it) appointed otherwise, that it should be kept on the Sunday that
did fall between the fifteenth and one and twentieth. It seems S. Peter and S.
John differed as much about Easter, as S. Peter and S. Paul did about Tonsure.
And this, says he, all the Churches of Asia after S. John's death and his
successors observed (it seems his Authority vanished at his death) and the
whole Church, which was not first decreed but confirmed by the Council of Nice.
What prodigious ignorance and confidence is here joined together! as will
appear presently. Colman asked him, what he thought of Anatolius a man much
commended in Ecclesiastical history, who declared that the Sunday was to be
taken from the fourteenth to the twentieth. Wilfrid tells him, they did not
understand him (no more than himself); and as to their Ancestors he was willing
to think charitably of them, and hoped that the keeping Easter on a wrong day
would not damn them, as long as they had no better information. But, says he,
for You and Your Companions, if you refuse to obey the Decrees of the
Apostolical See, yea of the Universal Church, confirmed by Scripture, without
all doubt you sin in it. For, says he, our Lord has said, Tu es Petrus, and
super hanc Petram, etc. This I confess is home to the business; V. Whe^o. not.
in. Bed. l. 3. c. 25.
although the Saxon Homilies with no less than malignant ingratitude understood
the Rock of Christ himself and the faith which Peter confessed; but however
Wilfrid made such a noise with S. Peter's Keys; that the good King Oswi verily
believing that he kept Heavengates told them all plainly, that for his part he
would follow S. Peter, for fear he should shut Heaven-gates against him when he
came thither: and we may be sure the people could not but be mightily moved
with this: by which means Wilfrid prevailed and Colman was forced to retire
from his Bishopric. Steph. Heddius adds only farther, St^ph. H^dd. vit. W^lfr.
c. 10.
that Wilfrid insisted on this, that the Nicene Fathers had appointed the Cycle
of nineteen, by which they could never keep Easter on the fourteenth, and that
an Anathema was pronounced against those who should keep it otherwise. Thus far
we have an account of the State of the Controversy, from the parties engaged
in it.

. 10. 2. Let us now see what reason there was for charging the British and
Scottish Christians with opposing the practice of the Universal Church, and the
Decrees of the Council of Nice in reckoning the Easter Sunday from the
fourteenth to the twentieth, and not (as the Roman Missionaries would have
them) from the fifteenth to the one and twentieth. I shall therefore now show,
P^tav. ani^^^vers ad (...). 51. Epiphan.
that if they were guilty of an error or heresy in so doing, (so Petavius
calls it insignis error, imo haeresis Scotorum) not only the Apostles and their
Disciples, but the Roman Church it self was guilty of as great. The great
ignorance which Wilfrid and the rest of the zealots for the Roman customs
betrayed, lay in this, that what they saw practiced in their time at Rome, they
supposed to have been always observed there, and that it came from a command
of S. Peter, that the day of Easter should be observed as it was then in the
Roman Church; whereas there was nothing like any Apostolical Precept for it,
and the Church of Rome it self had but lately embraced the Alexandrian Cycle,
which Wilfrid would with so much Authority have enforced upon the poor Scottish
Christians. In the beginning of Christianity nothing was looked on with greater
indifferency than the anniversary day of the Christian Pasch; thence came so
different customs among several Churches; the Churches of Asia, properly so
called, Syria, Mesopotamia and Cilicia, (...). de Synod. and ad Africa^. ^p.
observed it on what day of the Week soever it fell; as any one that knows any
thing of Ecclesiastical History understands: For as S. Chrysostom says,
Chrysostom. To^. 6. p. 382.
they did not believe that any one should be called to account that he observed
the Pasch in this or that month: For they had neither the leisure nor the
curiosity to examine the Cycles then in use by the rules of Astronomy; but took
them as they found them among the Jews without comparing them with the heavenly
Bodies. Now there were two things observed by the Jews for finding out the
days of Passover, viz. the beginning and ending of the first month; and the
fourteenth day of the Moon, on the evening of which they were to begin their
Passover; and these two were observed by all Christians in the beginning of
the Christian Church till toward the end of the second Century, according to
the Jewish cycle, which was of eighty four years, as Epiphanius tells us;
Epiphan. haer. ^1.
which although it were not exact according to the motions of the Heavens, yet
that was not thought a sufficient ground for the alteration of it. Yea,
Epiphanius mentions an Apostolical Constitution (quite different from what is
now extant in the Book that goes under the name of Apostolical Constitutions)
wherein Christians are commanded not to trouble themselves with calculations,
Epiphan. h^^r. 70.
but that they should keep the Feast at the same time with the Brethren that
came out of the circumcision, although they were mistaken (in their
calculations): not with those that remain in the circumcision, but with those
that came out of it, says Epiphanius, which he understands of the Bishops of
Jerusalem, fifteen of which continued to A. D. 136. till toward the end of the
Empire of Hadrian, at which time Marcus was the first Bishop that was made of
the Gentiles. Petav. animad. in haeres. 70.
Petavius knows not what to make of this constitution, for by it, he supposes
the Christians were obliged to keep Easter with the Jews on the fourteenth day;
for he takes it for granted, that the Bishops of Jerusalem did so: as he
confesses some of the Apostles did; but the Learned Primat of Armagh, thinks
Petavius mistaken in this, because although they did then (...) the Jewish
computation, yet he supposes that they did keep Easter not with the Jews on
what day of the Week soever it fell, Uss^r. Prolegom ad Epist. Ignat. c. 9.
but on the Sunday in honor of our Saviors resurrections And it cannot be
denied, that Narcissus Bishop of Jerusalem and Theophilus of Caesarea, with
Cassius of Tire and Clarus of Ptolemais, do in their Synodical Epistle declare,
that they agreed with the Church of Alexandria, viz. in keeping it on the Lords
day, and that this had been the constant practice of the Church of Jerusalem.
And it is plain Epiphanius understood it so, or else it was to no purpose to
distinguish in this matter, those who remained in the circumcision, and those
which came out of it. But notwithstanding these Churches and the Western did
observe the Lords day for the Paschal feast, yet in the way of reckoning it,
they did observe the Jewish computation, both as to the Age of the Moon and the
Vernal Aequinox. For although Constantin in his Letter does upbraid the Jews,
that they kept their Pasch, before the Aequinox (which was then rightly fixed
on March 21.) yet we are to understand it of the Astronomical Aequinox, and not
of that which was in popular use among them, which might anticipate the other
about three days, (because according to their beginning the month Nisan from
March 5. the fourteenth of the Moon might fall on the eighteenth day, and so
their Passover be kept three days before the Aequinox at the time of the
Nicene Council.) For, as Clavi^s observes, Clav. Cal^nd^r. Gregor. c. 4. sect.
7.
God does not tie his Church to the subtleties of Astronomical Calculations,
but to the common judgment of sense, in which the Aequinox has the latitude
of four days with us, and as many more in those more Southern parts. The like
liberty was used in the Christian Church before the Nicene Council: for in the
Council of Caesarea, they do allow the celebration of Easter before the
Aequinox, which they then supposed to be March 25. and yet they reckon three
days before that among those on which the Paschal Sunday might fall, as
appears by the Epistle of one Philippus, about the Council of Caesarea, extant
in the Works of Bid; B^d. oper. To^. 2. sab tit. de V^^nali Aequino^tio.
wherein, he says, that after the Resurrection or Ascension of our Savior,
the Apostles being dispersed abroad, and employed in preaching the Gospel,
could appoint nothing concerning the Paschal Feast; but did observe it on the
fourteenth of the Moon what day soever it fell upon. (Thus far sure the
British and Scottish Christians were no Heretics in doing as the Apostles
did) But after, says he, the Apostles were gone, the Christian Churches
observed different customs, both as to Paschal Fast and Feast; upon which by
the direction of Pope Victor a Council was called at Caesarea for settling the
way of keeping Easter; where after they have fixed the Aequinox on the eighth
of the 5. Kal. of April, they determined that the three days before should be
taken within the Paschal limits; (so that the Sunday for Easter might be
reckoned on any day from the 11. Kal. of April to the 11. Kal. of May, viz.
from the two and twentieth of March to the one and twentieth of April
inclusive; and withal they add, that it should not be lawful for any to exceed
these limits. And yet afterward these limits were so far exceeded, that the
Latin Church in Leo' s time made the Cycle of the Paschal Sundays to consist
of thirty three days; and the Alexandrian Cycle took in two days more, viz.
the twenty fourth and twenty fifth of April, because they found the former
limits too strait, unless they were understood of the (...) as they called it,
i. e. that the anniversary day of our Saviors passion should always fall
between the two and twentieth of March and one and twentieth of April.

. 11. The first person who published a Paschal Canon was Hippolytus Bishop of
Porto, A. D. 222. above an hundred years before the Council of Nice, which was
found A. D. 1551. and set forth by Scaliger with Notes upon it, in which Canon
he makes the nearest Paschal Sunday to be the sixteenth of the Moon which is
March 20. beginning the Lunar Month March 5. which is one day before the Nicene
Aequinox, and five before that of Caesarea: and in which he reckons the Paschal
Sundays not from the fifteenth to the one and twentieth, but from the
sixteenth to the two and twentieth. By which we may easily see, what reason
Wilfrid had to make the then practice of the Roman Church to have been the
Universal practice of the Christian Church: for the two fundamentals of the
Rule then in use were, that the Paschal Sunday should be reckoned from the
fifteenth to the one and twentieth, and that it should never be before the
Aequinox. The first we meet with who laid down this Rule about the Aequinox,
was Dionysius of Alexandria, Eus^b. l. 7. c. 20.
who sat there from A. D. 247. to A. D. 264. wherein he was followed by
Anatolius Bishop of Laodicea, who would by no means have the Paschal Sunday
observed before the Aequinox, which he following Sosigenes supposed to be March
25. but made the first Easter day to be March 27. But that which is most
observable in him to our purpose, is, that he reckoned neither as the Latins
from the sixteenth to the two and twentieth, nor as the Alexandrians from the
fifteenth to the one and twentieth, but from the fourteenth to the twentieth,
Aegyd. (...). de doctr. (...). (...). 464.
just as the British and Scottish Chruches did, as appears by the second,
fifth and eighteenth of his Cycle published out of MSS. by Aegidius Bucherius
with learned Annotations, and so makes no scruple at all of that, which Wilfrid
and Bid made such a great matter of, viz. of keeping Easter day upon the
fourteenth, and therein complying with those notable Heretics called the
Quartodecimani. But Anatolius, in the Preface to his Canon, was so far from
supposing an universal consent of the Church in his time, that he complains of
very different and contrary Cycles that were then in Use, some following
Hippolytus his Cycle of sixteen; others the Jewish Cycle of eighty four; others
a Cycle of twenty five; others of thirty; and he mentions the endeavors of
Isidore, Hierom, Clement and Origin, all of Egypt, to compose this matter. But
notwithstanding all the care used to settle this Controversy, the breaches of
the Church continued about it; and if we believe Hen. Valesius, Vales. not. in
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 23.
the inhabitants of Syria and Mesopotamia had espoused the celebrating Easter
on the fourteenth day, not long before the Council of Nice.

But what differences soever happened before the Council of Nice, was not an
uniform practice settled by the decree of it, and all Churches obliged to reckon
the Paschal Sunday from the fifteenth to the twenty first, and consequently the
British and Scottish Churches were guilty of opposing the Universal practice
of the Church at least after the Council of Nice? This is all the pretense that
I know can be left in this matter; but neither was this decreed in the Council
of Nice; nor if it were, was it universally observed after it. A Synodical
Epistle was sent out after the ending of the Council, which I suppose was the
same with that of Constantin; E^s^b. vit. Constant. l. 3 c. 18, 19.
wherein all Christians are dissuaded from compliance with the Jews, and
earnestly exhorted to an agreement upon one day, and the lesser part to submit
to the practice of the greater: but no limits are set, no Cycle established by
the decree of the Council. For although Dionysius Exiguus who brought in the
Alexandrian Cycle into the Latin Church, would have it believed, Dio^ys. Exigui
^p. prima in ^ppend. Bucherii. p. 485.
that herein he followed the Nicene Fathers; yet Aegidius Bucherius a learned
Jesuit, has fully proved, that no Cycle or certain Rule was at all appointed
by the Council of Nice: Bucher. Commentar in Victorii Canon. Pa^ch. c. 3 c. 6.
although soon after he confesses the Cycle of 19. was found out, (as he
probably thinks, by Eusebius of Caesarea) and afterward perfected by
Theophilus of Alexandria, in the time of Theodosius the elder. But if the
Alexandrian Cycle had been determined in the Council of Nice, V. E^ seb. vit.
Constable. l. 4. c. 34.
how comes it to be omitted in the Kalendarium Romanum published by Herwart,
which he says, was set forth the very year of the Nicene Council A. D. 325.
wherein though there are Dominical Letters, yet there are no Golden Numbers:
(but if he were mistaken in the time, and it came forth in the Reign of
Constantius, the argument will still hold). And if there were so universal a
consent in the practice of the Church after, how came it to pass that S. Cyrill
of Alexandria in his Paschal Epistle says, Cyrill. Epist. in Append. Bucherii
p. 482.
there was so much confusion in the account of Easter, in the Church, the Camp,
and the Palace? how came Theodosius to send so earnestly to Theophilus of
Alexandria, about it? But above all, whence came such mighty differences
between the Eastern and Western Churches about Easter, long after the Council
of Nice? of which a full account is given by the two learned Jesuits, Petav.
Doctr. T^m. l. 2. c. 63. p. 531. Bu^h. doctr. T^m^. c. 4, 5, 6.
Petavius and Bucherius: which latter has at large proved that the Latin
Church did still proceed according to the Jewish cycle of eighty four, and not
according to the Alexandrian of nineteen, and that they reckoned not from
fifteen to twenty one, but from sixteen to twenty two: from whence arose those
hot contests about the right Easter between the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria;
especially in the time of Leo in the years 444. and 455. And Paschasinus in his
Epistle to Leo about the former Easter, mentions the Romana Supputatio,
Paschas^i Ep. Leon. 1. inter Ep. Leon. 63.
as distinct from that of Alexandria, and as the occasion of the Dispute. In A.
D. 455. there were eight days difference between the Easter at Rome and at
Alexandria, which caused great disputes, as may be seen in the Letters of Leo
to Martianus and Eudocia; Leo Ep. 64, 65.
and the answer of Proterius Bishop of Alexandria; of which Prosper in his
Chronicon says, Prosper. Chro^. A. 455.
that although the Latin Church did submit for peace sake, yet that it was in
the right, and such an example ought not to be followed: and the same Prosper
Prosper. Chronic. A* D. 46, 1^0, 214, 298, 382.
does often mention the Cycle of eighty four, as that which the Latin Church
did make use of at that time. But this being found too short and insufficient,
Victorius was employed to frame a new Paschal Canon fitted to the use of the
Latin Church; which was first printed by Bucherius; V. Bucher. Comm^nt. in
Victorii Ca^o^. Paschal. p. 9^.
wherein, although he differed from the old Latin calculation in the beginning
of the Lunar month, yet he proceeded still in the old way of reckoning from
sixteen to twenty two. Victorius writ his Paschal Canon A. D. 457. to Hilarus
Archdeacon of Rome who succeeded Leo; and it appears that the occasion of
writing it, was from the difference between the Alexandrian and Roman Church in
the computation of Easter; So Hilarus confesses in his Epistle to Victorius:
Victor. Prolog. ad Ca^. n. 3, 4, 5.
and Victorius shows wherein the difference lay, viz. in three things: the
Alexandrians began their Paschal month from March 8. and reckoned it to April
5. inclusive; the Roman Church from March 5. inclusive to April 3. exclusive.
The Alexandrians reckoned the fourteenth Moon from March 21. to April 18. the
Romans from March 18. to April 15. inclusive. The Alexandrians reckoned the
Paschal Sunday from the fifteenth inclusive to the one and twentieth. The Roman
Church from the sixteenth to the two and twentieth. Now Victorius thought by
his Canon to accommodate the difference between the two Churches embracing the
Alexandrian Cycle of nineteen, as more certain than the old Latin one of eighty
four, but agreeing with the Latins in reckoning from sixteen to two and twenty;
and yet according to his Canon, the Easter sometimes differed eight days from
that kept at Alexandria: Bucher. Com. mentar. c. 8, 9.
and sometimes it fell a month later than it did according to the former Latin
computation. But this Canon of Victorius gave no satisfaction either to the
Eastern or Western Church; all the Eastern Church followed the Patriarch of
Alexandria, and the Church of Milan in the West, from the time of S. Ambrose as
appears by his Epistle to the Bishops of Aemilia: Ambros. ep. 83.
Victor Bishop of Capua writ against Victorius his Canon, A. D. 550. upon a new
controversy risen in the Church about Easter day; but this was twenty five
years after Dionysius Exiguus had brought the Alexandrian Canon into the use of
the Roman Church, which was A. D. 525. After which time it did by degrees
prevail in the Western parts; but was never fully received in France till it
was settled there by the Authority of Charles the Great.

. 12. This is the short and true account of the Paschal controversy, which
made so much noise, and gave so great disturbance to the Christian Church; let
us now bring it home to the case of the British and Scottish Churches, and see
what reason Wilfrid then, and the Roman Missionaries since, have had to condemn
them. Was it that they opposed the universal practice of the Christian Church
in not reckoning from fifteen to twenty one? but we see the Roman Church it
self had but lately embraced that way of computation; having before made use of
the same Cycle the Britains did, of eighty four, and reckoned from sixteen to
twenty two. Was it, that according to their way different Easters would be kept
the same year? but, why should this be worse with the Britains and Scots, than
with the Eastern and Western Churches, which differed sometimes a month in
their Easter; as, besides, what has been mentioned already, appears by the
ancient Laterculus Paschalis first published by Bucherius, in which he shows,
that within the compass of it, viz. an hundred years, the Easter of the Latins
was kept a month sooner than the Alexandrians, viz. A. D. 322, 349, 406.
Bucher. Comment. p. 264.
And A. D. 387. a threefold Easter was kept, some March 21. others April 25.
others April 18. as appears by S. Ambrose's Epistle written on that occasion.
Again A. D. 577. V. Labb. Chronolog. Te^hnic. ad A. 387. and ad A. 577.
a threefold Easter was kept, some keeping it the eighteenth of April, as those
which followed Victorius, others the twenty fifth of April, viz. those which
followed the Alexandrian Canon; and others again, even in Gaul, as Greg. Greg.
Turon. l. 5. c. 1^.
Turonensis says on the 12. Kal. of April, March 21. the very day of the
Vernal Aequinox: So he tells us, they did in compliance with the Spaniards, who
it seems thought it no heresy so to do, even after the decree of the Council
of Nice. But I suppose the main fault of the British and Scottish Churches
was, that at some times it would so happen that they might keep their Easter-
day on the fourteenth of the Moon, and so comply with the Jews. Was this it in
truth which unchurched them all, and rendered their Ordinations null? The
Apostles I am sure did far more in compliance with the Jews than this came to,
as to matter of Circumcision and other things, and even in this point, if
Ecclesiastical History may be credited, and yet I hope their Ordinations were
good, and the Churches Orthodox which they planted. Methinks, it might have
been called compliance with the Apostles as well with as the Jews? and will
indeed compliance with an Apostolical practice unchurch whole Nations? it must
be surely only with the Church of Rome that it can do so. And yet did not the
Church of Rome it self comply with the Jews in the use of their Cycle, and in
the beginning of their Lunar Month on the fifth, and not on the eighth of March
as the Alexandrians? And why should one sort of compliance unchurch people, and
not another? If every compliance does it, farewell to the Church of Rome it
self and her Ordinations, even after the Nicene Council. But, what if after all
this, the Church of Rome after the embracing the Alexandrian Cycle, did comply
more with the Jews than the British Churches did in keeping their Easter on
the fourteenth of the Moon: for by that Canon they were to keep it on the
fifteenth, and that was the great Festival day among the Jews, for on the
evening of the fourteenth they did eat their bitter herbs, but the next day was
the solemn Festival: and I would ^ain understand whether it were not a greater
compliance with the Jews to feast the same day they did, than to keep that for
a Festival, on which they eat their bitter herbs, and began the Passover only
on the evening? Besides, they who kept it on the fifteenth, must celebrate the
memory of Christ's passion before the fourteenth, which certainly was as great
an incongruity as could happen by keeping it on the fourteenth. But supposing
it were a compliance with the Jews; it is plain it was not a studied and
designed compliance with them; for they kept their Easter on the Lords day in
opposition to them; only it happened once in seven years, says Mr. Cressy,
that the fourteenth of the Moon and Easter met, and then they kept it with the
Jews; If this were it which unchurched them; how hard was it for such Britains
and Scots to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven! Or rather, how hard is it for
such who can Unchurch whole Nations of Christians on such pitiful accounts as
these? S. Paul would have said, I will keep no Easter while the world stands,
rather than destroy whole Churches of such for whom Christ dyed. But what do we
meddle with S. Paul; they are only the Usurpers of S. Peter's Chair, that dare
so easily, in their own opinion, send whole Churches to Hell; viz. for doing no
more in effect, than themselves had done not long before. Nay, to conclude all,
it is very probably supposed by two learned Persons, Aegid. B^cher. Comment^^.
in Pas^ b. Canon. p. 190.
that what the British and Scottish Churches, at that time accounted the
fourteenth of the Moon, was in truth the sixteenth, (whether by the correction
of Sulpitius Severus, as Bishop Usser supposes, Usser. de Pri^o^ d. Eccles.
Britan. p. 934.
or the shortness of the Cycle, as Bucherius; is no matter at all). And I hope
all persons shall not be presently sent to Hell, that do mistake in the
Computation of Easter, according to the Judgment of the Roman Church; for then
God have mercy on all those that do not follow the Gregorian Account. And I
think the difference as great and a weighty now, as it was in the famous
Dispute between Wilfrid and Colman: But if notwithstanding this difference the
British and Scottish Christians were very good Christians, and so many English
Churches were planted by them, Mr. Cressy must harden his forehead in standing
to it, that the English Saxons were converted by Benedictin Monks.

CHAP. V.
Of the Poenal Laws against Papists.
. 1. I Am now come to that which Mr. Cressy looks upon as a very important
subject, Epist. Apol. sect. 98, 99. p. 119.
and deserving serious consideration; which is, how far those who acknowledge
subjection to a foreign Power, as all English Catholics do, can give
satisfaction to the State of their Fidelity to his Majesty? Which, he says,
the Person of Honor repeats in several places, and is most accurately
descanted upon in his nine Questions near the conclusion of his Book. I shall
therefore give a short account of what the Person of Honor says upon this
subject; and then consider what Mr. Cressy offers by way of Reply to it.

1. He says, Ani^adv. p. 10.
that the Personal Authority of the Pope, was that, and that only which first
made the Schism, and still continues it, and is the ground of all the animosity
of the English Catholics against the Church of England, and produced their
separation from it; and if they will renounce all that Personal Authority in
the Pope, and any obedience to it within his Majesty's Kingdoms, they will
purge themselves of all such jealousy, or suspicion of their Fidelity, as may
prove dangerous to the Kingdom, and against which the Laws are provided:
because it is their dependence on a foreign Jurisdiction, which makes them or
their opinions taken notice of by the Politic Government of the Kingdom.

2. P. 243.
That it is necessary for the personal security of Kings and Princes, and for
the peace and quiet of Kingdoms, that it may be clearly made manifest, what the
Authority and Power is, that a foreign Prince does challenge in another
Princes Dominions contrary to, and above the Laws of the Land, and what
obedience it is that subjects may pay to such a foreign Prince, without the
privity, and contrary to the command of his own Sovereign; which cannot be done
by a general Answer, but by distinct assigning the bounds of the Popes Temporal
and Spiritual Power in England; and what the full intent of them is, that the
King may discern whether he has enough of either to preserve himself and the
Peace of the Kingdom.

3. P. 245.
That till such time as the Roman Catholic Subjects of England give as good
security to the King for their Fidelity and peaceable behavior, as all his
other subject do, they have no cause to wonder that they may be made subject to
such Laws and restraints, as may disable them from being dangerous; when they
profess to owe obedience to a foreign Prince, who does as much profess not to
be a friend to their Country, and will not declare what that obedience is.

4. P. 9, 101.
That the Roman Catholic Subjects of England have a more immediate dependence
on the Pope, than is allowed in any Catholic Countries: and that those who
under pretense of Religion refuse to declare, that it is in no Earthly Power to
absolve them from their Fidelity to the King, do refuse to give as full
satisfaction and security for their Allegiance, as Catholic Subjects do give
for their Fidelity to Catholic Kings: P. 246.
there being no French Roman Catholic who dares refuse to do it.

5. P. 71, 72.
That there is so much the more reason to require this, since the late instance
of the Irish Rebellion, wherein the Pope absolved the Kings Subjects from their
Oaths, and took upon himself to be their General in the Person of his Nuntio,
P. 247.
and assumed the exercise of the Regal Power, both at Land and Sea, and
imprisoned those Catholics, and threatened to take away their Lives who had
promoted the peace, and desired to return to the Kings subjection; and has
since given a severe check to those of the Irish Nobility and Clergy, who had
declared that the Pope had no Power to dispense with their Fidelity to his
Majesty, or to absolve them from any Oaths they should take to that purpose:
and employed his Nuntio to discountenance and suppress that Declaration, and to
take care that it should proceed no further; P. 75.
and that Cardianl Barbarine at that same time put them in mind, that the
Kingdom of England was still under Excommunication; and since that, the Pope
has made many Bishops in Ireland, which his Predecessors had forborne to do
from the death of Queen Elizabeth, to A. D. 1640. And therefore there is no
reason to believe, that the Court of Rome does recede from its former
principles, as to these things.

. 2. These several particulars carry so much weight along with them, as may
easily raise the expectation of any one, to see what Mr. Cressy will reply to
them. And in truth he enters the Field like a Champion; for he says, his
Apology is published permissu Superiorum; E^i^t. A^ol. p. 101.
and what he writes on this special subject, he desires the Person of Honor to
consider, not as the inconsiderable opinion of one particular person only. And
he does assure him, that there is not any one Point of Controversy upon which
they more earnestly desire to be summoned to give an account before equal
Judges, than this. Thus he enters the lists, and walks his ground, and
brandishes his sword, and makes legs to the Judges with more than ordinary
assurance, and fails in no point of a Champion, but overcoming his Adversary.
Which he is so far from, that after these Bravado's and flourishes he dares not
stand before him; but looks round about him to discern any way to escape. But
although it be beneath the Greatness of his Adversary, to pursue him over all
his Bogs, and to draw him out of his Fastnesses; yet I shall endeavor to bring
him into the Lists again, that his Adversary may not go away blushing at so
mean a Triumph.

There are five things which Mr. Cressy offers at by way of Answer to the
Discourse of the Person of Honor on this subject. 1. P. 112, ^13.
That there is no reason to suspect the Catholic subjects of England to be
more wanting in Fidelity to their Prince than of other Nations, whose Catholic
Ancestors were so far from acknowledging any Supremacy of the Pope in
Temporals, and much less any Authority in him to depose Princes, that even in
those times when Churchmen had the greatest Power in this Kingdom, Statutes
were made with the joint Votes of the Clergic upon occasion of some Usurpations
of the Roman Court, Stat. 25, and 27 Eaw. 3. Stat. 16 R. 2.
in which the Penalty was no less than a Praemunire against any one who without
the Kings License should make any Appeals to Rome, or submit to a Legates
jurisdiction, or upon the Popes Summons go out of the Kingdom, or receive any
Mandats or Brieffs from Rome, or purchase Bulls for presentiments to Churches:
and which is most considerable, the ground of their rejecting Papal Usurpations
is thus expressed, For the Crown of England is free, and has been free from
earthly subjection at all times, being immediately subject to God in all things
touching the Regalities of the same, and not subject to the Pope; to which he
says, the Bishops assented, and the Lords and Commons declared their
Resolution to stand with the King in the cases aforesaid, and in all other
cases attempted against him his Crown and Regalitie in all points, to live and
to dye.

2. That whatsoever they suffer here in England by virtue of the Poenal Laws,
P. 125.
it is purely for their Religion and the Catholic faith; and therefore he
parallels our Poenal Laws, with those of the Medes and Persians against Daniel;
P. 122.
and of Nero, Domitian and Dioclesian against the Apostles and their
successors: P. 44.
and yet Mr. Cressy confesses, that the occasion of the Poenal Laws, was the
treasonable actions of some of their own Religion; P. 104.
but he adds, that they were scarce one score of persons, and abhorred by all
the rest, for which actions of theirs, he confesses, that care is taken of
exacting Oaths both of Fidelity and Supremacy from Roman Catholics as
dangerous Subjects; and days of Thanksgiving are kept for the discovery and
prevention of such personal Treasons; whereas, says he, the whole Kingdoms
deliverance from almost an universal Rebellion designing the extinction of
Monarchy and Prelacy both, and executing the murder of the lawful Sovereign is
not esteemed a sufficient motive for such public Thanksgivings, neither it
seems is there at all a necessity of requiring from any a Retraction of the
Principles of Rebellion, or a promise that it shall not be renewed. By which we
might think Mr. Cressy had been utterly a stranger in his own Country, and had
never heard of the thirtieth of January or the twenty ninth of May, which are
solemnly observed in our Church, and the Offices joined with that of the fifth
of November, and are purposely intended for that very thing which he denies to
be taken notice of by us, in such a manner. What must we say to such men? who
openly and to our faces deny that, which the whole Nation knows to be true.
These stories might have passed abroad, where they have been wont to lie for
the Catholic Cause, but to have the impudence to say such things here, which
every Boy can confute, is not the way to advance the Reputation of their Church
among us.

And what does Mr. Cressy think, the Renuntiation of the Covenant was intended
for, if not to prevent the mischief of the former Rebellion? And is it possible
for any man who knows the Laws of his Country concerning these matters, to
dare to say in the face of the Kingdom, That it seems there is no necessity at
all of requiring from any a Retraction of the principles of Rebellion, or a
promise it shall never be renewed? If this be the way of defending the
innocence of Roman Catholics, I had rather be accounted guilty, than have my
innocence thus defended.

3. He says, P. 100.
We also confidently affirm, (so we have seen he has done too much already)
that by virtue of the Spiritual Jurisdiction inherent in the Pope, the Temporal
Rights and Power of the King (or even of the meanest of his Subjects) are not
at all abridged, or prejudiced. Which assertion, he says, has been always
maintained in France, the Pope not contradicting it; from whence it follows,
that it is agreeable to Catholic Religion. After this I expected he should
speak home to the purpose, and say, this is all the Power challenged by the
Pope as to England, or owned by any Roman Catholics here; which, finding what
he had affirmed about other matters, I thought he would have made no scruple
of; but I see he durst not, either for conscience or mere shame. But how then
does he get over this difficulty? Why English Catholics, says he, should be
suspected not to be as tender of the just Rights and precious lives also of
their Sovereign, as the Catholic Subjects of any other Kingdom, and why they
should be thought to be willing to acknowledge any Temporal Power director
indirect, to be inherent in the Pope over the King or Kingdom, to which not any
Catholic Gentleman or Nobleman would submit, I cannot imagine. I am very much
to seek for the sense of this, and know not what the submitting relates to; but
I suppose something left out, or struck out by his Superiors, who did not take
care to leave sense behind: But is this indeed all the security Mr. Cressy
offers, that he cannot imagine it should be otherwise here than in France? We
find, when he pleases, he can imagine strange things: and is this only out of
the reach of his imagination? What does he think, of the Kingdoms being under
Excommunication at Rome, as Cardinal Barbarine takes care to put the Irish
Nobility in mind, for some good end doubtless. Is the Kingdom of France so?
What does he imagine of Bulls from Rome prohibiting the taking the Oaths
required? Are there any such things in France? What does he think of the Popes
Nuntio appearing in the Head of an Army, and absolving the Kings subjects from
their Allegiance? I confess, it was not much better in France in the time of
the Holy League; but what opinion had they of the Popes temporal Power then?
Cannot Mr. Cressy imagine that there are such people in England as Jesuits? and
it is not many years since their Reasons were therefore showed to be
Unreasonable in pleading an exemption from the Sanguinary Laws, because they
did hold the Popes power of deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from their
Allegiance. And do not the Iesuitical party still plead that their opinion is
the common doctrine of their Church, confirmed by General Councils, and
approved by multitudes of Divines of all sorts; and that the contrary is only
asserted here, by a very inconsiderable party, whereof some are excommunicated
at Rome for their zeal in this matter? And do not we know, how much greater
sway the Iesuitical party has among the Nobility and Gentry, than the despised
Secular Priests? I do not at all question, but the Nobility and Gentry of
England would do as much to preserve the just Rights and precious lives of
their Sovereigns, as of any Nation in the World, and have as great a sense of
their own Honor as well as Interest, and of the Duty they owe to their
Country. But ought not the Laws to take so much the more care to keep their
Consciences untainted in these things? they being such Persons whose Loyalty
cannot be corrupted, but under a pretense of Conscience; and their Consciences
being so much in danger, by being under the direction chiefly of those who are
the sworn servants to the Papal Power.

4. He offers by way of satisfaction concerning their Fidelity, P. 108.
that they will subscribe the French Declaration lately made by the Sorbon, or
the Censure of the Faculty of Paris A. D. 1626. P. 116.
and that very few if any at all would refuse subscription to that Form
prescribed by the State, P. 111. P. 120.
in case that unlucky word heretical were left out. As though all those who had
hitherto refused to take that Oath, had done it only upon this nicety, that the
word heretical were to be taken not in the sense of the Givers, but of the
Takers of the Oath: whereas Mr. Cressy himself says, P. 112.
that common Reason teaches, that all Oaths, Professions and Promises are to be
understood in the sense of those who frame and require them, and not of those
upon whom they are imposed. But if this were all the ground of refusing this
Oath among any of them, Mr. Cressy therein charges them with the want of common
Reason: whereas I shall make it appear in the progress of this Discourse, that
this was far from being the true and only reason of Roman Catholics refusing
the Oath of Allegiance.

5. That since Ordination abroad does not in the least render English Priests
defective in their duties to the Civil Magistrate; P. 121.
it will follow that whatsoever penalty is inflicted on them on such an
account, is not inflicted according to the Rule of Justice, and by consequence
that whatsoever blood shall be shed, the guilt of it before God will be imputed
to the whole Kingdom, since it is shed by virtue of the whole Kingdoms votes,
and consent given long since upon motives long since ceased. And therefore he
charges it deeply upon my conscience to endeavor to free the whole Kingdom
from such a guilt. This is the substance of what Mr. Cressy says upon this
very important subject, as himself calls it; and by virtue whereof he hopes, P.
119.
the poenal Laws may be repealed, and those of their Religion may enjoy the
Liberty of their Religion and all the Rights of Freeborn Subjects. P. 98.
Which are things too important to be debated in such a manner by persons who
by making reflections on the Justice and Wisdom of a Nation do endeavor to
expose the Laws and Government of it to the censure and reproach of the
malicious and ignorant. But since our Laws are so publicly accused of
injustice and cruelty, and the Kingdom charged with the guilt of innocent
blood, I hope I may have leave as an English man to vindicate the Laws of our
Country, and as a Protestant to wipe off the aspersion of Cruelty from our
Religion: which I shall do without the least intention of mischief to any men's
persons, or of sharpening the severities of Laws against them.

. 3. And to proceed with the greatest clearness in this matter, I shall
consider,

1. The charge of injustice and cruelty which he lays upon our poenal Laws.

2. The proposals he makes in order to the repeal of them, and giving a full
liberty to the exercise of their Religion.

1. The charge of injustice and cruelty upon our poenal Laws. Whosoever
adventures to charge the public Laws of a Kingdom in such a manner ought to be
very well advised upon what grounds he proceeds; and to understand thoroughly
the nature, and constitution of Government and Rules of Justice, and the power
of interpreting as well as making Laws, and the certain bounds within which
Laws may make actions Treasonable, and how far actions thought Religious by the
Persons who do them, may become treasonable when they are against Laws made for
the public safety; and what actions of Religion make men Martyrs when they
suffer for them and what not; for it is certain, they are not all of equal
consequence and necessity; these and many other things a man ought to come well
provided with, that dares in the face of the World to charge the Laws of his
own Nation with injustice and cruelty. But Mr. Cr. may be excused in this
matter, for that would indeed be an unjust and cruel Law to require
impossibilities from men: I wish so noble a subject had been undertaken by a
Person fit for it, that could have managed it otherwise than in a bare
declamatory manner. But since he is the Goliath that dares so openly defy our
Laws and Government, I shall make use of his own Weapons to cut off the heads
of this terrible accusation. For, 1. He grants, That the Laws made by their
Catholic Ancestors, viz. the Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors were just
Laws. 2. That our King has reason to expect as much security of the Fidelity
of his Catholic Subjects, as any Catholic Prince has from his. 3. That all
Christian Kings have in some sense a kind of spiritual Authority, that they
ought to be Nursing Fathers to Gods Church, that they ought to promote true
Christian doctrine both touching Faith and manners, and to employ their power
when occasion is, Epistle Apolog^t. p. 102.
to oblige even Ecclesiastical Persons to perform their duties, and all their
Subjects to live in all Christian Piety and Virtue. These are his o^n words,
which in short come to this, that they are bound to promote and pre^erve the
true Religion. P. 105.
4. That it is absolutely unlawful for them to defend their Religion, being
persecuted by Sovereign Magistrates, by any other way but suffering: which, he
says, they do sincerely profess according to their persuasion. 5. That the
treasonable actions of persons of their own Religion were the occasion of
making and continuing the poenal Laws: for upon their account, he says, they
are thought dangerous Subjects, P. 104.
and care is taken to exact Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy from them. 6.
That where the Popes temporal power is owned, especially as to deposing
Princes, there can be no sufficient security given as to the Fidelity of such
persons. This I prove from his saying, that there is no reason to question
their Fidelity, whose Ancestors were so far from any Supremacy of the Pope in
Temporals, and much less any Authority in him to depose Princes, that they made
the Statutes of Praemunire and Provisors, (which by his favor is a very weak
argument, unless men can never be supposed to degenerate from the Virtues of
their Ancestors) but besides, the satisfaction he offers, P. 116, 117
is by renouncing the Popes temporal power, and declaring that his power of
deposing Princes, and absolving Subjects from their Allegiance, is repugnant to
the Word of God, although they dare not call it heretical; from whence it
follows, that Mr. Cressy does not think those can give sufficient security for
their Fidelity, who dare not thus far renounce the Popes power.

7. That where there is no sufficient security given for the Fidelity of
Persons, there is great reason they should lie under the severity of Laws.
Which Mr. Cressy always supposes; and only complains of their hardship upon
the offers he makes of their Fidelity. And this must hold as to all sorts of
persons who may be dangerous to Government, although they may pretend never so
much exemption by their Function, or being employed in Offices not immediately
relating to Civil Government.

From these concessions it will be no difficult task to clear our Poenal Laws
from injustice, and to vindicate the whole Kingdom from the guilt of innocent
blood, if I can prove these following assertions.

1. That the same Reasons which justify the ancient Statutes of England and
the Laws of Catholic Princes abroad, do vindicate our Poenal Laws from the
charge of Injustice and Cruelty.

2. That Laws originally made upon the account of acknowledged treasonable
practices, do continue just upon all those who do not give sufficient security
against the principles leading to those practices.

1. That the same Reasons which justify the ancient Statutes of England, and
the Laws of Catholic Princes abroad, do vindicate our Poenal Laws from the
charge of Injustice and Cruelty. For if the penalties do bear no greater
proportion to the nature of the offense; if the Power be as great and as just
in our Lawmakers; if the occasions were of as high a nature, and the pleas in
behalf of the persons equal: then there can be no reason assigned why those
Laws should be just and lawful, and not ours. And the making out of these
things is my present business.

1. I begin with the ancient Laws and Statutes of England. And I hope no one
dares question, but that the power of making Laws is as good and just in
England since the Reformation, as ever it was before: For if there be the least
diminution of Power by virtue of the cutting off the Popes Authority, then so
much of the Civil Power as was lost by it, was derived from the Pope: and this
is in plain terms to make the Pope our Temporal Sovereign, and the whole
Kingdom to be only Feudatary to him: which is asserting his Temporal power with
a vengeance; and contains in it a doctrine that none but very Self-denying
Princes can ever give the least countenance to; because it strikes at the very
root of their Authority, and makes them only precarious Princes, (and in a much
more proper sense than the Popes use that Title, The Servants of Servants.)
Supposing then the Legislative and Civil Power to be equal since the
Reformation and before; our work is to compare the other circumstances
together; and if it appear, that the Plea of Conscience and Religion did
equally hold then, and notwithstanding that the penalties were as great, upon
the same or far less occasions, I hope our Laws will at least appear as just
and reasonable as those were.

. 4. To make this out, I must give an account of the State of those times, and
the Reasons and Occasions which moved the Lawmakers to enact those Poenal
Statutes: in which I shall show these two things. 1. That they began upon a
controversy of Religion; and that the Poenal Laws were made against those
persons who pleaded Religion. 2. That the Reasons and Occasions of the Poenal
Laws since the Reformation were at least as great as those.

1. That the ancient Poenal Laws were made upon a Controversy of Religion: And
to give a clear account of the Rise and occasion of them, I must begin from the
Norman Conquest; for then those Foundations were laid of all the following
controversies which happened between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power. On the
behalf of the Ecclesiastical Power was the plea of Conscience and Religion, on
the behalf of the Civil Power nothing but the just Rights of Princes, and the
necessary preservation of their own and the public safety. And this
Controversy between the Two Powers was managed with so much zeal, and such
pretenses of Conscience on the behalf of the Ecclesiastical Power, that the
Civil Power, notwithstanding the courage of some Princes, and the resolution of
Parliaments, had much ado to stand its ground, or to be able to preserve it
self from the encroachments and Usurpations of the other. So that to see
Princes give any Countenance to the same pretenses would be almost as strange,
as to see them turn Common-wealths-men. I know there were good Laws frequently
made to strengthen the Civil Power; but the very frequency of them showed how
ineffectual they were; For what need many Laws to the same purpose, if the
first had any force at all? and the multiplication of Laws for the same thing,
is a certain sign of defect in the Government. To undeceive therefore all those
who judge of the State of Affairs by the Book of Statutes, I shall deduce the
History of this great Controversy between the Ecclesiastical and Civil Power
in England, so far as to show the necessity there was found of putting an issue
to it, by casting out the Popes pretended Power and Jurisdiction in this Nation.

The two first who began this Dispute, were both men of great Spirits and
resolute in their undertakings; I mean william the Conqueror and Gregory the
seventh, who was the first Pope that durst speak out; and he very freely
declares his mind about the subjection of the Civil Power to the
Ecclesiastical, and the exemption of all Ecclesiastical Persons and Things from
the Civil Power. In his Epistle to Herimanus Bishop of Metz about the
excommunication of Henry the fourth, Gr^g. 7^. Ep^stol. l. 8. Ep. 21.
and absolving his Subjects from their Allegiance; he thus expresses himself;
Shall not that power which was first found out by men who knew not God, be
subject to that which God himself has appointed for his own honor in the
World, and the head of which is the Son of God? Who knows not that Kings and
Dukes had their beginnings from men who gained their Authority over their
equals by blind ambition and intolerable presumption, by rapines and murders,
by perfidiousness and all manner of wickedness? Is not this a very pretty
account of the Original of Civil Power by the Head of the Church? But this is
not all; for he adds, While Princes make Gods Priests to be subject to them, to
whom may we better compare them than to him, who is the Head over all the Sons
of Pride, who tempted the Son of God with promising him all the Kingdoms of the
World, if he would fall down and worship him? This is better and better; it
seems it is as bad as the sin of Lucifer, for Princes not to be subject to the
Pope; and it is like the Devils tempting Christ, to offer to make Priests
subject to the Civil Power. Who doubts, says he, that Christ's Priests are to
be accounted the Fathers and Masters of Kings and Princes and all the faithful?
Now, says he, is it not a lamentable madness, if the Son should offer to make
the Father subject to him (but one of his Successors did not think so, that set
up Henry the fifth against his own Father) or the Scholar his Master, or to
think to bind him on earth, by whom he expects to be loosed in Heaven? These
were the Demonstrations of that Age, and the main supports of the Cause*
G^^gor. 7. Epist. l. 7^* Ep. 25.
and in his Epistle to William King of England, he tells him, that God had
appointed two kinds of Government for mankind, the Apostolical and Regal (that
is much, that the same Government should come only from the sins of men, and
yet be from the appointment of God: but we are to consider he writ this to a
King whom he hoped to persuade, and therefore would not tell him the worst of
his thoughts about the beginnings of Civil Power) but, says he, these two
powers, like the Sun and Moon, have that inequality by the Christian Religion,
that the Royal Power next under God is to be under the care and management of
the Apostolical. And since the Apostolical See is to give an account to God of
the miscarriages of Princes, his wisdom ought to consider, whether he ought not
without farther delay take an Oath of Fealty to him. For no less than that
would content him: but William was not so meek a Prince to be easily brought to
this, as Robert of Sicily, Richard of Capua, Bertram of Provence, Rodulphus,
and several others were, whose Oaths of Fealty to him are extant in the
Collection or Register of his Epistles. Epistol. ^. 1. c. 21.
But William gives him a resolute answer, L. 9. 3. 12. Lanfra^c. Ep. 7.
which is extant among the Epistles of Lanfranc; that for the Oath of Fealty,
he had not done it, neither would he, because he never promised it, neither did
he find that ever his predecessors had done it to Gregory's predecessors. The
Pope storms at this, and writes a chiding Letter to Lanfranc Archbishop of
Canterbury; who like a better subject to the Pope than to the King, writes an
humble excuse for himself to the Pope, and tells him, he had done his endeavor
to persuade the King, but could not prevail with him: La^^ra^c. Ep. 8.
And Cardinal Baronius says, Annal. Eccl^siast. A. 1079. n. 25.
the Pope took it very ill at his hands, considering the kindness he had
received from the Papal See. For Alexander the second favored his cause
against Harold, and sent him a consecrated Banner; and if we may believe
Henricus de Silgrave, Henr. de Si^gra^e Chro^ic. MS in Biblioth. Cotton.
the Pope gave him his title to the Crown of England, on condition that he
should hold it in Fee from the Papal See: but I find no such thing mentioned by
Ingulphus, or Gulielmus Pictaviensis, who understood the Conquerors affairs as
well as any, being about him at that time; neither would Gregory the seventh
have omitted it: but however Bertholdus Constantiensis, B^rthold. Constant.
A^p^nd. ad Her^. C^^tr. A. 1084.
or rather Bernaldus an Author of that time, and the Popes Poenitentiary,
affirms confidently, that William King of England made this whole Nation
tributary to the Pope; which there is no pretense for, but only that he, after
some demurr, caused the ancient Eleem^synarie Peter Pence, to be sent to Rome.
So careful had Princes need to be, of the continuance of Gifts to Rome, which
in time are looked on as a Tribute; and that Tribute an acknowledgement of
Fealty; and that Fealty proves a Subjection in Temporals. But this was not the
only dispute between these two Conquerors, for Gregory the seventh at the same
time that he sent Hubert his Legate to England about the Oath of Feal^y, he sent
Hugo to keep a Council in France against the investitures of Bishops by
Lay-hands, Baron^ A. D. 1080. n. 3.
and afterward in a Council at Rome, solemnly condemned them; and threatened
deposition to all that received them, Greg. 7. ep^ l. 7. ep. 14.
and the vengeance of God upon those that gave them. The bottom of which lay
not in the pretense of Simony, but because it was too great a token of their
subjection to the Civil Power; and Gregory the seventh was, as Bertholdus
says, Berthold. ^onst. A. D. 1085.
a most zealous defender of Ecclesiastical Liberty, i. e. the total exemption
of Ecclesiastical persons from subjection to the Civil Power; and Eadmerus
says, that the Bishops made their homage to the King before they received
investiture by the Staff and the Ring. Eadmer. prae^at. p. 2.
But notwithstanding all these Decrees and Threatenings, William the Conqueror,
as that Author tells us, would never part with the Rights of the Crown in this
matter: and he declares that he would not only keep the ancient Saxon custom of
investiture, Seld^. not. ad Eadm. p. 142.
(as Ingulphus and other Authors show it to have been) but all the ancient
customs of his Predecessors in Normandy relating to Ecclesiastical affairs: So
that all Ecclesiastical as well as Civil things, Eadmer. p. 6.
says Eadmerus, were under his command. These customs were, 1. That none
should be acknowledged Pope, but whom the King pleased. 2. That no Bulls should
be received, but such as were approved by the King. 3. That nothing should be
decreed in Provincial Councils, but by his Approbation. 4. That no Persons
about the King should be excommunicated without his knowledge: but besides,
Pope Gregory charged him with two more enormities, Greg. R^gistr. ^. 7. ep. 1.
viz. 5. Hindering all appeals to Rome of Bishops and Archbishops: which was
such a thing, he says that a Heathen would not have done it. 6. Seizing upon
the person of his Brother Odo being a Bishop and imprisoning him; which he said
was plainly against Scripture, Qui vos tangit, tangit pupillam oculi mei; and
Nolite tangere Christos meos; L. 11. Ep. ^;
which no doubt were understood of the Archbishops and Bishops of the
Patriarchal and Jewish Church. But I do not find that King William did at all
recede from the Rights of his Crown, although the Pope according to his skill
quoted Scripture against them; and although the Bishop of Baieux was clapped up
on the account of Treason, as our Historians agree, yet in Pope Gregory's
opinion he suffered for Religion and the preservation of Divine Laws: and such
men as Mr. Cressy might have compared such Laws with those of Nero and
Domitian; but I think they durst not have done it in the Conquerours time; who
at the Council of Illebon in Normandy declared his resolution to maintain the
customs of his Predecessors, O^d^r. Vital. Eccles. histor. l. 5. P. 554.
relating to Ecclesiastical affairs.

. 5. After the death of Gregory the seventh, there was no Pope acknowledged in
England for eleven years, (...) A. 10^1.
because of the Schism between Urban and Clement; and our King had declared for
neither of them: And william Rufus told Anselm, who would fain have gone to
Urban the second for his Pall, that he had not yet acknowledged him for Pope,
and therefore he should not go. And, says he, if you own him without my
Authority, Ead^^r. p. 26.
you break your faith to me, and displease me as much as if you did endeavor
to take away my Crown: Anselm however stands upon it, that himself had owned
him for Pope, and would do so whatever came of it; and would not depart from
his obedience for an hour. A Parliament being called at Rockingham upon this
occasion, the Nobility and Bishops all advised him to submit to the King. P. 27.
Anselm notwithstanding cries, Tues Petrus and super hanc Petram, etc. and Qui
vos tangit, tangit pupillam oculi, as Gregory the seventh had done before him,
and to as much purpose; but no such things, says he, are said of Kings or
Princes, or Dukes or Earls; and therefore he resolved to adhere to the Pope:
The King being acquainted with his answer, P. 28.
sends some of the Nobles and Bishops to him, to let him know, that the whole
Kingdom was against him, and that hereby he endeavored to take away one of the
Flowers of his Crown from him, by depriving him of one of the ancient Rights of
it: and withal that he acted contrary to his Oath to the King. P. 24.
Anselm (if we may believe Eadmerus, who lived in his time, and was his
constant companion) stood upon his privilege, that an Archbishop of Canterbury
could be judged by none but the Pope: and so by that means was wholly exempt
from the Royal Power: and he bore all the affronts he met with patiently out of
his firm devotion to the Papal See. The Bishop of Durham whose advice the King
asked in this matter, told him, that Anselm had the Word of God and Authority
of S. Peter of his side. The King said, he would never endure one equal to
himself in his Kingdom: and therefore took off his protection from him, and
commands the Nobility and Bishops to disown him: P. 30, 31.
and banishes his Counselors, and gives him time for a final answer. The mean
while the King tryes by several arts to gain him, viz. by sending to Urban
secretly for the Pall, and acknowledging him to be Pope, P. 32, 33 ^
and at last they brought it to this issue, that he should receive the Pall at
the Kings hands, which he utterly refused to do, and would take it no otherwise
but off from the Altar of Canterbury. P. 34.
After this, he desires leave to go to the Pope, the King denies it, he
persists in his entreaty, P. 38.
the King absolutely denies it, he resolves to go however, because, says he,
it is better to obey God than men. As though God had commanded him to disobey
the King in this matter. When the Bishops had dissuaded him from it, and told
him they would keep their fidelity to the King: Go, says he, then to your
Lord, and I will hold to my God. P. 39.
Did he mean the same God which the Gloss upon the Canon Law speaks of, our
lord God the Pope? and it is hard to conceive any other could be meant in this
case. The King sends some of the Bishops and Barons to him to put him in mind
of his Oath to observe the Laws and Customs of the Realm; he told him they were
to be understood with the reservation of being according to God, P. 40.
and that it was not so, to keep him from going to the Pope, and therefore he
would not observe it; and so takes his leave of the King to be gone; and the
King after his going seizes upon all his profits. I desire to know of such as
Mr. Cressy, whether the King or Anselm were in the right in all this affair?
And if the King had used greater severity to him, whether Anselm had suffered
on the account of Religion Or Treason? But he complains to the Pope, P. 43.
that the Law of God, and Authority of the Pope and Canons were overwhelmed by
the Customs of the Realm; and therefore he resigns his Archbishopric to him,
and desires the Pope to put one into it; which was contrary to the ancient
Rights of the King: P. 53.
The Pope in a Council at Rome solemnly excommunicates all Lay-persons that
gave Investitures of Churches, and all that received them, and all
Ecclesiastical persons that paid Homage to Princes, saying it was very unfit
that they who made their God, should put their hands into the obscene and cruel
hands of Princes: as Eadmerus relates it, who was present in the Council.

. 6. After the death of Rufus, P. 56.
Anselm returns for England, the new King Henry the first demands the
accustomed Homage from him, he denies it, and gives the late Council at Rome
for his reason; adding further, if the King would submit to the Decrees of that
Council, there would be peace between them, otherwise he would be gone again.
The King was very unwilling to part with the Rights of his Predecessors in the
Investiture and Homage of Bishops; for says Eadmerus, it seemed to him as much
as to lose half his Kingdom: and yet was afraid to let Anselm go, lest by his
means the Pope should have set up his Brother Roberts Title against him; the
King being in this strait, endeavors to gain time, and sends Ambassadors to
the Pope, to try, if he could procure his consent, to let him enjoy his own
Rights: Ead. p. 60.
Pope Paschal the second in his long Epistle to Henry, absolutely condemns
them, as inconsistent with God, with justice, or with salvation: and adds that
to the wit of his predecessors, that it was a monstrous thing for a Son to
beget a Father, or a man to make a God; (but Urban gave that, as a reason
against it, because Priests were men that did make a God) now Priests, says
he, in Scripture are called Gods; and are not Princes or Secular Powers? The
King not at all moved with this Bull, requires from Anselm either to pay him
homage, and to consecrate those that had received investitures from him, or
immediately to be gone out of the Kingdom: and withal declares, that he would
preserve the Rights of his Predecessors, nor would endure any in his Kingdom
that would not do him homage; P. 61.
the Nobility and the rest of the Bishops join with the King, and used all
persuasions to keep him from submitting to the Pope. The King hoping to compose
this matter, sends three Bishops to the Pope to let him know, says Eadmerus,
that if the King did not enjoy his Rights, he would banish Anselm and renounce
the Pope. Brompton. C^ro^. p. 999.
But Brompton has the smart Letter the King sent upon this occasion, wherein
he tells him, he would not fail of that respect and obedience which his
predecessors had shown to the Popes, on condition that all the Honors, Uses and
Customs which his Father had in his predecessors times might be freely enjoyed
by him; and that by the help of God none of them should be lessened in his
time; and if, says he, which God forbid, I should be so base to let them go;
yet my Nobility, nay, the whole people would by no means suffer it. The Pope
told them, P. 63.
he would not yield to the King in this matter to save his Life; and writes
word to the King, that by the judgment of the Holy Ghost he had forbidden all
investitures by Princes: and encourages Anselm in his opposition to the King,
with some impertinent texts of Scripture. (For of all men, the Popes,
notwithstanding their pretense to infallibility, have been very unhappy in
applying Scripture in their Bulls; and it would be one of the strangest
Commentaries that ever the World saw, to set down the places of Scripture
produced by them with their interpretations of them: but that is not my present
business.) The King called together the Great men of the Nation in Council at
London: P. 65.
and sends some of them to Anselm, to know, whether he would observe the
customs of his predecessors or be gone? The Bishops pretending private
instructions contrary to the Popes Bulls, Anselm desires time to know the Popes
mind, and still stands to the Popes Letters; upon which the King told him, he
would bear these delays no longer; P. 70.
Quid mihi de meis cum Papa; what have I to do with the Pope about my own
Subjects? What Rights my Predecessors had, are mine too: whosoever would take
them away from me is my enemy, and every one that is my Friend knows it. Anselm
tells him, that to save his life he would not contradict the Popes decrees
unless he were absolved by him. The King would not so much as hear of the Popes
Bulls, nor suffer others to do it, which grieved Anselm much; and away he goes
again to receive comfort from the Pope. The King sends an Ambassador to the
Pope, P. 73.
who told him his Master would lose his Kingdom rather than the Investiture of
Bishops; the Pope very graciously replied, Before God I will lose my head
rather than he shall quietly enjoy them. But at last, the Pope was content he
should enjoy other customs excepting this of Investitures; the King was not at
all satisfied with this, P. 76.
but sends word to Anselm he must not set foot on English ground unless he
would promise to observe the former customs of the Realm: which he still
refused to do, and after several endeavors to compose this difference, the
King was at last forced to yield up the ancient Right of Investiture, and
retain only homage, which the Pope and Anselm were at present contented with;
P. 87, 91.
but this Agreement held not long; for notwithstanding the Pope did lay so much
weight on this business of Investitures, Mat Paris A. 1107. P. 63.
(as besides what is mentioned already, Petr. de Marca de Co^co d. Sa^erd. and
I^p. l. 8. c. 20. ^. 2. Floreat. Wigorn.
he said, that Christ dyed in vain if Lay-investitures were allowed) yet the
King was certainly informed that this same Pope had yielded Investitures to the
Emperor Henry 5. as Florentius Wigorniensis and Malmsbury report, A. D. 1111.
Malmsbur. de g^st. Reg. Angl. l. 5. Mat. Paris A. 1113. P 65.
and therefore Anselm writes to the Pope, Mat W^stminst. A. 1113.
that the King would resume his too: and it is evident he did so, for Matthew.
Paris and Westminster say expressly, that the King invested the next Archbishop
of Canterbury, with a staff and a ring after the ancient custom: which was
after the Lateran Council wherein the Pope again revoked the Emperors
privilege about investitures, which he says, is contrary to the Holy Ghost
and the Canonical Institution. But where was the Holy Ghost then when he
granted this privilege? Eadm. l. 5. p. 115, 118.
After this, the Pope complains of the King for retaining the other ancient
Rights, of hindering Appeals to Rome and not receiving Legates; but at last Pope
Calixtus yielded to the King the enjoyment of the Customs which his Father had
in England and Normandy. Was not this Pope very kind to the King who so
patiently yielded to those customs which his Predecessors had condemned as
contrary to Religion, and making Christ's death to no purpose? The same
Callis^us 2. in the Council of Lateran, A. D. MCXXII. put an end to the
Controversy of investitures in the Roman Empire: Malsmbur. de Hear. 1. p. 95.
yielding to the Emperor the right of Investitures so it were performed
without Simony, and by a Scepter and not by a staff and a Ring; because,
forsooth, if it had been done by a ring, it made it a kind of marriage, and so
made a spiritual Adultery between the Bishop and his Church; as the former
Popes very learnedly proved in their Epistles against Investitures.

. 7. This Controversy being at an end, the Popes bethought themselves of a
more subtle way of effecting their design, which was by engaging the Bishops by
oaths of Fidelity and obedience to themselves, as well as taking away their
homages and Fealty to Princes, that so with less noise and more security, they
might compass the design of Ecclesiastical Liberty or rather slavery to the
Pope. Gregory 7. Urban 2. and Paschal 2. did all forbid Clargy-men to give any
homage to Princes, Petr. de Marc^ de Co^ord. Sacerd. and Imper. l. 8. c. 21. ^.
4.
as Petrus de Marca proves from the Authentic acts of their several Councils;
instead of which they required an Oath of Fealty to themselves. For it was not
a bare oath of Canonical obedience, which the Popes required, but as much an
oath of Fealty and Allegiance, as ever Princes require from their other
Subjects: which will be made appear by comparing the oaths together. The most
ancient form of Allegiance I meet with, is that prescribed in the Capitular of
Charles the Great, which is contained in very few words.

Promitto ego partibus Domini mei Caroli Regis and filiorum ejus, Co^stit.
Caroli Magni c. 2. p. 263.
quia fidelis sum and ero diebus vitae meae sine fraud vel malo ingenio, as it
is in the old Edition of the Constitutions; but in the latter out of Sirmondus
his Copy it is somewhat larger. Histor. Fraac. Scriptores ed. ab A^. Du Chesn.
Tom. 2. p. 186.


Promitto ego quod ab isto die in antea fidelis sum Domino Carolo piissimo
Imperatori pura mente absque fraud and malo ingenio de mea part ad suam
partem and ad honorem regni sui, sicut per drictam debet esse homo Domino suo.
The ancient Form used in this Nation ran thus,

Tu jurabis quod ab ista die in antea eris fidelis and legalis Domino nostro
Regi and suis haeredibus; Sp^lma^. Glossar. ^Fid^l^tas.
and fidelitatem and legalitatem ei portabis de vita and de membro and de
terreno honor, and quod tu eorum malum aut damnum nec noveris nec audiveris
quod non defendes pro posse tuo, ita te Deus adjuvet: Now let us compare these
with the Oath made to the Pope; I shall take that form which is published out
of the Vatican MS. by Odoricus Raynaldus, which was taken by Edmund Archbishop
of Canterbury.

Ego Edmundus, O^oric. Ray^ald. A^^al. E^clesiast. A. 1233. ^. 65.
etc. ab hac hora in antea fidelis and obediens ero S. Petro and S. R. E. andD.
Papae Gregerio suisque successoribus canonice intrantibus. Nonero in facto
neque in consilio, aut consensio ut vitam perdant, aut membrum, aut capiantur
mala captione. Consilium vero quod mihi credituri sunt per se, aut per nuntios
suos sive per liter as ad little damnum, mesciente, nemini pandam. Papatum
Romanum and Regalia Sancti Petri aajutor eis ero ad retinendum and defendendum
salvo meo ordine contra omnem hominem, etc. This is enough to show, that if the
other were properly Oaths of Allegiance to Princes, this is so to the Pope, and
thereby they are bound to the very same obedience to the Pope as their
Sovereign, as anymen are to their own Princes. For here is no exception at all
of the Rights of Princes and the duty they owe to them; not the least notice
being taken of them, as though they did owe them any allegiance: which we
plainly see was never intended should be paid by those who first imposed this
Oath. That Learned Gentleman Sir Roger Twisden supposes this oath to have been
framed by Paschal 2. Historical Vindicat. Chapt. 3. n. 50.
and it is certain, that Rodulphus being made Archbishop of Canterbury in his
time, is the first we read among us, that took an oath of Fidelity to the Pope,
with that of Canonical obedience: after whose time we frequently meet with it,
but not before: Eadmer. l. 5. p. 113.
but in truth, it is the very same oath, Rad. de Diceto p. 534.
only applying it to Churchmen, which Richard of Capua took by way of Fealty to
Gregory 7. Gervas. Do^ r^born. p. 1307.
as may appear to any one that compares them together: Mat. Paris p. 414.
where there are the same expressions word for word: vit. Abbat. p. 140.
by which we may see the strictest allegiance to the Pope is understood by it,
Thorn. p. 1899.
without the least reservation of any other Princes Rights. And considering the
doctrine and design of the first imposers of it, it cannot be questioned, but
their intention was hereby to exempt the takers of it from all Allegiance to
any other than the Pope. But lest this design should be too easily suspected,
at first it went only along with the Pall to Archbishops, then it came to
Bishops, shops, and at last, as the Gloss upon the Canon Law tells us,
Decr^tal. de jure jurand. l. 2. tit. 24. c. 4.
to all that receive any dignity, consecration, or confirmation from the Pope;
and now the oath in the Pontifical is much larger than it was, and by it the
takers are bound to observe and defend the Papal reservations, Pontifical.
Ro^an. p. 86. to 97. A^tw. 1627.
Provisions and mandates, and to persecute to the utmost of their Power, all
Heretics, Schismatics and Rebels to the Pope. Much kindness then is to be
expected from all who are sworn to persecution, and much allegiance to Princes
from those who own the Pope to be their Sovereign in as express terms as any
Subjects can do their Princes: and so Cassander takes notice, that several
passages in this Oath relate to mere civil obedience, Epistolae select. Cent.
1. ^p. 21. p. 94, 97.
which we owe to Princes and not to the Pope: and for what relates to the
Papacy, if by it be understood the Papal Tyranny, as no doubt it is, be utterly
condemns it as an unlawful oath; and I extremely wonder at those who make so
many scruples about oaths of Allegiance to Princes, that they make none at all
about this, which as far as I can see, leaves no room for Allegiance to them,
any more than a person who has already sworn Allegiance to one Prince, has
liberty to swear the same thing to another; which it is impossible he should
keep to both.

The first contriver of this Oath to the Pope, was no other than Gregory 7. who
could not be thought to understand less than the strictest Allegiance by it,
since he required Fealty from Temporal Princes, and forbad all Clergymen
paying homage to them. In the Council held by him at Rome, A. D. 1079. the
Archbishop of Aquileia took an Oath in the same form with that published by
Raynaldus out of the Vatican MS. and therein he is sworn, Council. Gene^al. To.
11. p. 2. p. 379.
to defend the Roman Papacy and the Royalties of S. Peter; which makes me
wonder how the form extant in the Canon Law should have it Regulas Sanctorum
Patrum instead of Regalia Sancti Petri, for we are not to imagine that Gregory
9. had any such thought to bring down the Royalties of S. Peter to the ancient
Canons; and the oath which was taken had the Regalia sancti Petri always in it
from Gregory 7. time: unless they hoped to deceive the simple by this means,
for we find that even Cassander himself thought there had been no other Form
besides that in the Canon Law, till the Bishop of Munster sent him the Form he
was to take; wherein were the Regalia sancti Petri, as they are now in the
Pontifical. But if the strictest tie of Allegiance to the Pope as their
Sovereign were not intended by this oath, why could not the Popes be contented
with the former oath of Canonical Obedience, which from the time of Boniface
was required by the Pope of all Metropolitans together with the Pall, although
many refused to submit their necks to that Yoke. Before A. D. 450. De Conco^d.
Sac^rd. and I^ per. l. 6. c. 3. n. 13.
Petrus de Marca observes, nosuch thing as an Oath of Canonical Obedience from
Bishops to the Metropolitan was used in the Church; and therefore Leo 1.
reproves Anastasius of Thessalonica for requiring it from Atticus a Bishop
under him; but afterward by degrees it came into Use, as appears by the words
of the Bishops of Aquileia in Baronius to the Emperor Mauricius, Baron. ad A
590. n. 42. Form^l. antiquae pro^ot. in append. ad Tom. 2. Council. Gall. form.
12.
and the profession made by Adelbertus to Hinomarus his Metropolitan. Whereas
the Metropolitans themselves made only a bare profession of their faith, and a
promise to their suffragan Bishops to observe the Canons of the Church. But
when Gregory sent Boniface, as his Missionary into Germany, he made him take an
Oath over the Relics of S. Peter in the Vatican, to be true and faithful to
the interests of the Roman See, S^rrar. Rerum Moguntiae^, l. 3. c. 19. Boni^^c.
Epistol. p. 163.
but still it was within the compass of the Catholic Faith and the ancient
Canons: and this (...) being a very faithful servant to the (...) See, makes it
his business to persuade the Bishops of Germany and France, to profess
subjection to the Bishop of Rome; and all the Metropolitans to receive Palls
from thence, Bonifacit epist. 105. p. 144.
and to give Canonical obedience to the Popes decrees: these things went very
hardly down with the Bishops; for two years after A. D. 744. Boniface complains
to Pope Zachary, Bonifac. cp. 141. p. 211.
that he was afraid they would not keep their words; but he assures the Pope it
was none of his fault; but at last they were wheedled into it under this
pretense that it was only a mark of honor to receive the Pall, and not a badge
of subjection; and Hincmarus told Nicolaus 1. Hin^mar. ep. 26. p. 310. Tom. 2.
That he could receive no more power by it, than the Canons had given to
Metropolitans already; but when they were brought to receive the Pall the
promise of subjection went down with it: the Form of which is extant among the
ancient Formulae published by Sirmondus, Formul. antiq. 13. append. ad To. 2.
Council. Gall. p. 656.
wherein they promise to the Pope only debitam subjectionem and obedientiam,
which is properly Canonical Obedience. Now if Gregory 7. had understood no more
than that, why did he alter the Oath, and put in so many expressions which
properly imply the same Fealty which Vassals owe to their Lords, or Subjects to
their Princes? I know not, how it came to pass that so jealous a Prince of his
own Rights as Henry 1. came to suffer the new Archbishop to take this oath to
the Pope; but this is certain that it was extremely disgusted in other
Countries. For Baronius tells us that the Kings and Nobility of Sicily and
Poland were very much offended at it, Baron. A. 1102. n. 5, 8^
as a thing there was no ground for in the ancient Councils; as though says
Paschal 2. in answer to them, the Councils could set bounds to the Popes
Authority: which was bravely said and like a Prince that endeavored to make
the greatest Bishops his Vassals; but I cannot imagine what satisfaction this
could give to Secular Princes, who might easily discern how much their own
Power was lessened by these manifest encroachments upon it, by the exacting
oaths of Allegiance from some of the most considerable of their Subjects, to a
Foreign Power.

. 8. After the death of Henry 1. the Papal power got more ground in the
troublesome Reign of King Stephen, than ever it had done before; For his title
being very bad, he saw it was the more necessary for him to strengthen it by
the Popes Authority. To which end, after his Consecration by William Archbishop
of Canterbury, who together with Stephen had before sworn Allegiance to Maud
the Empress, he sends to the Pope for a Confirmation of his Title, which the
Pope very amply sends him; and the Bull is extant among our Historians;
Richa^d. Prior. H^guls^ ad. i^ter 10. Script. p. 313.
wherein among other things he takes notice, that on the day of his
consecration (as the Pope calls it) he promised obedience and reverence to S.
Peter; which no doubt went very far in his Title: and the Bishop of Winchester
his Brother told him (as Malmsbury Mal^sb^^. hist. No^ell. l. 2. p. 103.
relates who lived in that time) that he came to the Crown not by any military
power but by the Churches Favor, and therefore he ought to be kind to it; and
so he was it seems at first, for he yielded to their own terms, as Gul. Gul.
N^wburg. l. 1. c 4.
Newburgensis says, and the Bishops did swear only a conditional Allegiance to
him, viz. as long as he preserved the Liberty of the Church. To give them
therefore all the satisfaction they desired, he made that Oath extant in
Malmsbury, Malmsb. l. 1. p. 10^
wherein he put all Ecclesia^tical Persons and Things under their own
jurisdiction; and when afterward he violated this Liberty, his own Brother
being then the Popes Legate, presumed to summon him to appear before his
Ecclesiastical High Court of Justice, and to give him an account of what he had
done in daring to imprison the Bishops of Salisbury and Lincoln: For, said he,
if the Bishops do any thing amiss, the King has nothing to do to judge them,
but they must be left to the Canons; and withal he adds, that the King was
bound to give them an account of what he had done: but the King sent them word
that he appealed to Rome; and so the business fell. Thus we see how much he
advanced the Popes power by yielding to a Legatine Power here, to hear causes,
and suffering himself to be called to an account before it; by which example,
Appeals grew very frequent and troublesome in his time, as our Historians sadly
complain; and the Bishops and Monks went commonly over to Rome upon Appeals;
Radulph. de Di^c^o. p. 509.
nay Theobald Archbishop of Canterbury went to the Pope, then in Frarce,
expressly against the Kings command, and the Pope suspended the rest that did
not come; and William Archbishop of York was deposed by the Pope, merely
because nominated by the King, Chron. Gervas. Dorobonn. p. 1363. Richard.
Ha^ulst. 326. Hovede^. A. 1143.
and another put into his Room without the Kings consent, or approbation: the
right of Investitures was condemned in a Council held at Westminster, and the
infringers of Ecclesiastical Liberty punished with Excommunication, not to be
taken off but by the Pope himself; and after the reconciliation between Stephen
and Henry 2. Radulph. de Dic^to. Imag. hist. p. 528.
the effect of it, says Radulphus de Diceto, was, that the Churches Dominion
was exalted by it.

. 9. This was the state of things here, when Henry the second came to the
possession of the Crown; all the Customs of his Ancestors which they accounted
Rights of the Crown were lost during the Usurpation of Stephen, and strange
insolences and villainies were committed under the pretense of Ecclesiastical
Liberty, or the unaccountabless of Ecclesiastical Persons for their actions to
Civil Justice: which made the Judges complain to the King of the thefts,
rapines, and murders frequently committed by Clergymen, over whom they had
then no jurisdiction; (...)
and as Gulielmus Newburgensis says, the Bishops were more concerned to defend
their privileges, than to punish offenders, and thought they did God and the
Church service in protecting them from the hands of Justice. By which means
things were come to that height between the Civil and Ecclesiastical Power,
that one or the other must yield; the Ecclesiastical Power being in the hands
of Thomas Becket, a man after the Popes own heart, and in whom the very soul of
Gregory the seventh seemed to have come into the World again; and the Civil
Power in the management of Henry the second, a Prince of a high Spirit and
great courage, and that could not easily bear the least diminution of his
Power. And where there was so much matter prepared, and such heat on both
sides, it was no great difficulty to foretell a storm, when the Clouds that
hovered in the air should clap together, or fall upon each other. This was
foreseen by the more discerning men of that time when they found the King bent
upon making him Archbishop after the death of Theobald: Cod Cotton. l. 1. Ep.
125.
For however Becket himself boasted of the freedom of his election and the
consent of the Clergy and Kingdom in it, yet in the Epistle sent to him by the
Bishops and Clergy of the whole Province, they plainly tell him, Codex
C^ttonian. Epistol. l. 1. Ep. 123.
the Kings Mother dissuaded him from it, the whole Kingdom was against it, and
the Clergy sighed and groaned as much as they durst; but the King would have
it so. Hov^d^a. Annal part. post. p. 292. Baron. A. 1167. n. 32.
For the King being then in Normandy sent over his great Minister Richard de
Lucy on purpose to let the Suffragan Bishops and the Monks of Canterbury
understand his pleasure, that he would have Becket chosen Archbishop. Gilbert
London. Epistol. T^onae Cant^ar l. 1. Ep. 126. in Cod. Cotton. MS.
Which the Bishop of London in his excellent Epistle to Becket (which gives a
more true account of the Intrigues of the whole quarrel than any thing yet
extant, and which Baronius could not but see in the Codex Vaticanus, although
he takes no notice at all of it) tells him, was a greater invasion of the
Churches Liberties, than any of those things he made such ado about. You, says
he, now tell us that we ought to obey God rather than men: would to God we had
done so then; but because we had not the courage to do it then, therefore we
now suffer shame and confusion for it, and the tears run down our cheeks for
the calamities that are come upon us. By which we may judge of the truth of the
Quadripartite History, written by Thomas his own Disciples, as Baronius
confesses, Baron. A. 1162. ^. 21.
for therein Herebertus and Job. Sarisburiensis tell of Thomas his protesting
against his being Archbishop to the King, and his being hardly persuaded to it
by the Popes Legate; whereas the Bishop of London proves to Becket himself, that
during Theobalds Life he had his eye upon it, and made all the interest he
could to obtain it upon his death, that he gave several thousand Marks to the
King to be Chancellor, hoping by that means to come the easier into the Sea of
Canterbury, that being in Normandy at Theobalds death, he posted over, and the
Kings Favorite brought his command for his election. Vit. S. Thome Ca. (...).
MS. in (...) Co^t^^ p. 10.
And it is likewise confessed by Fitz Stephen in the MS. History of Beckets
Life, that the whole Clergy knew it was the Kings pleasure he should be made
Archbishop; and that Gilbert, then only Bishop of Hereford, (afterward of
London) dissuaded all that he could from his election; and after said, that the
King had done a strange thing, viz. he had made a Soldier Archbishop of
Canterbury; for but a little before he had been in arms with the King at
Toulouse. And this opposition of his, he calls not only God to witness, was not
out of any ambitious desire to have been in his Room, (as Thomas and the Monks
charge him) but Becket himself, for no man could attempt any such thing, but he
must know it, his Favor being so great with the King then. But it seems, the
wiser men among the Bishops, thought that by reason of his insolent, Job.
Sarisbur. l. 1. ^^. 85. l. 2. ep. 28, 29.
rash, and inflexible temper, (which even his Friends complained of in him) he
would bring all things into confusion. When he was summoned at Northampton to
appear before the King, he would needs carry the Cross, with his own hands into
the Court; upon which the Bishop of London told him, he behaved himself as if
he had a mind to disturb the whole Kingdom; Fitz Stephon. vit. Thom. Cant. p.
26.
You carry the Cross, Codex Cotton. p. 10.
says he, and what if the King should take his Sword? but, said he to one that
stood by, He always was a Fool, and ever will be one. These things I only
mention, to let men see what apprehensions the more prudent men of that time
had of the likelihood of great disturbances coming to the Church by his ill
management, although by the rashness of others added to his, he has had the
fortune to be accounted a Saint and a Martyr.

. 10. But my business is not, to write a particular account of all the passages
between the King and him, after the difference between them; which has been so
largely done by Baronius, and our own Historians; but I shall show, that the
Controversy between them was about Gregory the sevenths principles, and if he
dyed a Martyr for any thing, it was in defense of these. Which I shall the
rather do, La Vie de S. Thomas de Canterb^ry. A Paris 1674.
since I find his Life very lately published in French with a high character of
him, and dedicated to the King of France; but especially because I find, that
those among us of that Religion, who disown Gregory the sevenths principles,
are willing to believe him a Martyr upon other grounds, History of the Irish
Remonstrance, from p. 397 to 462.
viz. that his quarrel with the King was upon the account of the ancient
Municipal Laws of England which had a respect to the immunities of Clergiemen.

I shall therefore prove, 1. That the matters in Dispute between the King and
Becket, were the very same that Gregory the seventh and his successors
contended about, with Christian Princes. 2. That the pleas made use of by
Becket and his party were no other, than those, which Gregory the seventh and
his successors used, so that they had no relation at all to the Municipal Laws,
but to the controversy then on Foot between the Civil and Ecclesiastical
Power. In both which I hope to make some passages clearer than they have yet
been, having had the advantage of perusing several MSS. relating to this
matter, and especially that Volume of Epistles, which Baronius accounts an
unvaluable Treasure; and as far as I can perceive, the Cotton MS. is more
complete than the Vatican, Ba^on. A. 1 162. n. 21.
which Baronius made use of.

1. For the matters in Dispute between them. The whole controversy might be
reduced to two heads. 1. Whether Ecclesiastical Persons were unaccountable to
the Civil Power for any misdemeanors committed by them? 2. Whether the Pope
had the Sovereign Power over Princes and all under them, so that he might
contradict the Kings Laws and Customs, and command his Subjects against his
consent to come to him? and whether the Kings Subjects in such cases were not
bound to obey the Pope, let the King command what he please? These, in truth,
were the points in debate, and the most weighty particulars in the Customs of
Clarendon were but as so many branches of these. In that Copy of them which is
extant in the Cotton MS. Cod. Cotton. l. 1. l. 12.
and was drawn up by the Kings own Order, the occasion of them is set down, to
have been the differences which had happened between the Clergy and the Kings
Justices and the Barons of the Kingdom about the Customs and Dignities of the
Crown; the most considerable of those which the Pope condemned were concerning
1. The Trial of Titles of Advowsons and Presentations in the Kings Courts. 2.
The Trial of Clergymen before the Kings Judges; and the Churches not
defending them after conviction or confession. 3. That neither Archbishops,
Bishops or others should go out of the Kingdom, without the Kings consent, and
giving security to the King, that in going, staying, or returning, they will do
nothing to the prejudice either of the King or Kingdom. 4. The profits of
Ecclesiastical Courts upon absolutions, for they demanded not barely personal
security of all excommunicated persons, to stand to the Churches judgments,
but Vadium ad remanens as the Law term was then, which implies real security,
or so much money laid down which was to come to the Court, if they did not
perform the conditions expressed. For it was one of the things the Kings
Ambassador complained of to his Mother the Empress, Cod. Cotton. L 1. ep. 49.
that the matters in controversy were not things of advantage to men's souls,
but to their own purses; and that the Faults of Offenders were not punished in
the Ecclesiastical Courts by the injoyning of Penance, but by the giving of
money. And the Empress her self in her discourse with Nicholas de Monte the
Archbishops Friend, insisted on these pecuniary mulcts for sins as one of the
great occasions of the troubles; which made people suspect this pretense of
Ecclesiastical Liberty to be only a cloak for their own profits. But however
the good Pope, whether he understood this Vadium ad remanens or no, at all
adventures condemned it. For what should the Court of Rome do without
exchanging Money for Sins? 5. That no Person who held of the King in capite, or
belonged to him should be excommunicated, or have his Land interdicted without
making the King acquainted with it, or his Justice in his absence. 6. That in
matters of Appeal, they were to proceed from the Archdeacon to the Bishop,
from the Bishop to the Archbishop, and from thence to the King, and not to
proceed further without his express leave. These were the main things in
dispute; and what do they all amount to, but the very same Rights of the Crown
which the Kings predecessors did insist upon? and what could be the sense of
Becket in opposing them, but that Clergymen were not accountable for their
Faults to the Civil Power, and in case of the Popes command, whether upon
appeal or otherwise, Bishops and others were to go to his Court in spite of
the King? as Anselm and Theobald had done before. It is agreed by Baronius
himself, Baron. A. 1163. n. 19^
that the quarrel brake out, upon the Archbishops denying to deliver up the
Clergie-man that was accused and convicted of Murder after Ecclesiastical
Censure to the Secular Power; which the King earnestly desired, and Becket as
peremptorily denied. And upon what principle could this be done, but the
highest pretense of Ecclesiastical Liberty, that ever Gregory the seventh or
any other asserted? And it is plain by this, that the King did not deny the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, nor hindered the proper Censures of the Church
upon offenders; but the Question was merely this, Whether Ecclesiastical
persons having committed crimes against the public peace, were only to be
punished with Ecclesiastical Censures, and never to be delivered over to Civil
Justice? Which was the main hinge of the Cause, and which Becket stood to, to
the last. And that this was the true State of the Controversy appears by the
representation made of it to Alexander the third by the whole Clergy of the
Province of Canterbury: (...) Cotton. (...) 127.
who confess that the peace of the Kingdom was very much disturbed by the
insolence and crimes of some of the Clergy (for upon the account of this
exemption, any Villains were safe, if they could but get into any kind of
Orders;) the King for the safety of his people, pressed the Bishops after their
Censures to give such guilty persons up to the Laws, because bare degrading was
by no means sufficient punishment for wilful murder, which was all the Church
censures reached to. This all the Bishops at first opposed as derogatory to the
Churches Liberty, but afterward ( Becket excepted) the rest saw a necessity of
yielding at present, for, as they confess themselves, this liberty was extended
even to a Lector or Acolythus; and the Empress Matildis said, Cod. Cotton. l.
1. cp. 49.
that the Bishops gave orders very loosely without titles; by which we may
easily imagine what a miserable state the whole Kingdom might be in if these
things were suffered. So that we see the plea insisted upon at the beginning of
the quarrel was, that no persons in any Ecclesiastical Orders, upon any crime
whatsoever, were to be delivered over to be punished by the Secular Power. And
what could such a pretense arise from, but only from Gregory the sevenths
principles of Government? viz. that the Civil Power had nothing at all to do
with Ecclesiastical Persons, and that all the Subjection and Obedience they
owed was only to the Pope as their Sovereign; and that this was the Liberty
which Christ purchased for his Church with his own blood, Sugar. vit. Lu^or.
as Paschal the second answered the Emperors Ambassadors, and as Becket very
frequently expresses it in his Epistles. A blessed Liberty! and worthy the
purchase of the Blood of Christ; viz. a Liberty to sin without fear of
punishment, or at least any punishment which such persons would be afraid of;
for the utmost Becket could be persuaded to in the case of the Canon of Bedford
convicted of murder, was only to confine him to a Monastery for a time: which
was a very easy expiation of Murder; So that the Benefit of Clergy was a
mighty thing in those days. But it is impossible to give any tolerable account
of Beckets actions, unless we suppose this to have been his Ground and
Principle, that God had exempted by his Law all Clergymen, by virtue of being
such, from any subjection to Civil Power: For if they owe any subjection, they
are accountable for their breaches of the Laws to that power to which they are
subject; if they are not accountable for any crimes they must be supposed to be
wholly independent on the Civil Government.

. 11. Neither is there any ground for such an exemption by the ancient
Municipal Laws of England, either in the Saxon, or Norman times: and I cannot
but wonder to see the Laws of Princes concerning Ecclesiastical Persons,
brought to prove their total exemption from the power of Princes, which was
that Ecclesiastical liberty which Becket did plead for. For according to his
principles, neither Alured, nor Edward, nor Canutus, nor any other Prince had
any thing to do to appoint the punishments of Ecclesiastical Persons; but their
judgment was to be wholly left to their own Superiors. And supposing there
had been such Laws among the Saxons, Becket would not have valued them at all,
but rather have thought them a prejudice to his Cause, and an encouragement to
Hen. 2. to have repealed those and made others in their place. For why should
not the Power of this King be as good as the Saxons to make and alter
Ecclesiastical Laws as they saw convenient? but Becket understood his business
better than so. He would not upon any terms be brought to the trial, whether
they were ancient Customs or no which the King contended for? the King offered
it very frequently, and by any fair ways of trial, and declared he would
renounce them if they did not appear to be so, he appealed often to the
judgment of the Church of England about it, and would stand and fall by it;
and none of these things would be accepted of: by which it is evident that
either there were no Laws could justify Becket, or he thought the producing
them would be hurtful to his cause; for not one of all the Customs he excepted
against, was in his opinion so bad, as for Princes to take upon themselves to
determine Ecclesiastical causes, and to appoint the punishments of
Ecclesiastical Persons. For then he knew the King need not to stand upon the
proof of his other Customs, this one Right of the Crown would put an end to
the whole dispute. For if Henry 2. had the same Power that Edgar had, A^lied.
de G^nealog. Reg. Angl, p. 360.
when he said, that the trial of the manners of Ecclesiastical Persons belonged
to him, and therefore gave Authority to Dunstan and the rest to expel criminal
Clergymen out of Churches and Monasteries, why might not he punished
Ecclesiastical persons? And then to what purpose had Becket contended with the
King, if he had allowed him as much power as the Saxon Kings did make use of?
And what if the Saxon Laws did appoint the Bishops to examine Clergymen, and
pass sentence upon them in criminal causes? was not the punishment already
established by the Kings Laws, and the Bishop only the Minister of the Kings
Justice upon Ecclesiastical Delinquents? And even in the Laws of Edward the
Confessor, Leges Edw. Co^f^ss. c. 5.
in case of default in Ecclesiastical Courts, a liberty is allowed of going to
other Courts; and in the Laws of the elder Edward, any one in Orders is
appointed to make compensation according to the nature of his crime, Leg. Edw.
Sen. c. 3.
and without sureties he was to go into prison; but in case of a capital
offense, he was to be taken, that he might undergo penance from the Bishop for
his fault. Where, by capital offense we are not to understand such as were
punished with death, but the Poenitential Canons of Egbert tell us by capital
crimes were understood Pride, Eg^^rt Poenit. Exc^rpt. c. 5.
Envy, Fornication, Adultery, Perjury, etc. But the Laws of Canutus appoint
degradation for murder by a Clergyman; and compensation and banishment withal,
Leges Ca^nti. c. 38.
which were Civil punishments after degradation, the very thing which Becket
denied, and in case this compensation were not undertaken within thirteen days,
then the Person was to be Out-lawed, which to be sure, was a civil punishment.
By the Laws of King Alured, Leges Alured. c. 2^.
if a Priest killed a man he was to lose his privileges, and the Bishop was to
expel him out of the Temple being already degraded, unless due compensation
were made; i. e. if he did not undergo the Civil punishment: For then the
greatest crimes, (excepting murder of a Prince or Lord by his Subject or
Vassal, or killing any in a Sacred place, or Treason) might be expiated by
pecuniary Mulcts, and Ecclesiastical Penance, according to the Poenitential
Canons. For it appears by the old Poenitential Canons of Theodore and Egbert,
Theod. Canon. Poenit. c. 9.
that murder had so many years penance appointed for its expiation, Egberti
Canon. Poenitent. c. 3.
which had been a vain thing, if it had been punished with death; now in this
case it was but reasonable that the guilty Person should be delivered to the
Bishop to receive his Penance; whether he were a Clergyman or Layman; And the
Laws of Princes did enforce them to submit to Ecclesiastical Penance. So King
Alured commands in case of perjury, Leges Alured. c. 1.
that the Person be taken into the Kings custody for forty days, that he might
undergo the Penance which the Bishop shall impose upon him; and if he escaped
he was not only to be anathematized, but put out of all protection of the Law:
and by the Laws of King Edmund any Person guilty of Murder was not to come into
the Kings presence till he had undergone the Penance enjoined him by the
Bishop: Leges Edmund. c. 3, 4.
And from hence I suppose it was, that in the Saxon Times, the Bishop and the
Sheriff sat together in the same Court, as appears by the Laws of Edgar and
Canutus, Leges ^dgar. c. 5.
not barely to instruct the people in the Laws of God and man; Legis Canut. c.
17.
but as the Sheriff was to appoint the civil penalty, so the Bishop was to
enjoin penance according to the nature of the Fault: and one of these did not
exclude the other, but, he that did pay such a pecuniary mulct to the Sheriff,
did undergo so many years penance besides. Therefore the Laws which mention
persons being delivered to the Bishop for Penance, do by no means imply that
they were excused from any Civil penalty either before or after it: as might be
proved from the Laws of the Empire, and the Capitulars, if it were needful. So
that in the Saxon times, if a Clergyman were guilty of wilful murder, the
poenitential Canons imposed ten years penance upon him, of which seven were to
be spent in banishment; Eg^ert. Canon. Poe^it. c. 7.
but besides this, the legal compensation was to be made, as is evident by the
Laws of Edward and Canutus: from whence it appears, how very slender the
pretense is of Beckets contending for the ancient Saxon Laws, when he denied
the giving up a Clergyman convicted of murder to the Secular Power after
Ecclesiastical Censures. But where ^s there the least Foundation in the Saxon
times, for such open defiance of the Civil Power, as to the punishment of
offenders of what degree or order soever? and that was the case of Becket, the
King only desired that Justice might be executed indifferently on all Persons,
and the ancient Customs revived; but he would not yield as to either of these,
not upon the pretense of former Laws, but the repugnancy he supposed to be in
them to that Ecclesiastical Liberty, which he said, Christ had purchased with
his Blood.

. 12. After the Norman Conquest, the Ecclesiastical and Civil Courts were first
separated, as appears by the Grant of William the Conqueror to Remigius Bishop
of Lincoln, and many others to the same purpose; (...). p. 167.
but I find no particular exemption of a criminal Clergyman from the Civil
Power established. The main plea is from the confirmation of the Saxon Laws,
but to how little purpose that is, is already showed. By the Laws of Henry 1.
(...) 1. (...). c. 73.
if a Bishop committed murder, he was to be deposed, and undergo twelve years
penance, seven of which were to be with bread and water: if a Priest or Monk,
he was to lose his Order and to undergo ten years penance; if a Deacon, to lose
his Orders, and to have seven years penance; if a Clerk only (i. e. in
inferior Orders) six years penance; and then it follows, if a Layman, five
years penance; which was very prudently left out with an etc. by P. W. because
it marrs all the rest; for if according to these Laws, Clergymen had an
exemption from Civil Justice, so had the Laity too; and upon better terms, for
their penance is but half that of a Priest or a Monk, and not half of a Bishop.
But after Henry 1. the penance was turned into a pecuniary mulct, as King Henry
2. complained, Fitz Steph. vit. S. Thom. P. 15.
and men committed the greatest crimes at a certain rate, by which means
abundance of villainies, and murders, and rapines were daily committed; and in
Henry 2. time, the Kings Justices complained of it to the King, Radul^^b, de
Diceto Imag^histor. P. 536.
who commands them to punish all offenders severely; and if any Clergymen were
convicted, they were to be delivered to the Bishop to be degraded by him in the
presence of the Kings Justice, and so to be returned to the Court to be
punished; but in the case of the Canon of Bedford, Becket utterly denies the
delivering him up to the Kings Justice after degrading. Fitz. Steph. vit. Tho^.
p. 19.
Fitz Stephen gives more instances, which exasperated the King, one whereof
was, of a person who had destoured the daughter and murdered the Father, whom
Henry 2. would have punished according to La^, but the Archbishop would not
suffer him to be delivered up to the Kings Justice. (Yet methinks it might bear
a dispute how far a person degraded is capable of Ecclesiastical immunities;
but Becket, it seems, extended them to all that were or had been such; or it
may be, the indelible character preserved still some title to a legal impunity
in sinning.) The King apprehending the very bad consequences of such an
exemption of all sorts of Clergymen from Civil punishments, and not knowing
what the late encroachments upon the Civil Power by the Ecclesiastical might
come to (for so Fitz Stephen says, some about the King told him, Fitz. Steph.
vit. S. Thom. p. 14.
if these things were suffered, and the Archbishop let alone, his Royal
Authority would come to nothing, and the Clergy would make whom they pleased
King, as they had showed their power and will already, in the case of King
Stephen) therefore the King resolves to resume all the Rights of his Ancestors,
and to have a solemn recognition made of them in Parliament. But first he
treats with all the Bishops at Westminster to know whether they would observe
the Ancient Customs? they gave him a shuffling answer, that they would do it
salvo ordine suo and jure Ecclesiae: which the King took for a denial, and was
extremely enraged at it. The Bishop of London confesses, that they all agreed
in the denial, and gave this as the reason, Gilbert. London. Epist. l. 1. ^p.
126.
because their yielding to those Customs was repugnant to the Liberty of the
Church, and the Fidelity they owed to the Pope: which was a plain confession of
the true state of the Controversy, whether the King or the Pope were to be
obeyed in those matters? Baronius tells us, that Becket sent over an express to
the Pope ( being th^n at Sens) to know what they were to do in the straits they
were in, the Pope encourages them to stand up for Ecclesiastical Liberty to the
utmost; notwithstanding this, the King resolves to have a recognition of these
Customs at Clarendon, B^^on. A. 1163. n. 23, 26.
where the Authors of the Quadripaarite History say the whole Kingdom was
present, and they confess, that Becket with the rest of the Bishops did promise
the King to observe them Bona Fide: which they parallel with S. Peter's fall in
denying Christ: But the Bishop of London in his Epistle to Becket gives a more
particular account of it, A. 1164. n. 3.
which is worth our not^ce: Three days, he says, all the Bishops withstood
the Kings desire, and no threats could move them, but they resolved rather than
to yield to dye upon the spot for Christ and his Church, ( as he speaks) at
last Becket withdrew from them, and coming in again used these words to them;
It is the Kings pleasure I should forswear my self at present, and I will do it
and repent afterward; ( were not these brave Heroic words for a Saint and a
Martyr?) at the hearing of them, he says, they were all astonished, and their
hearts failed them; and so they all promised in verbo veritatis to observe the
ancient Customs. Thus, says he, was the Controversy then ended between the
Kingdom and Priesthood, and so Israel descended into Egypt. But notwithstanding
this solemn promise, in a few days Becket breaks his word, and attempts to go
beyond Sea without the Kings leave: at which the King was extremely troubled,
and as the Bishop of London says, had rather he had wounded his body than his
reputation by such an escape into foreign parts, where he was sure to be
represented as a Tyrant and persecutor of the Church. Becket was driven back by
a Tempest, the King takes no notice of it, uses him kindly, and bids him take
care of his Church. Not long after, a Controversy happened about some Lands
which Becket challenged as belonging to his Church, the King sends to him to do
justice to the Person concerned in it: notwithstanding complaints are brought
to the King for want of it, the King sends a summons to him to appear before
him, that he might have the hearing of the Cause. Becket refuses to obey the
summons, and sends the King word he would not obey him in this matter: at which
saucy answer, the King was justly provoked, as a great disparagement to his
Royal Authority. Upon this he calls the Parliament at Northhampton, where the
People met as one man; the King represents his case, with becoming modesty and
eloquence: however, he consented that his fault should be expiated by a
pecuniary mulct: after this the King exhibited a complaint against him for a
great sum of money received by him, during his Chancellorship which he had
never given account for: ( it was 44000 Marks, as the Bishop of London told the
Cardinals who were sent by the Pope afterward to end the Controversy) Becket
pleaded that he was discharged by his promotion, Cod. Cotton. l. 2. ep. 7.
(...) cp. 38.
( as though, as the Bishop of London said, promotion were like Baptism that
wiped away all Scores.) But this being a mere civil Cause, as the Bishop tells
Becket, yet he denied to give answer to the King and appealed to the Pope, as
the judge of all men living, Ioh. Sacris^^^. in Cod. Cotton. l. 2. ^p. 64.
says sarisburiensis; and soon after in a disguise he slips over the Sea, and
hastens to the Pope; who received him with great kindness, and then he resigns
his Archbishopric into the Popes hands, as our Historians generally agree,
because he received investiture from the King, and takes it again from the
Pope. This is the just and true account of the state of the Controversy, as it
is delivered by one of the same time, that knew all the intrigues, and which he
writes to Becket himself, who never answered it that I can find, nor any of his
party; and by one, who was a Person of great reputation with the Pope himself,
Codex. Cotton. l. 1. ^p. 63. l. 2^. ^p. 111, 112.
for his Learning, Piety, and the severity of his Life. And is it now possible
to suppose that Gregory 7. if he had been in Beckets place, could have managed
his cause with more contempt of Civil Government than he did? when he refused
to obey the Kings summons, declined his Judicature in a Civil Cause, and broke
his Laws against his own solemn promise, and perjured himself for the Popes
honor. If this be only defending ancient privileges of the Church, I may
expect to see some other moderate men of the Roman Church plead for Gregory 7.
as only a stout defender of the ancient Canons, and an enemy to the Popes
temporal Power. But men are to be pittyed when they meet with an untoward
objection (such as that from Beckets Saintship and Martyrdom is to prove the
doctrine of Ecclesiastical Liberty and the Popes temporal Power to be the sense
of their Church) if they cannot find that they endeavor to make a way to
escape; and I hope the Persons I now deal with have more ingenuity than to
think this new pretense any satisfactory plea for Beckets Cause. And as the
Bishop of London tells Becket, it is not the suffering, but the cause which
makes a Martyr: to suffer hardship with a good mind is honor to a man; but to
suffer in a bad cause and obstinately is a reproach; and in this dispute, he
says, the whole weight of it lay upon the Kings power, and some Customs of his
Ancestors, and the King would not quit the Rights of his Crown which were
confirmed by Antiquity, and the long usage of the Kingdom: This is the cause
why you draw your sword against the Sacred Person of the King, in which it is
of great consequence to consider that the King does not pretend to make new
Laws, but as the whole Kingdom bears him witness, such as were practiced by his
Ancestors. And although it appears, that he wished well to the main of Beckets
Cause; yet he blames him exceedingly for rashness, indiscretion and insolency
in the management of it; and bids him remember, that Christ never entered
Zacchaeus his house till he came down from the Sycamore Tree; and that the way
of humility did far better become him, and was likely to prevail more with the
King, than than which he took.

. 13. But Becket being out of the Kings reach, and backed by the King of
France, and favored by the Court of Rome, made nothing of charging the King
with Tyranny; as he and his party do very frequently in the Volume of Epistles;
Cod. Cotton. l. 2. ep. 41, 52, 54, 61, 63, 64.
and because the Empress his Mother pleaded for some of the Customs as ancient
Rights of the Crown, she is said to be of the ra^e of Tyrants too. L. 1. ep. 49.
The King finding himself thus beset with a swarm of Horne^^ (...) of his own
Power to (...) farther attempts upon his Crown and Royal Authority, which was
exposed to such public ignominy in foreign parts: and therefore sends this
precept to all the Bishops to suspend the profits of all such Clergymen as
adhered to him.

Nosti quam male Thomas Cantuariensis Archiepiscopus operatus ^ Cod. Cotto^. p.
26. b.
est adversus me and Regnum meum, and quam male recesserit, and ideo mando tibi
quod Clerici sui qui circa ipsum fuerint post fugam suam, and alii Clerici qui
detraxerunt honori meo, and honori Regni, non percipiant aliquid de redditibus
illis quos habuerant in Episcopatu tuo nisi per me, nec hab^ant aliquod
auxilium nec consilium a Te, Test Richardo de Luci apud Marlebergam.

After this, I^.
the King commands the Sheriffs to imprison every one that appealed to the
Court of Rome, and to keep them in hold till his pleasure were known: and he
causes all the Ports to be watched, to prevent any Letters of Interdict from
the Pope; and if any Regular brought them, he was to have his feet cut off; if
in Orders, he was to lose his eyes and something else: and if he were a
Layman, he was to be hanged. Accordingly the Popes Nuntio was taken with
Letters of the Popes coming over for England, Cod. Cotton. l. 1. (...). 40.
and imprisoned by the Kings Order. But the difference still growing higher,
and the King being threatened with excommunication, and the Kingdom with an
interdict; the King commands an Oath to be taken against receiving Bulls from
the Pope, or obeying him, or the Archbishop, and the penalty no less than that
of Treason: which is so remarkable a thing, I shall give it in the words of the
MS.

A. D. MCLXIX. Rex Henricus jurare facit omnem Angliam a laico duodenni vel
quindecim annorum, Cod. Cotton. l. 4. ep. 54.
contra Dom. Papam Alexandrum and B. Thomam Archiepiscopum, quod eorum non
recipient literas, neque obedient mandatis. Et si quis inve^tus foret literas
eorum deferens, traderetur Potestatibus tanquam Coronae Regis capitalis
inimicus.

Here we see an Oath of Supremacy made so long ago by Henry the second, and
those who out of zeal, or whatsoever motive brought over Bulls of the Popes,
made liable to the charge of Treason: but the Archbishop by virtue of his
Legatine Power took upon him to send persons privately into England, and to
absolve them from this Oath, as is there expressed.

The same year, the King being in Normandy sent over these Articles to be sworn
and observed by the Nobles and People of England,

1. If any one be found carrying Letters from the Pope, Cod. Cotton. l. 1. p. 27
or any Mandate from the Archbishop of Canterbury, containing an Interdict of
Religion in England, let him be taken, and without delay let justice pass upon
him, as upon a Traitor to the King and Kingdom.

2. No Clergie-man, or Monk, or Lay-Brother may be suffered to cross the Seas,
or return into England, unless he have a Pass from the Kings Justice for his
going out, and of the King himself for his return; if any one be found doing
otherwise, let him be taken and imprisoned.

3. No man may appeal either to the Pope or Archbishop; and no plea shall be
held, of the Mandates of the Pope or Archbishop, nor any of them be received by
any person in England; if any one be taken doing otherwise, let him be
imprisoned.

4. No man ought to carry any Mandat either of Clergie-man or Laick to either
of them on the same penalty.

5. If any Bishops, Clergymen, Abbots, or Laics will observe the Popes
interdict, let them be forthwith banished the Realm, and all their Kindred; and
let them carry no Chattels along with them.

6. That all the Goods and Chattels of those who favor the Pope or Archbishop,
and all their possessions of whatsoever rank, order, sex, or condition they be,
be seized into the Kings hand and confiscated.

7. That all Clergymen having revenews in England, be summoned through every
County, that they return to their places within three months, or their revenues
to be seized into the Kings hands.

8. That Peter Pence be no longer paid to the Pope; but let them be gathered
and kept in the Kings Treasury, and laid out according to his command.

9. That the Bishops of London and Norwich be in the Kings Mercy, and be
summoned by Sheriffs and Bailiffs to appear before the Kings Justices to answer
for their breach of the Statutes of Clarendon in interdicting the Land, and
excommunicating the person of Earl Hugh, by virtue of the Popes Mandat, and
publishing this excommunication without License from the Kings Justices.

I hope these particulars will give full satisfaction, that the Controversy
between King Henry the second and Becket, was not about some ancient Saxon
Laws, but the very same principles, which Gregory the seventh first openly
defended of the Popes temporal Power over Princes, and the total exemption of
Ecclesiastical Persons from Civil Iudicatures.

. 14. 2. This will yet more appear, if we consider that the Pleas used by
Becket and his party, were the very same which were used by Gregory the seventh
and his Successors. The beginning of the quarrel we have seen, was about the
total exemption of Men in any kind of Ecclesiastical Orders from civil
punishments, which was the known and avowed principle of Gregory the seventh
and his successors; and it seems by Fitz Stephen, Fitz Steph. vit. S Thom. MS.
^ott^n p. 16.
that several of the Bishops were for yielding them up to the Secular Power
after deprivation; and said, that both Law and Reason and Scripture were for
it: but Becket stood to it, that it was against God and the Canons; and by this
means the Churches Liberty would be destroyed, for which in imitation of their
High Priest they were bound to lay down their lives: and bravely adds, that it
was not greater merit of old for the Bishops to found the Church of Christ with
their blood, than in their times to lay down their lives for this blessed
liberty of the Church: and if an Angel from Heaven should persuade him to
comply with the King in this matter he should be accursed. By which we see what
apprehension Becket had of the nature of his cause from the beginning of it:
for this was before the King insisted on the reviving the Ancient Customs at
Clarendon. Where it seems Beckets heart failed him, which the Monks and
Baronius parallel with S. Peter's denying Christ; Bar^^. A. 1164. n. 5.
but it seems the Cock that brought him to Repentance, was his Crossbearer: who
told him, Cod. Cotton^ p. 8.
that the Civil Authority disturbed all: that wickedness raged against Christ
himself; that the Synagogue of Satan had profaned the Lords Sanctuary; that the
Princes had sat and combined together against the Lords Christ; that this
tempest had shaken the pillars of the Church, and while the Shepherd withdrew,
the sheep were under the power of the Wolf. A very loyal representation of the
King, and all that adhered to his Rights! After this, he spoke plainly to him,
and told him, he had lost both his conscience and his honor in conspiring with
the Devils instruments in swearing to those cursed customs, which tended to the
overthrow of the Churches Liberty. At which he sighed deeply, and immediately
suspends himself from all Offices of his Function, till he should be absolved
by the Pope; which was soon granted him. The Pope writes to the King very
sharply, Baron. A. 1164. n. 12. Cod. Cotton. l. 1. ^p. 42.
for offering to usurp the things of Jesus Christ, and to oppress the poor of
Christ by his Laws and Customs, and threatens him to be judged in the same
manner at the day of judgment; and tells him of Saul, and Ozias, and Rehoboam,
and parallels his sin with theirs, and bids him have a care of their
punishments. And was all this zeal of the Pope only for the good old Saxon
Laws? When the Bishop of Exeter begged the Archbishop at Northampton, to have
regard to his own safety and theirs too, he told him, he did not savor the
things of God: he had spoken much more pertinently according to P. W. if he had
told him, he did not understand the Saxon Laws. When the Earl of Leicester came
to him, to tell him, he must come and hear his sentence; he told him, that as
much as his soul was better than his body, so much more was he bound to obey
God and Him, than an earthly King: and for his part he declared he would not
submit to the Kings judgment or theirs, in as much as he was their Father, and
that he was only under God, to be judged by the Pope; and so appealed to him.
Which being an appeal to the Pope in a Civil cause about accounts between the
King and him, it does plainly show, that he did not think the King had any
Authority over him, but that the Pope had a temporal Power over Princes to hear
and determine Causes between them and their Subjects. And in his Letter to the
Pope upon this appeal, he says, Baron. A. 1164. n. 24.
that he was called as a Laick to answer before the King, and that he insisted
upon this plea, that he was not to be judged there, nor by them; Cod. Cotto^.
l. 1. ^p. 26.
For what would that have been, but to have betrayed your Rights? and to have
submitted spiritual things to temporal; and if he should have yielded to the
King, it would have made him not a King but a Tyrant. And whereas the Bishops
pleaded obedience to the King, he says, they were bound corporally to the
King, but spiritually to himself. What in opposition to the King about his own
Rights? which were so plain in this case at Northampton, that the Bishop of
Chichester charged him both with Perjury and Treason, because these things
related to the Kings temporal Honor and Dignity; and therefore the Bishops
were not bound to obey their Archbishop. The Pope applauds Becket for what he
had done, and nulls the sentence against him, which was still taking more upon
him the exercise of a Temporal Power over the King. But Fitz Stephen, who says
he was present at Northampton with Becket, says, Vit. S. The. p. 31.
that when the Bishop of Chichester charged him with his Oath at Clarendon, he
replied, that what was against the Faith of the Church, and the Law of God,
could not lawfully be kept; now these customs were never supposed to be against
the Faith of the Church till Gregory the seventh had very subtly found out
the Henrician heresy, i. e. the heresy of Princes defending their own Rights
against the Papal Usurpations: and he particularly insisted on this, that the
Pope had condemned those Customs, and he adds, that we ought to receive what
the Roman Church receives (for he knew no difference between the C^urt and
Church of Rome) and to reject what that rejects: and concludes all with this,
that his Oath at Clarendon was an unlawful Oath, and could not bind him. But
what pretense were there for this, if he had only contended for the ancient
Municipal Laws? what unlawfulness could there be in swearing to observe the
Kings Laws, although different from former Laws? So that the only way to excuse
him from manifest perjury, is to suppose, that he looked on the Customs of
Clarendon as repugnant to the Popes Decrees, and therefore not to be kept by
him: and the Pope tells him, that God had reserved him to this time of trial
for the confirmation of Catholic and Christian Truth; Cod Cotto^. l. 1. e^. 13.
in which it must be employed, that which Becket defended against the King, was
a part of the Catholic Faith, in the Popes judgment. L. 1. ep. 30.
In his Epistle to Robert Earl of Leicester he pleads for the Liberty of the
Church, which Christ has purchased with his blood; who then, says he, dares
bring her into slavery? who art thou that judge another man's servant, to his
own Master he ought to stand or fall? And all that he advises to for making up
the breach, is their repentance and satisfaction for the injuries done to
Christ and his Church* And whereas the Bishop of London had told him, that the
King was willing to submit to the judgment of his Kingdom about his ancient
Rights; L. 1. ^p. 124.
Becket replies, Who is there in Earth or Heaven that dares judge of what God
has determined? humane things may be judged, but divine must be left as they
are. In his Epistle to all the Clergy of England, L. 1. ep. 125.
he says, that at Northampton Christ was judged again in his person before the
Tribunal of Pilat (for him he understands by the name of President). In his
Epistle to the King, he pleads, that the Liberty of the Church, (which he
contended for) was purchased by Christ's own blood; L. 1. ep. 60.
and adds farther, to the very hearts desire of Gregory the seventh, that it
was certain that Kings did receive their power from the Church, and not the
Church from them, but only from Christ: from whence he infers, that the King
could not draw Clergymen to secular Tribunals, or establish the Customs in
dispute between them. Hoved An^al. p. ^85.
I do not say as Hoveden does, that these words were spoken in a Conference at
Chinun, for they are a part of the Epistle sent to the King, not long after his
banishment; and written in justification of his opposition to the Rights which
the King challenged. Therefore I desire to know what the^e words can signify
to his purpose, unless they do imply such a derivation of Civil Power from the
Church, that the Church may take cognizance of maladministration, or of the
Civil Authorities taking to it self any of the privileges belonging to the
Church? For if all this related only to the Ceremonies of Coronation, it were
to no more purpose than for an Archbishop of Canterbury to plead now, that the
Kings power is derived from the Church, because the ceremony of inauguration is
performed by him. Who would not smile at such a consequence? But we know that
the Popes temporal Power over Princes was never more asserted than in that Age,
that Alexander the third at that time challenged and exercised it over the
Emperor and other Princes, and that no man was more stiff in the Popes Cause,
nor more eager for the exercise of his Power over our King than Becket was, and
his actions discovered this to be his opinion, why then should men study to
find evasions for these words which neither agree with the course of his
actions, nor with the doctrine of that Age? Does not Becket himself magnify
the Popes power to the greatest height? In his Epistle to the Bish^p of London,
he says, L. 1. (...). 117.
that none but an Insidel or Heretic, or Schismatic dares dispute obedience
to the Popes commands; that no one under the Sun can pluck out of his hands.
And in one of his Epistles to the Pope, he makes very profane addresses to him,
applying what the Scripture says only of God and Christ, to him. Exurge
Domine, L. 2. ep. 51.
and noli tardare super nos: ill^mina faciem tuam super nos, and fac nobiscum
secundum misericordiam tuam. Salva nos quia perimus: and immediately adds, let
not our adversaries triumph over us; yea, the adversaries of Christ and his
Church; quia nomen tuum invocavimus super nos. And lest any should think these
were addresses to God, although contained in a Letter to the Pope; it follows,
Non nobis Domine, non nobis, sed in nomine Domini nostri Jesus Christi fac tibi
grande nomen, repara gloriam tuam. For at this time the Kings Ambassadors
promised themselves great things in the Court of Rome, and boasted of the
Favor they had, which put Becket into such a Consternation, that in the very
Agony of his Soul he poured out these prayers to the Pope. And we may judge of
Beckets opinion in this matter, by that of his great Friend Cardinal Gratianus,
for when the King saw himself deluded by the Pope, he expressed his resentment
in some threatening words, upon which the Cardinal said, L. 3. ep. 6.
Sir do not threaten, we fear no threatenings; for we are of that Court, which
has been wont to command Emperors and Kings. And because Becket suspected the
Cardinal of Pavia a former Legate, to be too favorable to the King, he begins
his Letters to him, with wishing him Health, L. 2. ep. 11, 12, 13, 20.
and Courage against the insolence of Princes: and says, that the Church
gained her strength by opposition to Princes. We have no reason therefore to
question Beckets meaning in the former expression, to be according to the sense
of Greg. 7. it being not only most agreeable to the natural sense of the words,
but to the course of his actions, and nature of his quarrel, and his
expressions at other times. In another of his Epistles to the King he
complains, L. 1. ep* 39.
that in his Kingdom, the daughter of Sion was held captive, and the Spouse of
the great King was oppressed, and beseeches him to set her free, and to suffer
her to reign together with her Spouse: otherwise he says, L. 1. ep. 40.
the most Mighty would come with a strong hand to deliver her: (as one of his
Friends writ to him, that the Church could not have peace but with a strong
hand and stretched out arm.) Again, L. 1. ep. 61.
he tells the King, that his Royal Power ought not to intermeddle with the
Churches Liberties, for Priests ought only to judge Priests, and that the
Secular Power had nothing to do to punish them, if they did not offend against
faith. It seems then in case of heresy only the Secular Arm is to be called in
for help: and is not this very agreeable to Becket's principle that Kings
receive their power from the Church? for their assistance is only to be u^ed
for their own interests, but by no means in case of Treason, or Murder, or any
other Crimes; but if Princes have an inherent Right or Power in themselves,
methinks they might be allowed to take care of their own and public safety
against all offenders. It is the office, says he, of a good and Religious
Prince, to repair old and decayed Churches, and to build new ones, (it seems
the King was only to be Surveyor General,) and to h^nour the Priests and to
defend them with all Reverence. But that they had nothing to do with the
judgment of them, he endeavors to prove after his fashion; and he makes use
of the very same arguments the Popes had done before in his Grandfathers time;
and almost in the same words; about the relations of Fathers and Children,
Masters and Scholars, and the power of binding and loosing. Nay, he does not
let go, Qui vos odit me odit; qui vos tangit, tangit pupillam (...): which were
Gregory 7's beloved places, and served him upon all occasions. And then after
his exact method, he thunders out the examples of Saul, Ozias, Ahaz and Uzza;
and again says, that Secular Powers have nothing to do in the affairs of the
Church; but that if they be faithful, God would have them be subject to the
Priests of his Church: and yet further, Christian Kings ought to submit their
acts to the Governors of the Church, and not set them above them: for it is
written, none but the Church ought to judge of Priests; and no human Laws ought
to pass sentence upon such; and that Princes ought to submit to the Bishops and
not to sit as Judges over them. Which he thinks he cannot repeat too often; And
after all uses the very same argument to Henry 2. which Gregory 7. had done to
William the Conqueror, That Princes ought to be subject to the Priests,
because they are to give an account of them to God: and therefore he ought to
understand, that Princes are to be governed by them; and not they brought to
the Wills of Princes: for, says he, some of the Popes have excommunicated
Kings, and some Emperors. I do not think that ever the Hildebrandine doctrine
(as some call it) was delivered in plainer terms, and pleaded for by more
arguments (such as they were) than by Becket and his party, as appears by the
Whole Volume of Epistles relating to his quarrel, out of which I have selected
these passages. It would be endless to reckon up all the places, wherein they
declare it was the Cause of God and his Church which they defended; C^d.
Cotton. l. 1. ep. 49, 82, 93, 124, 125, 133, 140, 143, 144, 16^.
that however ancient the Customs were, they ought not to be observed, because
contrary to Gods Law; that they were not only unlawful but heretical pravities,
L. 2. ep. 9, 12, 32, 37, 42, 45, 52, 54, 55, 64, 72, 103, 104.
that those who defended them were Henricians and not Christians; that they
were Balaamites, Egyptians, Samaritans, nay Satanites, and what not? and that
themselves were the poor of Christ, L. 4. ep. 57. 63.
and the persecuted ones, and such as waited for the Kingdom of God. L. 5. ep.
18. 22, 46, 68, 69, 77.
And if these things will not satisfy men, that the Controversy between Henry
the second and Becket was not about ancient Municipal Laws, but about the
Gregorian principles of Ecclesiastical and Civil Government, I know not what
can ever do it.

. 15. But it is still pleaded on his behalf, (or rather on their own who allow
him to be a Saint and a Martyr, and yet deny the Gregorian principles) that
those principles were not the immediate motive of his death; but only his
refusal of giving absolution from Ecclesiastical censures, (but upon a certain
condition) to some Bishops after the King was reconciled to him. It is no doubt
a great piece of subtilty to find out another cause of his death than he
thought of himself; for he declared, that he dyed for God, and Justice, and
the* Liberty of the Church; i. e. in prosecution of the same cause, which he
had undertaken from the beginning. For Becket knew well enough there never was
a perfect reconciliation between the King and him; and that only the necessity
of his affairs, and the fears of being served as the Emperor was by the Pope,
i. e. deprived of his Kingdom by excommunication, (which Becket pressed with
the greatest vehemence) and the jealousy he had of the rest of the Bishops,
several of whom kept great correspondency now with Becket, and the favor of
the People to his cause, forced the King to those shows of reconciliation; for
that they were no more on either side, is manifest by this, that the main
Controversy was not taken notice of about the ancient customs; each party
hoping for better circumstances: afterward all that the King consented to, was
laying aside any personal displeasure against Becket, for what was passed, and
allowing him freely to return to his Church in expectation of a better
behavior toward him for the future. All which appears from Beckets own
Letters to the Pope, upon and after this reconciliation; for, he says
expressly, the Customs were not once mentioned between them, L. 5. Ep. 46* 53,
77.
and that the apprehensions of the Popes interdict and Fredericks condition was
that which moved him to this reconciliation. The King indeed failed in no point
of complement to the Archbishop, as he very punctually tells the Pope, how he
saluted him at first bare-headed and ran into his embraces, how he bare his
rebukes patiently, and held his Stirrup at his getting upon his Horse, (if he
had but trampled on the Kings Neck too, he had been equal to the Pope himself,
and it might have raised some jealou^ie between them). But for all this
reconciliation, Becket, supposing himself the Conqueror, resolved not to abate
one jot of his rigor against those who had sworn to the ancient Customs; and
therefore procures power from the Pope to excommunicate the Bishops that had
done it, and to return to their excommunication those already absolved, and to
absolve none without taking an oath, to stand to the Popes command. This the
Kings Officers upon his return into England told him was against the Customs of
the Realm; but they promised, they should take an oath to obey the Law, salvo
honor Regni: Becket at first said, it was not in his Power to rescind the
Popes sentence; which he knew to be false; for the Pope had given him power to
do it; and he immediately adds, that he could absolve the Bishops of London and
Salisbury if they took the common oath which was in the Cotton M S. se juri
parituros, but it is interlined se vestro mandato parituros, as the Vatican
Copy in Baronius has it. But the Archbishop of York told the other Bishops,
that the taking such an oath, without the Kings consent, was against the Kings
Honor, and the Customs of the Realm. And it is observeable, that the same
time, he was so zealous for the Bishops taking this oath to the Pope, he
peremptorily refused suffering those of his retinue though required to do it by
the Kings Officers, to take an oath of Allegiance to the King, to stand by him
against all persons, nec vos excipientes nec alium, says he to the Pope,
neither excepting you, nor any other; as the Cotton M S. has it very plainly,
Baron. A. 1170. n. 41.
but Baronius has Printed it Nos, whether agreeably to the Vatican M S. I know
not, but I am sure not to Beckets sense; for he gives this reason of his
refusing it, lest by that example the Clergy of the Kingdom should be drawn to
such an oath; which would be much to the prejudice of the Apostolical See; for
by this means the Popes Authority would be discarded or very much abated in
England. Judge now, Reader, whether Becket did not remain firm to the Gregorian
principles to the last? and whether the immediate motive of his death did not
arise from them? for upon the oath required of the Bishops, they with the
Archbishop of York went over to the King in Normandy, upon the hearing of which
complaint the King spoke those hasty words, from whence those four Persons took
the occasion to go over to Canterbury, and there after expostulations about
this matter, they did most inhumanely Butcher him as he was going to Vespers in
the Church: upon which Ioh. Sarisburiensis, who was his Secretary and present
at his murder, I. 5. ep. ^2.
says, that he dyed an Assertor of the Churches Liberty, and for defending the
Law of God, against the abuses of ancient Tyrants. But what need we mention his
judgment, when the Pope in his Bull of Canonization, and the Roman Church in
his Office do say that he dyed for the Cause of Christ? Ba^o^ A. 1173. n. 7.
And what can be more plain from hence, than that to this day, all those who
acknowledge him to be a Saint and a Mart^r, cannot with any consistency to
themselves reject those principles for which he suffered; any more than they
can reasonably be supposed to reject the Republican principles, who cry up the
Regicides for Saints and Martyrs? But this is a subject lately undertaken by
another hand, and therefore I forbear any farther prosecution of it.

. 16. After Beckets death the Royal Power lost ground considerably; for to
avoid the interdict and excommunication threatened the Kingdom, L. 5. ep. 88.
the King by his Ambassadors, and the Bishops by their messengers, did swear
in the Court of Rome, that they would stand to the Popes judgment; for among
the terms of the Kings reconciliation by the Popes Legates, this was one of the
chief: Ep. 9^.
that he should utterly disclaim the wicked Statutes of Clarendon, and all the
evil customs, which in his days were brought into the Church: and if there
were any evil before, they should be moderated according to the Popes command,
and by the advice of Religious Persons. Thus after so many years contest were
the Rights of the Crown and the Customs of his predecessors given up by this
great Prince; so true was that saying of Becket, that their Church had thriven
by opposition to Princes. Petr. Bles. ep. 136.
And if Petrus Blesensis may be believed, this King stooped so low* upon the
Rebellion of his Son, as to acknowledge his Kingdom to be Feudatary to the
Pope. The Authority of which Epistle is made use of not only by Baronius,
Baron. A. 1173. n. 8.
but by Bellarmin and others, to prove, Bellarm. Apolog. 8.
that the King of England is Feudatary to the Pope, Torto c. 3.
or that he holds his Crown of him upon paying certain acknowledgments; B^can.
contr. Anglic. q 9.
which it is hardly possible to conceive a Prince that understood and valued
his own Rights so well as Henry the second did, should ever be brought so low
to confess, without the least ground for it. For when it was challenged by
Gregory the seventh, it was utterly denied by William the Conqueror, and never
that we find so much as challenged afterward of any lawful Prince, by way of
Fee before his time, but only in regard of the Popes temporal Power over all
Princes. Although a late French Monk who published Lanfranc's Epistles, D'
Acher. not. in Epistol. Lanfra^c. 7. p. 347.
wonders it should be denied because of the Tribute anciently paid to Rome,
viz. of the Peter Pence, which were not so called because paid to S. Peter's
pretended Successors, but because payable on S. Peter's day, as appears by the
Law of Canutus to that Purpose; and were only Eleemosynary for the sustenance
of poor Scholars at Rome, as the late publisher of Petrus Blesensis confesses:
Vit. P^tr. Bles.
who withal adds that Henry the second denied their payment, but was persuaded
to it again by Petrus Blesensis; and him he acknowledges to have been the
Writer of the foregoing Epistle. And we must consider that he was always a
secret Friend of Becket and his Cause in the whole quarrel, and being employed
by the King in his straits to write to the Pope to excommunicate his Son, he
knowing very well the prevalent arguments in the Court of Rome might strain a
complement in the behalf of his Master to the Pope, for which he had little
cause to thank him; although it may be, Petrus Blesensis expressed his own
mind, whether it were the Kings or no.

And we have no ground that I can find, to imagine this to have been the Kings
mind in the least; for upon his submission a Clause was inse^ted, L. 5. ep. 95.
Hov^de^. p. 303.
that he was no longer to own the Pope, than the Pope treated him as a
Christian and Catholic King; and as the Popes predecessors had done ^is. And
after the writing of that Letter and the reconciliation with his Son, Radulphus
de Diceto, Dean of S. Paul's about that time, has an Authentic Epistle of
Henry the second to the Pope, Ra^ lph. de Di^eto Imag. histor. p 591.
wherein he acknowledges no more than the common observance which was usual
with all Princes in that Age, whereas Feudatary Princes write after another
Form. So that I cannot but think it to be a mere complement of Petrus Blesensis
without the Kings knowledge, or else a Clause inserted since his time, by those
who knew where to put in convenient passages for the advantage of the Roman See.

It is said by some, that Henry the second A. D. 1176. did revive the Statutes
of Clarendon which the Pope and Becket opposed so much, in the Parliament
called at Northampton. Ge^vas. D^^obern. 1433.
It is true that Gervase of Canterbury does say, that the King did renew the
Assise of Clarendon, for whose execrable Statutes Becket suffered; but he does
not say, that he renewed those Statutes; but others which are particularly
enumerated by Hoveden, Hoveden. p. 314.
upon the distributing the Kingdom into six Circuits, and appointing the
itinerant Judges, who were made to swear that they would keep themselves, and
make others to observe the following Assizes, (as the Statutes were then
called:) but they all concerned matters of Law and Civil Justice, without any
mention of the other famous Statutes about Ecclesiastical matters. Whereas at
the same time it is said that King Henry the second granted to the Popes Legate,
though against the advice of his great and Wise men, Mat. Pa^is p. 133.
that Clergymen should not be summoned before Secular Tribunals, Radulph. de
Diceto. p. 591.
but only in case of the Kings Forest, and of Lay-fees; which is directly
contrary to the Statute of Clarendon: but some men love to heap things
together, without well considering how they agree with each other; and so make
the King in the same page to null and establish the same Statutes.

But it is observable, that after all this contest about the exemption of
Clergymen, and the Kings readiness to yield it, they were made weary of it at
last themselves; for as Richard (Beckets successor in the Sea of Canterbury)
says, in his Letter to the three Bishops, that were then three of the Kings
Justices, Pet. Bl^s. ep. 73.
the killing of a Clergyman was more remisly punished, than the stealing of a
Sheep: and therefore the Archbishop persuades them, to call in the Secular Arm
against Ecclesiastical Malefactors. And now in his opinion the Canons and
Councils are all for it, and Beckets arguments are slighted; and no regard had
to the Cause he suffered for, when he found what mischief this impunity brought
upon themselves. But for this giving up their Liberties, the Monks revenge
themselves on the memory of this Archbishop; as one that yielded up those
blessed privileges which Becket had purchased with his blood.

Notwithstanding the sufferings the King had undergone by his opposing the
Ecclesiastical encroachments, we may see what apprehension after all he had of
the declension of his own power, and the miserable condition the Church was in
by those privileges they had obtained, by that notable discourse which Gervase
of Canterbury relates the King had with the Bishops in the time of Baldwin
Archbishop of Canterbury; G^rvas. Dorob^rn. p. 1595.
wherein with tears he tells them, that he was a miserable man, and no King; or
if a King, he ha^ only the name and not the power of a King: that the Kingdom
of England was once a rich and glorious Kingdom, but now a very small share of
it was left to his Government. And then gives a sad account of the strange
degeneracy both of the Monks and Clergy; and what, says he, in the day of
judgment shall we say to these things? Besides, Those of Rome see our Weakness
and domineer over us, they sell their Letters to us, they do not seek justice
but contentions, they multiply appeals, and draw suits to Rome, and when they
look only after Money, they confound Truth and overthrow peace. What shall we
say to these things? how shall we answer them at Gods dreadful Judgment? Go
and advise together about some effectual course to prevent these enormities.
Was this spoken like a Feudatary of the Popes? and not rather like a wi^e and
pious Prince, who not only saw the miseries that came upon the Kingdom and
Church by these encroachments of Ecclesiastical Power, but was yet willing to
do his best to redress them, if the great Clergy would have concurred with him
in it: who were a little moved for the present with the Kings Tears and
pathetical speech, but the impression did soon wear off from their minds; and
things grew worse and worse, by the daily increase of the Papal Tyranny. And
when this great Prince was very near his end, some of the Monks of Canterbury
were sent over to him, who had been extremely ^roublesome to himself and the
Kingdom, as well as to the Archbishop by their continual Appeals to the Court
of Rome; and they told the King, the Convent of Canterbury saluted him as their
Lord; I have been, said the King, G^^vas. p. 1545.
and am and will be Your Lord, Ye wicked Traitors; Upon which one of the Monks
very loyally cursed him, and he dyed, says Gervase, within seven days.

. 17. Having thus far showed that the Controversy between the Ecclesiastical
and Civil Power, was accounted a Cause of Religion by the managers of the
Ecclesiastical Power, and that so far, that the great Defender of it is to this
day accounted a Saint and a Martyr, for suffering in it, I now come to show
that the ancient panal Laws were made against that very Cause which Becket
suffered for. After the death of Henry the second, Beckets Cause triumphed much
more than it had done before; for in the time of Richard the first, the great
affairs of the Nation were managed by the Popes Legates during the Kings
absence, and after his return scarce any opposition was made to the Popes
Bulls, which came over very frequently; (unless it were against one about the
Canons of Lambeth, wherein the King and Archbishop were forced to submit) no
hindrance made to Appeals; and even in Normandy the Ecclesiastical Power got
the better after long contests, (...) ^e Di^^to Ima^* hist. p. 657.
In the latter end of Richard the first the Pope began to take upon him the
disposal of the best Ecclesiastical preferments in England, either by
translation, or Provision, or Collation; which, Fi^z S^eph. vi^ S. (...).
Fitz Stephen says that Henry 2. told those about him, (after the four
Courti^rs were gone for England to murder Becket) was the design Becket
intended to carry on, viz. to take away all Right of Patronage from the King
and all Lay-Persons, and so bring the gift of all Church-preferments to the
Pope, or others under him. Upon the agreement of King John with the Popes Legate
he renounced all right of Patronage, and gave it to the Pope; but it is no
wonder in him, who so meekly resigned his Crown to the Popes Legate, and did
swear homage to the Pope, declaring that he held the Kingdom in Fee from him
upon the annual payment of a thousand Marks. And I desire it may be observed
that the Oath of Fealty extant in Matthew Paris. Mat* Paris. p. 235, 236, 237.
and the Records of the Tower, and the Vatican Register, which King John made
to the Pope, Odor. Raynqld A. 1213. n. 75, 81.
has no other expressions in it, than are contained in the Oath which all the
Popish Bishops now take at their consecration, Mat. Westminst. ad A. D. 1213.
Sr. Tho. Moor' s Supplication of Souls. p* 29^.
only with the variation of necessary circumstances. And although Sr. Tho. Moor
once denied any such thing as King John's Resignation of his Crown, yet the
matter is now past all dispute by the concurrence of the Records of the Tower,
and the Vatican Register, and the Authentic Bull of the Pope, B^ll. I^^ocent,
3. in Bib^ioth. Cotton. I^^oc^nt. 3. R^g^st. 16. n. 79.
and the Epistles of Innocent the third, published out of MS. by Bosquet now a
Bishop in France; wherein, the devout Pope attributes thus resignation of his
Crown to no less than the inspiration of the Holy Ghost: and says, the Kingdom
of England was then become a Royal Priesthood: and in another Bull he accepts
of the Resignation, Odor. Raynald. A. 1213. n. 88.
and declares that whereas before these Provinces were subject to the Roman
Church in Spirituals, they were now become subject in Temporals too: and from
hence he requires an Oath of Fealty from himself, and all his Successors, and
charges all persons under severe penalties not to dare to infringe this
Charter. Regest. Innocent. 3. l. 16. ep. 131.
And although the Parliament, 40 Edw. 3. did deny the payment of the Popes
Tribute upon the invalidity of King John' s Charter, not being done by the
consent of the Barons (as the Pope said it was) yet we are to consider what
Gregory the seventh said to the Princes of Spain, that a Kingdom once belonging
to the Sea of Rome can never be alienated from it, Gr^g. l. 1. ep* 7.
but although the Use be discontinued, yet the Right still continues: so that
although the thing be never so much null and vain in it self, yet it still
serves for pretense to usurp the same temporal Power over our Princes, when
opportunity serves them. Mat. Paris. A. 1216. p. 289.
And it is certain that Henry the third did swear homage and Fealty to the Pope
at his Coronation, and promised to pay the tribute; which was performed several
times in his Reign, till the King and People protested against it in the
Council of Lions, Mat. Paris A. 1245. p. 666.
as a grievance of the Kingdom, which was extorted by the Roman Court unjustly
in a time of War, and to which the Nobles had never consented, and never would.
(...). p. 681.
But whatever opinion the Nobles were of, the Pope had the Bishops sure to him,
for upon his Message to them they all set their hands to King John' s Charter
of Resignation; which highly provoked the King, and made him swear that he
would stand for the Liberty of the Kingdom, and never pay the Tribute more
while he breathed. In the same Council the English complained, that infinite
numbers of Italians were beneficed among them, that more money went out of
England every year into Italy than the Kings Revenues came to, that the Popes
Legates grew more intolerable, and by reservations, and Provisions, and one
trick or other, the Patrons were defrauded of their Right, and the Clergy
impoverished by unreasonable pensions; and whoever would not presently submit,
his Soul was immediately put into the Devils Custody by Excommunication.
Notwithstanding all these complaints, the Pope goes on in the same way with
them, and resolved to try how much the Asses back would bear without kicking:
the English Ambassadors go away highly incensed from the Council, and resolved
to defend their own rights: but they yet wanted a Prince of Spirit enough to
head them. Mat. Paris A. 1231. p. 371.
Before this time the insolence of the Roman Clergy was grown so intolerable to
the Nation, that the Nobility and Commonalty joined together in a resolution to
free themselves from this Yoke, and threated the Bishops to burn their goods if
they went about to defend them; they sent abroad their Letters to several
places, with a Seal with two swords, between which were written Ecce duo gladii
hic, in abuse of the Roman Court; and it seems they destroyed the goods of
several Roman Clergymen; but Matt. Paris says, they were all excommunicated
by the Bishop of London and ten Bishops more: although Matt. Mestminster says,
Mat. W^stimi^st 1232. p. 292.
the Bishop of London was cited to Rome, for favoring them, and having his
Purse well emptied was sent home again. It seems the Pope was so nettled at the
Remonstrance of the English Nobility at the Council of Lions, that he entered
into a secret consultation with the King of France either to depose the King of
England, Mat. Pa^is A. 1246. p. 691.
or to bring him wholly to his will, so that neither he nor his people should
so much as dare to mutter against the oppressions of the Roman Court: and the
Pope offered the utmost assistance of his Power for it, but the King of France
declined the employment. However the Pope goes on with his work and grants a
Bull for raising ten thousand Marks out of vacant Benefices in the Province of
Canterbury, which so incensed the King, Id. p. 69^.
that he made at Proclamation, that whosoever brought Bulls of Provision from
Rome should be taken and imprisoned; but this did little good* says Matthew.
Paris, because of the uncertain humor of the King. The same year a Parliament
was called about the intolerable grievances of the Roman Court, Id* p. 696.
in which many of the Bishops favored the Popes party: but at the Parliaments
meeting at Winchester, the Ambassadors were returned from the Pope, who gave a
lamentable account of their Ambassy, viz. that instead of any redress, the Pope
told them the King of England kicks and plays the Frederick (whom he had
deposed from the Empire in the Council, of Lions) he has his Council, and I
have mine, which I will follow; and withal they say, Id. p. 709.
they were scorned and despised as a company of Schismatics for daring to
complain. Upon this the King issues out another Proclamation, that no money
should be sent out of England to the Pope. At which the Pope was so enraged,
that he sent a severe Message to the Bishops of England under pain of
excommunication and suspension, to see his Money punctually paid to his Nuntio
by such a day in London; and the King by the persuasion of the Bishop of
Worcester and some others, fairly yields, and gives up the Cause to the Pope.
After this the Pope sends for a third part of the profits of all Benefices from
Residents, Id. p. 7^6.
and half from Non-residents, with an Italian Gentleman called Non obstante,
that had almost undone the Nation: the Clergy meet at London about it, and
make a grievous Remonstrance of their sad condition; declaring, that the whole
Kingdom could not satisfy the Popes demands; Id. p. 719.
but it seems, the Bishops brought the inferior Clergy to it against the
consent of the King and Parliament. The next year the Parliament made another
Remonstrance of the grievances of the Clergy and People of England, which they
sent to the Pope and Cardinals; Id. p. 721.
wherein they declare, that it was impossible for them to bear the burdens laid
upon them; that the Kings necessities could not be supplied, nor the Kingdom
preserved if such payments were made; that the goods of all the Clergy of
England would not make up the sum demanded: but all the effect of this was
only a promise, that for the future the Kings leave should be desired; which,
says Matthew Paris, came to as much as nothing. By which we may judge of the
miserable condition of this Nation under the intolerable Usurpations of the
Court of Rome.

. 18. After so long trial of the Court of Rome, by Embassies, Remonstrances,
and all fair ways, and no success at all by them, at last they resolved upon
making severe Laws (the last Reason of Parliaments) and to see what effect this
would have upon the Clergy for the recovering the ancient Rights of the Crown.
For, we are to consider, that the Controversy still was carried on under the
same pretense of the Ecclesiastical and Civil Power; and it is a foo^ish thing
to judge of the sense of the Ruling Clergy at that time by the Acts of
Parliament and Statutes of Provisors and Praemunire. For by this time, the Pope
had them in such firm dependence upon him, and they were fed by such continual
hopes from the Court of Rome, that they were very hardly brought to consent to
any restraints of the Papal Power; and in the Parliament 13 Rich. 2. The
Archbishops of Canterbury and York for them and the whole Clergy of their
Provinces made their solemn Protestation in open Parliament that they in no
wise meant, or would assent to any Statute or Law made in restraint of the
Popes Authority, but utterly withstood the same; the which their Protestations
at their requests were enrolled; as that Learned Antiquary Sr. Robert Cotton
has showed out of the Records of the Tower. Abri^gement of the Records of the
Tower, 13 R. 2. p. 332.
By which we see the whole Body of the Clergy, were for the most exorbitant
Power of the Pope, and would not consent to any Statutes made against it: So
that what Reformation was made in these matters was Parliamentary even in that
time, and I do not question, but the Friends to the Papal interest made the
very same objections then against those Poenal Statutes of Provisors and
Praemunire, that others since have done against the Laws made since the
Reformation. And all that were sincere for the Court of Rome did as much
believe it to be mere Usurpation in the Parliament, to make any Laws in these
matters; For was the King Head of the Church? might he not as well administer
Sa^raments, as make Laws in deregation of the Popes Authority and Jurisdiction?
What was this, but to make a Parliamentary Religion, to own the Popes Sovereign
Power no farther than they thought fit? If any thing were amiss, they ought
humbly to represent it to his Holiness, and to wait his time for the Reforming
abuses; and not upon their own Heads, and without so much as the consent of
their Clergy to make Laws about the restraint of that Power which Christ has
set up in his Church. How can this be done without judging what the Pope has
done to be amiss? and who dares say, that his Holiness can so much err, as to
aim at nothing but his own profits, without any regard to the good of the
Church? What! are they not all members, and will they dare take upon them to
judge their Head? What! Sons rise up against their Father, and Secular men take
upon them to condemn the things which Christ's Vicar upon earth allows? What!
and after all the Sufferings and Martyrdom of S. Thomas of Canterbury, that
ever we should live to see a Parliament of England make Laws against that good
Old Cause, for which he dyed? This is but to increase the number of Confessors
and Martyrs, as all those will be, who suffer by these Laws. For do they not
plainly suffer for Conscience and Religion, although the Parliament may call it
Treason? What an honor it is rather to suffer than to betray the Churches
Liberty for which Christ dyed? or to disobey the Head of the Church who
commands those things which the Parliament forbids? And must we not obey God
rather than men?

After this manner we may reasonably suppose the Roman Clergy and their
adherents at that time to have argued: but it is well Mr. Cressy at least
allows these Stasutes of Provisors and Praemunire, and boasts of the Loyalty of
those Ancestors that made them: but I fear he has not well considered the
occasions and circumstances of them, and what opposition the Papal Clergy made
against them, or else I should think he could not afterward have declaimed so
much against the injustice and cruelty of our Poenal Laws. But even those
ancient Statutes were passed with so much difficulty, and executed with so
little care, that they by no means proved a sufficient salve for the sore they
were intended for, as will appear by this true account of them.

. 19. In the time of Edward the first, who was a Prince both wise and resolute;
the grievances of the Kingdom, (by his connivance at the Papal encroachments
for a long time,) grew to that height, that some effectual course was necessary
to recover the ancient Rights of the Crown, which had now been so long buried,
that they were almost forgotten; but an occasion happened which for the time
thoroughly awaked him to a consideration of them. Bonif. 8. out of a desire
still to advance Ecclesiastical Liberty, had made a Constitution, strictly
forbidding any Clergie-man paying any Taxes whatsoever to Princes, without the
Popes consent; and both the payers and receivers were to fall under
excommunication ipso facto not to be taken off without immediate Authority from
the Court of Rome, unless it were at the point of death. Not long after this,
the King demands a supply in Parliament, the Clergy unanimously refuse on
account of the Popes Bull, the King bids them advise better, and return a
satisfactory Answer; at the time appointed Winchelsea then Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the name of the whole Clergy declares, That they owed more
obedience to the Pope than to the King, Kinghton de event. Angl. l. 3. c. 5.
he being their Spiritual, and the King only a Temporal Sovereign; but to give
satisfaction to both, they desire leave to send to the Pope. At which saucy
answer the King was so much provoked, that he put the whole Clergy out of his
Protection, and seized upon their Lands; for which an Act of Parliament was
made to that purpose says Thorn. Ch^o^i^. W* Thor^. A 1^96. p. 1965.
And although many of the Clergy submitted and bought their peace at dear
rates, yet Winchelsea stood it out, ready, says Knighton, to dye for the
Church of Christ: which if he had done, there might have been a S. Robert as
good a Martyr, as S. Thomas of Canterbury: For our Historians say, this
Constitution of the Pope was procured by Winchelsea's means; (...) A. (...) p.
69
and he caused it to be pulished in all Cathedral Churches. After this, the
King sends a prohibition to the Bishops, against doing any thing to the
prejudice of himself or his Ministers: (...)
and another, against all excommunications of those who should execute this
Law; and herein he declares, (...)
that the doing such a thing would be a notorious injury, to his Crown and
Dignity a great scandal to the people, the destruction of the Church, and it
may be the subversion of the whole Kingdom; (...). ^5 E. 1. M. 8.
and therefore he charges them by virtue of their Allegiance, that they should
forbear doing it. At the same time he issued out Writs for apprehending and
imprisoning all such persons as should presume to excommunicate any of his
Subjects on the accont of this Bull of Pope Boniface: Pat. 25 E. 1. M. 12.
and our Learned Lawyers mention out of their Books, Davis Case of Praem. Cooks
Report. l. 5.
a Person condemned for Treason in this Kings time for bringing a Bull of
excommunication against one of the Kings subjects; but although they do not
mention the time, it seems most probable to have been upon this occasion. Answ.
to Cooks Rep. 5. par.^* 26^*
Parsons laughs at Sr. Edw. Cook for saying, this was Treason by the ancient
Comm^n Law, before any Statutes were made; but it does sufficiently appear by
the foregoing Discourse, that this was looked on as one of the ancient Rights
of the Crown, that no foreign Authority should exercise any jurisdiction here
without the Kings consent. Besides, this King revived another of the ancient
Customs, forbidding all Persons of the Clergy or La^ty to go out of the
Kingdom without his leave, (...) 25 Ed. (...) M. 25.
and so stopped the freedom of Appeals to the Pope; and by the Statute of
Carlisle, 35 Edw. ^. All Religious Houses were forbidden sending any Moneys
over to those of their Order beyond Sea, although required to do it by those
Superiors whom they thought themselves bound in conscience to obey: And it
appears by the Statute of Provisors 25 Edw. 3. that the first Statute of this
kind was made in this Kings time, at the Parliament at Carlisle;
notwithstanding that the Pope challenged the liberty of Provisions as a part of
the plenitude of his Power. Cl^ment. l. 2. c 1. (...)
But although this Statute were then made, yet it had the fortune of many good
Laws, not to be executed: and therefore in Edward the thirds time the Commons
earnestly pressed for the revival of it 17 Edw. 3. A^ridgeme^t of Records. p.
41.
upon which they sent for the Statute of Carlisle; and then, says the Record,
the Act of Provision was made by the common consent, forbidding the bringing of
Bulls or such trinkets from the Court of Rome; and in the next Parliament it
was enacted, Abridgement of Records, p. 64.
that whosoever should by process in the Court of Rome seek to reverse
judgment given in the Kings Courts, that he should be taken and brought to
answer, and upon conviction to be banished the Realm, or be under perpetual
imprisonment, or if not found, to be outlawed. But notwithstanding these Laws,
the Commons 21 Edw. 3. complain still, that Provisions went on in despite of
the King: Ib.
and judgments were reversed by Process in the Court of Rome; and therefore
they pray that judgment may be executed upon delinquents; and this matter
brought into a perpetual Statute, as had been often desired: the King grants
their desire, and the Commons bring in a Bill to that purpose, extant in the
Records: but the Statute of Provisors did not pass till 25 Edw. 3. which is the
common Statute in the printed Books: yet soon after, we find that the Commons
pray for the execution of it; and the Kings answer was, that he would have it
new read and amended: P. 80.
then 27 Edw. 3. passed that other Statute of Praemunire, against Appeals in
Civil Causes to the Court of Rome; which we have seen Becket made a
considerable part of the Churches Liberty which Christ had purchased, and
practiced it himself at Northampton, appealing from King and his Parliament to
the Pope in a mere Civil Cause of Accounts between the King and him. Yet after
all these Statutes 38 Edw. 3. a Re-enforcement of them was thought necessary in
another Statute made that year against Citations to Rome, P. 100.
and Provisions; wherein are grievous complaints, that the good ancient Laws
were still impeached, blemished and confounded, the Crown of our Lord the King
abated, and his person very hardly and falsely defamed, the treasure and riches
of the Kingdom carried away, the inhabitants and subjects of the Realm
impoverished and troubled, the Benefices of the Church wasted and destroyed,
Divine Services, Hospitalities, Alms deeds, and other Works of Charity
withdrawn and set apart, the Great men, Commons and Subjects of the Realm in
body and goods damnified: And yet Sr. R. C. says, that in the Record are more
biting words* a Mystery, he says, not to be known of all men. In 40 Edw. 3.
It was declared in Parliament by common consent, that if the Pope should
attempt any thing, against the King by process, or other matters in deed, P.
10^.
that the King with all his Subjects should with all their force and power
resist the same. Yet still so deep rooting had the Popes power gotten in this
Nation, that 47 Edw. 3. The Commons beg remedy still against the Popes
provisions, P. 119.
and complain that the Treasure of the Realm was carried away, which they
cannot bear; and 50 Edw. 3. A long Bill was brought in against the Popes
Usurpations, as being the Cause of all the Plagues, P. 128.
injuries, famine and poverty of the Realm; and there they complain,
notwithstanding all former Laws, that the Popes Collector kept his Court in
London as it were one of the Kings Courts, P. 129.
transporting yearly to the Pope twenty thousand Marks, and commonly more: and
that Cardinals and other Aliens by reason of their preferments here have sent
over yearly twenty thousand Marks; and that the Pope to ransom the Kings
enemies did at his pleasure levy a Subsidy of the Clergy of England; and that
to advance his gain he did commonly make translations of Bishoprics and other
Dignities within the Realm; and therefore again the Commons pray the Statutes
against Provisors may be renewed: P. 147.
which they repeated 51 Edw. 3. but all the answer they could get was, that the
Pope and promised redress, the which if he do not, the Laws therein shall
stand: but upon another Petition, P. 15^.
promise was made, that the Statutes should be observed. In 1 R. 2. P. 161.
the Commons are at it again upon the same complaints: and it is declared to be
one Cause of calling the Parliament 3 R. 2. and an Act then passed, P. 182.
wherein as Sr. R. C. observes, the Print makes no mention of the Popes abuses,
which the Record expressly sets down, P. 186.
and that the Pope had broken promise with Edward the third, and granted
preferments in England to the Kings enemies. 7 R. 2. another Statute was made
against Provisions, P. 295.
wherein the Print differs from the Record, as the same Person desires it may
be noted. 11 R. 2. the Commons pray that those that bring in the Popes Bulls of
Volumus and Imponimus may be reputed for Traitors. P. 324.
13 R. 2. the Statute of Provisors was again confirmed, P. 333.
notwithstanding the Protestations of the Bishops in Parliament against any
Statute made in restraint of the Popes Authority: and a Praemunire added
against those that bring any sentence of excommunication against those that
execute it. 15 R. 2. the Archbishop of York being Chancellor told the
Parliament one of the Causes of calling them, P. 341.
was the restoring to the Pope what belonged to him about Provisions; but in
the same Parliament Sr. William Brian was sent to the Tower, for bringing a
Bull from Rome against some that had robbed him, which Bull being read, was
judged prejudicial to the King, his Council, and in derogation to his Laws. 16
R. 2. the Commons grant to the King, P. 347.
that by the advice of his Lords and Commons, he should have power to moderate
the Statute of Provisions to the honor of God, saving the Rights of the Crown:
so as the same be declared the next Parliament, to the end the Commons may then
agree or no. In this Parliament happened an extraordinary thing, P. 348.
For William Courtny Archbishop of Canterbury made his Protestation in open
Parliament, saying, That the Pope ought not to Excommunicate any Bishop, or
intermeddle for, or touching any presentation to any Ecclesiastical dignity
recovered in any of the Kings Courts; He further protested, that the Pope ought
to make no translations to any Bishopric within the Realm against the Kings
will: for that the same was the destruction of the Realm and Crown of England
which has always been so free, as the same has had none earthly Sovereign,
but only subject to God in all things touching Regalities, and to none other;
the which his protestation he prayed might be entered. Then passed the famous
Statute of Praemunire upon occasion of the Popes Bulls of excommunication
coming into England against certain Bishops, who it seems at last, were brought
to obey the Laws; and that which the Archbishop of Canterbury protested was a
part of the Statute, wherein the Commons not only declared their resolution to
live and dye with the King in defense of the Liberties of the Crown against the
Papal Usurpations; but moreover they pray and in justice require that he would
examine all the Lords as well Spiritual as Temporal severally, and all the
States of the Parliament, how they think of the cases aforesaid, which be so
openly against the Kings Crown, and in derogation of his Regality, and how they
will stand in the same cases with our Lord the King in upholding the Rights of
the said Crown and Regality. By which it appears that the Commons had a great
suspicion of the Spiritual Lords; And it seems they had reason, for the
Temporal Lords declared frankly their concurrence with the Commons, and that
the Cases mentioned were clearly in derogation of the Crown, as it is well
known and has been a long time known. Mr. Cressy would make us believe that
all the Bishops present, Ep^st. Apol. p. 113.
and the Procurators of the absent unanimously assented; but the very words of
the Statute say the contrary; for there it is added, that the Lords Spiritual
did make their Protestation first, that it is not their mind to deny or affirm
that the Bishop of Rome may not excommunicate Bishops, nor that he may make
translation of Prelates after the Law of Holy Church: (but it seems by the
Records the Archbishop of Canterbury alone spoke plain to the sense of the
Parliament, and entered his Protestation different from the rest.) Neither do
the^ declare their assent to the freedom of the Crown of England from all
earthly subjection; and that it is immediately subject to God in all things
touching the Regalities of the same, and not subject to the Pope; (which they
touch not upon) but only with several clauses of Reservation about processes,
excommunications and translations, they declare in such and such cases, they
are against the King and his Crown: and in these cases they would be with the
King in maintaining of his Crown, and in all other cases touching his Crown and
Regality, as they be bound by their liegeance; which are words very ambiguous,
and imply a secret reservation of salvo Ordine suo, and jure Ecclesiae, or with
a salvo to the Oath they had taken to the Pope. But however the Act passed, and
a praemunire by it lies against all that procure or bring Bulls, or any other
things whatsoever which touch the King against him his Crown and Regality or
his Realm, By this Statute, the Parliament 1 H. 4. declared, Abridgement of
Records. p. 387.
that the Crown of England was freed from the Pope and all other foreign Power;
and it was one of the articl^s against Rich. 2. at his deposition, that
notwithstanding the Statutes, he procured the P^pes excommunication on such as
brake the last Parliament in derogation of the Crown, Statutes, and Laws of the
Realm. And yet we find new Statutes of Provisors made 2 H. 4. c. 3, 4. 6 H. 4.
c. 57. 7 H. 4. c. 6, 8. 9 H. 4. c. 8. In the 1 H. 5. it was again enacted that
all Statutes made against Provisors from Rome should be observed.

. 20. By which we see that although the Parliament showed a very good will
toward the restraint of the Popes Usurpations, yet it all signified very
little, as long as his Authority and Supremacy were acknowledged here; for what
did Laws signify, when the Pope could null them by a Bull from Rome? And it
was in those days verily believed by those who did acknowledge the Popes
Supremacy, and followed the Churchmen in their opinions, that an Act of
Parliament had no power at all upon conscience, if it were repugnant to the
Laws of the Church, i. e. as they then thought, to the Popes decretals. And we
need not wonder at that, after the Popes Decretals were digested into a Body of
Canon Law, and that looked upon by all the hearty Friends to the Church of
Rome, as the Rule of Conscience in what it determined. Which we need not at all
to wonder at, since Petrus de Marca himself declares, Petr. de Mar^^ Prol^g. p.
51. l 2. c. 11. n. 8.
That the Constitutions of Princes are in themselves null when they are
repugnant to the Canons and received Decrees of Popes; and that Bishops have
always abstained from the execution of them as much as they durst; by which we
see that Acts of Parliament were no certain indications of the judgment of the
Church or the generality of the People in that time; but notwithstanding all
the Statutes, the good trade of Provisors went on still, and the Court of Rome
never wanted Chapmen for their forbidden Wares. For many of our Bishops dying
in the time of the Council of C^nstance* Martin 5. as soon as he was well
settled in his place, put in several Bishops by way of Provision at his own
pleasure; and nulled elections made by Chapters; so that in two years time he
put in thirteen Bishops in the Province of Canterbury in spite of all the
Statutes of Provisors; Vita H. Chi^bele p. 54, 55, 56, etc. a^ A D^^k.
and made his Nephew Prosper Colonna Archdeacon of Canterbury at fourteen
years of Age; who afterward had as many Benefices granted him in England as
came to five hundred Marks. Besides, he granted Appropriations, Dispensations,
etc. as he pleased, without regard to the English Nation. These things the
English Ambassadors complained of in the Council of Constance, and at last the
Pope came to an Agreement with them, which were called the Concordates between
Martin 5* and the Church of England; in which no manner of regard was had to
the Statutes of Provisors although so often repeated, only some agreements were
made between the Pope and the English Bishops, about Unions of Churches, the
capacity of English Bishops for any Offices of the Roman Court, and such like.
But other Ambassadors who came a little after these, pressed the matter
somewhat harder upon the Pope, against Provisions and Aliens and the Kings
Supplies out of the moneys raised for the Court of Rome; the Pope giving them
no favorable answer, they replied, unless he did presently satisfy their
demands, the King would make use of his own Right, because it was not necessity
but respect that made them seek to him, and pray that they might enter this
Protestation before the Cardinals by the Kings Command. At this same time the
States of France renewed their Statutes against the Popes Usurpations; and
added, that they would not acknowledge him Pope till he consented to them; and
the Rector of the University of Paris was proceeded against as a Traitor for
appealing from the Kings Edicts to the Pope. Notwithstanding all this, the same
Pope sends his Nuncio into England to raise moneys; who was called Ioh.
Opizanus, but he was cast into Prison for his pains, for which the Pope
expostulated very sharply with the Duke of Bedford about it, H. 5. being then
dead. Archbishop Chi^hel^ was in that time no friend to the Popes continual
encroachments, Abridgement of Records. 6 H 6. n. 16.
upon which as appears by the Records, he was cited to Rome, and the Commons
make it their request to the King, that he would write to the Pope on his
behalf: but we are told by a considerable Lawyer, that the Archbishop of
Canterbury and the rest of the Bishops offered the King a large supply, if he
would consent that all the Laws against Provisors might be repealed: but it was
rejected by Humphry Duke of Gloucester, Sr. I. Davis Case of Praem^nire.
who had lately cast the Popes Bull into the fire. This is certain that Card.
Beaufort, then Bishop of Winchester, incurred the penalties of the Statutes of
Provisors 10 H. 6. for which he was questioned in Parliament; but at last, had
his Pardon granted by the King, with the consent of all the Estates: By which
we see, that not one of all the Papal encroachments was ever cut off by the
severity of the Poenal Laws, as long as the Popes Supremacy was allowed; for
never any thing was more vigorously attempted, more frequently enacted, more
severely threatened than this business of Provisors, yet in despite of all the
Laws it continued still, as long as the Pope was allowed to have a Power above
Laws, and that he could null, abrogate, or dispense with them as he pleased.
And thus far I have given an impartial account of the ancient poenal Laws of
England: The like to which have been made in France, Spain, Italy, Flanders and
other parts of Europe, as might be easily proved if it were necessary; but I
forbear that,

. 21. And come to compare the ancient poenal Laws of our own Nation with the
modern, as to the Reasons and Occasions of them, that by them we may judge
whether those who allow the ancient Laws to be just, can have any ground to
charge the present with injustice and Cruelty, which can be only on one of
these two grounds. 1. Either that the Occasions of the present Laws were not so
great. Or, 2. That the old Laws did not relate to the exercise of their
Religion, as the latter do. I shall consider both of them.

1. For the occasions of the present poenal Laws, Mr. Cressy confesses them to
have been Treasons; not consequentially only, when an act may be declared to be
Treason which in it self is not so; but such Treasons as all Mankind
acknowledge to be such, viz. depriving Sovereign Princes of their Crown and
Dignity, endeavoring by open Rebellions, and secret conspiracies to take away
their Lives; if these be not Treasons the^e are none such in the world. And
that these were the Occasions of the present poenal Laws, I shall not produce
the Testimony of the Lord Burleigh in his Book published on occasion of the
poenal Laws, called, The Execution of Justice in England, not for Religion but
for Treason; imprinted at London, A. D. 1583* but I shall make use of the
Testimony of Persons less liable to the exception of our Adversaries, viz. The
Secular Priests, who printed their Important Considerations, A. D. 1601.
wherein their whole design is to show, that the poenal Laws, considering the
many Treasons which were the occasions of them, were very just and merciful.
For they acknowledge, 1. That the State of Catholics was free from persecution
the first ten years of Queen Elizabeth; and that Parsons and Creswel confessed
as much. 2. That themselves were the true Causes of the change that was made
toward them; by Pius 5. moving a Rebellion here by Ridolphi, exciting the King
of Spain abroad to join his Forces, and denouncing a Bull of Excommunication
against the Queen, and absolving her Subjects from their subjection, on purpose
to foment their Rebellion for depriving her of her Kingdom: which they prove by
particular circumstances. 3. That they could hardly believe these things
themselves, till they saw them expressed and owned in the Life of Pius Quintus,
printed and allowed. 4. That notwithstanding these things, and the Rebellion
breaking forth 1569. the Prisoners were only under greater restraint, but none
were put to death on that occasion, but only such who were in actual Rebellion:
wherein they confess the Queen did no more, than any Prince in Christendom
would have done. 5. That upon these occasions a Parliament was called 1571. and
a Law made against the bringing any Bulls from Rome, Agnus Dei's, Crosses, or
Pardons; and against all persons that should procure them to be brought hither;
which Law although they think it to have been too rigorous, yet they cannot but
confess that the State could not without the imputation of great carelessness of
its own safety have omitted the making some Laws against those of their
Religion. And although they were in their opinion too severe, yet they
acknowledge, 1. That the occasions were extraordinary, most outrageous, as they
expressed it. 2. That the execution of them was not so Tragical, as was
represeuted. 6. They believe that neither this Law nor any other would have
been executed upon them, had there not been daily new provocations: such as, 1.
Sanders his confession in his Book De visibili Monarchia, that the Pope had
sent two Priests, Morton and Web before the Northern Rebellion into the North
to excite the Lords and Gentlemen to take up Arms: declaring to them that the
Pope had excommunicated the Queen, and her Subjects were released from
obedience to her; and that Sanders does justify the said Rebellion, and
imputes the miscarriage of it, to the over-late publishing the said Bull;
affirming that if it had been sooner published, the Catholics would
undoubtedly so have risen, as that they must have prevailed against the Queen,
and had certainly executed the said sentence at that time, for her deposition
from the Crown. 2. Sanders his magnifying the Heads of that Rebellion, after
they had been arraigned, condemned and executed by the ancient Laws of our
Country for high Treason: which course since that time was followed by Parsons
and others. 3. The full discovery of the plot of the Pope and King of Spain
with the Rebels at home, for the depriving the Queen of her Kingdom. 4.
Stukely's attempt in Ireland, assisted by Sanders and others; which was
afterward encouraged by the Pope himself; when Sanders publicly appeared as a
Ringleader of the Popes Forces to persuade the Catholics to join with the
Rebels already in Arms. 5. Gregory 13. renewing the Bull of Pius 5. against
Queen Elizabeth. 6. Upon this the Jesuits coming into England, who were the
chief instruments of all the mischiefs against the Queen; and of the miseries
which they or any other Catholics have upon these occasions sustained. 7.
Parsons his endeavor to set the Queens Crown on another Head, as appeared by
his Letter to a certain Earl. 8. In all the Plots, none were found to be more
forward than the Priests; and the Laity, they say, if the Priests had opposed
themselves to their designs, would have been overruled by them. 9. All which
considered, they confess, that no King or Prince in the World, disgusting the Sea of Rome, having either force or metal in him, would have endured the
Priests, but rather have utterly rooted them out of their Territories, as
Traitors and Rebels, both to him and his Country; and therefore they rejoice
unfeignedly, that God had blessed this Kingdom with so gracious and merciful a
Sovereign, who has not dealt in this sort with them: and that all Catholics
deserve no longer to live, than they hereafter shall honor her from their
^earts, obey her in all things, so far as possibly they may, and pray for her
prosperous Reign, and long life; and to their powers defend her against all
enemies whatsoever.

7. They say, notwithstanding all the former provocations from the time of the
said Rebellion and Parliament there were few above twelve that in ten years had
been executed for their consciences (as we hold, say they, although our
Adversaries say for Treason) and of those twelve some perhaps can hardly be
drawn within our account, having been tainted with matters of Rebellion: and
for the rest, although themselves knew them to be free from seditions, her
Majesty and the State could not know it, and they had great Cause as Politic
persons to suspect the worst. 8. They confess, that a Parliament being called
A. 1576. no Laws were made at that time against them: the ancient Prisoners
that had been more narrowly restrained A. 1570. were notwithstanding the
Rebellion in Ireland again restored to their former liberty to continue with
their Friends, as they had done before: and such who were not suspected to have
been dealers or abetters in the said Treasonable actions were used with that
humanity, which could well be expected. 9. The State having notice of the
second excommunication, and having found the bad effects of the former was
concerned in Policy to prevent the like by the second. And the jealousy was
much increased by Sherwin's answer upon examination eight months before the
apprehension of Campion. For being asked, whether the Queen was his lawful
Sovereign, notwithstanding any sentence of the Popes? he refused to give any
Answer. Then followed a greater restraint of Catholics than at any time
before; and in Jan. 1581. a Proclamation was made for calling home her
Majesty's Subjects beyond the Seas; especially those trained up in the
Seminaries, pretending that they learned little there but disloyalty. The same
month a Parliament ensued, wherein a Law was made agreeable to the
Proclamation, but with a more severe punishment annexed, viz. the penalty of
death, for any Jesuit or Seminary Priest to repair into England, etc. 10. They
confess, that if all the Seminary Priests then in England, or which should come
after, had been of the mind of Morton and Sanders, or Parsons, the said no Law,
no doubt, had carried with it a far greater show of Justice: but that was, say
they, the error of the State, ( and yet themselves say, the State could not
know the difference between them) and yet they add that it was not altogether
(for ought they knew) improbable, those times being so full of many dangerous
designments and Iesuitical practices. 11. This same year Campion and other
Priests were apprehended; whose answers upon their examinations agreeing in
effect with Sherwins did greatly incense the State. For this being one of the
Questions propounded, If the Pope pronounce her Majesty deprived, and her
Subjects discharged of their obedience; and after either the Pope, or some by
his Authority invade the Realm, which part would you take, or ought a good
subject to take? To this, they say, some answered, that when the case should
happen, they would then take counsel what were best for them to do: others,
that when the case happened they would answer; another, that he was not
resolved* what to do; and another, that if such an invasion were made for any
matter of his faith, he thinks he were bound to take part with the Pope. Now,
say they, what King in the World would not in the same circumstances, justly
repute such persons Traitors, and deal with them accordingly? 12. After this, a
new plot was laid between his Holiness, the King of Spain, and Duke of Guise,
for a sudden and desperate designment against her Majesty; at which time they
c^nfess the Iesuitical humor had so possessed the hearts of sundry Catholics,
as they rue and are ashamed at the remembrance of it. And here they give a
particular account of the Treasons of Throckmorton, Arden, Somervile, Parry,
Northumberland, Babington, Stanley, defended by Cardinal Allen, who laid down
this for a Maxim, That in all Wars which may happen for Religion, every
Catholic is bound in conscience to employ his Person and Forces by the Popes
direction, viz. how far, and where, either at home or abroad, he may and must
break with his Temporal Sovereign. These things, they say, are necessary to be
known, to clear her Majesty from the imputations of more than barbarous cruelty
toward them cast upon her by the Jesuits, when themselves were the Causes of
all the Calamities any of them had endured since her Majesty's Reign: and they
think, all circumstances considered, few Princes living of her judgment, and
so provoked, would have dealt more mildly with such their subjects, than she
has done with them. 13. They confess the Spanish Invasion 1588. to be an
everlasting Monument of Iesuitical Treason and Cruelty. For it is apparent in a
Treatise penned by the advice of Father Parsons altogether (as they do verily
think) that the King of Spain was moved and drawn into that intended mischief,
by the long and daily solicitations of the Jesuits and other English
Catholics, beyond the Seas, affected and altogether given to Iesuitism; and
that Parsons as they imagine, ( though the Book went under a greater name)
endeavored with all his Rhetoric to persuade the Catholics in England to
join with the Spaniards: but Cara^nal A^en takes it upon himself, and says the
P^^^ had made him Cardinal, intending to send him his Legate for the sweeter
managing this (forsooth) godly and great affair: and there he affirms that
there were diverse Priests in the Kings Army, ready to serve ever man's
necessity: and promises them the assistance of all the Saints and Angels, and
of our Blessed Savior himself in the Sovereign Sacrament ( after a very
invisible manner) and they do not at all deny, that the Pope did join and
contribute toward this intended Invasion. 14. That in these ten years from
1580. to 1590. the Prisoners at Wisbich lived together without any trouble,
Colledge-like, without any wan^; that of all sorts toward the number of fifty
suffered death; as they think, most of them for conscience, but as their
Adversaries do still affirm for Treason: that such Priests as upon examination
were found any thing moderate, were not so hardly dealt with; insomuch as fifty
five that might by the Laws have been put to death, in one year 1585. and in a
dangerous time, were only banished; and that although some hard courses were
taken against them, yet it was not by many degrees so extreme, as the Jesuits
and that Crew have falsely reported and written of it. 15. That there being just
apprehensions of a new Invasion, a Proclamation was set out 1591. against
Sem^nary Priests, as being suspected to (...) sent hither to p^^pare a way for
it; and Parsons did not only acknowledge such a design, but said the King of
Spain had just cause to attempt again that enterprise: but in the mean time
they tried a shorter course by the several Treasons of Heskett, Collen, both
set on by Jesuits, Lopez, York, Williams; and Squire, animated by Walpole the
Jesuit. 16. That Parsons at last set up the title of the Infanta of Spain, and
endeavored to get subscriptions to it, and promises to persuade the Catholics
of England to submit to it; and that the Seminary Priests were to promote her
Title, against the Queen and her Lawful Successors. From all which they
confess, that the Iesuitical designs abroad, and the Rebellions and Traitorous
attempts of some Catholics at home have been the Causes of such calamities and
troubles, as have happened unto them; great, (they confess) in themselves: but
far less (they think) than any Prince living in her Majesty's case, and so
provoked would have inflicted upon us. And what more need to be said, for the
Vindication of the Poenal Laws from the charge of Injustice and cruelty, than
is here so ingenuously confessed by the Secular Priests, men of the same
Religion with those who complain of them, men that suffered themselves in some
measure, men that thoroughly understood the true Reasons and casions of the
several Laws that were then made; and yet after all this, can Mr. Cressy have
the impudence to parallel these Laws with those of Nero, Domitian and
Dioclesian, and to say, that they who suffered by them, suffered only on the
account of Religion? If the primitive Christians had been guilty of so many
horrible Treasons and Conspiracies, if they had attempted to deprive Emperors
of their Crowns, and absolved Subjects from their Allegiance to them, if they
had joined with their open and declared enemies, and employed persons time
after time to assassinate them; what would the whole World have said of their
sufferings? Would men of any common sense have said, that they were Martyrs for
Religion? no; but that they dyed justly and deservedly for their Treasons. And
for all that I can see, all such as suffered in those days, for their attempts
on their Sovereign and Country, are no more to be said to have suffered for
Religion, than the late Regicides; who pleaded the Cause of God and Religion as
well as they; and if the one be Martyrs, let the other be thought so too: but
if notwithstanding all their fair pretenses of Religion and Conscience, the
Regicides shall not be thought to suffer for their Religion, why then should
those in Q. Elizabeth' s or King Iames' s time, who suffered on the account of
actual Treasons, as those did who were engaged in the Gunpowder Treason, as
well as those who suffered in the Queens time? And if the supposition of
Conscience or Religion makes all men Martyrs, the Regicides will put in their
plea for Martyrd^m; if it be not, then there is no reason to say they suffered
for Religion, whom the Law condemned on the account of Treason. If it be then
allowed, that the Laws must determine Treason, then it will follow that those
suffer for Treason who act directly against those Laws which determine it to be
Treason.

. 22. But suppose the Law should make it Treason for men to serve God according
to their Consciences, as for Roman Priests to officiate or say Mass; can such
men be said to suffer for Treason if they be taken in the Fact, and not rather
for their Religion? To this I answer, that a great regard is to be had to the
occasion of making such a Law for the right interpretation of it. For if plain
and evident Treasonable actions were the first occasion of making it, as it is
confessed in Q. Elizabeth's time, then all those Persons liable to the suspicion
of the State, may be seized upon in what way soever they discover themselves;
and in this case, the performing Offices of their Function is not the motive of
the Law or Reason of the penalty, but merely the Means of Discovery of the
Persons. For by reason of Disguises and Aequivocations, and mental Reservations
being set on foot by the Jesuits to prevent discovery, the Law had no certain
way of finding them out, but by the Offices of their Function, in which the
Magistrates are sure they will not dissemble so far as that a man who is no
Priest will not take upon him to say Mass: and therefore the Law looks upon the
Office of Religion, as only a certain Criterion of the Persons, and not as the
Reason of the punishment; not as the thing that makes them guilty, but as the
way of finding the guilty. As if we should suppose upon the account of the
Treasons of many years and frequent Rebellions and conspiracies for the
destruction of the King and Kingdom* which any Sectaries among us should be
found guilty of (as for instance, I will put the case of Quakers as more easily
differenced:) I desire to know, whether if the Law made it poenal for men, not
to put off their hats, only out of consideration of the Treasonable doctrines
and practices they were guilty of, should that man who were taken because he
did not put off his Hat be said to suf^er on that account, and not rather upon
the first Reason and Motive of the Law? In the Statute 23 Eliz. c. 1. the whole
intent and design of the Law is expressed to be, to keep persons from
withdrawing her Majesty's Subjects from their Obedience to her: and because the
Pope had engaged himself in several Treasons and Rebellions against her, by
giving assistance to them, and endeavoring what in him lay to deprive the
Queen of her Crown, therefore the drawing any persons to promise Obedience to
the Pope is adjudged Treason, as well as to any other Prince, State, or
Potentate. And where there is an equality of Reason, why should there not be an
equality in the punishment? If any other Prince should have engaged Persons in
the same actions which the Pope did, there is no question they had been
Treasonable actions; the Question this, whether that which would be Treason if
any other commands it, ceases to be Treason when the Pope allows or requires
it? If it does so, then the Pope must be acknowledged to have a supreme
Temporal Power over Princes, and they are all but his Vassals, which is
expressly against the ancient Law of 16 R. 2. if it remains Treason, then those
may be justly executed for Treason who do no more than what the Pope requires
them, and which they may think themselves bound in Conscience to do.

But on this account may not any act of Religion be made Treason, if the
Lawmakers think fit to make it so? By no means; for in this case, there was an
apparent tendency to disobedience and Treason in promising obedience to the
Pope; but there is no such thing in any mere act of Religion, considered as
such: but when Priests have been known to be the common instruments of
Treasons, as they were then, by the confession of the Secular Priests; then
those actions which are performed by such persons, and are proper only to
themselves, are looked on in the sense of the Law and according to the
intention of it, but only as the certain means of knowing the Persons whom the
Law designs to punish. So that if we do allow, that the Law of the Land can
declare Treason in any sort of Persons, and punish Persons for being guilty,
and appoint a certain means of discovering the guilty; then there is nothing in
that severe Law 23 Eliz c. 1. which is not according to justice and equity;
always supposing, that some notorious Treasonable actions, and not the bare
acts of Religion were the first Occasions or antecedent Motives of those Laws,
which is fully confessed and proved in this case by the most impartial
witnesses, viz. the Secular Priests. And the Preface to the Statute 27 Eliz. c.
2. gives the best interpretation of the design of it, viz. Whereas diverse
persons, called or professed Jesuits, Seminary Priests, and other Priests which
have been, and from time to time, are made in the parts beyond the Seas, by or
according to the Order and Rites of the Romish Church, have of late comen and
been sent, and daily do come and are sent into this Realm of England and other
the Queen Majesty's Dominions of purpose, (as it has appeared) as well by
their own examinations and confessions, as diverse other manifest means and
proofs, not only to withdraw her Highness Subjects from their due obedience to
her Majesty, but also to stir up and move Sedition, Rebellion, and open
Hostility, within the same her Highness Realms and Dominions, to the great
endangering of the safety of her most Royal Person, and to the utter ruin,
desolation and overthrow of the whole Realm, if the same be not the sooner by
some good means foreseen and prevented. For reformation whereof be it ordained,
etc. Can any thing be plainer from hence, than that the whole scope and design
of this Law is only to prevent treasonable attempts, though masked only under a
pretense of Religion? If the design had been against their Religion, the
Preface of the Law would have mentioned only the exercise of their Religion,
which it does not. But withal is there not a Proviso in the same Act, that it
shall not in any wise extend to any Jesuit or Priest that will take the Oath of
Supremacy; then it seems all the Religion they suffer for must be contai^ed
only in what is renounced by the Oath of Supremacy. And is this at last the
suffering for Religion Mr. Cressy talks of, viz. for the Popes Personal
Authority and Jurisdiction here? But who were the men that first rejected that
Autho^ity and Jurisdiction here? Former Princes long before the Reformation did
it as far as they thought fit; and made no scruple of restraining it, as far as
they judged convenient; and upon the same Reasons they went so far, H. 8. and
other Princes might go much farther. For the reason they went upon was, the
repugnancy of what they opposed to the Rights of the Crown; and was there any
other ground of the casting out the Popes Supremacy, when long experience had
taught men that it was to little purpo^e to cut off the Tail of the Serpent,
while the Head and Body were sound? But who were the zealous men in Henry the
Eighths days against the Popes Authority and Jurisdiction? Were not Stephen
Gardner and Bonner as fierce as any against it? and if they were not in good
earnest, they were notorious Hypocrites, as any one may see by reading Gardners
Book of True Obedience, with Bonners Preface; wherein very smart things are
said, and with good Reason against making the Supremacy challenged by the Pope
any part of Catholic^ Religion. Did not all the Bishops in H. 8. time, ( Fisher
excepted) join in rejecting the Popes Supremacy? And was there no Catholic
Religion left in England when that was gone? It seems then the whole Cause of
Religion is reduced to a very narrow compass, and hangs on a very slender
thread. If there be no more in Christian Religion, than what is rejected by the
Oath of Supremacy, it a is very earthly and quarrelsome thing; for it filled
the World with perpetual broils and confusions, and produced dreadful effects
where ever it was entertained; and leaves a sting behind where its power is cut
off.

But the Author of the Answer to the Execution of Justice in England, etc. who
is supposed to be Cardinal Allen, speaks out in this matter, and says plainly,
that it is a part of Catholic Doctrine, that heretical Princes being
excommunicated by the Pope, C^neert. Cathol. part. 3. c. 4, 5, 6.
are to be deprived of their Kingdoms, and their Subjects immediately upon
excommunication are absolved from their Allegiance; which he says, is not only
the doctrine of Aquinas, and Tolet, and of the Canon Law, but of the Council of
Lateran, and as he endeavors to prove, of Scripture too: and that War for
Religion is not only just but honorable; and for the deposing of Princes, he
brings several instances from Gregory the seventh downwards: particularly King
John and Henry the second; and says, that the promise of obedience to Princes
is only a conditional contract, and if they fail of their faith to God, they
are free as to the faith they promised them. This I confess, is speaking to the
purpose, and the only way in appearance to make them suffer for Religion; for
no doubt, these were the principles, which led them to those treasonable
practices for which they suffered. But the main question remains still, whether
Treason be not Treason, because a man thinks himself bound in Conscience to
commit it? and whether Magistrates have not reason to make severe Laws, when
such dangerous and destructive principles to Government are embraced as a part
of Religion? If there be any such thing as Civil Government appointed by God,
it must be supposed to have a just and natural Right and Power to preserve it
self: but how can it maintain it self without a just power to punish those that
disturb and overthrow it? if it have such a Power, it must have Authority to
judge of those actions which are pernicious and dangerous to it self; and if
there be such a natural inherent Right, Power and Authority, antecedently to
any positive Laws of Religion; either we must suppose that Religion left Civil
Government as it was, and then it has the Power of judging all sorts of
actions, so far as they have an influence on the Civil Government, so that no
pretense of Religion can excuse Treasonable actions; or we must assert that the
Christian Religion has taken away the natural Rights of Government which is
very repugnant to the doctrine of Christianity, and all the examples of the
Primitive Church. The substance therefore, of what I say about suffering for
Religion, or for Treason is this; that whatever principles or actions tend to
the destruction of the Civil Government, are in themselves Treasonable
antecedent to Laws; that Laws may justly determine the nature and degrees of
punishment, that those who are guilty of such actions, let them be done out of
what principle soever, are justly liable to punishment on the account of
Treason; and in the judgment of the Law and Reason do suffer on that account,
what ever private opinions they may have who do these things, concerning the
obligations of Conscience to do them: and where there is just suspicion of a
number of persons not easily discerned, the Laws may make use of certain Marks
to discover them, although it happens that those marks prove actions of
Religion; which actions are not thereby made the Cause of their suffering, but
those principles or actions which were the first occasions and Motives of
making those Laws. From which it is, I suppose, evident, that if the ancient
Poenal Laws were just and reasonable, our modern Laws are so too, because the
Occasions of making them were of as high a Nature, and the guilt as
proportionable to the penalty; and that men did no more suffer for Religion by
these, than by the Ancient Poenal Laws.

. 23. 2. But supposing these Laws were acknowledged to be just and reasonable*
as to the Actors of those Treasons, the Question is, Whether they continue
just, as to other persons who cannot be proved actually guilty of those
Treasons? And here I confess, as to the principles of natural Reason, the case
does vary according to circumstances: For,

1. In a jealous and suspicious time, when many Treasons have been acted, and
more are feared by virtue of bad principles, the Government may justly proceed
upon the trial of the principles to the conviction of Persons who own them,
without plain evidence of the particular guilt of the outward actions of
Treason. For the very designing of Treason is liable to the severity of the
Law, if it come to be discovered; and where the safety of the public is really
in great danger, the greatest caution is necessa^y ^or the prevention of evil;
and some actions are lawful for public safety which are not in particular
cases. Especially when sufficient warning is given beforehand by the Law, and
men cannot come within the danger of it without palpable disobedience, as in
the case of Seminary Priests coming into the Nation, when forbidden to do it
under severe penalties; In which case the very contempt of the Law and
Government, makes them justly obnoxious to the force of it. He that owns the
principles that lead him to Treason, wants only an opportunity to act them; and
therefore in cases of great danger, the not renouncing the principles may
justly expose men to the sentence of the Law. And if it be lawful to make any
principles or declared opinions or words treasonable, it cannot be unjust to
make men suffer for them.

2. In quiet times when the apprehension of present danger is not great, it
has been the Wisdom of our Government to suffer the course of Law to proceed,
but not to a rigorous execution. For the Law being in its force, keeps persons
of dangerous principles more in awe, who will be very cautious of broaching and
maintaining those principles which they hold; and consequently cannot have so
bad effects, as when they have full liberty to vent them; but in case Persons
have been seized upon by the legal ways of discovery, who yet have not been
actually seditious, it has been the excellent moderation of our Government,
not to proceed to any great severities.

3. There can be no sufficient reason given for the total repeal of Laws at
first made upon good grounds, where there is not sufficient security given that
all those, for whom they were intended, have renounced those principles which
were the first occasions of making them. These things I yield to be reasonable.

1. That where there is a real difference in principles, the Government should
make a difference; because the reason of the Law, is the danger of those
principles; which if some hear^^^y renounce, there seems to be no ground, that
they should suffer equally with those who will not; but since the Law is
already in being, and it is easier to preserve old Laws, than to make new ones,
whether the difference should be by Law, or by Privilege, becomes the Wisdom
of our Lawmakers to determine.

2. That such who enjoy such a Privilege, should give the greatest
satisfaction as to their sincerity in renouncing these principles; for if there
be still ground to suspect their sincerity in renouncing, by reason of
ambiguous phrases, aequivocations in words, or reservations in their minds,
they give instead of real satisfaction, greater cause of jealousy, because of
the abuse they put thereby upon the Government. For if men do aequivocate in
renouncing aequivocation (which it is very possible for men that hold that
Doctrine to do) they thereby forfeit their credit to so high a degree, that
they cannot be safely trusted in any Oaths or Protestations. This therefore
ought to be made sure, that men use the greatest sincerity in what they do, or
else there is no ground to grant any favor upon their offers of satisfaction.

3. Where there is sufficient ground to believe, that the much greater number
will not give sufficient satisfaction as to the renouncing the dangerous
principles to Civil Government, there is no reason for a total repeal of the
Poenal Laws already established. For if the Reason of the Laws was just at
first, and the same Reason continues, it becomes not the Wisdom of a Nation to
take off the curb it has upon a dangerous and growing party: and however
cautious and reserved many may seem, while the Laws are in force, no man knows
how much those principles may more openly show themselves; and what practices
may follow upon them, when impunity tempts them. I do not plead for sanguinary
Laws toward innocent and peaceably minded men (whatever their opinions be; and
how hardly soever my Adversaries think and speak of me, I would show my
Religion to be better than theirs by having more Charity and Kindness toward
them, than I ^ear they would show me were I in their circumstances) but I find
that even some of themselves think fit not to have those Laws taken off from
men of the Iesuitical Principles; as appears by a Discourse written to that
purpose, The Jesuits Reasons unreasonable. 1662.
since his Majesty's Return, by one of their own Religion. Wherein he shows,

1. That the Iesuitical party by their unjust and wicked practices provoked the
Magistrates to enact those Laws; and that their seditious principles are too
deeply guilty of the Blood of Priests and Catholics shed in the Kingdom ever
since they came into it: and that it is their principle to manage Religion, not
by persuasion but by command and force; and then reckons up the several
Treasons in Queen Elizabeth's time, the Iesuitical design of excluding the
Scottish succession and title of our Sovereign; the Gunpowder Treason; which if
it were not their invention, he confesses they were highly accessory to it, by
prayers before hand, and public testifications after the fact was discovered;
nay many years after they did, and peradventure to this very day still do
pertinaciously adhere to it. 2. That their practices of usurping Jurisdiction,
making Colleges and Provinces in and for Enland; possessing themselves of
great sums of money for such ends, are against the ancient Laws of the Land
even in Catholic times; it being the Law of England that no Ecclesiastical
Community may settle here, unless admitted by the Civil Power; and those that
entertain them are subject to the penalties ordained by the Ancient Laws. 3.
That it is no evidence of their Loyalty that any of them have been of the Kings
side, it being a Maxim or Practice of their Society in quarrels of Princes and
Great men to have some of their Fathers on one part and others for the
contrary; which is a manifest sign they are faithful to neither. 4. That there
is no ground to trust them, because of their doctrine of Probability; and their
General can make what doctrine he pleases probable, for the opinion of three
Divines is sufficient to make a Doctrine probable, and whatever is so, must be
done by them when commanded by their Superiors; so that the tenderness of
their Consciences is only about doing, or doing what their Superiors orders
them: besides, their doctrines about deposing Princes, Equivocations, mental
Reservations, and diverse other juggles. 5. That they have never yet renounced
the doctrine of the Popes deposing Princes; that their Generals order against
teaching this doctrine was a mere trick, and never pretended to reach England,
that Santarellus his Book was Printed ten years after it, teaching the power of
deposing in all latitude; and why should the peace of Kingdoms have no better
security than their Generals Order? Who knows how soon that may alter, when
good circumstances happen? and then it will be a mortal sin not to teach this
doctrine: that the Jesuits have never spoken one unkind word against this Power
of deposing Princes; that when the Pope shall think fit to attempt deposing a
King of England, no doubt their Generals Order will be released. 6. That by
their particular vow of obedience to the Pope, they are bound to do whatever he
commands them; as for example, if the Pope should excommunicate or depose the
Prince, and command them to move Catholics to take up Arms, they are bound by
their Vow to do it. 7. That they make themselves Sovereigns over the Kings
Subjects, by usurping a power of life and death over those of their Order for
pretended crimes committed in England, which is High Treason; for their
Subjects have other Sovereigns besides the King. 8. That there can be no
sufficient security given by them, who hold the Popes personal infallibility;
for whatever protestations, or renunciations they may make at present, they
will be obliged to the contrary whenever the Pope declares his judgment so:
and therefore no hearty Allegiance can be expected from those who hold it, but
such as must waver with every blast from Rome. 9. That they not only renounce
the doctrines of Equivocation and Mental Reservation, without which all other
protestations afford very little security; but men ought to be assured, that
they do not practice them, when they do renounce them; and he desires them to
find out some way for this, which it seems came not into his head. 10. That
without renouncing those doctrines which are dangerous to the Civil Government
there is no reason to expect favor from it: for temporal subjection to Princes
is the main ground of the peace and good Government of the Commonwealth; and
what is against that is against the Law of God and Nature.

. 24. I now come in the last place to consider the proposals made by Mr. Cressy
for satisfaction to the Government and the repeal of the poenal Laws: which are
of two kinds, 1. Subscribing the censures of the Faculty of Paris 1663. and
1626. 2. Taking the Oath of Allegiance, if the word heretical were turned into
Repugnant to the word of God.

But, 1. It were worth knowing what Authority Mr. Cressy had to make these
proposals in behalf of all the Roman Catholics of England: he says indeed,
that his Book is published permiss^ Superiorum, and what he writes, is not the
inconsiderable opinion of one particular person only: And what then? It may be
two or three more may be of his mind, it may be his Superiors are, it may be
several Gentlemen not governed by the Iesuitical party a^e: but is the State of
Affairs so mightily changed among them since 1662? Will not the same Reasons ^
old good still, that the Iesuitical party is not to be trusted in these
matters* have they made any renunciation since, of any of those doctrines which
were thought so dangerous then? or are they quite gone from us, and to use Mr.
Cressy's own comparison, like Rats have forsaken a sinking Ship? It would be
great Joy to the whole Nation to hear we were so well rid of them? but which
way went they? in what storm were they carried? Was it in the late great
Hurrican? or were they conveyed invisibly through some passage under ground?
But they are subtle men, they say, and full of tricks, and therefore may seem
to be gone and not be gone, even as they please. Mr. Cressy it seems has a a
Power beyond Proclamations, for he can send away the whole Fry in a tr^ce; but
a turn of his hand, and not a Jesuit, or a man of his principles appears more
in England. But for all this, neither the Benedictins, nor Secular Priests, can
get rid of them so easily; they swarm and govern too much for their interests;
they have too many Colleges in England to forsake them so easily, and too rich
a Bank to run away and leave it behind them: it may be, some of the poorer
Orders would fain be fingering of it, and therefore represent the poor harmless
Jesuits, as the only dangerous persons to the Civil Government, whereas they
think themselves as honest as their neighbors, and say, they hold no doctrines
but what other Divines hold as well as they, and if they understood themselves
they would find to be the doctrine of the Catholic Church for six hundred
years; only a few temporizing Secular Priests, and some others out of spite to
them, and hopes to get a better harvest to themselves when they are gone, would
lay all the blame upon the Jesuits: whereas the doctrine they own was the
general doctrine of their Church and received here in England, (the Council of
Lateran which decrees the Popes power over Princes having been received here by
the Council at Oxford A. 1222.) and what a^do is made now with the Jesuits, as
though they had been the first broachers and only maintainers of the doctrine
of the Popes power of deposing Princes, which has been decreed in Councils,
accepted by Churches, and only opposed by some, out of the passions of fear or
hopes from temporal Princes? What do ye tell us* say they, of the Sorbon, a
Club of State Divines, that act as if they believed the King of France 's
infallibility, though they will not own the Popes? What matter is it what some
few men say that are overawed by Secular Princes? Show us the Divines at Rome,
where men may speak freely, that hold otherwise: Was the Popes Nuncio that
appeared so bravely for the Catholic Cause in the Head of an Army in Ireland a
Jesuit? or were (...) adherents that cast off the Kings Authority there
Jesuits? Are all the Anti-Remonstrants in Ireland Jesuits? And what think we,
are not all those who opposed the Irish Romonstrance, very ready to give full
satisfaction in these matters? Nay, in the good humor Mr. Cressy found all
English Roman Catholics, it was pity, he had not gone farther; and who knows,
but in so lucky a day, the Pope and Cardinal Barbarine might have subscribed
the Censures of the Faculty of Paris? But well fare the honest Apologist for
the Jesuits who answered the Reasons unreasonable, A Let^er concerning the
Jesuits. p. 8. 1662.
and declares that he is no Jesuit, yet he says plainly, it would be a
temerarious oath to for swear in general terms a deposing Power in the Pope,
but to detest it as an heresy would be absolutely Schismatical: but he gives
very foolish Reasons, why the effect of that power need not be feared in
England; because, forsooth, Constantine left out England in his Donation to the
Pope; did he so indeed? it was a great kindness to the place of his Nativity.
But withal he adds, though there be much talk of King John's Resignation of his
Crown to the Pope, yet the Deed of Conveyance lies so dormant in the Vatican,
that it could never be awaked or produced on any provocation. And is this the
security the Pope will never exercise his deposing Power in England? But do not
you think the Pope makes too much of it, to show it to all comers? and yet this
Apologist need not have gone to the Vatican, to have seen that very Bull of the
Pope, wherein King John 's Resignation is contained; for it was ^ately to be
seen in England. But suppose King John 's Original were burnt at Lions, as our
Historians think; has the Pope never challenged any Power over Princes, but
where they were feudatary to him? Alas for his Ignorance! the Pope ^or a need
has a threefold claim to this Power, and he can make use of which he thinks
best; the feudatary, the direct temporal, and the indirect temporal. The
Feu^ata^y is by voluntary resignation, the direct temporal by the Canon Law,
and the indirect by the Sins of Princes; for those, if they happen to be of a
right kind, as Heresy, Apostasy, Mis-government, etc. give the Pope a notable
title to their Crowns, for then they fall to him by way of Escheat as the
principal Lord: but suppose the Pope should to save quarrels, quit the
Feudatary Claim, what security is there against the two other, that may do as
much mischief as the first?

For all that I can see then, Mr. Cressy had not sufficient Letter of Attorney
to declare in behalf of all the Roman Catholics, that they would subscribe the
Censures of the Sorbon; for the Popes deposing Power is yet good doctrine among
many of them. But why did Mr. Cressy take no notice of any difference among
them about these points? Must we Protestants be still thought such pitiful
Animals, as not to know that which has been publicly canvased among them
about the full Age of a man, viz. near seventy years! Alas for us! we never
heard of Blackwell, and Barclay, and Widdrington of one side; nor of Bellarmin,
and Singleton, and Fitzherbert of the other: We have only a little Grammar
Learning, and can make a shift to understand the Greek Testament, and read
Calvin's Institutions, or Danaeus upon Peter Lombard; but for these deep points,
it is well we have ever seen those that have heard others say they have seen
the Books that handle them. But why should Mr. Cressy so slily pass over the
business of the Nuntio in Ireland? was that nothing to the purpose? Did not the
Person of Honor mention it several times, that he could not avoid seeing it?
But we must forget all those things; and Cardinal Barbarins Letters about the
Irish Remonstrance: and whatever is material, if it cannot be answered, is
better let slip. Yet, is it possible for us to believe that all Roman
Catholics are so willing now to renounce the dangerous doctrines; when there
has been so late, so numerous, so vehement, (nay, I had almost said) so
Catholic, an opposition to the Irish Remonstrance? Not, as Mr. Cressy would
have it believed, out of indignation at a particular person, (who had much
greater Authority for what he did on the behalf of the rest by his
Procuratorium than Mr. Cressy does appear to have) nor a quarrel at phrases,
but at the very substance of the doctrine contained in it. Was it only about
some phrases, that the Popes Internuntio at Brussels de Vechiis condemned it?
when he said, it contained in it propositions agreeing with those already
reprobated by Paul the fifth, History of the Irish Remonstr. p. 16.
and Innocent the tenth, and this he expressed as the mind of the Pope. Was it
only about phrases, when he said the Remonstrance would do more hurt than all
the former persecutions of heretics? P. 18.
Was it only about phrases, when Cardinal Barbarin charged the Remonstrants
with corrupting faith under a pretense of Allegiance to the King: and he adds
too, that the propositions were condemned before by the Apostolical See; and
that his Holiness was troubled to the very heart about it? Methinks, a few
Phrases only, should not have given his Holiness so much disturbance. Was it
only for some phrases, P. 49.
that the Dominicans opposed it, as contrary to the doctrine of Thomas Aquinas,
who roundly asserts the Popes power of deposing Heretical Princes? and they
pleaded, they were sworn to maintain his Doctrine. It seems then, they can give
no security to the State without perjury; and I suppose there were some of
these among Mr. Cressy's Roman Catholics, who were so ready to renounce this
doctrine. Was it only for a few phrases, P. 102.
that the Lovain Divines condemned it, as wholly unlawful and detestable; and
containing things contrary to Catholic Religion? The true grounds of which,
were the taking away the Popes power over Princes, and the great Diana of
Ecclesiastical Liberty. If Mr. Cressy accounts these but phrases, the Court of
Rome owes him but little thanks for it. But this is so ridiculous a pretense,
that all the quarrels about the Irish Remonstrance were only about a few
phrases, that either he looks on the parties as extremely quarrelsome, or it
must be some greater matter which he confesses was the occasion of so many
commotions, dissentions, and scandalous invectives on both sides. Since then,
there has so long been, and we have reason still to believe there is, such a
difference among them about these matters, how can Mr. Cressy undertake so
boldly as he does on the behalf of English Catholics for the subscribing the
Censures of the Faculty of Paris? But of all sorts of men, I am apt to mistrust
great Undertakers.

. 25. 2. But supposing they should subscribe the Sorbon Censures, we may yet
question, whether hereby they would give full satisfaction in these matters:
Epist. Apol. ^. 118.
Mr. Cressy is of opinion, that this would be a more full and satisfactory
testimony of their Fidelity, than can be given by taking the Oath of
Allegiance; which makes me very much wonder, why they should refuse the less
satisfactory, and choose that which is more. But men had need to have fast
hold, that are to handle such slippery points as these are; for when we think
we have them safe, they slip through our Fingers and escape. Those who have not
considered all their arts and evasions in these matters, would think they offer
as fair things as any men in the world; but when it comes home to the point,
there is some sly distinction or mental reservation, by which they get through
all, and are as much at liberty as ever. That alone which in our Age and
Kingdom can give satisfaction, 1. Must reach our own case, and not that of the
King of France; i. e. 1. Of a King not of the same profession of Religion with
those who make the profession of Fidelity; 2. Of a King or Kingdom already
under censure of excommunion, as Cardinal Barbarin declared: 3. Of a King, not
barely considered as a King, i. e. while he remains such, and the Pope does not
declare him not to be a King; but so as to declare it, not to be in the Popes
power, to make him no King. For men may subscribe the Censures of Sorbon,
understanding them of Kings of their own Religion, not excommunicated by the
Pope, and while the Pope does not declare them to be no Kings. 2. What gives
satisfaction in our case, must exclude all manner of aequivocation and mental
reservation; For where that is not excluded, there can be no security at all
given; it being impossible to bring aequivocations and reservations within any
bounds; nay, those who hold it lawful to use them, may deny it, and do it in
denying it; therefore the matter of aequivocation must be stated, how far, and
upon what terms, and in what cases they allow it; and yet there may be
aequivocation in all this. So that as aequivocation has all the advantages of
lying, it has the disadvantage too, viz. that those who use it cannot safely
be trusted, though they do not use it; because though it be possible they may
not, no man can be well assured that they do not. But the Sorbon censures never
mention aequivocation at all, and therefore I do not wonder to see such as Mr.
Cressy ready to bring in those, instead of the Oath of Allegiance, because
although himself and some others may disown the doctrine of aequivocation, yet
if that be not expressly excluded, they know the very Jesuits will swallow a
Camel, let them but have the dressing of him. They know so many tricks of
Legerdemain, that I do not see why a very cunning Jesuit may not then think
himself a fit match for the Devil himself; for let him make never so many
promises in Words, he would have such a secret Reservation in his Mind, as
should make his Words to signify nothing. But it is not safe for them to play
such tricks with so old a Sophister, that first found out the way of
aequivocation. 3. What gives satisfaction in our case, must exclude absolutely
all power of Dispensing in the Pope; for if that be reserved they are safe
enough; they know how to get out presently, for they have one ready that can
knock off all their shackles, and set them as free as ever; nay, they have yet
another fetch concerning the Popes power, for he can null an Oath beforehand,
and make it stand for nothing, as well as absolve them from it afterward. But
how then can the Sorbon censures be so satisfactory in our case, when they
never so much as mention the Popes power of dispensing, much less disclaim it
so plainly as it ought to be done, to give satisfaction? So that we see, it is
not without reason Mr. Cressy would so willingly have the Oath of Allegiance
changed for the Sorbon Censures: and I do not at all wonder that fourteen
Jesuits in France offered to subscribe the Sorbon censures 1626. which Mr.
Cressy offers, as the most satisfactory Form, who never yet could well swallow
the Oath of Allegiance; for they very well knew whatever they did swear in
France could be dispensed with at Rome.

. 26. 3. But farther he declares their readiness to take the Oath of Allegiance
it self, if the word Heretical were left out. Whose readiness does he mean? All
Roman Catholics, Jesuits and all? And has this indeed been the only bone of
contention thus many years? Did Bellarmin, Suarez, Lessius, Fitz-herbert and
the rest of the opposers of this Oath, find no other fault with it, but only
that a Doctrine was declared heretical, which was never condemned in any
General Council? Would they have been content to have called the Popes power of
deposing Princes new, false, erroneous, and contrary to the Word of God, though
not heretical? For shame, let not men go about thus to impose upon us, as
though all the difference were about this nicety in the signification of a
word. It would be needless in so plain a case to show upon what principles
those went who opposed the Oath of Allegiance; but I shall only instance in
Fitzherbert, Fitz-herb: Reply, chapter 4.
being of our own Nation, and as considerable as any; he therefore insists upon
it, that it is an unlawful Oath, because it flatly contradicts the Lateran
Council, as to the Popes power of deposing Princes: but that is not all, but
his design is at large to prove, that it is repugnant to the Law of God in the
Old and New Testament, Chapter 5, 6, 7, etc.
to the practice of the Church, and express declaration of the Pope by three
Apostolical Breves; Chapter 17. p. 112.
and to those that object, that the Popes first Breve was obtained
surreptitiously and for want of good information; he says, it is not only
ignorance but malice in any to say so, because the Pope published another Breve
on purpose to declare that the first was not surreptitious, but written upon
his own certain knowledge, motion, and will, and after long and grave
deliberation had concerning all things contained therein, and that therefore
the Catholics were bound to observe it wholly rejecting all interpretations to
the contrary; and by his third Breve he gave Authority to the Archpriest to
deprive all Seminary Priests under his Jurisdiction that had taken the Oath, or
had taught or did still teach it to be lawful to take it; Nay, he adds farther
to take off that common evasion, that the Pope was not duly informed, that
before the sentence passed against it at Rome, it was long debated in certain
Congregations of Learned Cardinals, and other great Divines; wherein Cardinal
Bellarmin had but one voice, and Father Parsons (whom they suspect to have
misinformed the Pope) none at all. Now the Pope did not condemn it merely on
the account of the word Heretical, but because he said, the Oath contained in
it many things, contrary to faith and the salvation of souls. And therefore all
those who have any regard to the Popes Sentence in a matter of such importance
have other Reasons to decline taking the Oath, supposing the word Heretical
were le^t out. But some men love to pretend that a small alteration in
established Laws would satisfy them, to try if by those arts, they could bring
the Wisdom of the Nation to yield to them in that, and when they have obtained
it, then a thousand other objections are raised that were not mentioned before:
so I doubt not but it would be in this Case, if the word Heretical were left
out, and when they had gained this point, then they would start another, and
another till the whole Oath were brought to Nothing, and I A. B. left to stand
alone. But it is a very strange thing to me, that they who can swallow all the
other parts of the Oath should stick so much at the word Heretical; for if they
would use some of the same mollifying distinctions that they do about the other
parts of it, methinks Heretical might go down as glib as the rest. Were I of
their Religion, I should more scruple detesting, abjuring, and abhorring from
my heart, than calling a thing Heretical; the other are downright and plain
words capable of no Ambiguity; but Heretical, is a word, that may signify this
or another thing, as men please. That is Heretical with one that is not with
another, and Heretical may be meant in the sense of the Givers, and not the
Receivers; which is Mr. Cressy's way. But besides, what is it is said to be
Heretical? That Princes which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be
deposed or murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever; where or being
a disjunctive particle, if to say that Princes deprived may be murdered be
Heretical, though to say they may be deposed be not, yet that is enough to make
a disjunctive proposition true. This is one of Widdringtons ways; but he has
yet two more; viz. that, Adjoyn^er to Fitz Herberts first and second part. p.
73. N. 106. p. 69.
as heretical does not imply equality but similitude, and that they do abhor
and detest it as much, as if it were formal heresy; but the main of all is,
that a thing is not therefore heretical because the Church defines it; but
because it is repugnant to Catholic Faith, or which is all one to that which
is revealed by God; which he proves to be the proper notion of heresy, from
Alphonsus a Castro, Covarruvias and others: and if this were not the true
notion of it, the Church would have power to make new articles of Faith; and
therefore upon the same ground that any person rejects any doctrine as
repugnant to the word of God, he may reject it as heretical. I cannot therefore
imagine, whatever Mr. Cressy says, that it would give such general satisfaction
to have the word heretical turned into repugnant to the word of God; for I
cannot think the Roman Catholic Gentlemen to be men of so weak understandings,
to be able to digest all other parts of the Oath, and to refuse taking it only
on the account of the word heretical. I must therefore beg pardon, if I be not
of too easy a faith in this matter; it is easy to guess where the Oath
pinches, better than so.

. 27. 4. But after all this, I am not satisfied, with the grounds of Mr.
Cressy's hopes, that the taking off the objection as to their Loyalty may be
sufficient reason for the Toleration of their Religion; Epist. Apol. p. 98.
which is the thing aimed at in this Discourse. For although the inconsistency
of any Religion with the Civil Government be a sufficient ground against the
Toleration of such a Religion; yet its not being inconsistent is not enough for
its Toleration. For the matter of Toleration, in a Nation where there is a
Public Religion established by Law, has a respect two ways, to the Civil
Government, and to the Established Religion: and the Civil Government is bound
to defend and protect the Established Religion; because it is agreed on all
hands that it is bound to defend the True Religion, and that is declared by the
Laws to be the True, which is established by them. Now, if a party appears
active and dangerous, whose Principles are destructive to the Religion
established by Law, I appeal to any man of common sense, whether it be
sufficient ground for the Toleration of it, that one objection is taken off,
when the other remains in its fuil force? That which is then to be considered
in this case, is, whether such a party, which is dangerous without Toleration,
will grow less dangerous by it? which I think needs no great consideration; and
it will require as little, to show the danger that will come to the Established
Religion by a Toleration of Popery: not only by the diligence, industry, and
number of the Priests, who will be glad to make new Converts to gain new
Residences, (they being at present so much over-stocked;) besides their desires
to approve themselves to the Court of Rome for preferments by their activity;
and telling brave stories beyond Seas of their exploits against heretics, (as
a late Miles Gloriosus among them has done) how many Legions of Heretics they
have blown away by the Power of Principles and Demonstrations; but, by the
obligation that lies upon them that receive preferments from Rome, to persecute
Heretics, Schismatics, and Rebels to the Pope to their uttermost; which is
expressed in the Oath they take to the Pope; as appears by the Pontifical; so
that these men must either be perjured, or persecute when it lies in their
Power. And can any Nation in the World think it Wise or Safe to give Toleration
to Wolfs among Sheep; to those that have solemnly sworn to persecute to their
power all that own the Established Religion? and that look upon all such as in
a damned condition that do not submit to their Church? Till they abate of their
monstrous uncharitableness, till they renounce their Oaths to the Pope, till
they can give good security of their quiet behavior in not seducing others,
what pretense can there be, for their being allowed a free exercise of their
Religion, supposing they should take the Oath of Allegiance? But as to their
dignified Clergy, I mean such of his Majesty's Subjects, whom the Pope has
taken upon him to make Bishops without his consent (which was not suffered by
some Princes, even in times of Popery) it ought farther to be considered, what
security any following Oath can give as to those that have taken a former Oath
of Allegiance to the Pope? as I have already proved it to be; as much as King
John's was, upon the Resignation of his Crown; nay yet farther, they are bound
now by that Oath to defend all those Provisions and Reservations, and
Apostolical Mandates, which were accounted the intolerable grievances of this
Nation, long before the Reformation.

But why may they not enjoy equal liberty with the Sectaries? I am not pleading
the Sectaries Cause, (neither would others plead it now but for a farther end)
nor would I extenuate the guilt of their Separation; but they are blind, that
do not see the difference between the parties, if not as to number, yet as to
interest, foreign dependence, and danger to the Church of England: for surely,
a man is not in so much danger of being stung to death by Gnats, as being
poisoned by Vipers: I mean in respect of the avowed principle of Persecuting
all dissenters, in the Roman Church: which it were easy to manifest, not only
from our domestic story, Revelatio Consilio^^m quae initio Synodi Trideatinae
inter Pontificem, Caesarem caeterosa; Reges, Principes, etc. sunt inita. A.
1620.
and the entertainment in Queen Mary's days; and from the History of the
Inquisition abroad; but from the Cabal at the Council of Trent between the
Popes Legates, and the Ambassadors of Catholic Princes about the utter
extirpation of the Protestant Religion; and the defigns that were carried on in
prosecution of this in most parts of Europe, especially in Germany, Flanders,
Ad Edictae Principum de li^e ti^ sectarum.
and France; but I shall not meddle with the secret Intrigues, but the open and
avowed principles. In France, Auct. Claudio de Saints.
Claudius de Saints published a Book against Toleration, A. D. 1561. wherein
he pleads with all his strength for the utter extirpation of Protestants;
Jacob. Pam^lii de Religionibus diversis no^ admit.
the like did Iacobus Pamelius in Flanders; and both of them answer all the
common and popular arguments now brought for Toleration: A^tw. 1589. Casp.
Scioppii Classicum Belli Sa^ri Ticini. 1619.
the same did Scioppius in Germany; and we all know what the dreadful
consequences were in all those places. But this is a subject too large to enter
upon now: For my part, I am no Friend to Sanguinary Laws on the account of
Religion; and if the Wisdom of our Lawmakers should think fit to change that
popular way of public suffering (which the sufferers would have still believed
to be for Religion) into a more effectual course of suppressing the growth of a
party so dangerous to our established Religion, I should more rejoice, it may
be, therein, than those who are more concerned in it. Provided, that the
pretense of making new Laws more accommodate to our present State, be not
carried on merely with the design of leaving our Church without any security by
Law at all against so violent and dangerous a party: for it is a much easier
matter to repeal old Laws, than to make new ones. And if the objection against
the old Laws be, that they are not executed, it ought to be considered whether
the same objection will not lie against others, unless they be such Laws as
will execute themselves; and we have little Reason to believe that they who bid
difiance to our present Laws, and make sport with Proclamations, will be
persuaded by gentler means to obey others. And is such an affront to Laws a
sufficient Motive to Lenity? And we have good ground to think, that that they
look upon all our Laws, whatever they be, as things of no force at all upon
their Consciences, as being null in themselves, because they are contrary to
the Popes Authority and the Constitutions of their Church. And I believe if our
modern Papists were pressed home, the generality of those who are obnoxious to
the Poenal Laws, would not acknowledge those Ancient Rights of the Crown, which
were challenged by William the Conqueror, William Rufus, Henry the first,
Henry the second, (before his submission to the Pope) and afterward by Edward
the first, and Edward the third; viz. No exercise of any foreign jurisdiction
here without the Kings consent; no liberty of going out of the Kingdom, though
upon the Popes Command, without the Kings leave; and while they allow this
Power to the Pope to command his Majesty's Subjects, they make him Sovereign
over them, and make them more fearful of disclaiming his Power; No Decrees of
Popes or Bulls to be received without the Kings approbation; No Bishops to be
made by Papal Provisions out of the plenitude of his Power, etc. Those who will
not reject these, which were challenged by the Kings of England long before the
Reformation, as their ancient and undoubted Rights, with what face can they
plead for the Repeal of the Poenal Laws? when the ancient Law of England makes
them guilty of violating the Rights of the Crown. If they say, the Case is not
the same now upon the Change of Religion; I desire to know of them, whether any
ancient Rights of the Crown are lost by casting off the Popes Authority? if
they be not, they are good still, and what are they then that deny them? if
they be lost, then our Kings have lost some of their Sovereign Rights which
their Ancestors valued above half their Kingdoms; and how could they lose them
by casting off the Pope, if they did not receive them from him? If they
received them from him, then they make the Kings Power to be so far at least
derived from the Pope; for if it were independent upon him, how could they lose
any Power, by casting off the Popes Authority? If it be said, that these were
privileges granted by the Popes; I utterly deny it; for our Kings challenged
them in spite of the Popes, and exercised them in direct opposition to their
Bulls and Decrees; even the Decrees of Councils as well as Popes, as is fully
manifested in the foregoing Discourse. How then can such men plead for the
repeal of Poenal Laws whose principles do so directly contradict the ancient
acknowledged Rights of the Crown of England? For others that will not only own
these ancient Rights, but give sufficient security without fraud and
equivocation, of their sincerity in renouncing the Popes power of deposing
Princes, and other Principles destructive to Government; since it was never the
intention of our Laws to persecute such, they need not fear the enjoyment of
all Reasonable Protection by them. But it does not become me to discourse of
such points which are far more proper for the Wisdom and Council of the whole
Nation: And I know no true Protestant would envy the quiet and security of
innocent and peaceable men, where there is sufficient assurance, that by favor
received they will not grow more unquiet. But we cannot take too great care to
prevent the restless designs of those, who aim at nothing more, than the
undermining and blowing up our established Church and Religion: Which God
preserve.

Thus much may serve for an Answer to these points of Mr. Cressy's Book, the
rest I leave to a better hand.

And now My Lord, what reason have I to beg pardon for so tedious a Discourse!
But I know your Lordships love to the Cause, as well as to the Person
concerned, will make you ready to excuse and forgive,

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and obedient Servant, Edw. Stillingfleet.


