OF THE NATURE OF SUPERSTITION. A SERMON PREACHED At St Dunstans West, March
31. MDCLXXXII.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of S. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed for H. Mortlock at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Churchyard, and
at the White Heart in Westminster Hall, 1682.

Coloss. 2. 23. Which things have indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and
humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the satisfying of
the flesh.
SAint Paul was now a Prisoner at Rome for the sake of the Gospel, when he
wrote this Epistle to the Colossians, but his mind was at liberty; And the
compass of his thoughts and cares was so far from being confined within the
Walls of a Prison, that it reached not only to the Churches of Asia planted by
himself, as those of Ephesus and Galatia; but to those which had never seen
him, as the Colossians and Laodiceans. For, says he, I would that ye knew
Coloss. 2. 1.
what great conflict I have for you, and for them at Laodicea, and for as many
as have not seen my face in the flesh. Had not he trouble enough with the
Churches of Rome and Greece, and those he had conversed with in other parts,
but he must take upon him to interpose in the affairs of those Churches he had
never seen? But such was the largeness of the Apostle's mind, the fervor of
his Zeal, the extent of his Charity, that the care of all the Churches was upon
him; but especially those which had been planted by his means, although not by
his personal endeavors; among which, in all probability, this of the
Colossians was one. For this Epaphras whom St. Paul calls a faithful Coloss. 1.
7.
Minister of Christ to them, was employed as an Evangelist under him; and
particularly in the Cities of Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colosse, which were not
far distant from each other in Phrygia; and for the Churches there settled, S.
Paul testifies, that he had a mighty zeal and concernment: From whence it
arose, that hearing of S. Paul's 4. 13.
Imprisonment at Rome, he resolves to take a Journey thither to acquaint him
with the State of those Churches, and to desire his Advice and Direction in the
present danger they were in, of being seduced from the simplicity of the
Gospel, by the plausible insinuations of false Teachers, who pretended to give
them a more refined Systeme of Religion, by a composition of Law and Gospel and
Philosophy all together. S. Paul understanding by him the dangerous
circumstances they were in, although Epaphras himself was made a
Fellow-Prisoner with him; as appears by the Epistle to Philemon, sent at the
same time with this; yet Philem. 23.
he finds means by Tychicus and Onesimus to convey this Epistle to them.
Wherein by an admirable art of insinuation, far above the eloquent exordiums of
the Heathen Orators, he lets them understand, how passionately he was concerned
for their welfare; and what an Agony he suffered in his own breast for their
sakes, lest under some artificial colors and very fair pretenses, they should
be drawn off from the Love and Unity and Sincerity of the Gospel. For after he
had told them what conflict he had for them that had not seen his face in the
flesh, he immediately adds, that it was, that their hearts might be comforted,
being knit together Coloss. 2. 2, 3.
in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the
acknowledgment of the Mystery of God and of the Father and of Christ. In whom
are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And when he has thus set
forth the excellency and sufficiency of the Gospel; he then lets fall an
intimation of his design, And this I say, lest any man should beguile V. 4.
you with enticing words. But lest they should suspect from hence that ill
offices had been done them, and they had been misrepresented to S. Paul; in the
next verse he tells them, that at that distance, he did rejoice, beholding
their order, and the stedfastness V. 5.
of their faith in Christ. And therefore exhorts them, As they had received
Christ Jesus the Lord, so to walk in V. 6.
him: i. e. to adhere to that faith which they at first embraced; as he
explains it, in the seventh Verse. Having thus removed all jealousy and
suspicion as to their present stedfastness, he does more openly address himself
to them; in giving them caution against the most dangerous and deceitful
errors. Beware lest any man spoil you through V. 8.
Philosophy and vain deceit, after the Tradition of men, after the rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ. Not as though there were the least prejudice
to Christianity to be imagined by men's searching into the Works of God, or the
Nature of Moral Actions, or the digesting our own thoughts or conceptions of
things, which is all that is understood by true Philosophy; but that the Model
of Religion which they were in so much danger of being deceived by, was made
up, partly of Philosophical Precepts, and partly of Jewish Traditions and
ritual Observations; by which the false Teachers endeavored to corrupt and
adulterate the Gospel of Christ. Accordingly in the following Discourse, the
Apostle first disputes against the necessity of keeping the Ceremonies of the
Law, now under the Gospel, and sums up the force of it, v. 17. Which are a
shadow of things to come, but the body is of Christ. And having thus dispatched
the hardest Question about the Obligation of the Law of Moses, he enters upon
the debate about other Inventions, which they endeavored to recommend to
Christians.

(1.) About the Worshipping of Angels, as Mediators between God and Men; which
was an Opinion then generally received among the corrupters of Christianity,
the Gnostics and Judaizing Christians; who were not so vain in their
imaginations, to believe them to be supreme and independent Deities; for this
they utterly denied; owning one only supreme God the Father of all: but they
thought access to him was to be had by the Mediation of Angels, and therefore
they brought in the Worship of them. Baronius indeed denies, that A. D. 60. n.
17. Christian. Lup. in Tertul. de praescript. c. 33. Not. Alex. Saec. 1. p. 52.
Tertull. de praescript. c. 33. Epiph. haer. 21. p. 58.
the Gnostics introduced any Worship of Angels; but therein he is justly
confuted by some late Writers of the Roman Church. For Tertullian condemns the
Gnostics for a Magical Service of Angels; and Epiphanius says, that their
impure Sacrifices were supposed to be offered up by Principalities and Powers,
to the supreme Father of all. Which does evidently prove, that the Gnostics
did give Worship to Angels as Mediators. And although Baronius endeavors
likewise to clear the Cerinthians from this guilt (lest the Church of Rome
should be found to tread in their steps) because Cerinthus acknowledged Bar.
ib. n. 20.
one supreme Power above Angels, and because he had a bad Opinion of the Angel
which gave the Law; yet, why might not they worship the Angels as Mediators
between that supreme Power and them; and even that Angel which gave the Law as
well as the rest, since they contended for the necessary observation of the
Law? But besides, all the Judaizing Christians were not followers of Cerinthus,
there being different Sects among them; as appears by Irenaeus, Epiphanius and
others; and Baronius himself grants that the Pharisaical Jews of that n. 16.
and following Ages did Worship Angels as the Host of Heaven. And the Essens
had their Angels of Prayer; and made their prayers to the rising Sun, whom they
looked on as on the rest of the Stars, as animated and intelligent Beings. And
why the Judaizing Christians should not retain their former Superstitions, as
well as their other Traditions and Observations, I do not understand.
Especially, since Theodoret so expressly affirms, that those who then pleaded
for the keeping of the Law brought in the Worship of Angels, which custom, he
says, continued a long time in Phrygia and Pisidia; and at last the Council of
Laodicea, made a Canon against praying to Angels.

Those of the Church of Rome are so sensible of the force of this Testimony of
Theodoret against their practice, that they are driven to desperate shifts to
avoid it. Bellarmine says, that he speaks Bell. de S. B. c. 20.
against the Gnostics; whereas Theodoret mentions only those who were for
keeping the Law. Baronius says in plain terms, Theodoret was mistaken, and
that there were no such Heretics then; but this is so gross, that Bellarmin
and others contradict him in it. Others therefore say, that the Worship of
Angels here spoken against, is the Worshipping of them as Makers of the World.
But that is more than St. Paul says, for he speaks againstthat Worship which
arises from Humility, and nothing so proper for that, as the Worshipping them
as Mediators between God and us. Some think it is when Angels are preferred
before Christ, which is likewise more than the Apostle says; and they who
choose other Mediators, by whom God is more accessible by us, do prefer them in
Use, though not in Dignity: Others, as the Jansenists in their New Testament,
say Jansen. Preface Ep. Aux. Coloss.
it is, When Angels are set up as Mediators in opposition to Christ; but that
cannot be the Apostles meaning; for then his great business would have been to
have proved Christ to be the true Mediator, and not Angels; and if any
Religious Worship of Angels had been agreeable with the Christian Doctrine, the
Apostle would never have thus in general condemned it, but with such
restrictions and limitations as made it to be evil. Therefore to avoid these
difficulties, some conclude that by the Worship of Angels is understood such a
Worship as was introduced by a pretended Revelation of Angels; but against
this, we have the concurrent testimony of St. Chrysostom, St. Hierome, St.
Ambrose, Chrysostom. in l. Hier. Algas. q. 10.
Oecumenius, Theophylact, who all agree that it is to be understood of the
Worship given to Angels. So impossible it is for those who either give
themselves, or justify and allow the giving by others, any Religious Worship
to Angels, to escape falling under the Apostles censure, of being Seducers and
corrupting the Gospel of Christ.

(2.) About stricter Abstinence and greater Severity of Life. For these
Seducers gave out that the Christian Churches were yet very defective in this
matter: And that there were several Societies of Men, both among the Jews and
Heathens, which went very far beyond them: as the Essens, the Pythagoreans, the
Gymnosophists and others; who far outstript the Christians in Watchings and
Fastings, in the hard usage of their Bodies, and a total abstinence from Wine
and Flesh, and other lawful Pleasures of Life. On which account these false
Teachers represented the Christianity, as yet received in these Churches, as
too soft and gentle an Institution, and not answering the Character that was
given of it; but if they had a mind to set it off with advantage, it would be
necessary for them to take in some of the strictest Precepts of those
Societies, especially relating to Meats and Marriage, Touch not, taste not,
handle not: which they magnified as the greatest Instances of true Religion,
Self-denial, Humility, Mortification; without which they despised the Christian
Institution as a mean and ordinary thing, requiring only the belief of some
great things done and suffered by Jesus Christ in Judea, and the adhering
thereto till Death, and doing those Offices of Humanity and Kindness to each
other, and those Duties of Religion to God, which all Mankind thought fit and
reasonable to be done.

But these pretended refiners of Christianity, were not contented with such
common things; they must set up for something singular, and extraordinary; so
Epiphanius observes of the Gnostics in the beginning, that they condemned
Marriage, Epiph. Haer. 23. p. 63.
and abstained from Flesh, that under these pretenses they might draw others
into their snares. And likewise of the Ebionites, one of the Sects of Judaizing
Haer. 30. p. 139.
Christians, that they carefully abstained from all Flesh, and were every day
Baptized, and celebrated the Eucharist only in Water, for fear of being defiled
with the taste of Wine; wherein they were followed by the Encratitae, Aquarij,
and several others, who affected something out of the way, as a badge of more
than ordinary Sanctity. And there are scarce any of those who are mentioned as
the Authors of great Mischief to the Church, but were remarkable for something
of this Nature; as appears by Marcion, Montanus, Manichaeus, Severus, and
others. And which is observable, this sort of singularity prevailed no where
more, than in these parts of Phrygia; where the Encratitae very much increased
and continued so to do in the days of Epiphanius. So very little effect had
this wise and timely caution, given by the Apostle in Epiph. haer. 47. p. 339.
this place, upon those who were willing to be deceived in that, or following
Generations.

Cajetan confesses himself to seek what sort of Men those were the Apostle
discourses against; but it seems most probable to me, that they were a sort of
Judaizing Christians, who endeavored to introduce the Customs of the Jewish
Essens into the Christian Church. For when St. Paul speaks of Philo p. 876.
the Jewish Customs he mentions no other, but such as were in esteem among
them; he takes no notice of Sacrifices which were disesteemed among Epiph. p.
42.
them; But let no man judge you in Meat, which among V. 16.
them was only Bread and Salt; or in Drink, which was only Water; or in respect
of a Holyday or New Moon, or the Sabbath Days; which as Philo Philo p. 877, 899.
relates, they were great observers of. And when he speaks of the Customs they
would bring among the Christians, they were no other than such as were strictly
observed among them, viz. great abstinence, hard usage of their Bodies, and
some Religious Rites with respect to Angels. Concerning which the Apostle
delivers his Judgment two ways.

1. He grants that these things have a show of Wisdom in them; i. e. that they
make so good an appearance to men, as is apt to raise an esteem of those
persons in whom it is. First, Because they seem to flow from a forwardness in
Religion, so I render (...), which we call Will Worship; but that being a thing
of an ill Name, does not so well answer to the show of Wisdom; for what show of
Wisdom is there in doing an ill thing? This is therefore a readiness of Mind to
do any thing in Religion which men think pleasing to God, whether required by
him or not. So Hesychius expounds (...) by (...); and (...) by (...). And other
Greek Words of a like composition, do imply no more than a voluntary
inclination; as in (...), which Plato uses for a Plato Sym.
service out of good Will, and free Inclination: (...) is the same with (...)
and (...) in Xenophon: Xen. Cyr. Paed. 2.
And St. Augustine observes, that in his time, a Man that affected to be Rich,
was called Thelo-dives, and he that desired to be thought Wise Aug. Ep. 59.
Thelo-sapiens; so according to this Analogy, a Man that would be thought very
Religious, would then have been called Thelo-Religiosus; taking Religiosus in
the sense of Massurius Sabinus, A. G^ll. l. 4. c. 9.
and not of Nigidius Figulus: i. e. in a good, and not in a bad sense. And so
(...), is a desire of appearing more Religious than ordinary; which is not a
thing evil in it self, but depends on circumstances. The next is (...),
Humility, a Virtue so graceful, so becoming Mankind, with a respect to God and
to each other, that whatever makes a Show of that, does so of Wisdom too. The
third is (...), not sparing the Body, but using it with hardship to keep it
under. (...). Which Words have such a hardness in their construction, as has
caused great variety of interpretations; which I shall not repeat. That which
seems most natural, is, that Honor implies a regard to the Body and so it only
explains what was meant by (...); the sense being, not with any regard to the
Flesh for its satisfaction: which has a farther appearance of Wisdom, not
barely in the subjection of the Body to the Mind; but as it seems to argue a
Mind so elevated above the Body, that it has little or no regard to the
necessities of it.

2. Notwithstanding all this fair show of Wisdom, the Apostle does really
condemn these things as not pleasing to God, nor suitable to the Christian
Religion. For,

(1.) He says they have only a show of Wisdom. (...), says St. Chrysostom,
who certainly understood the force of the Words; the Show, says he, not the
Power, therefore not the Truth of Wisdom. Imaginem rationis, humanaeque
sapientiae, says St. Jerome. (...), says Theodoret; so that notwithstanding
the fair Show they make, they have no real Wisdom in them.

(2.) This new way of Worship, though it has such a specious show of Devotion
and Humility; yet it reflects on the Honor of Christ, as Mediator; and
therefore the Apostle charges the introducers of it, with not holding the Head.
If the Cerinthians V. 19.
did advance the Angels above Jesus Christ, they were so much the more guilty;
but if these Judaizers did only look on them as nearer and more agreeable
Mediators to us, yet therein they brought a great disparagement upon him, whose
Office it was to be the sole Mediator between God and Men. Mankind was very
excusable in comparison, for finding out other Mediators, before God had
declared to the World that he had appointed his Son to be our only Advocate and
Intercessor; but for those who own his Mediatorship, to make choice of others
besides Him, is to call in question the Wisdom of the Father, or the
Sufficiency, Interest or Kindness of the Son. For if God has appointed him for
this end, and he be able to go through his work, and willing to help all that
address themselves to him; what need to call in other Assistants? yea, what a
Dishonor is it for him to stand by, and Applications be made to them to do
that Office, which he was appointed alone to discharge?

(3.) These new inventions though never so plausible, are a disparagement to
the Gospel, as not containing sufficient, or at least not the most sublime and
perfect directions for Humility and Mortification. For our Blessed Savior was
so far from being remarkable for these affected singularities, that the freedom
and easiness of his conversation, was a great offense to those who understood
little or nothing of Religion beyond these things. The Son of Man came eating
and drinking, and they say, Behold a Man Gluttonous, and Matt. 12. 19.
a Wine-bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners. Not that he gave way to any
thing like Luxury, or Intemperance, who was the most exact pattern of all true
and real Virtues; but because they saw nothing extraordinary as to the severity
of his Life in these Matters, they looked on him but as one of the common sort
of men, making no appearance of more than usual Sanctity, as to eating and
drinking. And when John's Disciples who were bred up with greater austerity,
were really offended that Christ's Disciples did not fast as they did: our
Savior puts them off with a Parabolical Answer; Can the Children of the
Bride-chamber fast, as long as the Bridegroom is with Matt. 9. 12, 13.
them? which answer might puzzle them more, as not understanding why fasting
should be inconsistent with his corporal Presence; yet to let them see that he
did not look on Fasting, as a Duty unsuitable to his Religion, he tells them,
the Days would come, when his Disciples should have their times of Fasting. But
the Days will come when the Bridegroom shall be taken from them, and then shall
they fast. So that it is not Occasional or Anniversary Days of Fasting, which
are condemned here by the Apostle, as Will Worship, or neglecting the Body; but
the imposing a new and severer course of Life upon Christians, as a way of
greater perfection of Mortification, than what was required by Christ or his
Apostles. This is that which the Apostle calls being subject to Ordinances; and
living after the V. 20.
Commandments and Doctrines of Men. Theodoret observes that he does not mean
the Law by this, but the unseasonable Doctrine of these Seducers; and it is
evident from the foregoing part of the 20. v. Wherefore if ye be dead with
Christ from the rudiments of the World: i. e. if ye are freed from the Yoke of
the Law, what reason is there ye should submit to another, which depends only
on the Authority and invention of Men? But what then? Does S. Paul make it
unlawful to submit to any Orders or Rites appointed by the Church in which we
live? By no means. For neither does the Apostle speak of those who had lawful
Authority, but of Seducers; nor does he speak of things appointed merely for
Order and Decency; but of such things which are supposed by the Imposers to
have more of true Perfection and Sanctity in them; more Humility and
Mortification; and consequently to be more pleasing to God, than bare obedience
to the Precepts of Christ and his Apostles. Whoever introduce any such things
into the Christian Church, and maintain any such opinions of them, are justly
censured by the Apostle here, and fall under the condemnation of Seducers.

(4.) These things, whatsoever show of Wisdom and Humility they make, are
really the effects of Pride and Folly.

(1.) Of Pride: which appears,

1. By a great presumption of their great Skill and Knowledge in the Mysteries
of Religion, and of what is most pleasing to God; Intruding into V. 18.
those things which he has not seen, vainly puffed up by his fleshly mind. So
that here was a great outward appearance of Humility and Mortification; but
within nothing but Pride and Vanity. It has been long observed, that those who
strive to exceed others in the outward shows and appearances of Humility and
neglect of the Body, have been most liable to the Temptations of Sp ritual
Pride; i. e. to a high opinion of themselves, and a contempt of others, which
they have manifested by an invincible stiffness in maintaining their own
opinions; a readiness to impose them upon others; and impatience of
contradiction from any.

2. By an affectation of greater Humility, than appears in others. These
Seducers, we see, pretended to nothing more than Humility. Their Worship of
Angels was from Humility; their neglect of the Body from Humility too: they
made so much show of it, as gave reason to suspect Pride lay at the bottom. For
it is more real Humility to be contented to be thought Proud unjustly, than to
labor for such an opinion of more than ordinary Humility, as these Seducers
did.

(2.) Of Folly; in two things.

1. In placing the main of their Religion in things that would not bear the
weight of it, which the Apostle intimates in those Words, Which all are to
perish with the using: i. e. as the Greek Interpreters V. 22. Vid. Theod.
Theophyl.
explain it, the matters of eating and drinking are no such great things, that
so much ado should be made about them. For as our Savior says, Not Matt. 15.
11. 17.
that which goes into the Mouth defiles a Man; for it goes into the Belly,
and is cast out into the draught. And therefore says the Apostle, The Kingdom
of Romans 14. 17, 18.
God is not Meat and Drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy
Ghost; for he that in these things serves Christ, is acceptable to God, and
approved of Men.

2. In supposing the following their own Inventions to be more pleasing to God,
than the observing his own Commands. For this seems to be at the bottom of all;
these Seducers made no question, but they had found out ways much more pleasing
to God, than those which were in common esteem and practice in the Christian
Churches. So that which is called here (...), is by the Latins rendered in
Superstitione: i. e. in an opinion of pleasing God by some particular Rites of
their own; in making much of their Religion to lie in forbearing some things
and doing others, which God never required, and are made no parts of the
Christian Religion by Christ or his Apostles. So that here are two parts of the
Superstition here spoken of.

1. Forbearing some things as unlawful, which God never made unlawful by any
prohibition, Touch not, taste not, handle not. The root of their Superstition
did not lie, as some imagine, in supposing the things which they did forbear as
in themselves abominable, as some Heretics did; but in an opinion, that God
would be so much pleased with the mere forbearance of them, that those who
design to please God, were bound to abstain from them, although he had never
forbidden them. And there is a material difference between these three things.
(1.) Abstaining from things as in themselves unlawful to be used. (2.)
Preferring the Abstinence before the Use, on some particular Seasons and
Occasions. (3.) Making the forbearance of them as unlawful (though not
sorbidden) as necessary to the pleasing of God. There were such who did utterly
forbid the use of Marriage and Meats, of whom the Apostle speaks, 1 Timothy 4. 3.
And the Christian Church, as S. Augustine observes, does not fall under this
censure of the Apostle, when in some cases it prefers Abstinence from both.
Ille prohibet, says he, qui hoc malum esse dicit, non Aug. c. Faust. l. 30. c.
6.
qui huic bono, aliud melius anteponit. But yet there may be a Superstitious
Abstinence, without that Superstitious opinion; or else the Christian Church
had no reason to condemn the Abstinence of the Montanists, who, as Tertullian
pleads for them, utterly rejected that opinion. Neither was it merely Tert. de
Jej. c. 15.
because Montanus wanted Authority to make Laws of Abstinence. But Tertullian
acquaints us with other arguments against it, chiefly from the unsuitableness
of it to the design of Christianity. And to impose such Abstinence as necessary
to the pleasing God, is that which the Church condemned in Montanus; and the
believing it is a Superstitious opinion; though of another sort from that wh ch
made the Use of them in it self unlawful. For they did it upon an extravagant
fancy, that no living Creatures were of Gods making, but were produced by some
other powers in opposition to him; as appears by the Gnostics, the
Marcionists, the Manichees, and the En^ratitae. But the same reason could not
hold as to those Judaizing Christians, who believed the World and all living
Creatures were produced by the Power of God. For Irenaeus says, that the Iren.
l. 1. c. 26.
Ebionites did hold that God was the Maker of the World; and therein they
differed from the Cerinthians, as well as in some other opinions; yet these
Ebionites pretended to be Christians, and universally abstained from Flesh, as
Epiphanius says: not that they had Epiph. haer. 30. p. 139.
any reason to account Flesh abominable; but they had learnt from the Essens to
abstain from it, and thought it greater Sanctity so to do.

2. Their Superstition did lie in supposing that God would be mightily pleased
with their doing some things of their own invention, as the Worship of Angels
was; which was so far from being commanded by God in the Law of Moses, that
they had thence many arguments against it: but notwithstanding they thought
there was so much of Humility and Complement to God Almighty in it, that he
could not but be very much pleased with it. And when men lay a great weight of
Religion upon doing or forbearing things, neither commanded nor forbidden by
the Law of God, that is so far from being a pleasing Worship of God, that it
deserves no other name but that of Superstition and Will Worship; as they do
imply a show of Wisdom, without the Truth and Power of it.

But here arises the main difficulty; How shall we put a difference between
what is pleasing to God, and what is not; or between true Religion and
Superstition? For since the Apostle implies that some things may have a show of
Wisdom in them, i. e. may seem pleasing to God, which are not so; and other
things may be more pleasing to God, which do not make such a show of Wisdom to
Men; it seems to be a matter of as great difficulty as concernment to us, to
understand the just and true bounds between Religious and Superstitious Worship.

This is an enquiry of so great moment and consequence, for the easing our
minds of many trouble ome doubts and fears, and settling in them a true notion
of Religion; that I shall from hence apply my self to the consideration of the
true difference between the reasonable Worship of God, and Superstition.

Superstition in the general, is nothing else but an unpleasing Worship of God.
I do not speak of that Worship which relates to a false object; which is more
properly Idolatry; but when that Worship is ultimately referred to a true
Object, as in the Worship of Angels as Mediators, then it is Superstition too;
it being an undue way of giving Worship to the true God. I shall not trouble my
self with an enquiry into the Etymology of the words in Greek or Latin, it
being well observed by Aquinas, that in this matter we are not so much to Aq.
2. 2. q. 92.
observe the Etymology of Superstition, as the use of the Word. And that has
been different according to men's notions concerning Religion.

Those who believed no God at all, or at least no Providence, accounted all
Religion to be nothing but Superstition. And it is a weak and silly Apology a
late Commentator on Lucretius makes for his saying, so much mischief has been
done by Religion; Tan. Fabr. Not. p. 294.
by Religion, says he, he meant Superstition; for he accounted all Religion to
be nothing else but Superstition. And those in our Age, who can find no other
difference between them; but that one is allowed, and the other not; or one is
what we like, and Leviath. chapter 6. chapter 11.
the other what we dislike; do destroy any real difference between them; and
make only Religion a Superstition in fashion; and Superstition a Religion out
of fashion. Whereas if there be a God and Providence, there must be such a
thing as true Religion: i. e. there ought to be some Acts in us agreeable to
the Conceptions we have of the Divine Nature. For, His Majesty and Power
requires our Fear; not an amazing, confounding, unaccountable Fear, arising
from a perplexity and disorder of our imaginations; but a just, reasonable,
prudent Fear, springing from our most serious thoughts and deepest
consideration of things. For, if it be impossible for any thinking man to
satisfy himself in the train of Causes, but he must come to this thought at
last, that there is some Cause, whereof there is no former Cause, but is
Eternal; which is that we call God; then it is impossible if this man pursues
his own thoughts, but the first Consequence from hence will be, that if this
God be the first cause of all things, his Power and Majesty is so great, as to
command a due Reverence and Fear from us his Creatures. This is not such a Fear
as Men have in a storm, or when a sudden calamity seizes upon them, which
makes them at their wits end, and to run they know not whither for present
help; but it is a settled, calm, composed temper of mind; a Fear without
consternation; an Awe and Reverence of the Divine Majesty, without terror and
astonishment. For, as the mighty Power of God begets fear in us, so the
infinite Goodness and Wisdom of God, not only keep up men's minds from sinking
into slavish Fear, and horrible despair; but fills them with comfortable hopes,
and a patient and humble Trust and Confidence in his never-failing Providence.
And this is the Nature of true Religion in the Minds of Men.

But because it tends to the honor of our Maker, and the encouraging one
another to Acts of Piety and Devotion, that this inward sense of our Minds be
expressed by such external Actions as are agreeable thereto, from thence came
the necessity of the public Offices of Religion, wherein we offer up our
Prayers and Praises to the Divine Majesty in acknowledgment of our Dependence
upon him for what we have, or are, or hope for. And there is nothing in all
this, but what is highly just and reasonable, and this is true natural Religion.

But then we cannot deny, that there is too great a natural proneness in
Mankind to Superstition. For, when men cannot shake off the apprehension of a
Deity, and yet are conscious to themselves that they have offended him; the
very thoughts of him prove so uneasy to them, that they would be glad to
believe there were none at all, and give all the advantage to Atheistical
Objections which a willing mind can do: And as Plutarch observes of
Superstitious Men, they would be Atheists if they durst. But finding still an
inward dissatisfaction, and an impossibility of rooting out the fears of a
Deity; the next thing is, to think upon some ways to please him, and to
mitigate his displeasure against them. And we can hardly imagine any thing so
pompous and ceremonious, so mean and servile, so cruel and barbarous, so
ridiculous and foppish, but Mankind have made use of it to atone the anger of
their Gods. For, the first effect of Superstition, on Men's minds, was; that
they durst not make immediate Applications to the Supreme Being, as being too
great and powerful for them: therefore they pitched on some inferior Beings to
mediate, and to offer up their Devotions and Sacrifices to him, whom they
thought it too great presumption to approach. When thus Superstition in the
most proper sense of (...) had in a great measure supplanted true Religion in
the World; then it proceeded to find out such ways and methods of Worship, as
they thought would be most pleasing to these inferior Deities. They erected
Temples and Altars to them, and set out their Images with all the Art and
Splendour they were capable of; and upon extraordinary Occasions they were
carried with wonderful Pomp and Solemnity through the Streets, all Orders of
Men attending them with Supplications and Prayers and costly Sacrifices to
avert their Wrath and Displeasure. And they were not content with promiscuous
Sacrifices, but they studied by all possible means to find out what Sacrifices
would please them best; if they fancied it must be something very dear and
precious to them, they stuck not at offering up their very children to appease
them; and contrived by loud Music to stop their ears from hearing the hideous
cries of their Children while they were roasting in the flames. And in their
ordinary Sacrifices, they were extremely scrupulous, lest any spot or blemish,
or number, or unfit season, or so much as color should be displeasing to the
Gods they offered them to: some must have white and uneven; others black and
even sacrifices; some must have their Sacrifices offered at the rising, some at
the setting of the Sun; some must have one sort of Beasts, and some another;
and some no less than Man's flesh would satisfy; which inhumane Sacrifices, on
some occasions, did almost universally obtain, before the Christian Religion
prevailed in the World. But again, other Deities were presumed to be so nice
and squeamish, that nothing was to be offered them but Milk, and Wine, and
Honey, and some Fruits of the Earth. It were infinite to relate the Rites and
Customs of their Sacrifices, and all the ways they used to please their Gods,
and to find out whether they were pleased or not; by the posture, the tongue,
the entrails of their Beasts; by the flying of Birds, the feeding of Chickens,
the falling of a staff, the holes of a sieve, etc. and innumerable ways of
Divination, by which they flattered themselves that they understood the good
Will and Pleasure of their Gods, which did not so much satisfy their curiosity,
as fill them with perpetual fears, and oppress them with the horrible Bondage
of Superstition; which exalted almost every thing to the honor of a Deity, and
made themselves miserable by seeking to please them.

But although this were the deplorable state of Mankind, forsaken of God and
left to their own inventions; yet such is the weakness and folly of Men, that
when God himself had given a Law to the Israelites to regulate their Worship,
with as much condescension to their weakness, as the Wisdom of his Laws would
permit; yet so great was the Witchcraft of Superstition, that they were always
almost hankering after the Dotage of their neighbor Nations. And although they
often smarted severely for it; yet the rod was no sooner off, but they were
ready to return to their former Superstitious vanities, and were so obstinately
bent upon them, that nothing could move them; not their former experience; not
the unreasonableness of the thing; not the terrible denunciations of Gods heavy
judgments against them; till at last, when there was no remedy, the whole
People were carried into Captivity; from whence the greatest part never
returned, and their very memory is lost by a mixture with other Nations. Those
who returned, have been so wise ever since, as to abhor that provoking sin of
Idolatry; which their Ancestors suffered so much for: but by degrees they fell
into other kinds of Superstitions. For it was thought a mean thing among them
to keep to the Law; but the Traditions of their Elders were looked upon as
precious things; and happy was the Man that was strictest in the observance of
them. Their frequent Washings, their additional Fastings and Prayers, their
Garments, their Postures, their very Looks had such an appearance of Sanctity
above other Men's; that a man who kept only to the Law, was of no regard or
esteem for Piety and Devotion.

This was the state of Religion among the Jews when Christ appeared, who laid
open the foppery and hypocrisy of these great pretenders to extraordinary
Sanctity. He directed men to the love of God and their Neighbors, as the main
substantial parts of true Religion. And next to his making a propitiation for
the sins of Mankind by the Sacrifice of himself, his great end was to restore
true Religion to the World, which had been so long buried under the heap of
Superstitions. And there needed so great an Authority as his was, to assure
Mankind, that nothing was so pleasing and acceptable to God, as unaffected
Piety, and universal Goodness; which comprehends under it all the Duties of
Temperance, Righteousness and Charity. And it is one great Argument of the
Providence of God watching over his Church, that he has caused the Discourses
of our Blessed Savior to be preserved by the Writings of the Evangelists;
without which in all likelihood, the Christian Religion had been long since
lost in the World. For the Jewish Christians who corrupted Christianity, had
represented St. Peter as so favorable to them; and so misrepresented St. Paul;
that unless Christ's Doctrine had been preserved in his own words, and that by
the concurrent Testimony of different Writers, the Christian Religion had
preserved little more than its name in the World.

And yet with all this advantage, such was still the fondness of Mankind for
their own Inventions, that even under the Apostles eyes, most of the Churches
began to be tainted with these corruptions; partly by the Judaizing Christians;
and partly by the followers of Simon and Menander. But they all agreed in
something new and mysterious, and more pleasing to God, than the dull and
common way of Faith and Obedience. After the Apostles decease, the corruptions
still multiplied, and any new pretense to Revelations and Mysteries, especially
being joined with greater Abstinence and severity of Life, took wonderfully
among weak and injudicious Christians, and made them apt to despise the
Churches Devotions, as too cold and flat, and not having that Life and Spirit,
that Strictness and Austerity which appeared among the new pretenders. What
disturbance on this account did the Spirit of Montanus give to the Churches of
Phrygia, Galatia, and Cappadocia? The mere pretense to Revelation had never
done it, had it not been for the stricter Laws of Fasting and Mortification,
and greater Severity of Discipline than was used in the Catholic Church. It
was this which made Tertullian swallow the bait he had despised before; and the
force of all his Arguments against the Church is, we are stricter than you. But
notwithstanding all these pretenses, the Christian Church still kept it self
within its bounds, making nothing necessary to Salvation, but what Christ and
his Apostles had made so; yet recommending the Practice of Fasting, as there
were just Occasions, especially before the great solemnity of Easter; wherein
both the Sacraments were administered with more than ordinary Devotion, and the
Penitents reconciled to the Communion of the Church.

If we look at this day into the state of the Christian World; how great a part
of it is relapsed into almost Heathen Superstitions, in the Worship of Images,
and Saints, and Angels as Mediators? and no great difference in the outward
Solemnities and Processions, save that their Sacrifices are turned into a
Consecrated Wafer, which is carried in Procession, as the Heathen Gods were
wont to be. It is true, there are great pretenses to Will Worship, and
Humility, and neglecting the Body in several Orders of Men; and those are
looked on as ways of greater perfection, than living in the World, and doing
good in it. Which we have no reason to think agreeable to the Doctrine of
Christ or our Apostle here. But where there is not only Sanctity and Merit,
placed in such observations, but Supererogation too, they flatly contradict St
Paul; for if that be true, these things have far more than the show of Wisdom;
for what wiser thing can any man do, than not only to provide for his own
Salvation, but for others too?

In the Eastern Churches, the best part, I fear, of their remaining
Christianity, lies in the strict observing the Fasts and Feasts of the Church.
They mightily despise the Fasting practiced in the Roman Church, as not
deserving the name of Fasting, because they end it at noon, and allow Wine and
Fish for their repasts. Although it is said that of late the Greeks break the
strict Fast at noon; Mich. Nau. Eccl. Graec. Effig. p. 260. Bas. hom. de jejun.
Chris. hom. 6. ad Pop. Antioch.
but in St. Chrysostom. and St. Basils time they accounted it no Fast wherein they
did not totally abstain till night. The more Eastern Christians allow neither
Fish, nor Wine, nor Oil in their Lents, and they keep more in the Year than the
Latin Church V. Job. Ludolph. Hist. AEthipic. l. 3. c. 6. n. 8^. Thom. a Jesu
de Convers. omnium Gent. l. 7. c. 18. Cotovic. Itiner. Hierosolymit. and
Syriac. p. 207. Franc. Quaresm. Elucid. Terrae Sanctae l. 1. c. 53, 54, 55, 56,
57, 58. Eustrat. Zialouski de Eccles. Orient. Graec. p. 39. Metroph. Critopul.
c. 18. Haud scio, inquit Methodius Graecus (apud Mich. Nau. in Eccles. Graecae
effigy Dial. 13) unde factum sit ut vos Latini a reliquis Christianorum
Nationibus, sic in jejunando recesseritis, ut nulla vobis ne Maronitana quidem,
quae tota vestra est, consentiat. Jejunatis sabbato, feria 4. Non abstinetis ab
esu Carnium; pisces, and quibusdam in locis, lacticinia, quadragesimali tempore
comeditis, solvitis meridie jejunium, etc.


In the Church of England, which approaches nearest of any in the World to the
Primitive Church, the Duty of Fasting is recommended upon its true Grounds, not
as though there were any peculiar Sanctity or Merit in it, which are
Superstitious Conceits, but to keep the Body in Subjection to the Spirit. It
lays no snares upon the Consciences of Men; it gives no Countenance to
hypocritical pretenses to Fasting; but it sets before us the example and
practice of the Primitive Church, and according to the temper and Moderation
then used, leaves persons to judge of their own strength, occasions, times,
manner and degrees of Fasting; excepting the Fast on good Friday or the true
ANtepaschal Fast (which some kept longer than others) which Tertullian says,
was universally observed by the Christian De Jei. c. 2.
Church, as a necessary Fast, and had been so from the Apostles times; but as
to other times a greater liberty was allowed, Laxus ac liber modus abstinendi
Prudent. 1. Cath. hymn. post jejun. V. Tert. de jejun. c. 2. 13. Hier. ep. 54.
ad Marcel. Aug. c. Faust. Manich. l. 30. c. 5. ad Casul. Ep. 86. Epiph. in
Expos. fidei Cath. n. 23. Socr. l. 5. c. 22. Victor. Antioch. in Marc. 2.
Cassian. Coll. 21. c. 30.

Ponitur cunctis; neque nos severus
Terror impellit; sua quemque cogit velle Potestas.
Yet even this Church, that is so wise, so moderate, cannot escape the charge
of Will Worship and Superstition, for the Orders that are observed in it. But
wherein is it that we are liable to this charge? Do we make the Orders of the
Church any parts of our Religion? Or think that God is any otherwise displeased
with others violation of them, than as it argues a froward, restless,
unpeaceable Spirit? But what is it then? God, say they, has not commanded
these things, therefore they are Will Worship and Superstition.

This is an Objection, which for the honor of our Church I must remove, before
I proceed to what remains. The true Case among us is this, The Church appoints
such Orders to be observed in it, which have no express command in Scripture;
some utterly refuse them as unlawful, though no where forbidden in Scripture;
the Question is, Whether of these two sorts, those who practice according to
these Orders, or those who utterly refuse, are liable to the charge of
Will Worship and Superstition?

To clear this, we must state the notion of Will Worship and Superstition as
they are here used by the Apostle, and then apply it to the present Case.

(1.) Will Worship I have showed, is nothing but a forwardness to do something
that relates to the pleasing of God; and is said by the Apostle to have a show
of Wisdom, and therefore can be no more evil in it self, than Humility, or
neglecting the Body; but whether it be good or evil is to be determined by
circumstances.

(2.) Those circumstances which make it ill are, when men make those things a
part of their Religion, which God has neither commanded nor forbidden; and
think God is pleased with their mere doing or abstaining from doing them, and
this is true Superstition. For there are two things necessary to the Notion of
it.

1. That the matter about which it is conversant relate to the pleasing of God.
Superstition I grant, has been taken by Plutarch and others from him, for a
dreadful apprehension of the Deity; but that is rather the foundation of
Superstition, than the definition of it. For a Superstitious Man does both
think God to be angry without just cause, and beyond reason; and to be pleased
again without reason. If he thought God inexorable upon his Displeasure, he
must presently despair; but because he thinks he may be easily pleased again,
therefore he bethinks himself in what way he may best do it; and so devises
several ways of his own, and uses any means suggested by others, though never
so unreasonable in themselves, in hopes to please God by them. Thence Plutarch
mentions such Men's, (...), uncouth ways of Worship; and he observes, that at
the same time, (...), they flatter and reproach God; they think unworthily of
him, as of one that is (...) very easily provoked; and yet that he is (...), as
easily changed; and that is the reason why a Superstitious fear puts men upon
finding out any ways and methods to please him, though never so unreasonable;
for they looking upon God as a peevish, angry, humoursome Being, they have no
certain Rule to judge what will please him, and therefore follow their own
fancy and imagination about it.

2. That they be mistaken in their judgment concerning what they believe to be
pleasing to God, that is, that they judge that to be so, which really is not.
So Superstition is an excess or overdoing in the matter of Worship; that which
does modum legitimum cultus superstare and excedere, says Vossius; which
Etymology he thinks much better Voss. Etym. Cic. l. 1. de N. D.
than any other. Cicero says, that Religion is pius cultus, Superstition timor
inanis Deorum; i. e. one is a reasonable, the other an unreasonable Worship. So
A. Gellius says, it is inepta and importuna Religio; a foolish and troublesome
Religion. Festus applies it to those things which are done, praeter morem
Civitatis; against the Custom prescribed Fest v. Religios.
by Law. As those of the Church of Rome do, to things done against the commands
of the Church: and so not fasting upon Saturdays, and fasting upon Sundays are
both Superstitious in their account; but all the Trumpery of the Mass, and
Follies of their Worship are by no means Superstitious, because required by the
Church. Which however helps us with a good argument to prove that the Worship
of Images, and Saints, and Angels are required by their Church; or else by
their own confession they must be Superstitious. But their Divines Aq. 2. 2. q.
92. Art. 2. q. 98. Art. 3.
do all agree with Aquinas, that men may be guilty of Superstition in the
Worship of the true God; i. e. when men make choice of something unfit or
unreasonable to express their Worship of God. And Suarez Suarez de Rel. tr. 3.
l. 2. c. 1.
quotes Cajetan, as allowing this Text to be extended to all Superstitious
Worship not founded in right reason. And Cajetan upon the place says, that
although they have a show of Wisdom; yet not in any honor, says he, i. e.
they deserve no esteem, being only for the satisfying of the flesh: i. e. of a
carnal desire as to these external observations.

(3.) The Superstition here condemned, lay in the supposing God to be pleased
with the forbearance of lawful things; touch not, taste not, handle not. Which
if we understand either of Meats or Marriage, was a forbearance of things in
themselves lawful; but they supposed God would be far better pleased with their
forbearance of them. I do not say, it is Superstition for any man to abstain
from doing what he apprehends to be unlawful by virtue of a general command:
For that is a Moral Duty, and obedience to those places of Scripture which bid
us abstain from all kind and appearance of evil. But yet it is plain here was a
Negative Superstition in the forbearance of lawful things: And so it was in the
dispute between Christ and the Pharisees about healing on Matt. 12. 10. 12.
the Sabbath Day; they thought it unlawful: Christ declares it to be lawful to
do good on the Sabbath Days. Here was no positive observance on the Pharisees
part; Yet here was Superstition in them; and therefore the true notion of
Superstition does extend to the forbearance of things in themselves lawful as
displeasing to God.

But how shall we know, when such a forbearance is Superstitious?

By these Rules:

1. If such a forbearance be thought to bring some special honor to God. For
then, even Dr. Ames himself grants it to be Superstition, to abstain Fresh
Suit, p. 101.
from lawful things though accounted unlawful by the Persons who abstain; when
some singular service and honor is by that abstinence intended: For then he
grants it to be a kind of Ceremonious Worship. The question then is, when this
case happens; for our Abstinence from Popish or Mahumetan Superstitions, is not
any special Act of Service, or Honor to God. But if we lived where those Acts
of Worship were required by lawful Authority; and we refused to comply with
them, that would be a special Act of Honor and Worship to God; it being a
declaration of our Minds, that we thought God dishonored by such Acts, and
therefore durst not comply with them. It was once a great Question among the
Papists, whether they might lawfully come to our Churches, or not; and if not
to our Prayers and Sacraments, yet to our Sermons, to avoid the severe
Penalties of the Laws. And after great debate both by a Committee of the
Council of Trent, and afterward at Rome; it was resolved in the Negative, upon
this Reason, because in our Circumstances, it was signum distinctivum cultus, a
mark of distinction as to Religious Worship, and therefore it was an Act of
special honor and service to God to forbear. To abstain from pouring out Wine,
and throwing Incense in the fire, is in it self no Act of Worship; but when the
Heathen Emperors commanded the Christians to do it, in token of compliance
with their Religion; their abstaining then from it, was a singular Act of
Worship to God. So in the present Case, when men are required by lawful
Authority, to do things which in themselves are lawful, to testify their union
and conjunction with us in Religion; their refusal in this Case is a special
Act of Worship; and being without Ground, is nothing else but Superstition.

2. When men value and esteem themselves as more holy and more in the favor of
God on the account of such forbearance. As the Pharisees did on the account of
their Traditions, who believed that God had no such people upon Earth as they
were; and despised others who were far nearer to the Kingdom of God than
themselves, as mere Publicans and Sinners. And it is very natural to Mankind to
set a great value upon themselves, for the sake of their affected singularities
in Religion; and in a transport of pride and vanity, to tell God himself, as
the Pharisee did, That they are not like other Men: But this is a certain sign,
whatfoever they pretend, that they look on the forbearance of the things which
others do, as a part of Holiness; and if they do so, it is undoubtedly
Superstition. For, on this ground we charge the Papists with Superstition in
their Ceremonies, because they place holiness in them. It is true, they say
they are the Instruments to convey some degrees of holiness to them; but this
makes no material difference; for those who account themselves more in God's
esteem for the sake of such things, do attribute some real efficacy to such
distinctive Characters of themselves, as to the obtaining the favor of God.

3. When they forbear necessary Duties of Religion rather than comply with
others in lawful things, as Communion with the Church they live in, in Prayers
and Sacraments: which cannot be denied to be necessary Duties; but if men
resolve rather to forbear these, than to join in such Ceremonies and Prayers as
do accompany the performance of them, it is a sign they prefer the following
their own imaginations before the joining in Communion with the Church in the
most unquestionable Duties of Religion: As in the Case of the Encratitae of
old, who thought it unlawful to taste of Wine; and therefore refused to
communicate in the Eucharist, unless they might have it in Water alone. Was not
this a great Superstition in them, rather to forbear communicating with the
Church, than not to observe their own fancies in what they thought most
pleasing to God, as to the manner of doing it?

Now to apply this to our own Case.

We are often blamed for laying too great weight on the Ceremonies of this
Church. But certainly, never any Church laid less weight upon its own Orders,
supposing that it believes them to be just and reasonable. It places no
holiness, no merit, no efficacy in them, as to the obtaining the Grace and
Favor of God: It expects obedience only for Order and Peace-sake; It has
taken great care by Prefaces and Canons and Rubricks, to prevent any
misinterpretation of its intention and design.

But on the other side, those who dissent from us, lay so great weight on their
scruples, that they will rather hazard breaking a Church in pieces, ruining our
Religion by our differences, losing all the benefit of Communion with a Church,
whose Doctrine they approve in all the Duties of religious Worship; than they
will yield to the allowance of those circumstances of our Communion which our
Church requires. And now on which side the charge of Superstition more justly
lies, let all that are impartial judge.

So much I thought necessary on this Occasion to speak, in vindication of our
Church from this common imputation of Superstition, by those who so little
understand what it means.

Nothing now remains, but to make Application of all to our selves. You see how
much mischief the show of Wisdom was like to do in the Apostolical Churches;
let us all have a care of being deceived by it. It was long since observed by
Menander, That things which were like Truth were more easily believed by the
generality (...) Men.
of Mankind, than Truth it self. So I am afraid it is about Religion, which is
the Wisdomhere spoken of, that which makes a great show of it to the World, is
more apt to prevail among persons of weak and well disposed Minds than true
Wisdom. For the show of Wisdom strikes more upon the fancy and inclination of
such Persons, than sober, calm and well-weighed Religion; which seems dull and
flat to those who have more warmth and zeal than judgment and discretion. And I
do not at all question, but many of the corruptions of the Christian Church
came in, from an apprehended necessity of complying with the heat of some
over-zealous people; who were not contented with the plain and excellent
Religion of Jesus Christ; but they must, as they thought, heighten and improve
it, till they had mixed with it the freaks of Enthusiasm, or the dotages of
Superstition.

In the Church of Rome there is in many things a show of Wisdom, in
Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting the Body; And in some of our Sects,
that seem to abhor Will Worship so much, that for fear of it they will not give
civil respect to men; yet they pretend to show of Wisdom in Humility and
neglecting the Body, but after a different manner: others have a show of Wisdom
too in a wonderful, I had almost said, superstitious zeal, against what they
call Will Worship and Superstition. But what is to be done in this Case? How
shall we avoid being led aside by such a show of Wisdom, on every side? I shall
only lay down some Directions, and so conclude.

(1.) Fix a true Notion of God and the Christian Religion in your minds. If you
judge aright of the Divine Nature, it will ease your minds of many uneasy
thoughts, troublesome fears and superstitious fancies. He is not capable of
being flattered or deceived by us; God is neither taken with outward
appearances, nor is he pleased with any thing we do, merely because it is
displeasing to our selves, The righteous God loves righteousness; and he is
pleased best with the innocence, integrity and holiness of our hearts and
lives. And for the Christian Religion, take not your Notion of it from the
different and uncertain opinions of Men, but from the Doctrines of Christ and
his Apostles. Men do not read the Scriptures as they ought to do, with a design
to know their Religion by them; but to justify what they take to be Religion
from them. One would think it were impossible for any one that considered the
sayings of Christ or his Apostles, to place his Religion in being for or
against any particular Modes or Ceremonies of Worship; whereby he may so easily
see that it lies chiefly in an excellent temper of mind, holy, spiritual,
humble, calm, peaceable, charitable, and a suitableness of action to this
temper. This is so plain and easy to be understood, that he must read the New
Testament with a very ill mind, that does not find it out. And if you have
settled this Notion of true Religion, it will be a continual Touchstone about
you to judge of all Pretenders.

(2.) Set not an equal value on things that are good in order to other things,
that you do upon things that are good in themselves. For the one are but the
Instruments of Religion, the other are properly the Duties of it. He has
showed Mic. 6. 8.
thee, O man, what is good, viz. to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk
humbly with thy God. And this was spoken when very costly Sacrifices were
offered instead of it; no less than thousands, and ten thousands; yea the
firstborn, and the fruit of their Bodies. And therefore God sets a high value
on these Duties, and so ought we. No one that has any sense of Religion can
despise the immediate Duties of Divine Worship; it being a good Saying of
Pythagoras, mentioned by Cicero and Plutarch, that we are never better than
when we approach Plutarch de Superst. Cic. de Legib. l. 2. c. 9.
to God; or, as Cicero expresses it, when we do rebus Divinis operam dare, are
employed in the Duties of Divine Worship: But yet to do good is better than
Sacrifice, and to forgive an injury than the fat of Rams. It is a wise
Observation Porta Mosis p. 201.
of Maimonides, That the intention of the Law of God is to keep men within the
just Bounds of Virtue; but when men found a stronger inclination to one extreme
than to another, they made use of remedies proper to reduce themselves from
that extreme, by great severities toward themselves, by Watchings, and
extraordinary Fastings, and other hardships: But when Fools saw Wise men do
these things, they imagined presently that there was an Excellency in the
things themselves, and that if they did the same things, they should pass for
very good men, and be highly in the favor of God. Which, says he, is just
like an ignorant Fellow, who observing the Physicians prescribing Physic to
his Patients, and forbidding eating to them, and finding them to recover upon
it, should presently conclude, that surely it is the best way to live upon
Scammony and Aloes, and such like, and to keep himself with the same strictness
that was prescribed to the Sick; which instead of preventing a Disease, would
certainly bring one: so, says he, do those who use the remedies of diseased
minds in a state of health, they spoil a good constitution of their souls, and
make it uneasy and troublesome.

(3.) Judge of men's pretenses, not by their outward show and appearance, but by
the Spirit and Temper that goes along with them. This was the course the
Apostle here took; he regarded not their show of Wisdom and great appearance of
Humility and Mortification; but he pursued these things to their Fountainhead,
and there he found nothing but spiritual pride, and vanity of mind. We Ver. 18.
must not judge easily nor rashly concerning this; but where the evidence is
notorious, we have great reason to slight and contemn the most sanctimonious
appearance, i. e. if there be great uncharitableness and censoriousness toward
all who do not comply with them; great scorn and contempt of all other ways but
their own; great malice and spite against all who go about to oppose them;
where these are, whether in the Church of Rome, or elsewhere, whatever the show
of wisdom be, this wisdom descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual,
Jam. 3. 15. Ver. 17.
devilish. But the Wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable,
gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without
partiality, and without hypocrisy.

FINIS.

