SCRIPTURE AND TRADITION COMPARED; IN A SERMON Preached at Guild Hall Chapel,
November. 27. 1687.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. and Dean of St. Paul's.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1688.

Imprimatur,

Guil. Needham Rmo in Christo ac D. D. Wilhelmo Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domest.
Nov. 28. 1687.
THE PREFACE.
I Intend, God willing, to publish in a little time, a full Answer to J.S. his
Catholic Letters, so far as I am concerned in them. In the mean while, I
thought it not unfit to Print this Sermon I lately Preached, that I might give
a General View of Scripture and Tradition, as to the Way of conveying Matters
of Faith, before I come to the particular Debate with J.S. Wherein I do not
doubt, but I shall be able to show that we have ry good Grounds for the
Certainty of our Faith, and that they have none either as to Faith or
Tradition, as to the main Points in Controversy between us.

(...) nestly as he does to them? Must we think, as some do, that he uses these
Expressions as gentle Methods of Insinuation, and commends them for that, which
he would persuade them to? But this does not seem agreeable to the Apostles
simplicity and godly sincerity, 2 Cor. 1. 12.
which he elsewhere sets such a value upon. But it is far more probable that
hitherto they had been very orderly and steadfast: but Epaphras going to St.
Paul had informed him thoroughly of their condition, viz. That they were like a
Garrison closely besieged on all sides; and although hitherto they had held out
with great Courage, yet he did not know what earnest Solicitations, and fair
Promises, and tempting Motives might do with them, and therefore the Apostle
writes this Epistle to encourage them in their stedfastness, and to warn them
against Temptations. Which he does in such a manner, as shows,

2. That he had a more than ordinary Apprehension of the danger they were in.
And this I say, says he, lest any man should beguile you with enticing words,
v. 4. and beware lest any man spoil you with Philosophy and vain deceit, after
the traditions of men, after the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ,
v. 8. Let no man beguile you of your reward in a voluntary humility and
worshipping of Angels, etc. v. 18. All which expressions do imply, that he had
just reason to fear and to give them caution in time, that while they did yet
think that they stood, they should take heed lest they fall.

And this is that which the Apostle aims at in the words of the Text; As ye
have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him.

Receiving Christ Jesus the Lord, does not here relate to his Person, but to
his Authority, and to his Doctrine; so the Apostle himself explains it in the
next verse, rooted and built up in him, and established in the Faith, as ye
have been taught.

Walking in him is an Eastern way of speaking and supposes both an adhering to
that Faith they had then received, and living according to it, looking on
Christ and his Doctrine, as their only way to Heaven.

And as ye had received him, so walk ye in him, implies that the manner of
their receiving Christ and his Doctrine at first was different from that which
the false Apostles endeavored to bring in among them, and that they were bound
to keep close to that pure and Primitive Doctrine which they at first received.

From hence we may consider a double Obligation lying upon them.

1. To keep steadfast to that Faith which they first received, without being
seduced from it by the Arts of Deceivers, who were then busy among them.

2. To live according to it,; by making that Faith the Principle of a Christian
Life; and so walking in him, as they have received him.

1. As to the former, the Reasonableness of it cannot but appear from the
supposition here made, viz. that they had received Christ Jesus the Lord.

For, thereby they declared, that they received him as the Christ, i. e. as him
who was anointed of the Father to Teach and Instruct his Church; and therefore
they were bound to adhere to his Doctrine; there being no other, whom the
Father has sealed and appointed to declare his Will; Col. 2. 3.
and in him were hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

They received him as Christ Jesus, Col. 1. 14.
that is, they hoped for Redemption through his Blood, even the forgiveness of
sins. And if their hopes of Heaven depended upon his Mediation, they had the
greatest Reason to adhere only to him.

They received him as Christ Jesus the Lord, and therefore they ought to submit
to his Authority, to obey his Commands, and to observe his Institutions, and in
all Circumstances of Life to keep steadfast to the Doctrine which he delivered.

But here arises the great Difficulty, how they should know by any Certain
Rule, what was the true and genuine Doctrine of Christ, which himself
delivered? For,

1. The false Teachers among them pretended to deliver the true Doctrine of
Christ as well as the Apostles.

2. That which they at first received was no certain Rule. For the false
Teachers might have been before them. And first Possession gives no Title in
Religion.

3. The Apostle does not put the whole Trial merely upon their Judgments or
Memories, or Capacities; viz. What they thought, or remembered was at first
taught them for the Doctrine of Christ.

For, it was very possible for them to have mistaken, or to have mis-remembred,
what was at first delivered.

Nothing can be more weak than to imagine that the Judgments of People in
matters of Faith, must be formed according to the skill and excellency of their
Teachers. For the hearers of Christ himself; although he spoke as never Man
spoke, yet did very often mistake his meaning. And at one time so remarkably,
that although he took care to rectify their misapprehension, yet it is said,
John 6. 66.
From that time many of his Disciples went back and walked no more with him. So
that the highest infallibility in the Teachers, does not prevent the
possibility, or the danger of mistaking in the hearers. And whatsoever any
vainly pretend, nothing can do it, but Transfusing the Spirit of Infallibility
into all.

If we look over the Apostolical Churches while they were under the Care and
Conduct of an Infallible Spirit; yet this did not prevent their running into
great errors and mistakes, as appears by the Account we have of them, given by
that Spirit which cannot deceive in the Apostolical Writings.

In the Church of Rome it self, even at that time, when its Faith was spoken of
throughout the World, Romans 1. 8.
yet there were dissensions and differences there, and such as were contrary to
the Doctrine which was delivered. And St. Paul bids them to mark such which
caused them; 16. 17.
he does not say, it was impossible for them to introduce any thing contrary to
the Doctrine which they had learned by Tradition from the Apostles; but he not
only supposes it very possible, but he bids them have a particular Eye to them,
lest they should be deceived by them.

The Church of Corinth was planted by Paul, and watered by Apollos; and there
were Disciples of Cephas and of Christ himself. And yet in the midst of so many
Infallible Teachers, they had like to have lost all their Faith; as one of them
tells them. 1 Cor. 15.
How say some among you there is no Resurrection of the dead? 12. 14.
And if Christ be not risen, then is our Preaching vain, and your Faith is also
vain. Could not they remember to day what was taught them yesterday, and so
what the Apostles at first preached to them?

The Churches of Galatia had such an opinion of St. Paul, Gal. 4. 14.
upon his first preaching the Gospel among them, that they received him as an
Angel of God, even as Christ Jesus; yet presently after he says, am I
therefore become your Enemy beause I tell you the Truth? 16.
What! Of an Angel of God, or of one received as Christ Jesus, to become their
Enemy, and that upon the most unjustifiable account, because he told them the
Truth! But, where truth can make Enemies, errors may easily gain Friends. And
so we find it was in the Apostolical Churches, even under the Conduct and
Teaching of the Apostles.

The Colossians were not yet so far gone; but they were in such danger, that
the Apostle writes this Epistle with great concernment for them. He tells them
v. 1. he had a sharp Conflict in his own mind about them. Chapter 1. v. 7. ^^ 12.
They had not yet seen his Face in the Flesh, being converted by some sent by
him, of whom Epaphras is most taken notice of; but he was present with them in
Spirit, v. 5. i. e. He was deeply affected with their Condition; for he
understood the Designs and Artifices of the Seducers among them. He knew what
fair and plausible pretenses they had; viz. that they went about not to
undermine Christianity, but to advance it, by taking in some Jewish Customs,
and some Gentile Observances, and Modes of Worship which might easily be
Accommodated to the Christian Doctrine; and so a great deal of the Ammosities
both of the Jews and Heathens would be removed; and Christianity would thereby
gain more Friends, and meet with fewer Enemies.

The Apostle finding how necessary it was at this time, if possible, to keep
them Steadfast in the Faith,

1. He assures them, that the Christian Doctrine was of it self so sufficient
for the good of Mankind, that it needed no Additions, either from the Law of
Moses, or the Philosophy of the Gentiles, which might introduce several things,
with a specious Appearance of Wisdom, Humility and Mortification; but they
ought to be assured, that from Christ they had all that was necessary or useful
for Salvation; v. 3.
For in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge.

2. That this Doctrine was at first truly delivered to them, and they ought to
be steadfast in it; which is the design of the Text.

But they might object, that Epaphras was no Apostle of Christ himself; and if
he were, yet there were many Apostles, and the false Apostles pretended to be
true ones; and although St. Paul interposed his Authority; yet he was but one,
and the Iudaizers would not yield to it, but were ready to suggest, that the
other Apostles were more favorable to the Jewish Customs than he; and
therefore it was necessary some more general and common Rule be found out,
whereby to distinguish the Original and Genuine Doctrine of Christ from that of
Pretenders and Seducers.

The clearing of this is in it self a matter of great consequence; and not only
was to those of that Age, but is so in every Age of the Christian Church, where
the same Question may be put: What was the true Primitive Doctrine of Christ;
and by what means may we come to it? which concerns us this day as well as them.

And the Answer lay in two particulars, which I shall endeavor to clear.

1. (...) the Apostles did in common deliver to (...) by them, was the Genuine
Doctrine (...).

2. That which they have left in their Writings, after it came to be contested
which was the true Doctrine of Christ.

3. That which the Apostles did in common deliver to the Churches planted by
them. For, we have all the reason in the World to believe, that the Apostles
delivered one and the same Faith to all the Churches; having the same
Infallible Spirit to direct them. There was no need for them to meet together
before their dispersion, and to agree upon some common Articles of Faith,
Russia. in Symbol.
as Russinus imagins, lest they should differ from each other; For how could
they differ, Joh, 16. 13.
who had the same Spirit of Truth to lead them into all Truth? And we find
nothing like a Combination among the Apostles, as to matters of Doctrine: And
if there had been, it would have rendered the Faith they delivered more
suspicious, in that they durst not trust particular Persons with delivery of
it, without an antecedent Confederacy among themselves, which would have (...)
cerning him; and the Disciples when they first heard him were amazed; Acts 9.
13 21.
after this, he took a course by himself, and did not go up to Jerusalem to the
College of Apostles there resident, Gal. 1. 17.
but went into Arabia; so that, if any one might be thought to set up another
Doctrine, it was he; but he was so far from it, that he established and
confirmed the truth of what they delivered, and was very successful in his
Apostleship in all places. And when there had been some whispers concerning
him, as though he proceeded not in the same way with the rest, he went up to
Jerusalem, and there upon full examination, James and Cephas, 2. 9.
and John, who were the leading Apostles, gave him the right hand of
Fellowship; in token of their full consent in the same Faith.

2. The truth of the Gospel was the more plainly discovered.

All this while, the Apostles only preached and delivered their Doctrine to the
several Churches by verbal Instructions; but after these had been received in
the hearts of such multitudes, that there could be no suspicion that a false
Representation of Christ's Doctrine or Actions could be received by those
Churches, then the Wise Providence of God took care for Posterity, and employed
several Persons in distant Places and Times to write the History of our
Savior. And there was this advantage to the Church that the Gospels were
written no sooner. For all the Churches planted by the Apostles, were then made
Judges whether the Gospels written were agreeable to the Doctrine which the
Apostles had taught; and if not, there would have been just reason to have
questioned either the Truth of what had been taught them, or what was delivered
in the Gospels.

But when they found the main to be fully consonant to what they had been
taught, the Testimony of every one of these Churches did show the concurrence
of all the Apostles, as to the Doctrine contained in the several Gospels.

And that which adds to the strength of this proof is, that when the true
Gospels were written, there were several false and counterfeit Gospels
dispersed abroad, under the Names of the Apostles themselves. As of St. Peter
St. Thomas, Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 25.
St. Matthias, and others; as Eusebius informs us; and as we have the genuine
Acts of the Apostles, so there were the pretended Acts of Paul, of Andrew and
John, and the other Apostles. How came these to be rejected, and the other to
be carefully received? Here lies the true Advantage of Original Tradition
before the written Gospels, that by it the several Churches were enabled to
pass a true judgment concerning them when they came to be dispersed among them.
For they could presently tell, whether what they read were agreeable to what
they had heard and received from the Apostles. As suppose the Gospel of St.
Matthew being published in Judea, were carried into Mesopotamia or Persia,
where many Christian Churches were very early planted; these being thoroughly
instructed by the Apostles in all things relating to the Life, Death,
Resurrection and Doctrine of Christ, could presently judge whether St. Matthews
Gospel agreed with what they had heard or not, and the like holds as to all the
Churches in the Roman Empire. So that the Consent of the Churches so soon,
while the memory of the Apostles Doctrine was so fresh in their minds, is in
effect the consent of all the Apostles who taught them.

And this is very different from the case of particular Persons in some
Churches, who might mistake or forget what was taught; for this is a concurrent
testimony of all the Apostolical Churches, who could not agree to approve an
error in the Gospels contrary to the Faith delivered to them. And that while
some of the Apostles were still living. For the other Gospels were received and
approved, before St. John wrote his.

The case had been far otherwise, if no Gospels had been written in that Age;
for then it might have been suspected, that either the Impressions of the first
Teachers were worn out, or they had been by degrees altered from their first
Apprehensions by the cunning craftiness of those who lay in wait to deceive
them.

After the decease of the Apostles, the common Tradition of the Apostolical
Churches was useful in these cases;

1. To convey down the Authentic Writings of the Apostles or Evangelists,
which were delivered to any of them.

2. To bear Testimony against any pretended Writings, which were not first
received by the Apostolical Churches to which they were said to be written. For
there can be no Negative Testimony of more force than that; it being improbable
to the utmost degree that such a Church should not know, or not make known any
true Apostolical Writings.

3. To overthrow any pretense to a secret Tradition from the Apostles different
from what was seen in the Apostolical Writings. Iren. l. 3. c. 3. 4.
And to this purpose Irenaeus and Tertullian make very good use of the
Tradition of the Apostolical Churches against the pretenders to such a
Tradition, Tertul. de Praescript. Haer.
which those Churches were not acquainted with.

But they agree that the Apostles committed the same Doctrine to Writing which
they preached, and that it might be a Foundation and Pillar of Faith; that this
Doctrine was contained in the four Gospels; and that the Apostolical Churches
did receive them from those who first wrote them, and that within the compass
of the Apostolical Age.

It was therefore most agreeable to the Infinite Wisdom of God in providing for
a constant Establishment of the Faith of his Church in all Ages, neither to
permit the Gospels to be written till the Churches were planted, nor to be put
off to another Generation. For, then it would have been plausibly objected; if
these things are true, why were they not recorded, when there were Persons
living who were best able to have either proved, or confuted them? Then we
might have been satisfied one way or other; but now the Jews are dead, and the
Apostles are dead; and although there are many left who believe their Doctrine,
yet this can never reach to the Testimony of those who saw and heard the things
themselves, or whose Doctrine was attested by those who did so. And this is now
the mighty Advantage of the Church ever since that the things concerning Christ
were written by such Persons. With what another kind of Authority do those
words command our Assent, 1 John 1, 2, 3.
That which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen
with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the
Word of Life; For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear
witness, and show unto you that Eternal Life, which was with the Father, and
was manifest unto us, that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you;
then if all the Testimony concerning Christ were to be resolved into those who
heard some say, that others told them, they had it from such, who saw those who
conversed with them who saw Christ in the Flesh? At such a distance the
Authority of a Testimony is extremely lessened; which is not like a River which
grows greater by running; but like a Mineral Water which loses its strength by
being carried too far. We find in the time of Papias who lived but in the
second Century, the Authority of bare Tradition was mightily sunk; Eusebius. Hist
l. 3. c. 39.
For, Eusebius says, he conversed with the Disciples of our Lord and his
Apostles, he says of himself, that he went up and down to them to get what he
could from them, having a greater esteem of what he could learn from them than
of what was written. And what Advantage did this bring to the Church? It
brought some idle opinions into reputation, says Eusebius; for afterward they
thought it enough to fix them upon Papias. But how was it possible for him to
mistake? Eusebius says, that being a Man of mean capacity, he might easily
misunderstand the meaning of what was spoken. But if Tradition might fail after
such a manner so near the Apostles times; then we must be assured of the
Capacity as well as Integrity of those of every Age through whom a Tradition
passed, or else they might deceive, or be deceived about it.

But God was pleased to provide better for the security of our Faith, by
causing the Gospels to be written either by the Apostles themselves, as St.
Matthew and St. John, or by the Disciples of the chief Apostles, while the
others were surviving, as St. Mark and St. Luke; and the latter gives this
account of his undertaking to write it, Luke 1. 4.
viz. That thou mighest know the certainty of those things wherein thou have
been instructed. His instruction was by an Oral Tradition; but that it seems
wanted something to strengthen and confirm it; and that was by St. Lukes
writing his Gospel. How could they add any assurance to him, if all the ground
of his certainty were to be taken from Tradition? St. Luke thought it necessary
then, that those things which concerned the Life and Doctrine of Christ should
be put into Writing, that they might be more certainly conveyed; and that while
they had the Testimony of those, who were eyewitnesses and Ministers of the
Word.

2. And so I come to the second Rule of discerning the Primitive Doctrine of
Christ; viz. The Writings of the Apostles, when matters of Doctrine came to be
contested, were the Infallible Rule, whereby they were to judge, which was the
true and genuine Doctrine of Christ.

There are some who pretend, that the Apostles Writings were merely Accidental
and Occasional things, but that the main design was to lodge the great
Assurance of the Doctrine of Christ in Tradition from one to another; and what
they wrote was not to make any Rule of Faith, but only to give some good Advice
to those Churches they wrote to.

But I shall now prove that the Writings of the Apostles were intended by the
Holy Ghost to be a standing Rule, whereby the Church was to judge which was the
true and genuine Doctrine of Christ.

1. From the Reasons and Occasions of writing the Books of the New Testament.

1. As to the Gospels, we must distinguish the General Reason of writing them,
from the particular Occasions as to the several Gospels. The General Reason is
to be drawn from the Divine Wisdom which inspired and guided them; the
particular Occasions relate to the circumstances of writing them.

The General Reason is that which Irenaeus gives, I^^n. l. 3. c. 1.
viz. That the Gospel which they had first preached, was by the Will of God put
into Writing, that it might be a Foundation and Pillar of our Faith. Not merely
to keep up the Remembrance of it, which Fevardentius yields, and thereby
overthrows the Infallibility of Oral Tradition; but that so it may be a certain
Rule of Faith to all Ages. The Evangelists says St. Augustine, Aug. de Con.
^ers. Evang. l. 1. c. 54.
were but Christ's Hands, which himself as the Head, directed in writing the
Gospels, and therefore we are to look on the Gospels as his own Handwriting.
The Holy Ghost, says he, directed the Minds of the Evangelists, l. 2. c. 53.
as to the order and manner of their Writing. Which varied according to the
particular Occasions, but yet were all subservient to the General Reason.

St. Matthew wrote the first Gospel, Eusebius Hist. l. 3. c. 2.
says Eusebius, to the Jews to whom he had preached, because going into other
parts he would supply the want of his Presence among them by his Writing. What
need this, if Tradition were a certain and infallible way of conveying the
Doctrine of Christ? St. Chrysostom says, (...)
the Jewish Christians desired him to put into Writing what they had heard him
Preach. Did not they understand the force of Tradition better? Or why should
St. Matthew put them out of an Infallible Way? The Authority of the Imperfect
Work on St. Matthew says, (...). in Mat. in Pr^^ogo.
they desired him to write his Gospel, that where ever they went they might
carry an Account of their Faith with them. Clemens Alexandrinus, says, the
occasion of writing St. Marks Gospel was, Eusebius. l. 2. c. 15.
that the people were not satisfied with an unwritten delivery of the Holy
Doctrine, and therefore importuned Mark, who was the Disciple of St. Peter,
that he would leave a Monument of his Doctrine in Writing; which St. Peter
understanding by Revelation, approved and confirmed his Gospel for the use of
the Churches. Origin says, he wrote it according to St. Peter's directions.
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 25.
Epiphanius says, by his Authority, Athanasius says, it was dictated by him
at Rome. Epiphan. Haer. 51. Athanas. in Synopsi. p. 155.


It seems that Peter himself did not think fit to leave the Doctrine of Christ
to an Oral Tradition, even at Rome, but Irenaeus thinks it was written after
St. Peter's decease, T^t^l. c. Marc. l. 4. c. 5.
who therein differs from the rest, and shows how uncertain mere Tradition is.
Hieron. de Script. Eccles.
Tertullian says, St. Marks Gospel was attributed to St. Peter, and St. Lukes
to St. Paul. St. Ierom mentions the Opinion of some, that when St. Paul says
according to my Gospel, he means that of St. Luke.

But St. Luke himself plainly gives an Account of the occasion of his Writing.
Ambros. in Luc.
St. Ambrose thinks by those who had taken in hand to write of those things
which were firmly believed among us, Luke 1. 1.
he means the Authors of the counterfeit Gospels, as that of the Twelve
Apostles and St. Matthias. But we have no evidence that these were older than
St. Luke; his meaning is, that in those parts where he was, there were some who
did undertake to give an Account of the Life and Actions of Christ, who wanted
the Advantages which he had; having had great opportunities of knowing
circumstances from the Eyewitnesses; and therefore he set himself to give an
exact Relation of them, that not only Theophilus, Epiph. Haer. 51.
but every one that answers his name might know the certainty of those things
wherein they had been instructed. But, did not they know the certainty of these
things by the Apostles Preaching? Yes, but the things they heard might slip out
of their Memories; and to prevent this, says Theophylact, St. Luke wrote his
Gospel, Theophyl. in Luc.
that they might retain these things with greater certainty. And words that are
only spoken are more easily misunderstood; Maldonat. Com. in Evang. prol.
which Maldonat assigns, as one great Reason of the Evangelists writing their
several Gospels.

St. John likewise gives an account himself of the Reason of his Writing; and
that the greatest imaginable. But these are written that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, Joh. 20. 31.
the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life through his Name. Why
written that ye might believe? Did the Apostle in his old Age mistrust the
understandings or the Memories of Christians? Was not the Apostles Teaching
sufficient to keep up the Principles of the Christian Faith in the hearts of
the people; no, not while St. John himself was yet living? He had certainly a
very mean Opinion of Tradition, that thought it necessary for him to write that
they might believe that Jesus is the Son of God. For there was no point of
Faith more necessary than this, which was required of all Persons to be owned
before Baptism.

Yet for all this, and whatever else can be said, St. John thought it necessary
that these things be written that they might believe.

He lived the longest of any of the Apostles, and therefore saw how little
Tradition was to be trusted; for it was already corrupted in so weighty a point
as the Divinity of Christ.

Cerinthus and his Followers allowed the general Tradition of the Church, that
Jesus was the Son of God; but then they gave their own sense of it, by
extraordinary Favor and Adoption. Hierom. Proem. in Matthew. De Script. Eccles.
And from hence the Fathers agree that St. John took occasion to write his
Divine Gospel, to clear this Fundamental point of the Christian Faith.

And withal observing that the other Evangelists insisted chiefly on the
Actions of Christ for one year, Epiph. H^. 51.
viz. after John's Imprisonment he resumes the whole matter, Chrysostom. hom. 1. in
Matthew.
and adds those things which were omitted by the rest; Eusebius. l. 3. c. 24.
that so the Church might be furnished with a full Relation of all that was
necessary to complete and establish the Faith of Christians.

2. As to the Epistles.

The first Epistle we read of in the Christian Church, (and in probability the
first writing in the New Testament) was the Decretal Epistle of the Council of
Jerusalem. Act. 15. 23.


What should make the Apostles put these Decrees into Writing? They were very
short, and concerned the practices of Men, and withal were sent by Barnabas and
Paul, and Judas, and Silas. Were not these sufficient to deliver the Apostles
sense to the Churches, without Letters from them? What a pitiful thing did they
take Oral Tradition to be, if they thought such Men could not by it give full
satisfaction to the Churches of Syria and Cilicia, unless they sent it under
their hands?

The Epistle to the Romans was written by St. Paul on purpose to clear some
main points of the Christian Doctrine, which were then warmly disputed between
the Jews and the Christians, and between the Judaizing Christians and others,
as about Justification, Rejection of the Jews, the difference of Meats, etc.
And St. Paul took very needless pains in writing that excellent Epistle, if he
knew of Christ's appointing a Judge of Controversies there; or if he thought
Writing were not a certain way to make a Rule of Faith, whereby they were to
judge in those matters.

The first Epistle to the Corinthians was written not merely to reprove their
Factions and Disorders; but to direct them, and to establish and prove the
Faith of the Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. 2.
which was then contested among them. The Epistle was sent by Stephanus and
Fortunatus, who could have carried the Apostles sense without his Writing; but
there are many weighty things, besides the particular occasions which are of
lasting concernment to the Church in all Ages; as there are likewise in his
second Epistle to them.

The Epistle to the Galatians was written on occasion of one of the greatest
points of controversy at that time, viz. the Use and Obligation of the Law of
Moses. And St. Paul sound by sad experience among them, that it was very
possible for those who had the best Instructions, either to forget them, or to
grow out of Love with them, and to be fond of a change; else he would never
have said, Gal. 3. 1.
O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you that ye should not obey the Truth?
And I marvel that ye are so soon removed from him that called you into the
Grace of Christ into another Gospel, 1. 6.
How was it indeed possible for them to be removed, and to be soon removed, who
had received the Faith by the Delivery of St. Paul himself? Then, for all that
I can see, human Nature taken with all its Advantages and Motives, and
Evidences, is a very sallible thing; and if then it might be deceived, and that
so easily and grossly; then much more in any following Age of the Church; unless
human Nature be mightily changed for the better, since the Apostles times; or
any Teachers since be more effectual, than the Apostles, 1 Cor. 15. 10.
and especially than St. Paul, who labored more abundantly than they all.

The Epistle to the Ephesians, though written upon a general Argument, yet does
suppose that they were in continual danger of being deceived; Ephesians. 4. 14.
and tossed up and down, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine by the
sleight of Men, and cunning craftiness whereby they lie in wait to deceive.

And therefore he advises them to be upon their guard, and to have their Armor
about them, and one choice part of it, 6. 17.
is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.

The Philippians were assaulted by a rude, violent, headstrong Faction of
Judaizers; Phil. 3. 2.
which the Apostle bids them to beware of; and writes his Epistle to them for
that purpose, and he exhorts them to stand fast in one Spirit, 1. 27.
with one mind striving together for the Faith of the Gospel.

In the second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and in both Epistles to Timothy, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3.
he gives notice of a great Defection from the Christian Faith; he describes
the manner of it, that it shall be with signs and lying words, and with all
deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them that perish, 10.
because they received not the love of the truth; 1 Timothy 4. 2, 3.
that they shall speak lies in hypocrisy, and forbid to marry, and command to
abstain from meats, 2 Timothy 3. 1. 5.
being evil men, having a form of godliness, and denying the power of it. I
meddle not now with the time when this Apostasy began; but from hence, it is
evident that St. Paul supposed, that those who at first received the Christian
Faith by Tradition from the Apostles themselves, might notwithstanding through
their own weakness and folly, and the Artifices of Deceivers be drawn from it;
and that to prevent such mischievous consequences, he knew no better means than
a Written Rule, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17.
which he tells Timothy was able to make him wise to Salvation; and to make the
Man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished to every good Work.

And to name no more, the Colossians were set upon by some who thought to
refine Christianity; or at least to make it more passable in the World, and
therefore would have introduced into it some Rites of the Jews, some
Austerities of the Gentiles, some ways of Worship which would recommend them to
their Adversaries; and upon this occasion he writes this Epistle to them to
convince them that Christianity alone was far beyond any mixtures of the
Fancies or Traditions of men, and therefore he could give them no better
Advice, than as they had first received the Doctrine of Christ to continue in
it, or in the words of the Text, As they had received Christ Jesus the Lord so
to walk in him.

The design of what I have said is, that although the Gospels and Epistles were
written upon particular occasions; yet those occasions were so great and
considerable; and the Assistance of the Holy Ghost did so direct the Hands and
Pens of the Evangelists and Apostles in writing them, that what they have
therein delivered contains a complete Rule of the true and genuine Faith, as it
was at first delivered to the Church.

But against this, it is objected, that St. Paul himself charged the
Thessalonians to stand fast and hold the Traditions which they have been taught
either by word or by his Epistles. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.
From whence it appears, that there were other Traditions to be held, that were
not written.

The force of all this will be taken away, if we consider when that Epistle was
written; viz. one of the first which St. Paul wrote, and soon after the former
Epistle to the Thessalonians; which was some time before St. Lukes Gospel,
which was first received in the Churches of Greece planted by St. Paul.
Therefore all the proper Doctrine of Christ himself, and all that relates to
his Life and Actions were then but Traditions among them; and therefore St.
Paul had great Reason then to require them to stand fast to the Traditions they
had been taught; i. e. to the Doctrine of Christ they had received in that
manner.

But it is urged, Bell. de verbo. l. 4. c. 5.
that he mentions before, something he had said about Antichrists coming when
he was with them, v. 5.

If this be allowed, it will be more against than for Tradition. For, what is
become of that Tradition? If it be lost, then it follows that Tradition is no
Infallible Way of conveyence; and therefore we have more Reason to adhere to a
written word.

2. Which leads us to the second Reason from which I designed to prove, that
there ought to be a written Rule for discerning true primitive Christianity;
and that is from the notorious uncertainty of mere Tradition. I say, notorious,
because there never was any Trial made of it, but it failed, even when it had
the greatest Advantages.

I might insist upon the Tradition of the first Ages of the World; when men's
Lives were so long, and the principles of the Natural Religion so few; and yet
both before and after the Flood, mankind was strangely degenerated from them.

I might insist on many instances in the first Ages of the Christian Church; so
many, that scarce one can be produced wherein they pleaded mere Tradition, but
they were mistaken in it; As about the Millennium, the Age of Christ, the time
of Easter (on one side or other) the Communicating Infants. Aug. de Peccat
Meritis. l. 1. c. 4.
For St. Augustine quotes Apostolical Tradition for it.

But I shall wave all these, and only mention a very necessary and important
thing, which was a long time trusted to Tradition, and yet they differed so
much about it, as evidently proved, that mere Tradition was no Infallible Means
of conveyance. And that is about the Apostles Creed which was to be repeated by
all that were to be Baptized.

We have many plain Testimonies to prove, that this was not to be written; but
to be conveyed from one to another, by an Oral Tradition; In Symbolo Fidei and
Sp^i nostrae, quod ad Apostolis traditum, non scribitur in Charta and
Atramento, sid in tabulis cordis carnalibus. Hieron. ad Pammaclu: advers.
Errores Joh. Hierosol.
St. Hierom, Nec ut eadem verba Symboli teneatis, ullo modo debetis scribere,
sed audiendo perdisctre; nec cum didic^ritis scribere, sed memoria semper
tenere and recolere. August. de Diversis Sermon. 75.
St. Augustine, Iacirco denique haec non scribi Chartulis and membronis, sid
requiri credentium cordibus tradiderunt, ut certum esset haec neminem ex
lectione, quae interdum (...) ad infideles solet, sed ex. Apostolorum
traditione didicisse. Ruffinus in Symbol.
Ruffinus all affirm it.

And the Creed was commonly then called Tetul de Prascrip. c. 12, 13, 14, 21.
De Virgin. V^l. c. 1. Adv^s. Pra^^am. c. 2. August. Some. 59. 186. 213. 215.
Retract. l. 2. c. 3. En^i^i^. de Fide, n. 15. De Symbol. ad Ca^^c^. R^ffin. in
^^oem.
the Rule of Faith; which showed that they looked on all the Articles therein
contained, as the standard of necessary points.

And yet there is a plain and considerable difference in the Ancient Creeds;
some Articles being in some which were not in others; although we have Reason
to believe the necessary points were at first the same in all. Or else the
several Churches must have different Rules of Faith.

The Church of Jerusalem was called Theod. l. 5. c. 9.
the Mother of all Churches by the General Council of Constantinople; and in
the Creed there delivered to the Catechumens. Cyrill. (...). 11.
St. Cyril mentions the Eternal Generation of the Son before all Worlds; and so
does Theodo. l. 1. c. 12.
Eusebius at Caesarea in the Creed, which he says, he learnt at his Baptism,
which was long before the Nicene Creed. Cassian de (...). l. 6. c. 3, 4.
Cassian makes it a part of that Creed which the Apostles delivered to the
Church, and was particularly received in the Church of Antioch.

But no such thing was delivered in the Western Creeds as far as now appears,
by what St. Augustine, Ruffinus, and others say in their expositions of it.

St. Ierom writing against the Bishop of Jerusalem, urges him with the Creed,
Hi^^on ad Pammach
(no doubt that which was received in his own Church) and he says, it
consists of three main points, the Confession of the Trinity, the Unity of
the Church, and the Resurrection of the Flesh.

And the Creed of the Church of Aquileia went no farther, says Ruffin in
Symbol. p. 191. V. Vsser. de Symb. p. 8, 9.
Ruffinus; nor some old Copies of the Roman Creed.

But Marcellus of Ancyra had Eternal Life in his Epiph. (...) Haeres. 72.
Creed, and so had Cyrill. Catech. 18.
Cyril of Jerusalem; so had the African Church in St. August. de Symb. l. 1.
Petr. Chrysol, Sermon. 57, etc.
Augustins time; so had the Church of Ravena; but not the Church of Turin; nor
the Gallican Churches; if Maimus Taurinensis, and Venantius Fortunatus
explained all the Articles of their Creeds.

Ruffinus confesses the Article of Descent into Hell was not in the Roman, nor
in any of the Eastern Creeds.

The Creeds of Jerusalem and Aquileia had not the Communion of Saints; nor
those of Marcellus and Epiph Ancor at
Epiphanius.

The Title of Catholic was not added to the Church in the Creed in St.
Augustin^ de Fide and Symbolo. Et de Symbolo Sermon. 243.
Augustins time; for he makes it a Periphrasis, utique Catholicam, from whence
probably it came to be added afterward.

Ruffinus takes no notice of it, and it was not extant in the old Copies of the
Roman Creed; nor in that of Marcellus Ancyranus.

These things I mention, not in the least to shake the Faith of the Articles of
the Apostles Creed; which De Symbolo ad Catech. c. 1.
St. Augustine says was gathered out of Scriptures, and is agreeable to them;
but to show what an uncertain way of conveyance mere Oral Tradition is, when a
thing so easily remembered, so constantly used, of so much weight and
consequence fell into such varieties in the greatest. Churches, while they were
so scrupulous about the writing of it.

What cause have we then to be thankful to God, that has taken so much care of
his Church, as to provide us an Infallible Written Rule in the Holy Scriptures,
whereby we certainly know, what the true Primitive Christianity was, which was
delivered by Christ and his Apostles?

But here is a great difficulty to be removed, as to the Written Word.

How can we be certain, we have it, if not by Tradition? and if Tradition be so
uncertain, how can we be made certain by it, that we have that written Word
which the Apostles delivered? For might not that fail in this, as well as the
Creed? And then what security can we have for our Faith?

In Answer to this, I shall show,

1. What Advantage things that are written have, as to the certainty of
conveyance above things merely committed to Memory and Tradition.

2. What Advantage the Scriptures have, above any other things committed to
Writing as to the certainty of their conveyence.

1. As to the Advantage things Written have above those committed to Memory and
Tradition only. Which will appear by these things,

1. It was the way God himself made choice of, where the Reason for Tradition
was stronger; I mean as to the Ten Commandments, which were short and plain,
and easy to be remembered, and very agreeable to the Sense and General Interest
of Mankind; yet the Wise God who perfectly understood the Nature of Man, would
not leave the Ten Commandments to an Oral Tradition, but God delivered to Moses
Two Tables of Stone written with the Finger of God; Deuteronomy. 9. 10. 10. 4.
and on them he wrote the Ten Commandments. What a vain and superstuous thing
were this, if Oral and Practical Tradition were Infallible? But Gods own
pitching upon this way, after so long a Trial of Mankind in the other; is a
Demonstration of the greater certainty of it, if we suppose that God aimed at
the benefit of Mankind by it.

2. When Religion was corrupted among the Jews, the only way of restoring it
was by a Written Book of the Law.

As we find in the case of Iosiahs Reformation, which was made by the Book of
the Law, 2 Kings 22. 8. 23. 2, 3.
which was found in the House of the Lord.

This was the Rule by which Hilkiah the High Priest, thought it necessary for
Josiah to go by; and not by any Tradition left among them concerning the Law
which God had given by Moses.

3. This was that which our Savior appealed to in all his Disputes; John 5. 39.
search the Scriptures, says he to the Jews; not run to your Traditions, for
those were then very corrupt, especially about the Messiah, as that he was to
be a Temporal Prince, etc. which was then a dangerous and fundamental mistake;
and therefore Christ appeals from them to the Scriptures; And they are they
which testify of me. 46.
Had ye believed Moses, ye would have believed me, for he wrote of me; but if
ye believe not his Writings, how shall ye believe my words? 47.
And our Savior severely checks the Pharisees for regarding their own
Traditions more than the Written Law. Matt. 15. 3. 9.
And yet they pretended to an Oral Tradition down from Moses; as the Jews do to
this day; and none are more grossly deceived than they.

4. The general Sense and Experience of Mankind agrees herein, that all matters
of consequence are more certainly preserved by Writings than by mere words.
There is no Invention has been more valued by the Wiser part of Mankind than
that of Letters; because it is of such excellent use for conveying the sense of
our minds at a distance to others. All men have so great a mistrust, either of
the capacity or memory, or fidelity of others; that what they would have done
with security they commit to Writing. And whatever we truly understand of the
Ages before us, we are beholden to Writing for it; all those memorable Actions,
and Institutions, either of Philosophy or Religion which were not written, are
long since buried in Oblivion, without possibility of a Resurrection.

But where they have been committed to Writing they are preserved after so many
Ages; and by it we certainly know the History of the Patriarchs, and the
strange Revolutions that happened from the beginning of the World. By it, we
converse with the Wisest persons of former times; and were able to justify the
Scriptures by the concurrent Testimonies of other Writers. By it, we are
enabled to interpret Prophecies, and to make plain their accomplishments, which
without it, we could never make out. Yea by it, the Wisdom of those is
preserved for the benefit of mankind, who thought fit to write nothing
themselves, as Socrates and Pythagoras, but their Disciples took care in time
to Write their Doctrines. So that we have the general Consent of the wisest
part of mankind, that writing is a far more certain way of conveyance than mere
Tradition.

2. And especially in our case where there are so many particular advantages,
as to the Holy Scriptures, above any other Writings.

1. From the special Providence of God, with respect to them; for since it is
agreed by all Christians, that these were written by Divine Inspiration, it is
most reasonable to believe, that a more than ordinary care would be taken to
preserve them.

And therefore to suppose any Books of Scripture to be lost, which contained
any necessary points of Faith is a great Reflection on Divine Providence. For,
if God watches over his Church, he cannot be supposed to let such Books be lost
which were designed for the universal and lasting Benefit of his Church.

2. From the mighty esteem which the Church of God had always for them; for,
they built their Hopes of Heaven upon the promises contained in them. The Book
of Scripture was their Evidence for their future Inheritance; the Foundation of
their Hope, and Rule of their Faith; their Defense against Assaults and
Temptations; their Counselor in cases of Difficulty; their Support, under
Troubles; and their surest Guide to a happy Eternity; and therefore the
Primitive Christians chose rather to endure any Torments than basely to betray
it, and give it up to their Enemies.

3. From the early disputes that were about them. Which shows that they were no
Invention of after times; nor were brought into the World by Stealth and Art;
for, they endured the greatest shock of Opposition at first, while the matters
of Fact concerning them were the most easily proved. And having passed the
severe Scrutiny of the first Ages, when so many counterfeit Writings were sent
abroad, the following Ages could have no Reason to call their Authority in
question.

4. From the general consent of divided Churches about them. It might have
pleased God to have kept his Church from those unhappy Breaches which have been
in all parts of the Christian World; but the East, and the West, the North and
the South can all bear Testimony to the sad Divisions of Christendom; and those
of many Ages standing. But yet, we have this considerable Advantage by them;
that we can have no Reason to mistrust a conspiracy where the several Bodies
are so much divided.

5. From the great internal satisfaction which the minds of good Men have
concerning them; and which no other writing can pretend to give. For here we
read of the Promise of Divine Assistance to sincere and humble minds. And that
Assistance carries a Lumen Fidei into the mind; as Aquinas calls it 2. 2. a 3
ad 2. and by that he says, the mind is united to Truth, that its assent is
only fixed upon it; and therefore there is no danger of Damnation to those who
are in Christ Jesus, and are thus illuminated by Faith in him. Not that this is
an Argument to convince others, who have not that inward sense which they have;
but the same Holy Spirit which did at first indite them, may give such an
inward and effectual Testimony as to the Truth of the matter contained in them;
that from thence they may firmly conclude these Books to contain the word of
God. And that Assurance which the minds of good Men have from the Influence of
Divine Grace, may be more effectual and powerful in them, than all the
pretended Infallibility or Demonstration in the World. It is certain those
cannot be deceived whom the Holy Spirit teaches; and the best and wisest of
the Ancient Schoolmen did make the great firmness and certainty of Faith not to
depend on outward Motives, but on inward Grace; which so enlightened the Mind,
and fixed the Inclinations of the Soul, that nothing is able to remove it. This
sort of Faith is no blind Assent; but after all the Evidence which it has to
make its Assent Reasonable; it takes so fast a hold of Divine Truths by
discerning the excellency and value of them, that he that has it is willing to
let go any thing rather than that; and although the Apprehension of Faith be
not so clear as that of Science; yet the Hypostasis, as the Apostle calls it,
may be so firm, Heb. 11. 1.
that no Temptations may be able to shake it. And he that can die for his
Religion has a stronger and better Faith, than he that thinks himself never so
Infallible in the Grounds of it. That is a true Divine Faith which purifies the
Heart, Act. 15. 9.
and thereby enlightens the mind; which works by Love, Gal. 5. 6.
and not by cavilling and wrangling about the Grounds of it; 1 John 5. 4.
which overcomes the World, and not that which overcomes the Temptations of it.
And such a Faith, and only such a one will carry us to Heaven; when, if it were
possible for us to have the utmost Infallibility in the Act of believing; yet
if it did not work effectually on our Hearts and Lives, we might go infallibly
to Hell.

And so I shall conclude this Discourse with the second sense of the Obligation
which lies on those who have received Christ Jesus the Lord so to walk in him:
i. e. to improve their sound Faith into the Practice of a good Life.

For alas! What advantage will it be to us, to have the most Primitive and
Apostolical Faith, if our Works be not answerable to it? Luke 6. 46.
Why call ye me Lord, Lord, says Christ, and do not the thing which I say? Why
do we pretend to receive Christ Jesus the Lord, if we do not observe his
Commands? It is good, Gal. 4. 18.
says S. Paul, to be zealously affected always in a good thing. And no doubt
our Faith is such; but then let us be zealous of good Works too, that we may
show our selves to be that peculiar people who are redeemed by Jesus Christ.
Tit. 2. 14.
So that our Obligation arises every way from Christ Jesus the Lord, to walk in
him; if we consider him as our Lord, so we are to obey him; if as Christ Jesus,
so he died for us to redeem us from all iniquity. We can have no pretense to
live in our sins, if we have received him who commands us to forsake them; for
then we receive and reject him at the same time. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from iniquity, says St.
Paul, what should those then do that profess to receive him as their Lord, who
are thereby bound to yield obedience to his Laws? one of the great causes of
the Degeneracy of the Heathen World was the separating Religion and Morality;
when this was left to the Schools of Philosophers to instruct men in, whereas
their Religion consisted only of some Solemn Rites and Sacrifices. Let us have
a care of as dangerous a Separation between Faith and Works, or which is all
one, between receiving Christ, and doing his Will. For those are the proper
Works of the Gospel, wherein we own Christ as our Lord, and do them because he
commands us. And the Apostle has summed up the whole Duty of Christians in
those comprehensive words, Tit. 2. 12.
Teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live
soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World; 13.
looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearance of the great God,
and our Savior Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. line 18. for Days read Places. p. 25. l. 15. r. Matim^^. p. 28. l. 18.
for were ^. are.


