Protestant Charity.

A SERMON Preached at S. SEPVLCHRES Church, On Tuesday In Easter Week, A. D.
MDCLXXXI.

By EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His MAJESTY.

LONDON: Printed by M. Flesher, for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St.
Paul's Churchyard, and at the White Heart in Westminster Hall. 1681.

To the Right Honorable Sir PATIENCE WARD, Lord Mayor Of the City of LONDON,
AND TO The Court of ALDERMEN.
My Lord and Gentlemen,
IT is the great Honor of this City, since the Protestant Religion was
professed in it, that it has born a much greater proportion to the rest of the
Nation, in public Works of Charity, than in the largeness of its Buildings,
and number of its Inhabitants. For when, upon the unreasonable clamours of our
Adversaries of the Church of Rome, an account was thought fit to be taken of
such Acts of Charity as lay more open to the view of the World, within sixty
years from the settlement of the Reformation by Q. Elizabeth, it was found,
that they exceeded all that had been done in twice that number of years in the
time of Popery; and that therein this City did equal the whole Kingdom besides.
Dr. Willet's Synops. Papismi, p. 1219. 1224.
And although those who make this Report, complain of the too great
reservedness of some Companies in making known their Benefactours; yet upon the
diligent search some persons made, it did appear, that as to the best parts of
public Charity in founding Schools and Hospitals, etc. more was done within
that time, than from the Conquest to the Reformation.

For, besides the large and constant Charity of the City in the Care of their
Hospitals; many particular Citizens did so great things in several parts of the
Nation upon their own Stocks, that within that compass of Time, more than forty
Hospitals were built and endowed, and above twenty Free Schools, and upon a
reasonable computation, near a million of Money was thought to be bestowed in
Works of Charity, in London and the two Universities.

This was the true Protestant Charity of those times; which ran in a clear,
free and undivided Channel, without the mixture of Superstition, or being
diverted from its proper course to serve private ends and designs. And this
brought Honor to our Religion; advanced the Reputation of the City; and
promoted the Good of the whole Nation. And such are great and wise ends; fit to
be considered and carried on by those to whom God has given a heart suitable to
the largeness of their Estates; which they can neither carry into another
World, nor better employ in this than by doing Good to Mankind with them.

And as there still continued many and undeniable Instances among true
Protestants of extraordinary designs of Charity by particular Members of this
City, whom God had blessed in their Employments; so I have reason to hope, that
this Age will afford remarkable Examples of the same kind to Posterity: That so
our Protestant Faith may be always found fruitful in good Works; which will be
the best means both to adorn and preserve it.

To persuade and encourage others to tread in the steps of those worthy
Citizens, whose Faith and Charity deserve their imitation, is the chief design
of the following Sermon; which out of due Respect to the Order of your Court, I
now present to your Hands; with my hearty Prayers to Almighty God for the
continuance of his Blessing on this City and the Government of it. I am,

My Lord and Gentlemen, Your most faithful and obedient Servant, E.
Stillingfleet.

GALAT. VI. 9. And let us not be weary in well-doing; for in due season we
shall reap, if we faint not.
WHen Julian the Apostate designed (if possible) to retrieve the honor of the
Heathen Religion, Sozom. l. 5. c. 15.
he easily discerned that it was not enough for him to restore the Priesthood,
to open the Temples, Hist. Trip. l. 6. c. 29.
to appoint the Sacrifices to be offered upon the Altars; but he found it
necessary for them to imitate the Christians in the strictness of their Lives,
in the solemnity of their Devotions, in the exactness of their Discipline, and
especially in the erecting Hospitals, and taking care of the Poor. For he that
would not believe the Christian Religion to be from God, thought himself bound
to give some probable account, how a Religion so contrary to the Interests and
Designs of this World, should be able to prevail against all the arts and power
of its many and potent Enemies; and upon the deepest search which could be made
by himself, or the greatest Wits of the Heathens then about him, they concluded
the flourishing and propagation of it to be chiefly owing to those things which
he so much commended to the Heathens imitation. And from hence they inferred,
that if the same things could be brought into Practice among the Gentiles, they
should be able to supplant Christianity by its own methods, and restore
Paganism by the same Weapons by which it was overthrown. This was thought so
subtle and artificial a device by him whose great design was to extirpate our
Religion in a soft and gentle manner, without the blood and cruelty of former
times, that he writes an Epistle on purpose to Arsacius the chief Priest of
Galatia, requiring punctual observance of these Commands; and as to the
chargeable and expensive part, he offered large provisions out of his own
Revenue to defray it.

But Saint Paul had been beforehand with him in Galatia, having planted
Churches with great success there; and Christianity, by his means, took so deep
root in men's hearts, that neither the rage and fury of former Persecutions, nor
the plausible arts and insinuations of Julian were able to root it out. It is
true, that these Churches, soon after their planting, were in great danger of
being overrun by the pernicious Errors of some Seducers of that time; (the
apprehension whereof put Saint Paul into that astonishment which he expresses
in the beginning of this Epistle, Gal. 1. 6.
I marvel that you are so soon removed from him that called you into the Grace
of Christ unto another Gospel, etc.) yet by the early notice and care which he
took to prevent the spreading of these corruptions among them, the Galatian
Churches recovered the soundness of their Faith, and have preserved a name
among the Eastern Churches, though under great variety of conditions, to this
day. Some take notice, that this is one of the sharpest Epistles written by
Saint Paul. He appears indeed, by the beginning of it, to have been much
surprised and moved at the news of a great and sudden alteration among them;
which he was sure was not for the better. And by this plain dealing with them,
he knew, till they considered better, they would be offended with him; but
withal he tells them this did best become a Servant of Christ, who, like a
good Physician, has more regard to the Disease than to the Palate of his
Patient; For if I yet pleased Men, 1. 10.
I should not be the Servant of Christ. But having vindicated his own honor,
Chapter 1, 2.
which the evil reports of the false Apostles made necessary; and argued with
great strength and conviction against the imposers of the Law; Chapter 3, 4. part
of 5.
he betakes himself to the enforcing the practice of the general and necessary
Duties of Christianity upon these Galatians. If they had such a mind to keep
the Law, Gal. 5. 14.
All the Law, says he, is fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self. It was a vain and foolish thing for them to contend
about keeping the Law, who did overthrow the main design of it, by their heats
and animosities against each other; which, instead of preserving the honor of
the Law, was the certain way to destroy one another. 15.
But if ye bite and devour one another, take heed that ye be not consumed one
of another. From hence he shows, that hatred, 20.
variance, emulations, wrath, strife, seditions, heresies, are as much the
lusts of the flesh as adultery, 21.
fornication, murder, drunkenness, revellings and such like; and as
destructive to men's Salvation; of the which, says he, I tell you before, as I
have also told you in time past, that they which do such things shall not
inherit the Kingdom of God. And they that are true Christians must crucify the
flesh with all these affections and lusts thereof; 24.
such as vainglory, love of contention, envying the reputation of others. 26.
Let us not be desirous of vainglory, provoking one another, envying one
another. But the Apostle did not think the design of the Law, or the obligation
of Christianity was satisfied with abstaining from doing injuries to others;
therefore he proceeds to tell them what exercise of tenderness, compassion and
readiness to do good to others were expected from them by the Law of Christ.

(1.) If a man, through the frailty of humane Nature, or the sudden surprise of
a Temptation, be overtaken in a fault, do not, says he, trample upon him, nor
insult over him; but endeavor with the spirit of meekness to recover him from
his fall; considering that we carry about us the same load of flesh, and are
exposed to continual Temptations our salves. Gal. 6. 1.


(2.) If we see others groaning under the heavy burden of their own
infirmities, or the pressures and calamities of the world, do not add more
weight to their afflictions; but put your own shoulders under to bear a part
with them, to make their burden more easy to them; for herein lies a great
deal of that duty which Christ has laid on all his Disciples. Bear ye one
another burdens and so fulfill the Law of Christ. 6. 2.


(3.) If it be impossible for men to attend the service of your Souls and the
affairs of this World together, never grudge nor repine at the exercise of your
kindness and liberality toward your spiritual Teachers, v. 6. Let him that is
taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things. Which
instances being mentioned, the Apostle subjoins two things:

1. A general Proposition, viz. That every man shall receive in another World
according to the good that he does in this. Gal. 6. 7.
Be not deceived God is not mocked; for whatsoever a man sows that shall he
also reap. 8.
For he that sows to his flesh shall of his flesh reap corruption, but he
that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. i. e. He
that looks only after his present advantage in this world and dares not
venture to do any thing out of hopes of recompense for it in another life, he
is said to sow to his flesh; but he that is good and charitable and kind to
others without hopes of any other advantage than what God will give him for it,
is said to sow to the spirit; the Flesh and Spirit being opposed as the two
Centres of the different worlds: the great thing to which all things tend in
this world being something carnal or that relates to the Flesh; and the great
principle of another world being wholly spiritual. And these two Flesh and
Spirit are placed as two Loadstones drawing our hearts several ways, the one is
much stronger, but at a greater distance; the other has less force in it self
but is much nearer to us, by which means it draws more powerfully the hearts
that are already touched with a strong inclination to it. But the Apostle uses
the similitude of two Fields, wherein the product of the Seed answers to the
nature of the Soil; so he that sowes to the flesh, i. e. that minds only his
present interest in this world, his harvest shall be proportionable to his
seed, he may reap advantages to himself in this world suitable to his pains and
industry; but the utmost this world can yield is but of a short continuance,
being of a temporary, transient, corruptible nature, he that sows to the
flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption: but he that sows to the spirit, i.
e. has so great a regard to the rewards of another life, that he is willing to
let go a present enjoyment and bury it under ground, casting it in as seed into
the earth in hopes of a future resurrection, however he may be condemned as a
weak and improvident man by the men of this world, yet as certain as there is a
life everlasting to come, so certainly shall all his good deeds yield an
abundant increase and meet with a glorious recompense then, if there be no
corrupt mixture in the sowing which may spoil the virtue of the seed, for he
that sows to the spirit shall of the spirit reap life everlasting. And let
not men deceive themselves; if they look only at themselves and the things of
this world, let their pretenses be never so spiritual, if they dare not do
acts of Charity so as to trust God for a reward, they do but sow to the flesh;
and though the world may be cheated, and men may sometimes deceive themselves,
yet God cannot be mocked; he knows the hearts, and intentions, and secret
designs of men, and according to them their reward shall be; for whatsoever a
man sows that shall he reap. This I take to be the natural and genuine
meaning of the Apostle in those words.

2. A particular Exhortation, not to be discouraged in well doing, which is the
same with sowing to the spirit before, and with doing good in the following
verse, both which are to be understood of the Works of Charity; and therefore
we ought to take it in that sense here. These are especially called good Works
in the New Testament; Dorcas is said to be a Woman full of good Works and
Alms-deeds which she did. Act. 9. 36.
The Widow that was to be taken into Office in the Church, must be well
reported of for good Works; 1 Timothy 5. 10.
and these presently follow, the bringing up children, the lodging strangers,
washing the Saints feet and relieving the afflicted; In the Epistle to Titus,
Saint Paul gives him a strict charge, Tit. 3. 8.
that he deliver it with great assurance ((...)) that they which believe in God
might be careful to maintain good Works; these things are good and profitable
unto men; Tit. 3. 14.
Where the same word is used in the Greek, that is in the words of the Text.
And to the same purpose other words of a like signification are used, Heb. 13.
16.
as (...), To do good and to communicate forget not; '(...), Charge them that
are rich in this world -- that they do good, 1 Timothy 6. 18.
that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate.
That ye may abound to every good Work, says Saint Paul; which he after
explains, 2 Cor. 9. 8. 11.
by being enriched in every thing to all bountifulness. So that although well
doing in the general may extend to every good action, yet by the particular
sense of that phrase in the New Testament, and especially from the coherence of
these words with the foregoing and following verses, it appears that the well
doing here spoken of, is to be understood of Works of Charity. Which the
Apostle, as they were Christians, did suppose them to practice, but being
apprehensive lest the discouragements they met with in the world, should make
them grow cold and remiss in this great duty, he therefore exhorts them not to
faint or grow weary of doing it; and to that end he lays down the most
powerful Motive and Consideration; for in due season ye shall reap if ye faint
not: i. e. ye shall not miss of a reward from God.

So that from the words we may take notice of these two things which deserve
our consisideration.

1. The many discouragements men meet with in the World which are apt to make
them grow weary in well doing.

2. The mighty encouragement which God gives to our continuance and
perseverance in it; for in due season we shall reap if we faint not.

I. The many discouragements men meet with in the World, which are apt to make
them grow weary in well doing.

The Precepts of Charity delivered by our Savior and his Apostles are so
plain, so full, so many, so easy to be understood; and those Precepts enforced
by so just, and reasonable, and pious considerations, with respect to God, to
the World, to fellow Christians, to the honor of our Religion, and lastly to
our selves, from the comfort that is in well doing, and the reward that follows
it; that a man must have great impudence, to profess himself a Christian, and
yet to think himself not obliged to do acts of Charity. But notwithstanding
all this, and much more which might be said to this purpose, there are too many
still who are ready to find out some plausible pretenses to excuse them from
well doing; which being the greatest discouragements to men from continuing in
it; I shall make it my present business to examine them, and to show how little
weight there is in them, especially being compared with the Authority of him
who has made this our duty, and the reward we may justly expect for performing
it. And here I shall pass over the more common and trivial Objections, which
every one can easily answer that makes them; and rather argue an unwilling mind
to perform their duty, than one unsatisfied about the reasonableness of it; and
I shall therefore insist on those that carry a greater appearance of strength
in them; which are chiefly these two,

1. From the different state of our Times from those when these Commands of
Charity were given.

2. From the sad prospect of our own Affairs, which seem rather to call for a
Care of our selves than Charity to others.

1. The first pretense is from the difference of Times; There was then, say
such men, great reason for Charity which will not hold now; those were times of
persecution for Religion, and many were driven to great streights and
necessities on that account who deserved to be relieved, and the Christians had
been worse than Infidels not to do good to men that were brought to want
merely for Christ's and the Gospel's sake; the Laws then could take no care of
these poor and indigent persons; for the Laws made them so, being then opposite
to Christianity: but now our Religion is settled by the Laws; and we have many
Laws made for a competent provision for the poor, which will be sufficient if
they be put in execution, and if they be not, what Charity is this to relieve
an idle and disorderly sort of People who live upon Alms, when it is greater
Charity to such to make them work and to provide for their own subsistence?

This is the force of the Objection which seems to have a great deal of
strength and weight in it; but before I give an Answer to it I must acknowledge
the truth of some things contained therein.

(1.) That there is a great difference in the case of Charity, where our
Religion is settled by Law, and where it is persecuted by it. For a larger
measure and degree of Charity is justly required in a time of Persecution, in
as much as those are the truest Objects of Charity who prefer the keeping Faith
and a good Conscience before the good things of this Life. And we ought to look
upon it as an unvaluable blessing, that we have the Christian, yea the Reformed
Christian Religion settled by our Laws. And God grant it may ever so continue!

(2.) It cannot be denied that we have very good Laws for the maintenance of
the Poor, and that they might be sufficient for their common necessities, if
they were duly executed. And it is a very just and reasonable distinction which
our Laws make between the involuntary Poor, who are made so by the hand of
Heaven, either by Sickness, or Lameness, or Age, or Children, or Fire, etc. and
the voluntary Poor, who may help themselves but will not, being idle, dissolute
and slothful persons. These deserve rather the hand of Justice to punish them
than that of Charity to relieve them: For Saint Paul himself is so far from
thinking this to be true Charity, that he hardly thinks it so to keep such from
starving if we take that Proverbial saying in its strict and literal sense, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
If any would not work, neither should he eat.

(3.) I grant that it is greater Charity to put persons upon providing for
themselves than to relieve their present necessities. For that is the greatest
Charity which does a man the most good. And he that reduces a dissolute and
wandering Beggar to the taking pains for himself and Family cures an ill habit
of his Mind; puts him into the way of Virtue and Sobriety; gives him a lasting
stock for himself and Family (for diligence and industry is so) keeps him out
of the danger of the worst sort of Company; gains him more Friends, who will be
far more ready to help a person industrious in his Poverty than the most
clamorous and importunate Beggar. And therefore our Laws have wisely
determined, that Workhouses are the best Hospitals for the Poor, who are able
to help themselves. But after these concessions, I am far from thinking the
command of Charity to be swallowed up in our Laws for the relief of the Poor.
For,

(1.) If our Laws were the best in the World for this purpose, yet, if they be
not duly executed, they leave as much room for Charity as if there were none.
What if a Law were made that there should be no Poor at all among us; but that
immediate care should be taken, upon any man's falling into decay, that his
Stock should be supplied out of the superfluities of the Rich? If this Law were
not executed, men would be altogether as miserable in their Poverty, and as
great Objects of Charity as if there were no such Law in being. For the making
of a Law for their supply without putting it in execution, is but like the
Person in Saint James, Jam. 2. 16.
who said to those who were naked and destitute of daily food, be ye warmed and
filled; but notwithstanding gave them nothing needful for the Body; what does
this profit? What advantage or satisfaction is it to a Man to starve with the
Law on his side? Or can men be better fed or clothed with the Words of a Law
than of any particular Person? If not, then if care be not taken for the relief
and maintenance of the Poor according to the Laws, there is as great need of
Charity as if there were none at all.

(2.) If we suppose the Laws for relief of the Poor to be duly executed, yet
there are many particular cases of Charity which often happen which the Laws
cannot be supposed to provide for. The Law takes care only of general, and
notorious, and common cases; but there are continual Instances of singular and
extraordinary cases where relief is as much wanted, but is rarely challenged.
How often is some men's Reputation a snare to themselves and Families; who had
rather sink silently into the gulf of Misery, than have their wants made known
to their insulting neighbors, among whom they have lived in as good fashion as
themselves? How many have been tempted rather to put an end to a miserable Life
than to be despised and contemned for their Poverty in their old Age! How many
are unwilling to make known their condition for fear of a repulse and being
thought Liars, or impudent and common Beggars! How hardly will some pinch
themselves and Families, before they will make known their necessities! and
some have been known to have brought themselves so low, that when their sad
condition has been discovered, they have been past all possibility of
recovery. I hope such Instances are not frequent among us. And yet we are
lately told in Print by a Member of this City, Proposals for Employment of the
Poor, p. 29. 1681.
That he has reason to believe many hundreds have perished through want of
late years. If this be true, and their case was known; what a shame and
dishonor is it, in the midst of so much plenty and luxury, to suffer such a
reproach to Christianity to be among us? But if their case were not known in
time; the stain is not quite wiped off, because there ought to be in so great,
so rich, so well-governed a City, a due care taken to find out as well as to
relieve the truly necessitous.

(3.) The obligations of Charity reach much farther than the force of our Laws
does. For how small a matter within this City does answer the letter of the
Law, where Persons enjoy very great and plentiful Estates? And is that all
which their thankfulness to God, their love to their Brethren, and the regard
to our Savior's Commands will draw from them? Luke 6. 36.
Is this being merciful as our heavenly Father is merciful? Matt. 6. 4.
Is this giving our Alms in secret, that thy Father which sees in secret may
reward thee openly? Luke 16. 9. 22. 21.
Is this making to our selves friends of the Mammon of unrighteousness? Is this
being rich toward God; 2 Timothy 6. 18.
being rich in good works, being ready to distribute, willing to communicate?
Gal. 6. 10.
Is this doing good to all men as we have opportunity? Matt. 25. 35, 36.
Is this feeding the hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick and
imprisoned? Can we imagine that will be a good answer at the great day, that we
have paid our Rates to the Poor? If the Christian Charity had extended no
farther, Julian needed not have been so solicitous to have the Heathens equal
them?

The true Charity of Christians is a free and voluntary thing, not what men are
forced to do by the Laws; It is a largeness of mind, that disposes men to do
good to others, and embraces every opportunity for that purpose; It is the
flowing of a Fountain which runs freely, easily and constantly; and not like
the pouring water out of a narrow mouthed Vessel, where but little comes, and
with a great deal of noise. Charity spreads it self like the beams of the Sun,
and warms and enlivens the colder parts of the Earth; it pierces into the
bowels of it, and makes it self a passage to those secret and hidden objects
which are out of the view of the World. True Christian Charity has arms so
large to comprehend the whole World within them; but it is the Life and Spirit
of that Body whereof Christ is the Head; it passes from one member to another,
emptying it self from the larger vessels into the less, and so by a constant
motion and course through the Body it keeps heat and union in all the Parts. To
do good because one cannot help it, is to obey the Law of Necessity and not of
Charity. He that resolves to go no farther in Charity than the Law requires
him, declares he would not have gone so far unless the Law had forced him;
which is in effect to tell the World, he has not so much as an inclination to
Charity.

(4.) Our Laws give great encouragement to the best, Stat. de 39 Eliz. c. 5.
and 21 Jac. c. 1. 14 Car. 2. c. 9. Co. 2. Instit. 723.
the noblest, the most lasting Works of Charity; such as erecting Workhouses
for the Poor that are able to work, endowing Hospitals and Almshouses for the
impotent, distempered and aged Poor; setting up Free-Schools for the Education
of Youth. And I never yet met with any Objection against these that will not
hold against the best designs in the World. For it is possible they may be
abused, and may accidentally prove an occasion of Idleness to some Persons, and
they may exceed the due proportion of Persons fit for them, (Although we yet
see no great danger of that.) Yet what design can the wit of Man pitch upon in
a captious and suspicious Age, that will not meet with Objections from those
that have a mind to cavil? The best Religion in the World, the best Church, the
best Government, the best Laws, the best Men cannot escape the censures of
ill-minded Men; and why should we think the best designs of Charity should? But
some men whose minds are set upon one particular way of Charity, are apt to
disparage all other ways to advance their own: which is the common Error of
Mankind, to think sufficient Right is not done to the thing they admire, unless
they undervalue all other things in comparison with it. But it is a part of
Charity to allow, approve and encourage all true ways of Charity; not to set up
bodily Labor against the improvement of the Mind; nor the learning of Arts and
Sciences to the disparagement of breeding men up for Trade and Business; nor to
cry down Hospitals and Infirmaries for the Lame and Sick and Aged in comparison
of Workhouses for the Young and Strong and Healthful. For all these are
excellent and most commendable ways of Charity, and have nothing of
contradiction or inconsistency with one another, if they do answer the ends of
their Institution. I do not go about to lessen the esteem of casual and
occasional Acts of Charity done to particular Persons in present Want; when our
Blessed Savior in the midst of all his Poverty took care of the Poor, for when
he spoke to Judas at the Table, the Disciples supposed it was that he should
give something to the Poor. John 13. 29.
What admirable Charity was this, when he had not whereon to lay his head, and
was at the expense of a Miracle to give an entertainment to the People, yet he
had an Officer, one of his own Apostles, to take care of the Poor! And when he
pronounces such Blessedness to those who do acts of Charity to them, and
accounts them as done unto himself; Matt. 25. 34. 40.
which is the highest expression of his gracious acceptance of such Acts from
us, and of the great obligation that lies upon us to do them; since we ought
not to think much of any thing we do for the honor of our Lord and Savior,
who did and suffered so much for our sakes: Yet when we compare these with the
public Works of Charity before mentioned, being done for the same end; we
shall find these to exceed the other in some material circumstances, which add
much to the excellency of them.

(1.) In the Largeness and Extensiveness of their design. Other Charities are
for the present relief of some poor and indigent persons, whose bowels are
refreshed, and backs are clothed, and hearts are eased, by the kindness of
others to them; but these are soon gone, and men's Charity cannot follow them
beyond the Grave. But public endowments of Charity are to last for ever, and
do good to the Poor of many Generations. The Ages to come will rise up and
bless their Memory who took care to do good to those whom they never saw; and
to provide for such, yea very many such, whom it was impossible for them to
know. When a man sees a great object of Charity, as the Widow and Fatherless
under extreme necessities, the Mother weeping and bemoaning her Children not
having bread to put into their Mouths, and the poor Children looking ghastly
and frightfully crying for want of bread, but not knowing where to get it, the
very uneasiness of a man's own mind at the sense of so much misery in others,
will extort some present relief to still their cries, and to put such an
unpleasing Idea out of his Fancy. But if the Object it self do not move, yet
importunity may: if that does not, yet custom, reputation, natural humanity,
recommendation of Friends may prevail on men to be sometimes liberal to persons
whom they see under present Wants. But how much does all this fall short of a
fixed, certain, perpetual provision for the necessities of those, whom none of
those Arguments could excite men to show kindness to? The other is a more
sensible, natural, private Charity; this is a more rational, generous Christian
Charity; being built upon more free, and noble, and lasting considerations,
most agreeable to the design and honor of the Christian Religion, which puts
men upon doing the best things and which tend to the greatest benefit and
advantage of mankind. And in the comparison of things that are good, the
largest, the most public, the most lasting ought to have the preeminence.

(2.) In their Consequence and Usefulness; which ought to be especially
regarded in Acts of Charity. For true Charity must be accompanied with Wisdom
and Discretion. It is not a man's profuse liberality to every one that asks;
nor making himself poor to make others rich; it is not squandering away an
Estate among idle and indigent Persons, that makes him a charitable man; but it
is a wise dispensing the Gifts God has bestowed upon him for the benefit and
advantage of others. And the greater the Good is that is received the greater
is the Charity in bestowing it. The Schoolmen reckon up seven sorts of Corporal
Alms, and as many of Spiritual; to visit the sick, Visito, poto, cibo, redimo,
tego, colligo, condo.
to feed the hungry, to satisfy the thirsty, to cloth the naked, to redeem
the captive, Consule, castiga, solare, remitte, fer, ora.
to entertain the stranger, to bury the dead; are the former: to teach the
ignorant, to advise the doubtful, 2. 2. Q. 32. art. 2.
to comfort the sorrowful, to correct the wicked, to forgive the injurious, to
bear the troublesome, to pray for all; are the Instances of spiritual Charity.
But this is rather a distribution of the different sorts of Charity, than any
just Rule and Measure of our obligation to the Acts of it. For although in the
general, spiritual Acts of Charity to men's Souls, are to be preferred before
what refers only to their Bodies; yet in particular cases a man may be more
obliged to relieve their outward necessities than to give them good counsel for
their Souls; i. e. when those necessities are urgent and pressing, and by a
present supply they may have longer time and be in better disposition to
receive spiritual Advice. Some dispute if a bad man be in greater want and a
good man in less want, which of these two is to be preferred? And the Casuists
say, The Work of Mercy is greater in the former Case; but the Work of Charity
in the latter. For Mercy only relates to another's misery; Cajet. in 2. 2. Q.
32. art. 4.
but Charity takes in other Considerations. So I say, when the competition lies
between the present supply of some in great want, and making a lasting
provision for more persons in less want, there may be more Mercy in the former
case, but there may be greater Charity in the latter: because the more public,
the more common, the more useful the Good is, the greater the Charity is in
doing of it. I will not dispute, whether the breeding up of youth to Learning,
or Labor, be among us the greater Charity? I know no reason why two such
excellent ways of Charity should be set at variance with each other. But
certainly we are not to judge of men's usefulness to the public merely by the
strength of their limbs, or the hardness of their hands, or the nimbleness of
their fingers. Is it not possible that by the charitable education of Children
in the ways of Learning and Knowledge some may arrive at a greater capacity of
serving God and their Country, than if they had been grinding in a Mill, or
tugging at an Oar all that while? It is not only keeping People to hard
labor, or to continual working, which is the design of Charity; but the most
excellent way of Charity is, to improve all Persons according to their several
Capacities, so as to make them more useful and serviceable to the Public.
This is not only doing Good to the particular persons, but to the whole
Nation; and Charity is not barely to be measured by the quality of its Acts,
but by the largeness of the circumference it fills. The breeding up some few
great and useful Persons to a Nation is a Work of Charity the public Good is
more concerned in, than in the manual labors of many industrious Artificers:
who do serve the Public too in their way; but there is a difference between
those lesser Stars in the Firmament, that wanted a Telescope to discover them,
and those great and splendid Bodies which influence the Earth, and direct men's
passage in the deep Waters. That is therefore the greatest and most useful
Charity, which tends to the improving mankind according to their different
Capacities; some for Labor, others for Trade, others to be useful to the rest
of mankind with a respect either to their Country or to their Estates, their
Bodies or their Souls: And which takes all possible care to prevent the
unspeakable and innumerable mischiefs which idleness and debauchery do bring
upon mankind.

(3.) In the Honor they bring to Religion. There are some cases, wherein our
Charity must be so secret, Matt. 6. 3.
that our left hand must not know what our right hand does, i. e. when there is
danger of vanity and ostentation in the doing of our Alms; but when the honor
of God and Religion is concerned, Matt. 5. 16.
then Let your light so shine before men, that they may see your good Works,
and glorify your Father which is in heaven. But how can men see those Acts of
Charity which are done in secret, and are industriously concealed from the
knowledge of men? And if that were to be taken as a strict command in all
cases, then all the public Works of Charity, which are most considerable for
the Honor of God and Religion would be forbidden by the Gospel. But where men
do excellent and praise worthy things for great and good ends, without
Pharisaical Hypocrisy, it is the general concernment of Religion and the glory
of God not to have such things kept from the knowledge of the World. John 15. 8.
For herein, says our Savior, is my Father glorified that ye bear much fruit,
so shall ye be my Disciples. So shall ye appear to be my Disciples, for Christ
had owned them for his Disciples before, but this would manifest their being so
to the World; which would bring the greatest honor to God and to the Christian
Religion. And it is certain nothing did more advance the reputation of it in
the World, than their singular and extraordinary care of the Poor. For they not
only relieved in the first place those that were Christians, according to the
Apostle's Rule in the next Verse; especially to those of the Household of
Faith; but their Charity extended to the very Heathens: which Julian takes
notice of with great Indignation: Jul. Ep. ad Arsac.
Is it not a shame for us not to relieve our own poor, when the Christians not
only take care of their own but of ours too? And by the case of Lucian's
Peregrinus, it appears, that some pretended to be Christians on purpose that
they might be partakers of the great bounty and kindness which the Christians
showed to their Brethren. But such Instances as these did not make them weary
in well-doing; but still as the Church increased in Riches by the free and
large oblations of the People; so greater care was taken for the erecting
Hospitals for the reception of the Poor, who could provide no habitation for
themselves; and this was then always looked on as a particular concernment of
Religion, and not as a mere political Constitution.

Thus the matters of Charity stood in the Christian Church, till men came to be
persuaded that by the Priest's saying so many Prayers for the dead, their Souls
might be removed out of Purgatory and translated to Heaven. And when this
notorious Cheat prevailed, the stream of men's Charity was diverted from the
Poor, to the making good bargains for their Souls. And who could blame men who
had spent all their days in Wickedness, or raised an Estate by Fraud and
Oppression, if at their death they took care to leave enough to have so many
Masses said for their Souls, as might by a reasonable computation serve for
their Redemption out of Purgatory at a marketable Price. When the laying open
these Cheats to the World, gave the first occasion to the Reformation, a mighty
outcry was every where made, that the Foundation of all good Works was
destroyed, and if the Reformation prevailed there would be no want of Faith,
when every one might choose what he pleased, but nothing like Charity was to be
expected. To remove the former Calumny, our Reformers published the Articles of
our Religion; and to take away the latter, they put that admirable Prince
Edward the Sixth upon the new founding the famous Hospitals of this City, (for
although there were some Hospitals before, such as Saint Mary Bethlehem,
Elsying Spittal, Saint Bartholomew's, yet they were inconsiderable in
comparison of what they have been since) For by the care and Charity of the
Governors and other Members of the City, they have yielded a wonderful
support to a mighty number of poor Children, and wounded and diseased Persons
both in Body and Mind; which being joined with another Foundation of one single
Person, this City may justly vye with any other in the Christian World as to so
many and so great Foundations, for the best kind of Christian Charity, in the
Education of Youth and the Care of the Impotent and Diseased.

Our Religion teaches us better, than to have so vain and fond an opinion of
our good Works as to think we merit Heaven by them; but surely our Charity is
so much the greater, if we do these things out of a sense of Gratitude to God,
than if we think to drive a bargain with him, and put our imperfect Works in
the Balance with an infinite and eternal Reward. Those of the Church of Rome
may think they carry on a better Trade with Heaven than we do; and that they
have a mighty advantage in the overballance of what they hope for in exchange
for what they part with; but they had best look well to the stating their
Accounts, the due value of their Works, and the reason of expecting such a
disproportionable return; lest at last they deceive themselves, and totally
fail of their expectations: For in the great day of Account, all things will be
most exactly weighed; and although the greatest Benefactours rejoice in the
highest Acts of Kindness, yet when any thing is challenged in a way of Justice,
men do not love to be imposed upon or overreached in a Bargain. What madness
then is it, for any sinful Creatures to hope that any Acts of theirs, being
weighed by Divine Justice, can bear any proportion in a way of Merit, with no
less than the Kingdom of Heaven? This we utterly disclaim, and owe all our
hopes of Heaven merely to the infinite Goodness and Mercy of God through his
Son Christ Jesus: and yet we think our selves never the less bound to be
fruitful in good Works; because we hereby testify our obedience to the Laws
of Christ; our sincere love to God and our Brethren; our readiness to do good
to others by the mercies which God has bestowed upon us; our sense of the
obligation we have to one another, as partaking of the same nature, and liable
to the same infirmities, and exposed to the same calamities; our expectation of
a blessed reward, though not due to the merit of our Works, but to the infinite
Grace and Mercy of God. And I do not see, but where men have a due regard to
God and Religion, such considerations as these do more effectually stir men up
to true Acts of Charity, than those mercenary and corrupt Doctrines in the
Roman Church; which look rather like cunning devices to pick the Peoples
Pockets than any real Arguments for Charity. And upon a careful examination,
it has been found, that our Protestant Doctrine was so far from stopping up
the Channel that ran so freely before, that within sixty years after the
Reformation more great and noble Works of Charity were done in founding of
Schools and Hospitals, than for some hundreds of years before; and some say
from the Conquest till that time of the Reformation. But this I have formerly
insisted more upon, on the like Occasion.

The sum of what I have said is this, that we have no reason to be weary in
well-doing; on the account of our Laws for the common relief of the Poor;
because those Laws cannot provide for all cases of Charity; and because they do
suppose the greatest Works of Charity to depend upon the largeness and freeness
of those men's minds to whom God gives a heart to do great and worthy things
with the Estates he has given to them.

2. But there is another plausible pretense yet behind, viz. from the
consideration of our own Times. Were the times calm and fixed; had we a fair
prospect of things before us, that were a great encouragement to Charity; but
we live in perplexed and doubtful times, and know not what may become of us
all; men's minds are strangely discomposed and full of Fears; and therefore this
is a very unseasonable Time to persuade them to Charity, when they ought rather
to lay up and secure something against an evil day.

To which I answer,

1. What times were those the Primitive Christians lived in, who so much
abounded in Charity? 1 Cor. 4. 11, 12, 13.
Saint Paul tells us of himself and his Brethren, they were hungry and thirsty,
naked and buffetted, having no certain dewlling place; laboring, working with
their own hands, reviled, persecuted, defamed; and yet nothing relating to this
World was so much their care and concernment as providing for the Poor. For
when he went up to Jerusalem, and there conferred with James, 2 Gal. 9. 10.
Cephas and John, at his departure they had nothing to desire of him and
Barnabas, but to remember the Poor, the same which I also was forward to do;
as Saint Paul relates it. And you may see how earnest he was in it, 2 Cor. 8,
9. chapter
by his dealing with the Corinthians, when he persuades them to a liberal
contribution to the poor Christians in Judea, who then suffered much either
through Famine or Persecution or both. Saint Paul had undertaken for the
Churches of Achaia, (of which Corinth, being a populous and trading City, was
the chief) but the Collection not being yet made among them, he sends some on
purpose to Corinth to make all ready against his coming to them, and persuades
them to great liberality in their giving: for which end he makes use of the
most powerful and prevailing arguments and great arts of insinuation. (1.) He
sets before them the Example of the Churches of Macedonia; 2 Cor. 8. 1, 2, 3,
4, 5.
which is truly a very extraordinary instance of Christian Charity. They were
under great trouble and deep poverty at that time themselves, yet understanding
by Saint Paul this occasion of more than ordinary Charity, they not only
strained themselves even beyond their abilities, but did it with that
cheerfulness and satisfaction of mind, that they entreated the Apostle to
accept of what they had given, and to undertake the managing of so good a Work.
And Saint Paul seems to speak of it with a kind of transport, Moreover,
Brethren, we do you to wit of the Grace of God bestowed on the Churches of
Macedonia; how that in a great trial of affliction, the abundance of their joy
and their deep poverty abounded to the riches of their liberality; for to their
power I bear record, yea and beyond their power they were willing of
themselves; praying us with much entreaty that we would receive the gift, and
take upon us the fellowship of the ministering to the Saints. Nothing can be
added to the weight of these words and the Emphasis wherewith they are penned.
(2.) He lets them know what a shame and reproach it would be to so famous a
Church for other Divine Gifts to come behind others in Charity. Therefore as ye
abound in every thing, 2 Cor. 8. 7.
in faith, in utterance, in knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love
to us, (what artificial insinuations are these!) see that ye abound in this
Grace also. (3.) But lest he should seem to press too hard upon them, v. 8.
he draws off again; I speak not by commandment, but by occasion of the
forwardness of others, and to prove the sincerity of your love. (4.) Yet he
has no sooner said this, but he comes on again with the most prevailing
Argument taken from the Example of our Blessed Savior: v. 9.
For ye know the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poor that ye through his poverty might be rich. Can
any thing be more moving to Christians than this? (5.) His design was not to
lay a burden upon them, but to excite mutual compassion in Christians to one
another. v. 13, 14.
(6.) This would be a demonstration to the World of their kindness to him, and
that he had not spoken great things of them without cause. 2 Cor. 8. 24.
(7.) They might justly expect a retribution suitable to their Bounty; But this
I say, 9. 6.
He which sows sparingly shall reap sparingly; but he which sows
bountifully shall reap also bountifully. (8.) This would be the occasion of
many thanksgivings and prayers to God for them. v. 12.
For the administration of this service, not only supplieth the want of the
Saints, but is abundant also by many thanksgivings unto God. 13.
( Whilst by the experiment of this ministration they glorify God for your
professed subjection unto the Gospel of Christ, and for your liberal
distribution unto them, and unto all men.) 14.
And by their prayer for you, which long after you for the exceeding Grace of
God in you. Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable gift. 15.
Wherein he supposes the thing as already done, as believing it impossible for
them to resist the force of so many Arguments. And yet all this while Saint
Paul supposes their condition to be such as in a little time they might stand
in need of relief from others; which he thought was so far from being an
Argument against present Charity, that he uses it the other way; that now at
this time your abundance may be a supply for their want, 8. 14.
that their abundance may also be a supply for your want. i. e. Do not consider
what times may come upon your selves so as to hinder doing Good while it is in
your power to do it; leave those things to the wise Providence of God; if he
think fit to reduce you to want, he that now excites your hearts to do good to
them, will stir up others to make up the same measure to you. So that while the
Christians were either under great persecutions, or in expectation of them,
through the Power of the Magistrates, or the Rage of the People; yet the
Apostles pressed them, and that with great success, to a free, cheerful,
liberal contribution to relieve those who labor under greater wants than
others.

2. This very consideration is used as an Argument in Scripture to persuade men
to Charity, viz. That we do not know what times may come upon us. Eccles. 11. 2.
Give thy portion to seven and also to eight; for thou know not what evil
shall be upon the earth. This seems to the men of this World a strange way of
reasoning, and it may be they suspect from hence that Solomon was not so wise a
man as they took him to be. What! give away what one has because one knows not
what times may come. No certainly, say they, we ought to get what we can, and
to save what we have, for that reason. The difference of reasoning in this case
proceeds upon the different Principles on both sides. Solomon believed a Divine
Providence and they do not. And he thought that would be particularly concerned
for the good of those, whom no sad prospect of Affairs could discourage from
well-doing according to their Ability and Opportunity.

II. And so I come to the Encouragement here given to patient continuance in
well-doing; for, in due season we shall reap if we faint not. Wherein are three
things considerable.

1. The certainty of a future recompense for well-doing. We shall reap.

2. The time of receiving it, not immediately, but in due season.

3. The condition supposed on our parts, which is continuance in well-doing. If
we faint not. Some understand it as relating to the reward, that we shall
receive it without fainting; reaping and harvest being a time of labor and
sickness; but the more natural meaning of (...), seems to be the taking the
participle, as implying the condition on our parts.

1. The certainty of a future recompense for well-doing. Heb. 6. 10.
God is not unrighteous, says the Apostle, to forget your work and labor of
love, which ye have showed toward his name; in that ye have ministered to the
Saints and do minister. Though it be a work and labor, though it may seem
uneasy and troublesome for a while; yet being a work and labor of love; it is
but the work and labor of sowing, which a man goes through the more cheerfully
because he expects a plentiful increase. He does not reap presently the very
same which he sowed, but a wonderful improvement of it, when the seed being
cast into a fruitful soil brings forth some thirty, some sixty, some an
hundred fold. And this Harvest does not depend upon the uncertainty of the
Weather; here are no fears of blasting and mildew, or locust to prevent the
joyful expectation of it; no danger of the seed rotting in the ground, or
being picked up by the fowls of the air; but he that ministers seed to the
sower, 2 Cor. 9. 10.
will multiply the seed sown, and increase the fruits of their righteousness.
His Word is engaged that they which sow shall reap a plentiful increase; and
therefore God will not be unrighteous in not performing his Promise. This men
may as certainly depend upon as that Night and Day shall follow each other; for
Heaven and Earth may pass away, but the Word of God endures for ever.

2. The time of this retribution, in due season. Most men are unwilling to
trust God too long upon his bare Word; they would have something in hand, and
the remainder hereafter. And God by the course of his wise Providence, does
very often order things so in this World that the most charitable men, although
they may not abound with the greatest riches, yet generally meet with the
fewest difficulties; and in their straights find more unexpected assistance
than other men. David made it the observation of his own time, that in all his
days though he was then grown old, he never saw the righteous, Psalm. 37. 25.
i. e. the charitable man, forsaken, nor his seed begging bread. And they have
far more reason than other men to hope, that if they do fall into trouble and
sickness, God will have a particular regard to them; 41. 1, 3.
and besides this, they have the natural or rather spiritual contentment that
follows doing Good; and they have more satisfaction and ease in it, than others
have in hoarding up Wealth for they know not whom. But none of all these are
the reaping here mentioned; Ruth 2. 16.
They are like Ruth's gleaning of handfulls in the field of Boaz, which showed
a more than ordinary kindness; notwithstanding which he said, v. 12.
The Lord recompense thy work, and a full reward be given thee of the Lord God
of Israel, under whose wings thou art come to trust. So it is here, they may
have better gleanings and fuller handfulls sometimes in the common Field of
Providence, but this is not the full recompense which the God of Mercy will
give to those that trust in his Word. That is only to be expected at the great
Day when the Lord the righteous Judge shall say, Come ye blessed of my Father,
Matt. 25. 34, 35, 36.
inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the Foundation of the World. For I
was an hungered and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty and ye gave me drink; I was a
stranger and ye took me in; naked and ye clothed me; I was sick and ye visited
me; I was in prison and ye came unto me: v. 40.
For inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my Brethren ye
have done it unto me. O the infinite Goodness and unexpressible Kindness of our
Blessed Savior, who in the day of Judgment will interpret all Acts of Charity
so much to the advantage of those that do them! Who would deny any thing to a
Servant of that Lord who takes all kindnesses to them as done to himself, and
rewards them accordingly? What other apprehensions will covetous and
hard-hearted Wretches then have of their sordid penuriousness in heaping up
riches, without any tenderness or compassion to the necessities of their
Brethren and Christ's Representatives? How will they wish ten thousand times,
when it will be to no purpose to wish, that they had rather laid out their
money in doing good, than laid it up for those, who may go to Hell the faster
for the great Temptations they leave behind them. Neither let the prodigal
Fools think they shall escape better, for being so contrary to the griping and
stingy humor of the Covetous; for it is not the vain and careless squandring
an Estate away in riotous courses will make a man's condition more tolerable at
that day; but it is the provident, seasonable, careful distribution of our
Charity for wise and good ends, which shall meet with so glorious a reward.

3. Especially, in the last place, if we faint not, and do not repent of what
good we have done, but continue so doing to the end of our Lives. For this
reason I presume it is that many reserve their greatest Acts of Charity to
their Deaths; but it is dangerous putting off their Repenting and doing Good
till they come to die, for fear their hearts, or those whom they trust deceive
them. But if men begin to do well in their health and strength, let them not
faint when they come to die; but continue charitable as well as faithful unto
death, and God will give them a crown of life.

And now my business is to make particular Application to this great Assembly
not to be weary in well-doing; and therefore I shall repeat to You, A true
Report, etc.

You perceive by this Relation, how much Good has been already done in the
care of the Education of poor Children, and in the cure of and provision for
the Maimed and Distracted, all which are very commendable ways of well-doing,
and it is a great advantage to me this Day, that I am only to persuade you not
to be weary in this well-doing, for in due season You shall reap if ye faint
not. You have already broke through many discouragements, and since the sad
calamities of Plague and Fire, which made such desolations among us, You have
done even as to these charitable Foundations, what has been to the Admiration
and Astonishment of beholders. Which of us all who saw the City in its Ruins,
with so many Churches and Halls and Hospitals buried in its rubbish, could ever
hope to have lived to see them rise again with a much greater Glory; and our
new-built Hospitals to appear with that Magnificence, that strangers may easily
mistake them for Palaces? We have lived in an Age that has beheld strange
Revolutions, astonishing Judgments, and wonderful Deliverances; what all the
Fermentations that are still among us may end in, God alone knows; our
unanswerable returns to God for his great Mercies may justly make us fear, that
he has greater scourges provided for us; the best thing we can do for our
selves, is to amend our ways, and to bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of
life; not barely to own and profess the Protestant Religion, but to adorn it,
by holy and exemplary lives, and doing all the Good we can while we have
opportunity. And to that end I shall offer these Considerations, and so
conclude.

1. The more Good ye do, the more Comfort you will find in the doing it.
Therefore be not weary in well-doing. There is a certain secret pleasure and
inward satisfaction that follows doing Good; which increases by exercise and
continuance. This is so far above the pleasure of the Covetous and Voluptuous
in pursuit of their ends, that it approaches nearest of any thing we can
conceive, to the satisfaction of the Almighty, who delights in doing Good. It
was a remarkable saying of our Savior, which Saint Paul preserved, It is more
blessed to give than to receive. Act. 20. 35.
How happy do the Poor think themselves, when those who are Rich are bountiful
to them! But the advantage is on your side; they are the receivers but you are
the gainers. What you bestow on them you lay up in store for your selves: which
will yield far greater comfort when you come to die than having raised a vast
Estate: for that is only carrying a greater account into another World; but
this is a great help to discharge it.

2. Doing Good is really one of the best parts of our Religion. Jam. 1. 27.
True Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the
Widow and Fatherless in their Affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the World. It is not giving a cold formal visit to the Widow and Fatherless
that makes any part of Religion, but doing all the good we can to them, by
advice and counsel, by supplying their wants and taking care of their affairs.
No Duty takes in so much of the substance of Religion as true Charity. Gal. 5.
14.
It is the fulfilling of the Law; Tim. 1. 5.
the end of the Commandment, i. e. of the Gospel; Coloss. 3. 14.
the bond of perfectness. That, without which, all other pretense to Religion
is but flattering of God and mere hypocrisy. For all our Prayers and Praises
are but verbal acknowledgments; that which he has put the trial of our love to
himself upon, is our love to our Brethren. 1 John 4. 20.
For he that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom
he has not seen?

3. Doing Good to others is taking the best care of our selves. We all seem
very apprehensive of dangerous times, and very fearful what may become of us;
the best course every wise and good man can take in difficult and uncertain
times, is to do his own duty and to leave events to God. And there is no duty
more unquestionable, more safe, more advantageous, to himself as well as to
others, than to do good: i. e. to be kind and obliging to all, to forgive
injuries, to reconcile enemies, to redeem captives, to visit the distressed,
and according to our abilities and opportunities to relieve those that are in
wants and necessities. This is the way to dwell safely, and to be quiet from
the fear of evil; for as long as God governs the World he will take care of
those who commit themselves to him by patient continuance in well-doing.

4. Doing Good does the most answer the obligations God has laid upon you by
the Mercies he has vouchsafed to you.

And now give me leave to plead with you the Cause of the Poor and Fatherless
Children, the Cause of the Wounded and Maimed, who cannot help themselves, the
Cause of those who deserve so much more pity because they cannot pity
themselves, being deprived of the use of their Understandings. If God has
provided well for you and for your Children, wherein can you better express
your thankfulness for such a mercy than by your kindness and charity to those
who are destitute of the means to make them Men. If you have reason to bless
God for your good Education, show it by taking care of theirs who may hereafter
bless God for your kindness to them. If God has blessed you with Riches and a
plentiful Estate in this City, and raised you beyond your hopes and
expectations, what can you do more becoming the Members of this City than to
be kind to the Children of those who have been such and reduced to Poverty?
Remember from what God has raised you; do not think much to consider what you
have been, as well as what you are. You can never take the just height of God's
Mercies to you unless you begin at the bottom; and let others measure your
height now, as some have done that of the Pyramid's, by the length of your
shadow, by the refreshments they find under you. Think what God has brought
you to, and for what end; Was it for your own sakes, that you might be full,
while others are empty; that you might swim in abundance, while others are
pinched with necessities? Was it not rather to make you his Conduit-Pipes to
convey blessing and comforts to others through your means? When you are in
health and at ease, then think of the miserable condition of those who lie in
Hospitals under aches and pains and sores, having nothing to comfort them, but
the Charity of good People to them. They cannot represent their own condition
to you, being unable to come abroad to do it. Be you good Samaritans to the
wounded and hurt, bind up their wounds with your kindness, and help to defray
the charges of their cures. This is loving our neighbor as our selves, and
that is fulfilling the Law, and the great design of the Gospel. Lastly, when
you think what a blessing it is that you do enjoy the use of your Reason and
Understanding, pity the poor Creatures whom God has deprived of it. How
easily, how justly, how suddenly may God cast you into their Condition? Show
the esteem that you have of this Mercy of God to your selves, by the freeness
of your Charity to those that want it. Therefore, I conclude in the Words of
the Text, Let us not be weary in any of these ways of well-doing, for in due
season we shall reap if we faint not.

FINIS.

