Dr. Stewards Sermons.

TRIAS SACRA, A Second Ternary OF SERMONS PREACHED, Being the last (and best)
Monuments that are likely to be made public, of that most learned, pious and
eminent Dr. Richard Stuart, DEAN of St. Paul's, afterward Dean of Westminster,
and Clark of the Closet, to his late Majesty King CHARLES.

Being Dead, he yet speaks.

LONDON Printed by T. L. for Hen. Brom at the Gun in Ivy- lane, 1659.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have almost protested against Printing, in such a Time as this, wherein a
most ingenuous invention was never more abused; and it is doubtful, whether
this, or that of Powder, have hurted the modern world most: I dare believe, had
the Founders of them had so much of Providence, as Invention, they had stifled
their (...) in the birth, and never bequeathed such dangerous Weapons into the
hands of such mad men as we are, who abuse both the Powder and the Press (as
that cursed Assasine) to kill body and soul too. But since the soul must have
her Mess, without which she cannot live; and that is best and soonest carved
out to her from the shops of Intellectual provisions: And since too many saucy
and capricious Peasants have kicked down her dishes as they were serving in; and
most of her entertainment has contracted much dirt about it, and is rendered
unfit for her Table; Reader, take this as a part of the cleanest Divinity that
is left us, being (I think) disht out to thee before the s^uffle began, and is
sent to thee by A Steward, who, when alive, loved to serve those of the
household with clean diet, and well dressed; and now dead, is entered into the joy
of his Lord. It has no other plot upon thee, but to save thee; there be other
Tables spread for thee in the world, but it is foul meat, ill dressed, hard to
digest, will lie heavy on thy Stomach, which thou must disgorge, or die for it;
and a very hard reckoning at last. Use the Steward God has sent thee, who
brings thee this Angels food, and bread from Heaven, and taking what is carved
thee, go on eating, till thou come where thou shall read all in God.

A Table of the Texts.
PHILIP. 4. 17. Not because I desire a gift; but I desire Fruit, that may
abound to your account.

MARK 6. 20. For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy,
and observed him, and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him
gladly.

HEBREWS 10. 1, 2. For the Law having a shadow of good Things to come, and not
the very Image of the Things, can never with those Sacrifices which they
offered year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.

For then would not they have ceased to be offered, because the worshippers
once purged, should have had no more conscience of Sin?

The First SERMON.
PHILIPIANS, 4. 17. Not because I desire a gift; but I desire Fruit, that may
abound to your account.
GODS vineyard had for some certain years been now planted at Philippi, and
therefore no marvail, if the laborers did both desire, and expect fruit.
Indeed should those Disciples have believed only, it would have argued, that
the vines had taken root; but yet except they also bring forth fruit with
patience, the Apostle, who cultivated them, might well conclude the ground of
their hearts was but unprofitable. The Philippians then must be working; and
their works must be fruits too, answerable to those roots of Faith, which they
had received by Saint Paul's plantation. For if a Christian soul bring forth the
works of darkness, being himself a child of light, it is no less unnatural,
than for a vine to be^r Thorns, or a Fig*tree Thistles. If it yield works in
themselves good, yet without the culture and help of faith, it is but like some
hollow stump, which the bees have chosen to be their store house; it may afford
honey, a gift perhaps, and yet in it self be both dead and fruit*

That the Philippians were to abstain from works of impiety, both nature and
Saint Paul had taught them. My Apostle here becomes more punctual, and admits
not of all those works, which yet in man's judgment (perhaps) might seem
approvable; he is more curious in his choice; and like those Fishermen in Saint
Matthews Gospel, Chap. 13. He accepts not of all that comes to hand, but takes
the good, and refuses the bad. I desire fruit, says he; thus with them he
puts the good into vessels* but I desire not a gift, says he again; so he
casts the bad away.

In the whole there are these things considerable. First, A distinction of
works; they are either gifts, or fruits: or to speak more properly to this
text, a division of paris within the same good work. For either we consider the
matter whereof it consists, and so 't is a gift; or else the root from whence
it takes life, and so 't is fruit. Secondly, A direction for our practice. The
Axe is laid to the root of the tree, bring forth therefore fruits, not gifts
only: And this truth stands here Armed with a double weapon, the first* is the
judgment of mine Apostle, I desire not a gift, but I desire fruit. The Second
is the nature of ^he things themselves, fruits abound to your account, says my
Text* and thereby intimates, that what is but gift only, comes not into the
reckoning.


My discourse then must consist of these three parts. First I am to show you
the conditions requisite to the perfection of a good work, it must not only be
the gift of the man, but the fruit of his Faith* Next I must inform you, how to
esteem of a good work, you must not so much respect the gift it self* as the
Faith of him that gives it, for so my Apostle is resolute, I desire not a gift,
etc. He was in want and penury at this time, and yet takes more delight, that
his Philippians are good, than that they are liberal, joys more to see their
Faith, than to feel their bounty. In the last place, I must acquaint you with
the value, and price of good works. We have an account to make with the King of
Heaven* and at his great Audit such ^oyn as this ( good works) will be passable.

Strengthen me O Lord, while I treat of these particulars in their order; and
you my beloved, Here and (...) likewise.

Not because I desire a gift, but I desire fruit, etc. Gifts and fruits.

As the man is, so is his strength, was the Speech of those Midianitish
Princes, unto Gideon, the revenger of Israel, Judge. 8. 21. And it is no less
true in the Acts of Religion, than those of valor; as is the man, so are his
works. There are some you know, who want as much Faith, as they have
Hypocrisy; men that desire not so much to be, as to be accounted Religious, in
whose mouths there is a God sometimes, but their hearts are far from him.
Such as these may love our Nation (perhaps) they may build or endow Synagogues,
they may give gifts, even beyond the lists of a free mind, and become prodigal
in their charity* and yet when their goodly buildings fare now finished, their
large possessions firmly conveyed* in stead o being the Serv^ants of God,
become no better than the Slaves of their own ^ain Glory* with those founders
of Babel, Come let us build, and get a name, say they. I, they respect their
name, more than God, and desire more to live in the peoples applause* than with
Gods approbation.

But can such a man's works do good to others, and yet in themselves be evil?
may a man erect Temples to the honor of God, houses for the education of his
Prophets? may he give his bread to the hungry, and clothes to them who are
naked* and yet all these goodly deeds be counted reprobate* not so much as to
be termed good works? Can a man in the same Act be both a Benefactour and a
Sinner? My Text decides it so; for it expects in our good works, that they be
as well fruits as gifts; as well the fruits of faith, as the gifts of fortune*

If a man give Alms to the poor, not so much to express his duty to God, as
to win applause from spectatours, this Action may (possibly) be termed a good
gift, but it is no good fruit. It Is a good Gift, because it gave ease, perhaps
to his poverty, who received it: It Is no good Fruit, because the tree was
evil; it grew not upon a right stock; it proceeded not from his faith, but his
vain Glory.

It Is an old rule, and allowed by him, who is Truth it self, the tree is known
by his fruit; but I must now invert the Maxim, and tell you, the fruit is known
by the tree: For here it is so. Would ye find the difference between Cains
offering, and that of Abels? look not so much upon their Sacrifices, as upon
themselves. The elder brought the increase of his ground, the younger of his
Cattle, both alike (perhaps) in worth and estimation, had they been to have
been sold in the market: And yet there was as great a difference in their
works, as in their persons; as great a disproportion in their Religious
offices, as there was between Abel a Saint, and Cain a murderer.

My Apostle has penned the difference in the 11th. to the Hebrew^ at the 4th
verse. And as the example is there related, it seems as happily suitable to
this point, as to his conclusion. By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent
Sacrifice than Cain* See here the exact perfection of a true good work. He
offered Sacrifice, a* Gift; there is the matter whereof it consisted; but he
offered it by faith, says the Text, and therefore it was fruit too; and that is
the root from whence it took life. His Cattle made the work a gift, but his
faith made it fruit.

In Cains Sacrifice the case was otherwise. He came to the Altar, like him in
the Gospel unto the Kings Table, who came in as a man only, not as a guest;
for his marriage-robe was wanting, he had not on a wedding garment: so Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground, and probably his Sheaves might be as well
grown, in their kinds, as Abels Lambs, how be it his Sacrifice proved a gift
only, it was no fruit; why? because he who wants the root of faith, can never
offer the fruit of good works; Cain a reprobate may seem (perhaps) liberal
before men, he cannot be fruitful before God.

That of David at first hearing may seem harsh and improbable* Thou desire no
Sacrifice* else would ^ give it thee; thou delightest not in burnt-offerings;
it is in the 51 Psalm, at the 16. verse What, is God himself now become mutable?
is his mind changed? does his law so strickly enjoin Sacrifices* and yet in
David's time, does he not desire them? was the priesthood of Aaron at an end,
before that of Christ began? The sequel answers, and Satisfies the doubt, The
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit. For now, (me thinks) he speaks there in
the Kingly Prophet, neither more nor less, than what he has here intimated by
his great Apostle, I desire no Sacrifice, that is, I desire not a bare gift
only; what make your Cattle at the door of my Sarctuary, while your hears run
on whoring after strange Gods? Indeed I have commanded, that beasts should
beslain; but whiles their bodies are ^orn, your hearts should be rent too. I
desire not those naked Gifts, but I desire Fruit, a broken and contrite Spirit;
I desire repentance, the fruit of faith. Add this Salt unto your Sacrifice,
and then come* offer as much sacrifice as you will, make my* Altars grow fat
with offerings, weary my Levites, let my Priests faint through the multitude of
your oblations, offer up the fruit of your ground, the increase of your Cattle,
Tithe mint and cumins. It Is acknowledged, these gifts ought to be done, but
withal remember Justice and Judgment, remember to break and rent your hearts;
these fruits must not be left undone.

Will you see the Gospel exemplify this truth? attend our Savior into the
Temple, and with him behold the Jews casting into the Treasury, you may there
fix your eye upon some long-rob'd Pharisee, whose Phylacteries are so Spacious,
that they scarce leave any room for goodness; and suddenly perceive his pride
so super^uously bountiful, as if he came not to adore, but to purchase a
deity; you may then descry a poor, yet pious widow, whose bounty and living
are of the same extent; they both make but a farthing: And then hear Christ's
censure of the oblations, (...). This poor widow here has cast in more than
they all. How? more than the Pharisee? Can the truth it self be found at such a
fault? Can a farthing be more than thousands? yes, very well; in account,
though not in quantity. That which she did was a perfect good work; her
farthing was but a gift* but the good intent, the good mind, wherewith she gave
it* was fruit. That* namely her farthing, was the body only, but this, to wit,
her true devotion, was the soul of her Action; This crowned her good work. Each
of the rest gave a gift indeed* perhaps rich and goodly, but that was only the
carcass of a good work; one to win an opinion of Holiness, another of
Magnificence, but for fruit you can there expect none, where there is no
Integrity.

And now Beloved judge ye, whether is better, living David, then dead Goliath?
David is little, but yet a perfect man; Goliath is large and vast of bulk, but
yet no more than a Trunk. So a Pharisees works may be goodly indeed, and great
in outward show, but yet dead in themselves, because their hearts are
uncircumcised; Those of the widow are lively* and full of faith; little, but
good works.

Didiciate, Deus meus, inter datum and fructum discernere, says S. Austin in
his last book of Confessions, at the twenty sixth chap. I have learned it of
thee, O my God, to put a difference betwixt gifts and fruits. What may the
difference be, good Father? Datum est res ipsa, quam dat, qui impartitur, hae^
necessaria: Fructus recta voluntas Datoris est. A gift is no more than the bare
thing it self which is bestowed: Fruit is the good intent o^ him that gives it.

To afford a Disciple a cup of cold water is a gift: But to do it in the name
of a Disoiple, that argues a Religious inclination; and then it is fruit too. To
sustain a prophet, that's a gift; and so the Ravens did feed Eliah: But to give
him entertainment in the name of a Prophet, because he is a man of God, This is
fruit it self; and so he was nourished only by the good widow of Zarephah.
Didici a te, Deus meus, says the devout Father, this have I learned of thee my
God: He thought it worth the registring, that he had received so useful a
Doctrine from so great an Author.

For throughout the various passages of our doubtful life, what more
universally profitable? what more applyable? Each humane Action admits of this
mixture; there is a gift, and there should be fruit in it; your very approach
into these Assemblies, what is it but a gift? you give unto God your pains,
you give him your presence, you afford him the knee, the eye, the hand, with
those other complements of Religious honor. If these be done only upon some
false respects, as either to purchase an opinion of Holiness, or to avoid the
threats of the law; if they be done either for fear of Superiors, or to keep
correspondency with those of your own Rank, they make but a bare gift only,
and are as far from the nature of a good work, as truth is from hypocrisy.

That these gestures may become fruits too, make Religion the Mistress of your
outward Actions; let her prompt your feet to go, your eyes to look upward;
subject all your members unto the Scepter of her direction. Be indeed what you
would seem to be: For it is a shame that your bodies should be more Christian,
than your souls; that your tongues should be more ready to praise, than your
hearts to conceive the Lord; Your knees more officious to bow to him, than your
souls to adore him. Let that Kingly votary be your guide and instruction, Come
(says he) let us worship, and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our Maker.
First worship; that's the Fruit of a Religious intent: and then fall down and
kneel, those are the gifts of our outward Actions: and therefore, that the
service of your knees, eyes, hands may be acceptable, first take order, that
your Souls do worship.

My Text commands yet further, and will needs sit in judgment, even with this
exercise at which we are present, it claims rule in the Pulpit too, and
requires, that our Sermons be composed of its two ingredients, that they have
in them both gift and fruit; They must be gifts to others, and fruits to our
selves. If we preach, rather to ensnare men's ^ares, than to correct their
affections; if in stead of censuring men's sins, we defame their persons; if our
intent be not so much to win Souls, as followers, and that we preach, ac si
deus numeraret tantum, non aestimaret, as if God were able only to number our
Sermons, but not to weigh and judge of them; if thus, we offer gifts only, and
those as displeasing in the eyes of the eternal God, as they are often times
ridiculous unto the ears of a mortal Auditor.

But when with an upright and pure heart, we intend and endeavor the health of
Israel; when our reprehensions do as much move our selves, while we meditate
them, as we desire they should work upon our hearers, when we deliver them; if
Judah hear of her sins, not from our passion, but our conscience, and the house
of Jacob of their transgressions, not to vilify, but to reform her people,
then our discourses, and exhortations to you become Fruits too; and then are
they no less pledges of our own salvation, than they are the means of yours.
Happy Preacher! who endeavors this composition, who affects, that his Sermons
may appear to be as well the Fruits of faith, as the Gifts of learning, for in
so doing he shall both save himself, and them that hear him.

The word (...) is yet more Doctrinal. Good works* are here called Fruits; it is
to let us understand, that as fruits keep a due proportion to the tree that
bears them, so should our works be still answerable to our ability. In this
way to heaven, the blind man's fight, as it is expressed in the Gospel, must be
our direction, I see men as trees walking, we must walk like trees* you know
'twere unnatural for a pomegranate to bear fruits no bigger than a grape; and
it is no less unseemly, for a man of large Revennew to give Alms like his
meaner neighbor.

Neither must our charity exceed our Estate* for when a man grows liberal
beyond his means, *it is as if a vine, in stead of its proper grape* should bring
forth a gourd. We read, Exodus 35. 20. at the building of the Tabernacle, some
brought Gold and precious Stones, some Purple and Fine twined linen, others
Badgers skins, and Goats hair to the Sanctuary: all these were Fruits. Gold and
precious Stones fit for the Nobles of Israel to bear; Purple and Fine linen
for persons of middle rank; Skins and Goats hair for the poorer sort. Iael
may give Milk to drink, and bring forth butter in a Lordly dish; it is well if
the poor widow can give a little Cake, and a draught of water to Eliah.

Thus let each tree bring forth its own Fruit; let each man's wisdom proportion
his contribution to his Estate. Great men must do great works; and God may as
well expect, that a rich man should build a Church, where there is need, as
that another should adorn it. Should Caithas have cast in those Two mites into
the Treasury, men might rather have scorned his baseness, than commended his
charity; mites did well become the widow, but the high Priest must bring a
larger offering.

I know, it is not our substance, but our Faith, which commends the work; but*
yet we may well suspect the Niggards faith, when he gives too little of his
substance, and he is to be counted a very weak Christian, whose covetousness
shuts his purse so close, that his Faith cannot open it. There are some that
can speak great store of charity, they can give good words, to people in want;
Alas my brother! Alas poor man, I am sorry for you; yea they can be content to
pray sometimes, that God would help them, but it is with reservation, so that
they be not his instruments. But such Trees as these, bear not fruit, but
leaves; and, as you know it follows, their end is to be burnt.

If our good works be fruit, it follows, they ought not to make us proud, nor
to puff us up with any vain imaginations, as though they had deserved, that God
should favor us. For tell me, when Noah had bestowed* great pains in planting
a vineyard, do you think he was beholding to his slips, that they brought forth
graps?

Beloved, we are Gods vineyard, he has planted us, he has set an hedge about
us, and therefore to bring forth the fruits of a Godly life, is not our
kindness, but our duty. This truth is yet further manifested by the verse next
following. My Apostle had lately received a contribution from Philippi, and yet
thus he speaks of it (...), I have received all things; (...), is a word very
emphatical, it signifies to receive by way of due debt, as a Prince receives
his Tribute, or a Lord his rent; for so it is expounded by Saint Chrysostom, a
Greek Father, and therefore one that knew well the property of my Apostles
language.

Observe hence, when you minister unto the Saints necessities, you do but pay
what you owe; and such works, I hope, you will confess, are not to be accounted
as your liberality, but as Gods Tribute.

You have heard the difference between Gifts and Fruits; and I doubt not, but
the bare Narration of it has soon taught you which to practice: For Jacob
needed no other inducement to choose Rachel before her Sister Leah, than that
the one was bleare-eyed, but the other beautiful. The disproportion here is of
a far greater consequence: bare Gifts are dead, and unprofitable, but Fruits
are of a weighty value, the Testimonies of our Faith, and the pledges of our
Salvation. If neither Grace, nor yet Reason, has taught you which to choose,
learn at least to rely upon Saint Paul's Authority, I desire not a Gift, but I
desire Fruit: which I called my Second part, and I must now explain it to you.

I desire not a Gift, but I desire Fruit. To know the true worth of this
Apostolic assertion, we must as well enquire how Saint Paul then lived, as
what he wrote; we must look as well into his life, as his Epistle.

You must understand therefore, that he was now at ^ome a prisoner under Nero
the Emperor, whither the Jews malice constrained him to appeal, as Saint Luke
relates it from his own confession, in the last of the Acts, at the 19th.
verse. He was now indeed in a very Strange Land, forced to converse with
Romans, Strangers to his person, with Gentiles Strangers to his Religion, and
which makes his case far more lamentable, There was a Nero and a Paul
together, the most Zealous Apostle under the most Savage Tyrant.

You see Beloved, he is a miserable object, his condition, and in all likely
hood his wants also, not unfit for a whole Church to exercise their charity
upon. Here Is an Apostle, in necessity, in prison, and that under a cruel
Prince, among Strange people. The Philippians hear news of his Estate, and
presently in a Religious bounty they make Collections for him, and dispatch
them to him by Epaphroditus, who in their names was both to Salute and relieve
the prisoner. It may be thought, nothing could be more welcome to the Apostle
at this time, nothing more welcome than wealth in stead of want, than the Alms
of Philippi, in the midst of his great extremity.

But men of that opinion are ignorant of Saint Paul's abundance. He could truly
say of himself, what the Comaedian put into the mouth of his Actor, omnia
habeo, nec quicquam habeo, nihil cum est, nihil deest tamen. I have all things,
and yet possess nothing, there is nothing about me, and yet I want nothing. For
contentment is a large possession, and the man truly full, is not he that has
eaten most, but he that is satisfied. They are his own words in this present
Chapter. I know both how to be abased, and I know how to abound, I am
instructed both to be full, and to be hungry, both to abound, and to suffer
need; I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me.

How! all things? hear ye Elders of Philippi, what need is there of your
Churches bounty? Saint Paul wants nothing, he has already all the wealth he
desires, and it is but a Thanklesse expense to enrich a man beyond his wishes
Indeed had these Philippians, in a seeming Holiness, sent but their wealth, a
bare Gift only, his chain had been more welcome, than their Benevolence, Saint
Paul would have more esteemed the bonds of Christ, than the riches of
hypocrisy. But when under the shadow of this outward bounty, he descryes the
inward Truth of a Sincere affection, when he perceived it an odor of a sweet
smell, a Sacrifice acceptable, well-pleasing to God, then he breaks out, I
rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that your care of me has Flourished; not because
I desire a Gift, but I desire Fruit, not that I cove^ my own wealth, but your
Salvation.

A generous mind you see, and fit for an Apostles breast; he scorns to be
relieved, but by the hand of Faith; and can be as well content with the pangs
of hunger, as the Gifts of Infidelity. Indeed, had the Philippians been yet but
hypocrites, my Apostle might with a good conscience have used their bounty, for
it came to him by deed of Gift; and there is no fairer Title to any possession:
But he is not so content; to please him, they must send, as well Fruits as
Gifts, they must send such presents, as may abound no less to their accounts,
than to his necessity; otherwise they may satisfy his wants, perhaps, but not
his desire.

It Is a rule in the Mathematics, that Rectum est index curvi; the best way to
discover a Crooked line is to compare it with one that is straight. You know
it is a straight square that must tell the workman, whether his timber be
straight, or uneven.

The case is with us, as with Lines, Beloved. Men of a crooked disposition are
then best known, when they are compared with others of an upright heart* and
the only way to discover a false Philippian, is to examine his Actions by
Saint Paul's example. He was in want you heard, and yet desires not Gifts,
except they were Fruits too. How far then do those poor decline from the
straight steps of his Apostle, who scarce either desire the one, or respect the
other, but had rather be beholding to their own theft and cousenage, than
either to the Fruits of other men's Faith, or to the Gifts of their vain Glory?
Indeed, such men may usurp upon that speech of Saint Paul, these hands minister
to my necessities, but it is not of their own, but their neighbors goods.

The covetous person may here examine himself, and strait way discover the
error of his life. Saint Paul was poor, and yet desires not wealth; for his
contentment was his riches. This man abounds in all things, and yet is
therefore still poor, because he is not Satisfied. We may (all of us) behold
mine Apostle, and from him take a pattern how to rectify our affections: he
desires not Gifts, but Fruits; and delights more in the Philippians Faith, than
in their liberality.

This likewise shows the Crookedness of those perverse Christians, who
prefer their own profit, before the Salvation of their brethren; and would
more delight to see the Philippians become their Tributaries, than Christ's
Disciples. He that rules a Family must hence learn to take more pleasure, that
his servants are good, than that they are profitable: for if they labor their
Masters increase, either for hope of reward only, or for fear of offense, this
is but eye-service, neither Fruit, nor Gift, unless perhaps ye account that
given, which ye pay for. But when they become Trusty for conscience sake, when
they are industrious and truly diligent, not as in the sight of man, but God,
then are their labors Fruits, and a Christian Master must more joy to see his
Servants Faith, than his own Commodity.

That your Actions must be Fruits, not Gifts only, I have showed unto you in
my First part, from the Nature of the things themselves; in this Second part I
have showed it from the Authority of the Apostles choice. I must reiterate my
exhortation once more. Bring forth Fruits, if not for these reasons, yet for
your own commodity. Remember that great Audit which* you must one day make with
the Lord of Heaven: then Fruits will abound to your account; which I made my
last part, and must now be handled.

That may abound to your account. There Is a great correspondency between the
written and the eternal word; between Christ and the Scriptures. They have both
of them humbled themselves for us; He to the death of the Cross, This to the
dullness of our capacity. For how often does not the Scripture speak of God, as
of a mortal man? It gives him both eyes, and ears, and Feet, and hands; in
some places it supposes him an Husbandman, in others a Shepherd; some places
make him a man of War, and clothe him with harness to the battle; and in my
Text he is an Auditor. The Lord has sought a man after his own heart, says
the Scripture of David, first of Kings at the 13th. chapt. how, Sought? God is
every where, and may spare that inquiry; what needs he to seek, who sees all
at once? Non quod nesciat, ubi sit, quaerit, sed per hominem, more hominum
loquitur, quia sic loquendo nos quaerit, as Saint Austin speaks, in the 17. of
the City of God, at the 5th. chap. he did not seek David, because he was
ignorant where he was, but he so speaks, because he seeks us; for we are then
found, when we understand him.

That we might become learned, God is said to have Books too; The Books were
opened, says Saint John. Revel. 20th. that is, the particular Testimonies of
every ones private conscience. And again, another Book was opened; that is, the
Sacred register of Gods eternal Decree. My Text adds to this library, for it
implies Books too, namely Books of Account. So Zanchius unfolds the Metaphor,
hic Deo tribuit librum, the Apostle, faith he, in this place attributes to God
the use of a Book, wherein there stands the formal draught of an exact account.
Here he writes his expenses, namely the things w^i^h he has given us; and here
are his receipts too; that is, the duties which we have returned to him: again,
here he notes our Trespasses, or Debts, and here likewise he sets down our
weeping payment, our tears, those fruits of Faith, which so far abound unto
our accounts, that they turn our revenging creditour into a loving Father. Put
my Tears into thy Bottle; are they not noted in thy Book? Says David, a
weeper, in the 56th. Psalm, at the 8th verse, for so runs the original, it is a
word* varyed from (...) ( Sepher) which signifies a Book. He that has mercy
upon the poor, lends unto the Lord, Prove. 19th. the Lord borrows our works of
Charity, and puts them into his receipts.

See then, Beloved, do not such Fruits abound to our advantage? they make our
God become our Debtour; and our Accounts must then needs be easy, when we our
selves are become the Creditors; who gives a Disciple a cup of cold water only,
in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his
reward, says our Savior, Mat. the 10th. at the last verse. The thing here to
be given is scarce worth the valuing; and yet if this water be Fruit, if it
issues as well from his heart, that gives it, as from the Fountain from whence
it is drawn, how does it abound to our account? It both cancels our debts, and
entitles us to a farther Benefit; it gives us, not a Freedom only, but a reward.

Are our works then of so high a price? can they both discharge the debts we
owe, and yet leave us so rich, that we may purchase too? Indeed our Savior
seems to intimate it, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you before the world began, for your Fruits have abounded to your
accounts, I hungered, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me drink,
etc. Here Is no mention of offenses at all: it seems then our works shall both
Satisfy those debts, and also purchase a Kingdom for us.

But lest, with that purple whore, we become drunk with a conceit, or pride of
Merits, we must understand, that our accounts are to pass before such an
Auditor, whose only Mercy is our satisfaction. Indeed in his Reckonings our
Fruits shall pass for current coin, but yet it is his bounty that gives them
value. A Creditour, if he please, may accept of Brass for Gold, and of Iron
instead of Silver: though all our righteousness be as a stained cloth, yet God
in mercy may both pardon and crown our works: and when he so deals with us, we
are not beholding to the worth of our coin, but unto the bounty of our
Creditour; not unto the merit of our desert, but unto the mercy of our
Redeemer. Come ye Blessed of my Father, (...), (So the Greek has it) possess
ye the Kingdom by title of Inheritance. Mark, Beloved, we are heirs, not
purchasers, and we obtain the Kingdom, not by our own desert, but by Gods free
adoption: and yet, that all the world might know his sentence to be equal, he
adds, for I hungered, and ye gave me meat, I thirsted, and ye gave me to
drink; your Fruits make it manifest, that you are the Sons of me your Father;
and thus do they abound to your accounts.

The Civilians distinguish between Dominium and Possessio, between the right of
Title, and the form of taking possession. You know a man may have Title to what
he does not yet possess; and a man may wrongfully possess that, to which he
has no just Title Nabouh had to his vineyard, to wit, Title of inheritance;
the Lord forbid, says he to Ahab, that I should give the Inheritance of my
Fathers unto thee, 1. of Kings, 21. Yet at length Ahab possessed it, without a
Title, for ought we find, unless perhaps it were some new Law of Iezabels
enacting; that the Husband should succeed him, whom the Wife had murdered. We
may get a right of Title by others, for so Isaac had it to his Inheritance,
because he was the Son of Sarah, the wife of Abraham; and Mephibosheth to his
possession, because he was the Son of Jonathan, the Friend of David. But it is
the Act of their own Body usually, whereby men take possession.

Possessio, quasi pedis positio, say the learned Lawyers, it is gotten by
setting our foot, and seeming to take up our rest, upon the ground which we
meant to possess. You may remember Ahab went down in person to take possession
of Nabaoths vineyard, in the Text before cited. So then we may get a right of
Title from the bounty of others, but possession is the Fruit of our own
endeavors.

I apply it; the practice of this legal course, is no less observable in the
attainment of the Everlasting Kingdom: for to have a Title to it is one thing,
the manner of possessing it another. If we be Sons, then are we also heirs,
Says the Apostle; there is our Title, it is by a right of Inheritance. Well
done, good and faithful Servant, enter into thy masters joy, there is the manner
of possessing it; it is per pedis positionem, by setting our feet, and putting
our selves resolutely into that narrow way, which leads unto life, by
bringing forth the Fruits of Faith, which may abound, and advance us unto this
possession.

Calvin himself has intimated, what I now observed, in his third Book of
Institutions, chap. 17. In his locis, in these Texts, says he, where Eternal
life is called the reward of good works, the Holy Ghost speaks not of life it
self, but of the form of enjoying it, that is, as I understand him, he speaks
not of our Title to the Kingdom, but of the manner how we must possess it.
Without Fruits then our Account will not be taken; or to speak plainly, and
leave this Metaphor, without good works there is no Salvation. They are not
indeed the cause, but they are the way to life; They are not the Title whereby
we lay claym to Heaven, but yet they serve instead of that legal form, whereby
we must take possession of Heaven.

Nor is my Text any way injurious to Faith, while it holds good works in so
great esteem: for if you observe the word here used by my Apostle, when he
mentions the one, he implies the other; yea and chiefly extolls Faith, though
he does not name it, (...), he says not, I desire good works, but I desire
Fruit. They are not esteemed then for their own sakes, but because they grew
upon the Stemm of Faith. He that loves an Israelite, because he is the Son of
Abraham, loves Abraham, more than he does the Israelite; and so he that desires
good works, because they are the Fruits of Faith, honors Faith, more than he
does good works. For our affection looks chiefly at that which first moves it,
and therefore the cause, why we respect any thing, is still more in our
account, than the Thing it self.

Names of Relation always busy our understanding, and by a silent kind of
Command make us to search farther than the Thing we hear. If we call the
Rechabites no more but good men, our apprehension confines it self unto their
persons only; but when we Style them obedient Sons, we can hardly abstain from
making some farther enquiry touching their Father Ionadab. So, had it been here
said, Good works abound, we might perhaps have sought no further than into
their desert, but the name of Fruit, which is given them, makes us enquire for
the Tree on which they grow, and silently enformes our understanding, that good
works do therefore abound to our account, because they are the Fruits of Faith,
that saves us. So then, it is Faith that justifies, both our selves, and our
works too: it makes us of Sinful men become the children of God; and it makes
our works, of unprofitable Actions, become Fruits; abounding unto our Eternal
Freedom.

Where Is now the forehead of that Romish strumpet, who dares affirm, that our
Doctrine hinders good works, and that without blushing too? Indeed we must not
say they merit; that were as false as dangerous, and the ready way to make us
men, become rather proud than honest: yet we averr, without good works there is
no Salvation, and in mine Apostles phrase, that without such Fruit, we shall
fail in our account: our Master will be wroth with us, and deliver us over to
the Tormentor, to lie in prison, till we pay all that is due to him, which will
be to eternity.

If this be not a sufficient inducement to good works, what is? who can move
him, that regards neither the loss of Heaven, nor the gaining of hell? nor do
I well see, how our adversaries themselves should present us with a greater
motive; unless perhaps they will have the confidence to tell us, that the Fire
of Hell is not so hot, but burns more gently and softly than that of Purgatory.
'T were to be wished indeed, that in this point, our lines were as well able to
give Rome the lie, as our Doctrine is; she might then see, as well as read,
that the reformed Church, can be both good, and humble too; and knows both to
be rich in the Fruits of Faith, and yet to rely only upon Christ's satisfaction.

I conclude with that of Saint Austin, in the 23th. chapter of his Confession.
Germinet anima nostra opera misericordiae, Let our souls Bud and Bring forth
the works of mercy: pity the Fatherless, have compassion on the poor, relieve
those that are in distress, lend a tender and favorable ear to the widows
groans; Be ye members one of another, by compassion and a lively sense of your
Brethrens sufferings, and be ye members one to another by the free help of your
Benevolence and Chatity. Be Eyes to the blind, be Feet to the lame, be Hands to
them that cannot, through age or other impotency, labor for themselves. In a
word, give Alms, every man according to his Estate, liberally, frequently,
constantly worship God humbly and devoutly, do all kind of good works with
Diligence, Faithfulness and Sincerity; So shall your Fruit abound, not only
to your own, but to the Churches account; the Church shall have wherewith to
answer her Adversaries in this world, and your selves wherewith to satisfy that
great Judge of account in the world to come: which God of his mercy grant, etc.

The Second SERMON.
MARK 6. 20. For Herod feared John, knowing that he was a just man and an holy,
and observed him; and when he heard him, he did many things, and heard him
gladly.
EXamples give life to precepts: for as they usually make us conceive with
ease, what otherwise we should hardly understand; so do they cause us to
practice with encouragement, what without them (perhaps) we should scarce
attempt. Precepts indeed may command, but it is their examples, that persuade
obedience with greatest facility; the reason is, because they both imply matter
of Emulation, which is as a spur in many cases, unto men's spirits, and
likewise exclude impossibility, by showing that the thing, which is commanded
us, may be performed.

That we must in all things obey the voice of the Lord our God is a precept
better known than observed; and what can be more availeable to enforce our
performance of this command, than the consideration of Abraham's example? For
can thou stick to abandon the company of thy vicious Associates, when he, to
avoid occasion of sin, leaves both his kindred and his Fathers house? Can
thou forbear strangling thine in ordinate affections and lusts, when thou see
him, in obedience to the command of that great Law giver, turn Executioner to
the Fruit of his own loins, and rather than not to be the child of God, is
content to be no longer the Father of his dearest Isaac?

But amongst all the several kinds of Inducements, that are apt to work upon
us, and to move us to do this or that, there is none that more effectually
stirs our affections, than the good examples of those who seem most exposed to
ignominy and disgrace. For we can hardly brook the worthy Achievements of our
Equals in any kind, but we disdain and are vexed to see our selves out-stript
by our inferiors. And therefore that fabulous Philosopher, Aesope I mean, did
very wisely; who being desirous to incite and bring his Auditors to a more
virtuous course of life, chose rather to acquaint them with the Annals of
Beasts, than men; to the end that they might be ashamed to see sense out go
reason, and to observe those silly creatures performing the offices, which
either sluggish negligence made them unable, or their crooked and perverse
dispositions unwilling to execute.

This one example, which my Text proposes, affords variety of such
inducements. For if thou be possessed with a generous Spirit, and apt to
emulate the Actions of great men, Behold, here is Herod a Prince to be
imitated: but if thy drowsy affections permit thee not to look up, nor to be
awaked with such Alarmes, yet blush notwithstanding to see thy self outstript
by Herod, a man whom the Gospel has noted out, as notoriously infamous, an
incestuous person, and a murderer: Is it not a shame then for thee, to contemn
the Ministers of God, or to abuse his servants, to whom in this place Herod
himself does reverence? To be backward and slothful in attending to his word,
which Herod here again and again receives with gladness? lastly, would it not
argue great want of Grace in thee to be an idle hearer only, when we in this
Text find Herod himself doing, readily doing and performing many good deeds?

Consider I say, and blush at these circumstances, thou who ever thou art, that
have not as yet attained to Herod's perfection. Think how far short thou
come of those duties, which that last and great day shall exact of thee:
Seeing that the charity of our best Divines cannot so far o'rerule their
judgments, as to make them think this Galilaean Prince, throughout all these
Actions, to have gone any whit beyond a reprobate. For although considered in
their own nature, the many things, which he is here said to have done, were
doubtless good and truly commendable before men, yet being stained with
infidelity, and corrupted by the ill manner of the performance of them, they
were as far from the perfection of a true good work, in the sight of God, as
himself was in person from the privilege of a trueborn Israelite; to which yet
(as some say) he was not unwilling to pretend.

The Actions here specified are Three. First, the respect which Herod showed to
the Ministers of the word, and withal to the line of Aaron; for John was heir
to the course of Abia, being, as the Gospel shows and calls him, filius
Zachariae, the Son of Zachariah the Priest. He feared John, and observed him.
Secondly, the entertainment, the joyful entertainment, which Herod gave to the
word it self, which John preached. And when he heard him, etc. he heard him
gladly. Thirdly, the Reformation, or good effect, which John's Sermons, or
preaching, wrough upon Herod. He did many things, etc. Each of these apart in
their order, together with a particular discovery of their several
imperfections, are to be the subject of my present discourse; it being my
desire and intent principally, to acquaint you with the fair progress, which a
Reprobate may seem to make in godliness, and yet how far he comes short of
true Grace and Salvation.


Part I.
You may thence conjecture, that our Forefathers did highly esteem the Priests
office, because it was so often, in their time united unto the Kings Authority.
Majorum haec erat consuetudo, ut Rex esset etiam Sacerdos and pontifex: 'Twas a
custom among the Ancients, that he that was King, should be likewise Priest, as
Isidore Hispalensis observes in the 7th. of his Etymoligicks, at the 12th.
chapter. This was practiced by the Patriarks themselves, as we may read Heb.
7th. There Melchisedech partakes of both Tit^es, he received Tyth^s of Abraham,
as Priest of the most high God; and questionless he took Tribute of his own
people, as being King of Salem. Also the Scripture tells us of Eli and Samuel,
both Judges, successively invested with the same Sovereignty, and yet the first
a Priest, the second both a Priest and Prophet in Israel.

The Gentiles, though as yet they had not attained to the Faith of Israel, that
is, unto the true knowledge of Almighty God and his Law, yet in this particular
they thought not amiss to imitate the custom of Israel: among them there was.

Rexidem hominum Phaebique Sacerdos, As Virgil speaks of Anius, who was both
King and Priest, a King to Delos, and a Priest to Apollo, who was there
worshipped. And it is not unworthy of observation, that Moses Genesis 41. Styles
Potipherah his Father in Law (...) ( On Cohen) which you may render either
Prince, or Priest of On. Probably 'twas to let us understand, that Egypt liked
well of the old conjunction between the Sacerdotal and Princely dignity.

Thus did those elder times think Holiness the chiefest policy: and therefore
held him as most able to Reign, whom they saw to be most fit to Sacrifice. This
Ancient practice seems not a little to justify a Maxim of our own times. Rex,
lay we, est persona mixta cum Sacerdote, the King himself is partly a
Clergyman: his office then includes a Priesthood, and bids him not to rule
only, but to pray for his People.

Consult the Pagan Antiquities, and you will find strange variety of Honor
conferred upon the Ministers of their supposed Deities. Romulus styled them
Kings, as if he meant to have enlarged their power unto the height of his own
Authority. And when afterward the name of a King became as odious at Rome, as
the real oppression of a Tyrant was to other Cities, yet was she still content,
that the chief Master of her religious Ceremonies should retain the old Title,
and be styled Rex Sacerdotum, or the Priestly King. I might acquaint you with
the large Immunities and Privileges which they enjoyed, with the strange
Complements of Honor, wherewith they were little less than adored, did they
not contain as great an excess of Superstition, as they did abundance of
Reverences?

This will be sufficient to prove that they were both feared and observed, that
in succeeding ages, the Caesar's themselves became ambitious of the Priesthood,
as Sueto^ius has observed in Julius Caesar and Augustus; and Tacitus
witnesses the same, (in the third of his History) of Vitellius.

The Relations even of our modern times are not without some parallel examples
likewise. Henry the Archbishop of Ebora becomes King of Portugal, as you may
find in the late Spanish History: and Possevine the Jesuit relates this of the
Russian Monarch, otherwise called the great Duke of Muscovie, Rex Sacrorura
simul et Imperator videri velit, he does as much affect to be thought chief in
their holy Ceremonies, as to be held chief in his Empire: And therefore his
Robes are Copes, his Crown a Miter, and in stead of a^ imperial Scepter he arms
his left hand with a Crosiers staff.

Neither did the purer years of the Christian Church show themselves any whit
negligent, in the performance of so Religious a duty; being no way ignorant of
that Doctrine, which St. Paul had imparted unto his Timothy. Let the Elders,
says he, that rule well be had in double honor; especially those which labor
in the word and doctrine. 1 Timothy 5. 17. Indeed for those former Titles of
Sovereignty, as I read them not offered, so neither could they have been
accepted by the Ministers of the Gospel, they having received prohibition
against it from their Masters own mouth, vos autem non sic, The Kings of the
Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule among them are called
Benefactours: But you shall not be so. Luke the 22. Yet if we enquire into the
carriage of those Elder Christians, we shall easily find, that what was wanting
in those swelling Titles of Eminency, was supplied in the Truth of sincere
affection. So the Apostle himself witnesses of his Galathians in the 4th.
chap. of his Epistle to them. Ye received me as an Angle of God, yea as Christ
Jesus; nay I bear you record, that if it had been possible, you would have
plu^kt out your own eyes, and have given them unto me.

Happy Galatia! who were become the Mother of such aff^ctionate Children. If
you expect fear and reverence, they receive the Apostle as an Angel of God. If
love and affection; they could have spared even their own eyes to have supplied
his necessities.

But is the practice of our present times answerable? does it equal the se
precedents of the Apostolic age? do you fear and observe? nay do you not
rather scorn and neglect our profession? else what is the cause that the most
liberal and ingenuous dispositions are fearful to undertake this worthy
calling? what hinders them, but only the public contempt and much ignominy,
which in these times they see openly attends the Ministry? For doubtless, if a
man's reputation be his second life, you may now justly call Orders a kind of
Martyrdom; because I am sure, he hazards his account in the world much for
Christ's sake, whosoever in our days puts himself apart to serve the Tabernacle.

How are we contemned by the greatest? and injured by those of meaner rank? do
not the scorners deride us? and the Drunkards make songs upon us? nay is not
our very Function become a Proverb of contempt, even in their mouths, whose
education has ever been as servile, as their birth was base? There are perhaps
of our Masters in Israel, that can with Nicodemus be content, to afford us
countenance by candle light, I mean, in private, and during the absence of
those high-bred Spirits, who count it baseness to entertain discourse with
people of so mean Quality, as we are in their esteem.

But are the times so strangely altered? are we now thought unworthy to
accompany them, whom Antiquity held us fit to govern? 'Twas his Majesty's late
observation, before a most honorable and judicious Assembly, that the Clergy
was never grown into such contempt as now; and in his opinion 'twas one of
those great offenses, which argued the near approach of the latter day. There
he enjoined his Judges to countenance us, exhorted his People to reverence and
respect us; God continue so gracious a Prince, that reigns even in these days,
to become a Preacher: and let all those, that wish well to the house of Aaron
say Amen, Amen. For should not Judah, I mean the Scepter it self, stand firm to
Levi, the other Tribes would be as ready to prey upon us, as they are now to
scorn us.

Yet could the practice of former ages work any alteration upon these latter
times, I should not doubt but to leave this Auditory* as careful of our
Estimation here on earth, as we profess to be (and in some measure, I hope,
are) of your Welfare in Heaven. My speech has already laid open the examples
of the Patriarks and purer Church to instruct you; of the Pagans and Infidels,
to stir up and inflame your affections. But if through hardness of heart you
remain still unmovable, yet quake and tremble to think, how this Herod in my
Text shall one day rise up in Judgment against you, and shall condemn you; for
he feared and observed the Baptist, and I say unto you, it may be spoken of the
meanest Minister of the Gospel of Christ, A greater than John is here.

Speak I this of my self? says not the Scripture the same also in the eleventh
of Matthew, at the eleventh verse. Amongst them which are begotten of women,
arose there not a greater than John the Baptist; yet the least in the Kingdom
of Heaven is greater than he. Where our Savio^ makes comparison between John
and us; not in respect of any personal eminency; for therein, if in modesty we
would not, Truth it self would enforce us to yield John the precedence; but in
respect of our Office: and in that regard, as John was greater than the former
Prophets, because he taught Christ after a more clearer manner than they, so
are we to be preferred before John himself, because our preaching of Christ is
yet more manifest, than his was: for which reason the Christian Church is there
likewise honored by our Savior, with the Title of Kingdom of Heaven.

Thus Calvin understands the Text, and I find him accompanied in his exposition
with the best of our own Interpreters. Besides he is countenanced by the 7th.
of Luke, where that Evangelist relates it thus. Among them that are begotten of
women there is not a greater Prophet than John: mark, he says not a greater
Man, but a greater Prophet: the comparison then concerns not his Person, but
his Office. Only Maldonate the Jesuit challenges this Gloss, as injurious to
the Baptist. What shall each private Minister, each Priest and Deacon be
thought greater than John? yea, Jesuit, why not? your own Abulensis in his
thirty fourth question upon St. Matthew, confesses as much. Quanto de Messia
apertior, tanto major Propheta. We Ministers are Prophets too, and we are
therefore the greater, because the playner Prophets.

Surely this Jesuit fears to be out-stript by Herod in his respects to John,
and therefore we shall find him more observant, than ordinary. Hear therefore,
if you please, his Commentary upon the Text, The least in the Kingdom of Heaven
is greater than he, that is, says he, the least of them that receive the
Gospel. How? may the least Christian be greater than John, and yet not the
least Minister? He Is very observaunt indeed. John shall take place both of
Elias, and Paul, of Apostles and Prophets, yet Demetrius and his Crafts-men may
have the wall of him. There are of his Church, I confess, that go sarr beyond
this Herod in observance; they have taken the pains to climb Heaven it self,
as it may seem, to do the Baptist some show of Honor. For Gerson, in his
fourth Tract upon the Magnificat, with Maironius, and from them another Jesuit
Barradius, give him confidently the third place in Heaven, that is, next to our
Savior and his Virgin Mother; in the very same Throne say they, from whence
Lucifer fell. Great observance indeed, if there were as good ground for it.

But I go on, Had this fear and observance been done by Herodias; had she with
Mary Magdalen, of a lewd Strumpet become an humble Paenitent, the example had
not been so much worthy the noting; in as much as the tenderness and
instability of her sex might argue (possibly) some easiness in her conversion
also; or had they been performed by Philip, the forsaken husband of Herodias,
it had been no great marvail; no great marvail, I say, to see a man injuriously
disgraced by his Brothers lust, and perhaps not well able to revenge himself,
to think of a retired life, to renounce the World, and become follower to a
Prophet, in the Wilderness, especially to such a Prophet as the Baptist was,
whose zeal had already made him a party in his quarrel.

But that this lawful respect should proceed from Herod himself, who being a
man, wanted that tenderness of affection, which should mollify him, and for
ought we read, was not exposed to such injuries, as might discontent him in any
sort with the World, that he should do it, it may seem to argue abou^dance of
Grace, and that he went as far beyond the other two in Goodness, as he did in
Authority.

But upon a more strict inquiry into the nature of the Action, we shall find it
I doubt to issue from some bastard fountain; to proceed at best from Morality,
rather than from Religion. My Text discovers it plainly. Herod feared and
observed John, knowing him to be a just man and an holy. See, the respect which
was given to John, was given to his person, not to his office: Herod observed
him for those personal deserts, or merits, which he saw in the Man, not because
he was a Prophet, and the forerunner of so great a Majesty. To be short he
honored John, but not the Baptist.

And what was this more than Philosophy had taught her followers? R^me, even in
the height of Paganism and Idolatry, yet honored the Severer strictness of
Cato'es Integrity very much; and that Stern carriage of the Stoics in how
great estimation was it, even with those Athenians, which for their own persons
were most loosely profane and vicious?

But thou, who intendest after a right manner to regard and reverence Gods
Ministers, consider not so much what they are, as from whom they come; and the
respect, thou affordest them, give it not so much for their own sakes, as for
his that sent rhem. For who entertains an Ambassador only according to his
own personal deserts, may soon violate the law of Nations, by scorning him, as
either weak, or vicious, to whom in that employment belongs all the honor due
to his Princes person. Now we are the Ambassadors of Christ; whatsoever the
meannesse of our persons be, yet at least that is the Title and dignity of our
office.

Nor do I altogether condemn this Action of Herod: For fear and observance are
matters of due Debt unto Justice and Holiness; such qualities deserve respect:
yet neither can I commend it, I mean, as a work truly good. The reason is, I
find it not performed with any relation to the Author of goodness, without
respect to whose Glory, our best Actions may be goodly perhaps, but yet but
goodly Transgressions, splendida peccata, as the Father calls them.

But can so much good as this come out of Galilee? from whence there arises no
Prophet, can there come a man that shall so highly regard a Prophet? A shame it
is for these times, that the worst part of Israel should afford a man, whom we
can hardly better within our Christian Territo^ies. For of that small number,
which at this day either fear or observe the Ministry, the most part are
provoked unto it by Herod's inducements: Either they know them honorable, or
wealthy; or perhaps of an austere life, and exemplary conversation. In this
manner I confess, diverse of the Clergy are honored in these our days, and
yet but few Ministers are honou^ed*

Let a Baptist be called to some Eminent dignity in the Church, no doubt there
are of all sorts, both Scribes and Pharisees, that would reverence him. Let him
be Zealous and powerful in his profession, there are of the most vicious
Publicans and Sinners, that would sometimes even tremble under him. Nay let him
be but as violent against Ceremonies as Sins; Let him enveigh as bitterly
against the Priests vestments, as against the incest of Herod, he should have
followers by Troops from Jerusalem to Jordan, and from thence to Enon: only
he must lay apart his garment of Camels hair, and that girdle of skins about
his loins; because they are only in fashion now a days among our great
enemies, they are used only in the Cloisters of Babylon.

But you Beloved, that your entertainment of the Prophets may receive, and be
crowned with a Prophets reward, learn to receive them, not in the name of
learning, not in the name of kindred* not in the name of honor, wealth, or any
outward dignity, but only in the name of a Prophet, only in the name of their
office, and for their office sake. What though his bodily prefence be but weak,
and his speech contemptible, as some said of that great Apostle Saint Paul? Yea
what though his conversation be in some things faulty, and his life not
altogether unblameable? (indeed it should not be, we ought to be lights to the
world, as well by our conversation and good example, as by our Doctrine, but I
say, what though it happens sometimes to be otherwise) yet know thou, who ever
thou art, that stumblest at this s^one, God, is able, out of the mouths of
Babes and Sucklings, to ordain strength, unto his own praise, and can, even out
of the tongues of reprobates themselves, when he please, bring forth Salvation.

Else, why was Judas employed in the publication of the first good news of the
Gospel, as well as the other Apostles? Judas, I say, that Traitor and
reprobate, why was he sent to preach, if the poison of his wicked heart could
have envenomed his Doctrine? or that his treacherous intentions could have done
his Auditors, as much hurt, as they did his Master? yet Judas we see, was one
of the twelve, Judas was one of them, whom it pleased our Savior to send out
with that Solemn Affidavit, and encouragement of his, in the eleventh of Matthew.
He that receives you, receives me.

Else why did our Savior enjoin his Auditory to observe the preaching
Pharisees, if the wickedness of their works, and manner of living, could have
been an absolute hinderance to the success of their Doctrine? They sit in
Moses Chair: Whatsoever therefore they bid you observe, namely out of the Law,
and according to it, That, says he, do; but after their works do not. Matthew
23th. at the 3d. verse.

Away then with that affected parity of some amongst us, that thinks it self in
danger to be stained by the word it self, if it comes from the mouth of a
polluted Messenger. It Is a proud fancy, long since condemned by Saint Austin in
the Donatists, in his second Book against Petilians letters, and the 30th.
chapter. Non d^scernimus vitium, quod homo habet, and veritatem, quam non suam,
sed Dei habet. Can we not distinguish, says the Father, betwixt the Fault of
the man, and the truth of God? can our dullness make no difference between
Jacob and Esau, because they were (both of them) nourished in the same Family?
can we make no distinction between sincerity of Doctrine, and corruption of
manners, because they are both found in the same person? if the meanest
capacity here present scorn to be accounted so gross, let it shame us to
forbear the Assemblies of the Church for no better reasons, but only that the
Preachers are not Holy; let us remember, that though it be the same mouth, the
same tongue, which now Preaches, and anon will swear, curse, yea perhaps
blaspheme, yet that God is Author of the first, his Doctrine, but himself only
of his impiety and sacrilege.

In the first chapter of the Epistle to Titus, the Apostle cites an Authority
from a Cretian, Poet (...), from a Cretian Poet I say, a liar both by Country
and profession; and yet what he says in this case, is both heard and allowed,
(...). This witness is true, says Saint Paul, verse 13th. If therefore the
Apostle gives ear to this Moral verity, though vouched by Epimenides, an
Idolater and Infidel, how much more, it is Saint Austins argument still in the
place formerly cited, should you willingly accept of the word of life, though
it proceed from a Minister of blameable conversation?

Nor do I endeavor Apologies for these shames of Levi: woe to them that
separate Holiness from the Priesthood, woe, I say, to them, whosoever they
are. But what I speak, is for your sakes. Take heed, I pray, lest while you
seek a man, whose spotless life may answer your expectation, you carelessely
neglect that Doctrine, which would lead you forth to everlasting happiness,
even without humane sufficiency. For if you gladly hear them only who are just
and holy, what great thing do you? did not even Herod the same? you shall see
it plainly in my second part, which I am now to handle.

Part 2.
And when he heard him, etc. he heard him gladly. This Action of Herod I find
diversely censured; Some think it feigned and Hypocritical, so Lyra; others true
and sincere, as Beza with some other of our own Divines. I desire to give Herod
his due; and am therefore willing to account him, at least an ingenuous A^ditor
of the Baptist: the rather, because I see him well countenanced, not only by
the judgment of the forenamed Authors, Beza and others, but by the
Circumstances of the Text.

For my Evangelist, if you observe him, makes the Kings good inclination
toward John, the only advocate to plead for him against the wicked suggestions
of Herodias; who did not more passionately desire the pleasure of her
incestuous bed, then she did the destruction of him, who durst control her;
Herod then must needs be truly of himself well inclined toward John,
otherwise he neither would nor could have so often resisted her entreaties,
whose affections had enthralled him, and who desired nothing of him, but the
silencing of that tongue, whose public reprehensions were as prejudicial to
his own honor, as to her contentment.

But if we admit Herod to have been indeed a joyful receiver of the word, we
must acknowledge also some congruous and little cause of this his gladness,
and so necessarily allow him Faith, no less free from hypocrisy, than his joy
was from dissimulation and fiction. For otherwise it were a strange prodigy,
and as contrary to nature, as to see Grapes grow upon Thorns, or Figs on on
Thistles. Joy, or rejoicing in good things, (if it be true) is a Fruit of the
Spirit, and therefore necessarily supposes Faith* which is the first work of
Spirit in us, and the root and fountain of all others: And granting this, what
other thing do we but plead for Arminius, and bring in this Eastern Prince to
grace his Triumph? For here is Herod, a man truly Faithful, you say, because
truly glad or truly affected with the preaching of the word; and if
Faithful, justified also; for who dares deny the consequence? and yet I fear
his Absolution is now cancelled, and that whatsoever he once was, he is now no
better than a reprobate.

Hence therefore, namely by granting that Herod's gladness at the Preaching of
the word was Sincere and unfeigned, it may seem to follow what Arminius labors
to conclude, to wit, that a man truly justified may afterward full from
Grace, and become a reprobate.

But the inconvenience is well avoided by distinguishing between Truth and
Goodness: we must know, that an Action is not presently void of Sin, because
it is free from hypocrisy. Ahab, I doubt not, did truly joy at the death of
Nabaotb, yet that Gladness of his was damnable; and Herod might indeed truly
rejoice at the Preaching of John, but I shall detect his joy, and show it to
have been merely carnal, and so wholly set upon the respects of this life, that
it had no dependency at all on that to come.

And to begin the discovery aright, we must first observe his Faith; which I
take, (or rather find) to be Temporary; the fame that Saint Mark describes,
chap. 4th* at the 17th. verse. They have no root in themselves, and endure but
for a time; my Authority is Beza, ^adebat hic semen in saxosa loca, says he,
The sowers seed sell here upon stony ground. The servant must not be above his
Master; and therefore as Christ sometimes Preached to hard, and obdurate
hearers, that received not the word so kindly into their hearts, as that it
could take due root in them, so must John be content to do.

Now this Temporary Faith, although we may well enough style it true Faith, as
Truth is opposed to Hypocrisy, because it was not feigned, yet does it as much
differ from the nature and excellency of that which justifies, as Ismael did
from Isaak, he was no counterfeit child of Abraham, but yet begotten upon a
bondwoman: So these Faiths, the Temporary and Justifying Faith, do both
proceed from the same Spirit, as from the same Father, or Author of them; But
you know, that Sun, the Holy Spirit I mean, imparts his influences diversely
unto men, and after different measures, viz. according as he stands affected to
the* subject which he works upon.

No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost, says Saint
Paul, 1 Cor. 12. and yet the devils themselves, constrained no doubt thereto by
the evident power of Gods Spirit, non dicunt tantum, sed vociferantur, as one
says, they do not only speak it, but proclaim it. I know who thou art, says
the unclean spirit, in Saint Mark, chap. the 3. even the holy one of God. Here
are different works of the Spirit, you see, even upon reprobate and damned
creatures. But Spiritus Paracletus erit vobiscum, says Christ of the elect,
John the 14th. They shall receive the Spirit, not of Illumination only, but of
Comfort. The Scripture, it is confessed, styles them both by the name of Faith,
but the one is a bare assent only unto the Doctrine preached, the other is a
confident application of it; we, says that elect Apostle, have confidence by
Faith in him, Ephesians. 3. at the 12th. verse.

Lastly they both produce a gladness; this pure and Spiritual, out of a sense
of the forgiveness of Sins; being justified by Faith we have peace with God,
Romans 5. at the 1. that other impure, carnal, and only stirred up by the force
of some Worldly motives. So were the Philosophers at Athens most gladly
desirous to hear the Doctor of the Gentiles, not because their Souls were joy'd
with the soundness of his Doctrine, but because their ears listened after
Novelties.

'Twas a story to them that seemed to deserve attention, to hear of a Deity
Incarnate, of a God crucified; and that to the Immortality of the Soul, which
they had learned from nature, the Gospel now added the Resurrection of the
Body. The strangeness of such Doctrine as this, must needs delight, and give
satisfaction, no less to a Curious, than to a Godly Auditour.

How could the Doctrine of Christian liberty but be welcome to many irreligious
and loose people in Jerusalem? how could that news want ready entertainment,
that promised such absolute and present freedom, both to themselves from the
bondage of those annual ceremonies, and to their children also from the pain
and peril of Circumcision? Justification by Faith must needs joy them, that are
loath to be at the charge of good Works; and free remission of Sins is so
plausible a Theme, that I fear it makes many think, they are scarce put to the
trouble of Believing.

How many joyful hearers do these times afford, who yet never in their life
desired, much less labored, to attain a sense of the forgiveness of Sins?
Their joy imployes it self about other matters. The Preacher's eloquent,
perhaps; and then his pleasing periods command their attention. Perhaps he is
bitter; and then they are tickled with the display of their Neighbors vices;
and begin to take it for a kind of Innocence, that other men are as bad as
themselves. Nay are they not those, that press with eagerness into these
Assemblies, only that they may find, wherewith to busy their detracting
humors? Here he wanted Art; there diligence; these lines were too careless;
that strain too affected. Quibus plus Displices, si ominem sine aspiratione
dixeris, says St. Austin, quam si hominem oderis, men that had rather you
should break a Commandment, than offend a Grammar rule; and think it a greater
fault to mispronounce a man's name, than to murder his reputation. But let such
Auditors know, animis, non auribus loquimur, (as Seneca has it) we speak to
your consciences, not to your ears, and desire, not so much to please, as to
save your Souls.

I much wonder therefore at our English Arminius, I mean Thompson, in the 5.
chapter of his Diatriba, that makes the difference, according to Scripture as
he pretends, between the wavering or Temporary, and Justifying Faith, to be
only temporis tantum aut gradus, non rei et essentiae, that is, that they
differ not essentially and in nature one from another, but gradually, and in
respect of time, durance and perseverance only. So that Temporary Faith (with
him) so long as it continues, is as true Faith, as that which continues for
ever. And hence indeed it follows easily, that a man, though qualifyed only
with that fading imperfection of a Temporary Faith, yet for the time that such
Faith continues in him, must needs be justified before God; and when it fails,
that his Justification also cease and is broken off: and so the Title of his
Diatriba is made good, de interscisione Gratiae, etc.

But surely the Truth is far otherwise: Those things are distinguished
essentially, and in nature, that differ as I have showed these to do, that is
to say first in the cause. The Temporary Faith proceeding only from some
general and inferior operation of the Holy Spirit, commonly incident unto
reprobates and wicked men, who doubtless feel many times Impulses, and as it
were Knockings of the Spirit at the door of their hearts, which yet are never
opened to any true Conversion: whereas Justifying Faith proceeds from that
supreme and most special working of the Spirit, which is proper to the Elect,
and always effectual to Salvation. Secondly they differ in the things
themselves, or in their Definition: That, viz. Temporary Faith, being only a
bare assent unto the Doctrine preached; This, a confident and lively
application of it to ourselves, and to our own Souls. Thirdly in their effects:
This, to wit, Justifying Faith being the Fountain and Source of true Spiritual
joy and comfort; that other only of what is false and carnal.

We need not fear then to confess Herod a reprobate, and yet acknowledge him
to have given most joyful entertainment to John's preaching, and that
unfeignedly and in good earnest. For as Temporary Faith may be the Mother of an
unfeigned joy, which yet is not presently to be thought commendable, only
because it is not counterfeit. For Herod might take delight in some carnal
circumstances, more than in the principal matter preached; as to hear him tell
of a Messiah that was to come, of his strange Baptism, that he would Bapt ze
men with fire; of the excellency of the Messiah's person, seeing John, (whose
grave Aust^rity freed him from all suspicion of any complemental excess)
confessed himself not worthy to untye the the latchet of his Shoe.

He might be affected with his grave discourse, and Treatings of Justice,
Temperance, Fortitude and other Princely qualities, wherewith doubtless the
Baptist knew very well how to entertain him. For virtue loves to show its
luster, and will seem admirable sometimes even in the eyes of vice it self. Now
how could it but rejoice a King, to hear those, no less politic, than Divine
instructions, copied out in the third of Luke, where in at once he taught the
people charity, the Publicars conscience, the Soldiers contentment and
modesty? Thus did he ease Herod in governing, and make Religion supply that,
which otherwise would require the Princes Authority.

There is then a twofold Truth to be considered in our joy, rei and personae.
Herod's Person was truly glad, but his joy had made choice, and fix^d it self
upon a false object; and therefore false, because 'twas fading. For we may not
think he rejoiced in any sense which he had of the remission of his Sins; for
then we should have read him likewise partaker of John's Baptism, which was
preambulatory to it: nor that he put any confident assurance in the preached
Messiah; for then he would not have arrayed him in white, and so mocked and
despised him as he did, no, cadebat hic semen in terram petrosam, all this seed
fell upon stony ground: and that you may know that it did so indeed, by and by
it Sprung up; you may see a blade of it, almost as soon as it is sown: for so
the Text adds, He did many things: and that was my third and last part; which
I now come to consider, and un^old to you.

Part 3.
He did many things, etc. Faith argues our birth, but good works our growth in
Religion; and as we may well su^pect the child is abortive, if it lives only,
but increases not; so may we justly condemn that Faith for degenerate, that
believes only, but works not.

But Herod seems Religious beyond censure; who to manifest the Truth of his
Faith, adds also the integrity of a good conversation. And because one Action,
or two only, are scarce able to prove a man Good, he claims the Title by a
multitude, he does many things, perhaps feed^ the hungry, clothes the naked
that were in Israel; Fasts twice every week perhaps, gives Tithe of all his
possessions precisely, and becomes as Ceremonial and formal as any Pharisee in
the crew.

But we must learn from Saint Austin, lib. 1. Confess. cap. 17. Non uno modo
sacrificatur transgressoribus Angelis. The devils Altars admit of more than one
kind of sacrifice: ard though perhaps Herod might do him at this time no
worship, by way of oppression, or covetousness, or Idolatry; yet so long as
he kept Herodias, he was a true votary and servant of Satan, and his Incest
with his brother Philips wife, a welcome oblation.

This then is but another progress of a reprobate, a second step which such a
one may make in the way of salvation, and yet never attain it. He may do many
goodly works; and his charity may seem, though not more true, yet more
specious, splendid, and bountiful, than that of the Elect themselves: for
enquire but a little, wherein the strength of his devotion lies, you will
find, he had rather behead a Prophet, than displease a Minion; he had rather
hazard the loss of Religion it self, than forgo the pleasures of a beloved
si^.

This is Herod's piety. Thus did this dyi^g Tree shed all its fair fruit at the
blast of a woman; Those many things which he did, must all end in one Herodias.
So inconsiderately wicked was t^ is Galilaean, that he stains the beauty of
all his former Actions, and incurres the censure, or penalty, of the whole law,
by giving consent to that one transgression.

For this we must know, the Gospel has glo^s'd upon both the Tables of the
law, far beyond the strictness of Phari^aical Interpreters, teaching us by
effect, as well as report, that Christ came not to destroy the law, but to
explain it, and to take away, ^ot its Authority, but its sting only.

Thoughts were held free, till he taught, that but lusting was a breach of the
seavent^ commandment. A riddle, till then, beyond Sampsons subtilty.

H^c u^i vir non est, ut sit adulterium, as the Poet sc^ffingly expresses it,
that a woman should be an Adultresse, that never entertained a paramour; that
Herodias in the Court of Galile, should commit sin with Herod, absent from her
(perhaps) as far as Jerusalem.

It Is strange likewise that Achan, because guilty of Theft, should be arraigned
and made liable to the law of Murder; or that even Herod, because incestuous,
should be counted as him that impiously blasphemes and curses God. And yet it
is the Doctrine which Saint James in his Epistle teaches, chap. 2. at the
10th. verse. He that transgresses in one commandment, is held guilty of all.
Not that all sins are therefore equal, or that an incestuous person is ipso
facto, as we say, really and indeed made thereby a Blasphemer: to think so,
were, perhaps, little less than to blaspheme, and to accuse the justice of God
of a strange iniquity: but the sense is this. He offends the same Majesty, in
the breach of the seventh commandment, who lustfully climbeth up into his
neighbors bed, which he does, in the breach of the third, who sacrilegiously
Blasphemes and curses his Creator. The same Divine Majesty is offended by the
breach of any one Commandment, that is offended by the breach of all; and we
lose the love of God, and become liable to eternal damnation, by the breach of
one, as really and assuredly (I say not so deeply perhaps or h^inously, in
regard of punishment) as if we had transgres^ed them all.

Herod then may well do many things, and yet come far short of that
goodness, which becomes Religion. For as that man's joy is but carnal, that
looks not chiefly upon remission of sin, though he be otherwise entertained
with never so great variety of guest and delight; so are not his works to be
counted, otherwise than most imperfect and vitiated, who gives himself the
liberty of any one sin: yea, though he should be supposed, even from his youth
up, with that rich youngster in the Gospel, to have kept the Tenor of all the
other nine Commandments very strictly.

Now Herodem omne fert tempus, as the Orator said of Clodius. There are a
multitude of Herod's in all ages; our works are no better than his, imperfect
for the most part: few there are, that go beyond this Galilaean in Holiness;
go beyond, do I say? nay, may I not wish we did but equal him, and came up to
him? he heard and did many things, we hear, and do just nothing. The voice of
our Preachers now is as the voice of the Prophets were of old ( Ezekiel. 32. 32.)
we detain your ears, our Sermons are (perhaps) unto you, as a lovely Song of
one that has a pleasant voice; you are content to hear our words, but the
world sees, and your own conscience tells you, you do them not. I speak this
of the greater part of our hearers in these days.

And as for them, who think they ought to be excepted out of the list, as being
neither idle, nor curious, nor unprofitable hearers, but doers of the word,
Alas! how uncontroulably true is that of Bion in Seneca of us, omnia hominum
negotia simillima sunt initiis, all cur doings, what are they, but as it were,
beginnings to do? asla^es rather than a^chievements? endeavors (at least, as
we make our selves believe, and God grant, we do not in that thing very often
deceive our own souls, endeavors I say) rather than performances?

This man, perhaps, goes so far in Religion, as to check all Temptations of
unbeleeving thoughts, yet gives no check to his lust, but cherishes that, and
gives it the reigns of liberty, even to excess and scandal; if this man be a
hearer, (as there are such, not a few) what does he, but at the same time
confess God, and provoke his Maker?

Another, perhaps, goes further, and with a Godly fortitude resists the
assaults of those carnal and brutish lusts, but in the mean time yields to
pride, and busies himself perpetually with the fancy of his own perfections; or
to covetuousnesse, and instead of worshipping stocks and stones, worships his
Golden wedge: Such hearers as these, wherein are they better than Herod? either
Herod Antipas here in the Text, who did many things, as good as any they do; or
Herod Agrippa in the Acts, chap. 26. who professes himself but half a
Christian?

Not that I hold an absolute perfection in all good works, necessary to the
attainment of that saving Title; for then the Disciples of Christ must have
been called Christians, in Heaven only, not at Antioch: but I require the
absence of all darling and beloved sins; I require that no Sin, that is, no
kind of sin, reign in your mortal bodies; I require, that you give not your
selves up to any ev^l customs of vice, in what kind soever, whether of pride,
sensuality, covetousness, revenge, detraction, lying, envy, or the like. I
require that you mortify and resist all inclinations and pronenesse unto sin in
every kind, and that with all possible care, faithfu^lnesse and diligence:
because he is no less a slave that is commanded by some one, than he that
groans under the Tyranny of many Masters.

Be perfect therefore, as your Father which is in Heaven, is perfect. Reverence
his Ministers, not so much because thou see them wise, or honored by the
State, or rich, but because they are the Ambassadors of that great peace, which
the God of Heaven has granted, and by them publishes and confirms unto the
inhabitants of the earth.

Hear his word gladly, not because it is sometimes attended with the content of
temporal and carnal allurements, but because it brings promise of remission of
sins, and eternal life to penitent sinners.

And to those many things, which (I presume) the worst of you all does perform
in the service of God, and in order to your everlasting happiness, at some
time or other, add the forbearance, the diligent, careful, and conscientious
forbearance of all beloved and customary sin: So shall he, who vouchsafed
this Herod in the Text, the honor of a temporal kingdom, make you partakers
of his own kingdom which is eternal, and Crown you with that immarcessible
Crown of Glory, which he has prepared for all that love him. He grant it us to
all, who has so dearly bought us, Jesus Christ, etc.

The Third SERMON.
HEBREVVS 10. 1, 2. For the Law having a shadow of good Things to come, and not
the very Image of he Things, can never with those Sacrifices which they offered
year by year continually, make the comers thereunto perfect.

For then would not they have ceased to be offered, because the worshippers
once purged, should have had no more conscience of Sin?


TO confute Jewish Blasphemies in a Christian Assembly, were to give Medicines
for a Fever, to cure the Palsy: which promises, I think, as little health to
the Patient, as it does credit to the Physician. Indeed my Author, who here
b^speaks these Hebrews, a Nation that strangely doted on their legal
Ceremonies, did most profitably make the imperfection of their Law the subject
of his discourse: it being the most proper and persuasive argument, to win them
from those servile Elements, unto the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

But the contrary distempers of our Auditories require Treatings of another
nature. Here Is none that expect their part in the Covenant should be sealed to
them by the Sacrament of Circumcision; none that pretend to R^mission of Sins
by virtue of any Oblations of Levi; Lastly* I dare be confident, here is none
that looks for Justification by the works of the moral Law; although perhaps it
might be wished, our practice therein were a little more Jewish, so our Faith
con^inued Christian.

In these points it may not be denied, but our understandings enjoy a very
Health of Truth; only we languish in our other faculties, and our Actions are
far unanswerable to our Belee^. We have those whose consciences are already
dead in their Sins; and they must be quickened: we have others who groan under
the burden of an accusing conscience; and they must be comforted.

My Text considered in it self, gives occasion of many such particulars. I
shall therefore, by your patience, first briefly repeat the Argument wherein it
has pleased my Apostle to place his grand Proposition; and then handle ^t
singly and alone, without relation to its other circumstances. He disputes t^u^.

Those worshippers, who have been once purged, are no more troubled with a
conscience of Sins. That Is his Major proposition.

But the Jews, after all their Sacrifices, were still burdened with a
conscience of Sins: for otherwise what needed those annually repeated oblations
for the same offenses? There Is his Minor.

The Conclusion. Therefore they were not thoroughly purged by their legal
Sacrifices; and consequently the Sacrifices themselves unperfect, because not
able to bring the worshippers, or those who offered them, to perfection. You
see then my Text contains a Maxim, whereon my Apostle founds his disputation,
against the pretended perfection of Legal ceremonies: and may be thus simply
proposed.

Worshippers once purged, have no more conscience of Si^s. Divis.
In the handling of which words, not to be burdensome to your attention, I
shall insist only upon these three particulars.

Here Is first a Disease, and that is a troubled Soul, conscience of Sins.
Secondly here is a Remedy, namely one spiritual Evacuation, once being purged,
etc. Thirdly here is the State of the patient after recovery: positively peace
and quietness, but here expressed only by a privative particle (...) none, or
no more; no more conscience of Sins.
I confess, that here are Patients too implied in this first word,
Worshippers: Bu^ this particular shall stand as an Introduction to those that
follow, and serve only to enter at your patience.

You, whom this days devotion does make partaker of that goodly Title; you
that in this place, and at this time, are come to, worship, to fall down, and
kneel before the Lord our Maker, hearken while I show unto you, first the
nature of this Disease, and with all the many several degrees of it. Secondly
the condition of the Remedy, and therewith a several application to each
particular distemper: and in the last place, our happy estate after recovery,
together with the Truth of this whole proposition, in what cales, and how ^arr
it proceeds; Worshippers once purged have no more conscience of Sins.

And if my discourse by Gods Blessing, may be so effectual, as to leave among
you the happy Eruits of a good Canscience, it will be a blessed Antepast, and
most convenient to go before that great Banquet or Feast that attends you.

Part 1. The Disease, a troubled Conscience.
The Invention that first made us acquainted with forum conscientiae, a Court
of Conscience, seems to have made that power of the Soul an absolute
Iusticiarie. And indeed a slight enquiry will easily make it manifest, that
there are not more solemn proceedings in a civil Court, than in the Tribunal of
Conscience: only what is there committed to the execution of many several
Persons, is here strangely dispatched and done by the able disposition of one
only Faculty. Conscience is in it self both Informer to accuse, and also
Witness to testify: It Is a Judge to give sentence, and an Officer likewise to
do Execution: so that the Meditation of the Psalmist has already interpreted
my discourse, I am fearfully and wonderfully made.

For Is It not a wonder to see a man sit in Judgment against his own Soul? Is It
not Fearful to see him impartially becoming his own Executioner? and yet this
Truth wants no examples. Witness Judas his Conscience, in the 27. of Mat. that
both accused the Sinner, and gave in evidence to prove him guilty; that both
condemned, and hanged the Traitor.

Conscience then is that Judicial Faculty of the Soul, whereby we apply our
general knowledge, of what is good and ill, unto each particular Action; and so
both enjoins performance of the thing it approves, and condemns every
adventure and attempt that we make upon the contrary.

The light of nature had taught Cain, not to shed any man's blood willi^gly;
then^e ^is Conscience condemns the Slaughter of his Brother Abel. The law ^ad
informed David ^ot to lay hands upon the Lords An y^ted; and thence to have but
r^nt Saul's coa^, was censured by his tender Conscience, as if the Kings Robes
had bee^ as sacred as his Person, and Treas^n might have been committed against
his very garments. It Is this, that when we are quiet, Counsels us; when in
motion, directs us: if we intend ill, it checks our purposes; if good, it gives
encouragement to our designs.

Thus is the course of our whole li^e become subject unto the Cognizance of
this Court of Conscience; here our words must be censured, and our Actions
a^aign'd, and what ^'re shall be decreed by this Authority, our best way to be
at quiet, is to be obedient.

But we oftentimes wrong the Justice of this Court, by giving too facil^an ear
to our inordinate affections; which through the violence of their tempting
commands, make us to slight her verdicts, neglect her decrees; and then
Conscience, which was given us at first for our health, and to be our Guide,
becomes unto us only a remembrancer of our fallings: and seeing we entertain
her not as a remedy by observing her commands, she becomes at last a Disease to
us, and like the Cachexia of a bad stomach, continually upbraydeth us with our
Transgressions.

Which distemper yet, as I conceive it, is as unfitly called mala conscientia,
an evil Conscience, as if we should call him a Traiterous Judge, who condemns
a villane for conspiring against his King. And therefore my Text most properly
calls it, not a Sinning Conscience, but (...) a Conscience of Si^s; not as if
it were it self diseased, but because it bears witness of our infection.

I confess the Apostle, chap. 5. v. 15. of the Epistle to Titus, tells us of
some whose Consciences were defiled: and it is true, says Aquinas, Par. 1. Quae
^. 19. Art. 13. inquinatioinest conscientiae, at non ^anquam accidens in
subjecto, sed tanquam cognitum in cognitione. Their Consciences then were said
to be defiled, for no other reason, but because they accused those Sinners of
their notorious filthiness.

Besides I find, 1 Cor. 8. 12. (...), a Weak, or sickly Conscience; which, as
though Sins were grown scarce, produces a new kind of impieties, and through a
doubtful uncertainty concerning what she goes about, becomes the unhappy Mother
of her own affliction. Ea enim est vis Conscientiae, says Peter Martyr, ut
opus adiaphoron, cum dub^et* m^l^m reddat, For Conscience, says he, has that
un^ property, that its able to bring forth Sin out of indifferency, and to make
a fact law^u^l i^ its own nature, become damnable by her suspicion; according
to that Romans 14. He that doubts, is damned if he eat. Thus is she, not
unlike a man that is overfearful of sickness, qui omnem corporis calorem
calumniatur, as Seneca speaks, that belies his own health, and turns his very
Fear into a Fever.

Yet if we enquire into the several faculties of Man's Soul, we shall find, that
the word (...) is there to be taken in the largest acception as it comprehends
also that other animal faculty, which the Schools call (...): and consequently
that Weakness, which the Apostle mentions to proceed rather from an
imperfection in their Knowledge, than from any defect in their consciences
properly, speaking.

For had a constant (...) resolutely informed those weak Corinthians, that an
Idol was nothing; had they undoubtedly known, or been persuaded, that
whatsoever was sold in the Shambles was of like indifferency, their mouths
would scarsely have offended their (...), n^ would their Consciences have ever
checked, for eating part of the Heathenish Sacrifices! But their knowledge or
persuasion concerning that, being but doubt^ul and imperfect, begat in them
that affliction, which might well be called a weak Conscience, I mean ex part
causae, because it proceeded from so gross a weakness in their understanding.

Neither yet do I free Conscience it self from partaking somewhat in the
calamity of Adams fall; whereby, as the other Faculties of the Soul, so
likewise this of Conscience has lost much of her primitive Integrity. It Is now
become dull, and unapt to attend, so exactly as it should, to what the
understanding directs; its become sluggish, and will not always speak, though
knowledge has given its full and clear information.

No doubt David knew perfectly, that to be an Adulterer, was by the law of God
to be accursed: yet how long did his sleepy Conscience conceal the sad
consequence, which she should have inferred, and suggested to him, upon his
attempt with Balshebah? How long did she forbear to tell him, Thou have
committed Adultery with Vriahs wife, Therefore thou art accursed?

David was many Months, some say a whole year, before his Conscience spoke to
him, and wakened him to that good Confession, I have sinned against the Lord.
Nay this power was so far decayed, and as it were, stupifyed in him, that
probably it had still continued silent, had not Nathan prompted it. God must
send a Prophet to supply the negligence of his careless Conscience; that so,
though it of it self had no power to speak, yet with Rock and Mountains to help
it, it might be able to give an Echo to what he should deliver, when he made
that dreadful remonstrance to David, 2 Samuel 12. 17. Thou art the man: Thou have
slain Vriah the Hittite with the sword, and thou have taken his Wife to be thy
Wife; and therefore thou art accursed, the sword shall not depart from thy
house, and thy wives shall be given to thy Neighbor.

I consesse then, this Faculty of the Soul, Conscience, is in it self some time
distempered, and may then very well undergo the censure and name of a Sinning
Consciece.

But my Text speaks of another sort of Malady, which troubles and infests the
Conscience, while Conscience is in it self in perfect health, and diligently
accuses Sin; only the worshippers themselves are out of Tune, they are
distempered.

The Discase then that I am now to declare and treat of, is a Malady, not so
much in, as from the Conscience; Conscience now supplies the place rather of a
Discoverer, than a Receiver: and may properly enough bear diverse special
Appellations, according as it stands divided, or looking unto, several degrees
of Sin. I will name only two at present.

There is conscientia peccati ex partereatus, A Conscience, which not only
Testifies we have sinned, but affrights us too with the guilt of Sin, and makes
us out of a Iense of our own unworthiness and the deepnesse of our guilt, to
doubt of pardon; which fear yet, if it be moderate, does not utterly dismay, or
drive us to despair of it.

Secondly there is conscientia peccati ex part victimae, a Conscience which
not only questions our Sins, but our Atonement too; not only tells us, we want
a pardon, but that to procure it, we stand in need of a farther Sacrifice.

This is it, which my Apostle chiefly insinuates, according to St. Chrysostomes
exposition, (...), in that the Jews did offer Sacrifice, it shows that they had
a Conscience, which accused themselves of Sin: but that they did it
continually, argues they had a Conscience too, which accused their Sacrifices
of imperfection.

Whether I have now rightly named Conscience of Sin, a Disease or not, let
Galen himself be judge. Bring him a man, whose guilty thoughts do most
clamorously affright him, with the fearful alarums of some crying Sin; let him
see his countenance distracted, his face withered, his flesh consumed; Let his
bones be vexed, as were David's in this case, and let his moisture be like the
drought in Summer; either his rules contain no^ a perfect survey of our bodily
infirmities, or else they must confess this man distempered.

But could we see likewise those aniatus and ictus, as Socrates speaks in
Tacit^, those wounds and stripes, which so dreadfully afflict his threatened
Soul; could we see his confused thoughts choking one another; could we see,
how all his Meditations and purposes are made abortive, before they be
halfborn, we should soon conclude him not only Sick, but that his Disease is
past Galens help; that no earthly Pharmacon, or Dose, how Sovereign soever to
the Body, can do him good; and consequently, that he ought to be sent to my
Apostle sor remedy: which is contained in my second part, and I am now to speak
of it, namely of

The Remedy of this Disease. Part 2.
We ^eed not distrust the efficacy of that Medicine* wherein the Physician
himself disdain^s not to become the chief ingredient; and this will appear to
be our case, if you will but* hear Saint John describe the potion. The blood of
Jesus Christ, says he, chap. the first of his first Epistle, cleanses us from
all Sin. This then is that Divine Catholicon, that all-sufficient remedy,
which God from all eternity ordained for the cure of mankind; and which in the
fulness of time he sent into the world to that purpose, that is, actually to
effect the work, by altering of Religion, and changing the present shadows and
imperfections, into Truths and substances, the many and but empty Ceremonies,
by which the world was then busi^d, into one absolute and well-pleasing
Sacrifice.

So my Text has it (...). This great cure was to be wrought at once; and is
therefore perfect, because it needs no repetition. For that faith, which the
Synagogue professed, was therefore necessarily attended with a conscience of
sins, because she expressly taught and prescribed to her followers, a
reiteration of sacrifices: for that must needs cause them to suspect the
sufficiency of each former Attonment. But the very Tenor of our most holy
profession fully cures us of that doubting disease: in as much as it plainly
assured us, that Christ having once suffered, the wrath of God exacts no
further satisfaction. So my Apostle in the 9th. chap. of this present Epistle
at the 26th. verse. In the end of the world, says he, has he appeared once to
put away sin by the sacrifice of himself.

Dares Rome then tread the steps of old Jerusalem? does she affect to turn
this very remedy into a disease? For what else is her sacrifice of the Mass?
wherein their profession is, that they daily offer up again the body of Christ,
thinking by their sacrilegious repetitions to add some new suficiency to that
great oblation.

So truly may it, in these Christian times, be verified of that City, what was
observed of her being yet in Paganism. Roma magnam sibi assumpsisse videbatur
Religionem, quae nullam respueret falsitatem. It Is the acknowledgment of Leo the
great, as they call him, one of her own Prelates, in his first Sermon upon the
Nativity of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. Rome, says he, therefore thought her
self to be above all other Cities in the world chiefly Religious, because she
became the common receptacle of all their Idolat^ies.

And what else is her practice at this day? she is willing to profess the name
of Jesus, and therein joins with the Christians: she is content to impart
Divine worship to Images, and therein concurres with the Gentiles: Besides,
she is factious too for the daily repetition of expiatory sacrifices, and
therein accords with the Jews themselves.

So that it may seem now a point of injustice to deny the Roman Church, the
Title of universal, seeing she so friendly communicats with all Religions.

I, but yet Rome will still seem Orthodox for all this, and has learned from
her Doctors of Transubstantiation, at least to evade and delude, where she
cannot satisfy. Let my Apostle then in this Text, nay in a solemn discourse of
two whole chapters, not barely pronounce alone (which yet were more than
enough, where such a Majesty dictates the words) let him not I say barely
pronounce, but logically prove and conclude, that Christ can but once be
offered up, she will make him understand it de sacrificio cruento, only of the
bloody Sacrifice of the Cross, not of that unbloody one of the Altar; and so
with the same words, both corrupt his sense, and yet seem to condescend to his
conclusion.

Thus does Truth never suffer more dangerous attempts, than when she falls into
the hands of learned impiety. But my Text soon quits her, by the suggestion of
this one interrogatory. After Christ his bloody passion, remains there a
conscience of sins or no, ex part victimae? do our affrighted thoughts as
yet inform us, that the greatness of our sins exceeds the sufficiency of his
oblation? if so, then is the sacrifice of the Cross, as insufficient as were
those of the Jews: but if this doubt be absolutely removed, which my Apostle
clearly enough insinuates in the Text, then is their sacrifice of the Altar, as
Sacrilegious, as were those of the Gentiles. For what can more derogate from
that Divine Atonement, than that it should stand in need of a daily supply?
what other thing were this, than to Crucify again the Lord of life? for he
must in some sort be daily slain, that is daily offered: and so shall the Roman
Priests supply the like place at this day under the Pope, which the Roman
Soldiers once did under Pilate.

But they yield, you will say perhaps, the oblation of the Cross to be most
absolute, and that the sacrifice of the Mass is only requisite to make us
capable, or actually partakers of those Benefits, which the sacrifice of the
Cross obtained for us at Gods hands, and which the wisdom of God found good
to conveigh unto us by that means, viz. by means of the Mystical and unbloody
sacrifice of the same body in the Mass; what is this? one sacrifice required to
apply another; and by consequence a third will be necessary to apply the
second; and so we shall run, multiplying of sacrifices in infinitum; for what
shall hinder? where shall we stop? an absurdity as hateful to Religion, as
nature.

Indeed, should God have given us his son in sacrifice, and yet have denied
us a participation in his sufferings, what had it been but to have dealt with
his Church, (...) the Poets feign that Jupiter did with their Tantalus, that
is, showed her only the means of her recovery, and indeed to torture her,
rather than releeve her. For there can be no more bitter affliction, than to be
barred the enjoying of that good which is in our view, and whereto a probable
hope has already entitled us.

God therefore, as he is rich in mercy, so is he bountiful in declaring it;
and he that has not spared his Son to save us, denies not his holy Spirit, to
testify unto us the Truth of our recovery. No sooner then does the Court of
Heaven, by virtue of this remedy, pronounce us Justified from our sins, but
it presently dispatcheth the Spirit of Comfort, to bear that joyful news to
our afflicted souls, that we are there in^old for the Sons of God. Romans 8.
16. And while our soul is afforded due entertainment by those sweet
acclamations of Abba Father, it puts to silence all clamor of conscience, and
makes her smile, who was wont nothing but to frown, and threaten. Then the
blood of Christ grows Eloquent, and speaks better things to us, than that of
Abel; for that spoke only vengeance upon sin committed; this speaks nothing
but salvation upon sin pardoned.

The remedy thus applied cures this conscience of sins too, ex part reatus*
for there can remain no more guilt, no fear of punishment, where the holy Ghost
himself vouchsafes to testify, that Christ has satisfied what we have
deserved.

But Alas! we often times dispossess this Spirit, and suffer wickedness to
encroach upon his Territories: and then how can it sing the Lords Song in a
strangeland? ^ow can that be a fit place for the Ditties of Sion, where
Babylonish iniquity has usurped the scepter? No, when we sin, that is
grieved and silent; and where the Spirit tunes not the Anthemes of pea^e,
Conscience will not be long to towl the sad groans of desperation. Thus are our
very souls subject to relapses, being as liable to the distempers of sin, as
our bodies are to the assaults of sickness.

And must we then yet seek a further remedy? doubtless such a pretense is
wholly inconsistent with my Apostles Doctrine. (...). To cure all conscience of
sin, we need (with him) but one purgation, but once to be purged. Indeed it
is true, both in the point of justification, and in that of the passion, we can
but once be justified, but once be purged; yet may the sense of these benefits
be subject to reiteration. For a righteous man, though he be always justified,
yet does not perhaps always feel it: we can but once be purged, yet we often
lose the sense of this remedy; and it requires yet a further cure, to make us
become certain of our recovery.

Against this Disease, viz. uncertainty and doubtfullnesse of our
justification, were those tears of David, in the 51. Psalm. Lord, says that
Royal penitent, restore unto me the joy of thy salvation; laetitiam exoptat,
says one not untruely, non justificationem, he prays not for justification,
but Comfort; that God would then impart unto him on earth the joy of that
sentence, which questionless was long before pronounced in Heaven. If
therefore with that good King, thou art desirous to cure this conscience of
sin, that is, to repossesse and recover again the happiness of thy decaying
Comforts, repent, as he did, mourn, weep, pray, yea let thy soul ^e yet more
afflicted.

A strange remedy you might think, to cure involuntary sadness by mourning
willingly, were it not therefore to be esteemed the more availeable, because
humane wisdom counts it foolish and improper.

But true Religion prescribes Antidotes many times as full of wonder, as
health. Would thou live a Christian life? thou must dye to thy own
affections, and inordinate lusts; would thou recover again the loss of thy
spiritual comforts? thou must mourn, and be yet further afflicted for Sining.
Let therefore thine eyes become fountains of tears, and mingle thy drink with
weeping: let the Sorr^ws of thine afflicted soul out cry the guilt of thy
wounded conscience: so he that has not disdained to take thy body to be his
Temple, may be pleased also to accept of thy Tears for sacrifice.

Nor do I still enjoin thee to call a Confessor to witness; as if thy
Repentance were of necessity to be as legal, as thy Testament; if thou will,
confess only to that Judge, who alone can absolve thee; yet sure I am, in
case of great distress, open and free confession to a lawful Minister is most
availeable, both to cure a conscience of sin, as also to attain a sense and
feeling of their forgiveness; although the sentence of the Minister, it is
confessed, be of it self no Absolution.

For example, who knows not, that Gods word barely spoken, is of it self able
to challenge our belief? yet has Divine goodness been so indulgent to humane
infirmity, as to make words visible for our sake, that is, to ordain
sacraments, (which are commonly, and not unfitly called by Divines, visible
words) and to make us s^e that in a Sacrament, which we could but hear only
from a preacher; that so our weak Faith might stand the more firmly, being
supported by the evident information of more senses than one.

Although therefore the promise of remission of sins, at what time soever a
sinner repents him of his sin, Ezekiel. 18. should be as persuasive, as it is
certain, and induce into us a confidence of forgiveness, no less easily and
effectually, than the words sink into our ears; yet has God been pleased also
to invest his Ministers with the power of the keys, to the intent, that seeing
a man clothed with our own flesh, to represent his person, and now ready, as
from his mouth, to pronounce our absolution, our thoughts might be quickened,
our spirits revived, and our consciences become as free and exempt from
doubting, as his promise is from mutability or change.

You know it is the very Tenor of our great Commission, sealed unto us by that
King of Kings, our most Blessed Savior, in the 20. of St. John's Gospel.
Receive the Holy Ghost; whose soever Sins ye remit, they are remitted unto
them. Not that these words imply a Judiciary power; for in that sense the
Pharisees themselves were Orthodox, none can forgive sins but God only; yet do
they at least give us Authority to declare, what God has promised, and at
least to publish Absolution, though not decree it.

Of what efficacy then, you will say, is this declarative power? if it be but only
to make a bare nar^ation of forgiveness to a penitent Sinner, it is no special
power, it is ^o more than every Christian may do, yea ought to do, toward his
Brother in case of spiritual distress; and so by consequence it will follow
upon this supposition, that in the case of that crying Adultery, David's
Conscience might have been sufficiently pacifyed with the good words of any
common Israe^ite; as well by Hushai, the Kings ^riend, as by Nathan the Prophet.

But we must know in these cases of Conscience, there is somewhat more in a
Prophets word, than in a Courtiers. Hushai may do David good service, in case
of Treason perhaps, and in preventing the outward danger of an Absaloms
conspiracy, but in case of Sin, Nathan is most fit to be called to Counsel, and
it is his word, not Hushai's, that shall best appease the inward clamours of an
accusing Conscience. A friend may advise best for the Government and State of
his Kingdom; but for the ordering and settling the peace of his Soul, let the
Prophets words be heard. I say, in this case let the Prophet be heard; for his
words are in a special manner accompanied with Gods own promise: He will
perform the Counsel of his Messengers, Isa. 44. at the 26. verse^.

Amongst all the Sons of men we are said in Scripture to remit Sins; not that
we have of our selves an absolving power, but that our words might give the
greater satisfaction to afflicted Consciences; that when we speak upon good
grounds, they might be as fully assured of their remission, as if we indeed had
forgiven them. So Calvin upon that place of John, in the 3d. of his
Institutions.

We cannot then of our selves remit the crime, yet God has given us power, to
cure the Conscience; it lies not in us to acquit, it d^eth to comfort a Sinner;
which Truth is yet further illustrated by that Text in the 18 of St. Matthew's
Gospel; whatsoever ye shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in Heaven. First
we loose on earth, and then God in Heaven.

But what, you will say, does the Ministerial Act go before the Principal? may we
declare what God has not yet decreed? that were to play the Kings Interpreter,
while he is silent; or to publish a proclamation before it be penned. These
seem to be great inconveniences.

We must therefore understand, that upon the hearty and true contrition of a
penitent Soul, first God himself decrees his Absolution, then after his humble
Confession the Minister does publish, or pronounce it: to which Act of the
Minister, God by promise adds the assistance of his persuading Spirit, and so
the Sinner becomes certain of the remission of his Sin. In this sense therefore
it is true, that we are first loosed on earth, and then in Heaven, because that
after the Ministerial Absolution pronounced here on earth, our Consciences do
by the Spirit obtain an undoubted assurance, that we are loosed in Heaven.

Thus have I showed you, what this one remedy is, to wit Justification by the
blood of Christ; the manner how we attain a sense of it, the inward Testimony
of the Holy Ghost; the means how to recover this Testimony, when upon our Sins
we seem to lose it, humble Confession of our Sins, sometimes to God only,
sometimes to his Ministers also, and this either private, or more public, as
the case of the Penitent requires. And of this Confession to the Minister I
insisted somewhat the more largely, because, indeed to be, as my Text speaks,
once purged of sin, and yet to have a conscience not duly sensible of this
benefit, I mean the benefit of Absolution, by the lawful Ministry, is but with
those blinded Anamites, to be in the midst o^ the people of God, and yet not
know it.

After this remedy follows our happy estate of health, attended with the
blessing of peace and quietness; being in my last part shadowed out only under
a negative description (...), no more conscience of sin.

The happy Estate. Part 3.
I dare not undertake to describe this happiness, for I find it passes all
understanding, much more all discourse of man. To call it health, or peace, or
joy in the Holy Ghost, were to name it rather than to express it: so
mysteriously happy is this estate, that its conceived only by being enjoyed. I
shall therefore make use of my Apostles modesty, and call it only no
conscience of sin; yet does this Brevity include a panegyric of praises; for
you know all excellencies are defined by Negatives.

Nor do I hold it a weak argument of perfection, that Satan so much desires to
counterfeit this Estate, seeing things of mean condition are no objects for
imposture; men do not usually counterfeit Brass, or Copper, but Gold and
Silver. And therefore Satan, that grand Impostor and deceiver of souls, that he
may more securely cheat us of that which is true, labors with all subtlety to
work in us a false similitude of this blessedness; and in stead of leaving us
no conscience of sin, many times leaves us no conscience at all.

Saint Paul, chap. the 4th. of his first Epistle to Timothy, verse 2. fi^ly
describes such deluded ones, (...); men of seared consciences, as we say in
English; or rather, as Beza somewhat more Emphatically seems to render it,
such men, as an hot Iron, (set on fire, sur^ly by Hell) has not seared only,
but cut off their consciences quite.

H^u miseri servitutem qui intelligunt, miseriores qui non intelligunt, cried
the Orator; and I may well in this case be his Echo. Miserable are those men
that feel the burden and bondage of daily transgressions; but most of all
unhappy are they, that serve sin, and do not perceive it.

Can thou then, being a Noah, beget a Cham? make laughter the son of
drunkenness? can thou after a beastly surfeit jest at it instead of weeping?
can thou lie in wait to deceive chastity, and then impudently boast of those
Actions, of which nature her self is ashamed? If you be such, Beloved, it
behooves me then to turn this part of my Sermon, which I intended for your
consolation, into some Funeral discourse, and set my self rather to deplore,
than congratulate your estate: your disease is not cured, but changed; in stead
of the Fever, the burning Fever of a tormenting guilty conscience, you are
fallen into a Lethargy, or dead sleep, of unsensibleness and stupidity of
spirit; in a word, you are dead, not living.

Yet seeing the dead too shall hear the voice of the Gospel of Christ, I must
not forbear to call upon you; Awake therefore, thou that sleep in the
security and senselessenesse of sin, awake and stand up from the dead, that
Christ may give thee life. Take and consider well these few lessons I shall
give thee; they may possibly help to recover thee.

Lea^n* first to be diseased, that thou may be healthful; let the Terrors
of the Law threatening sin with death, affright thy soul; let them enter and
wound thy Conscience, that so thou may both hunger and thirst after this
remedy; by Tears and contrition labor to procure a sense of it; and so by
degrees at length attain the blessedness of this happy estate; wherein those
accusing thoughts shall be silenced, those distractions quieted and composed,
and instead of Terrors and amazement, thy conscience shall speak nothing but
peace unto thee.

Thus have I discoursd upon the words of my Text apart, and showed you
hitherto, what I was able to collect from each of them in particular by
themselves. It remains now, that I declare* according to my intended purpose,
and briefly, the Truth of this whole proposition, namely how far a justified
person may be again perplexed with his former transgressions, and in what sense
mine Apostle speaks, when he says, that

Worshippers once purged, have no more conscience of sin. Give me a man then
after Gods own heart, one who condemns himself with as much severity, as he
sins with fear; let his sorrow keep pace with his transgressions; and because
he must daily offend, let his life be a perpetual repentance; yet may even such
a Job, such a just man, and careful walker with God, be afflicted with his
passed offenses, after a settled confidence of Absolution.

He may hold himself, for their sakes, unworthy of the blessings of this
present life, as Saint Paul thought, he deserved not the high attribute and
Title of an Apostle, because the Christian Church had sometimes groaned under
his persecution. I am not meet, says he, to be called an Apostle, because I
persecuted the Church of Christ; yet I was received to mercy, because I did it
ignorantly through unbelief; I was received to mercy; that argues his
confidence of forgiveness. I am unworthy to be called an Apostle; that shows,
there was a conscience remaining in him, which some way accused his sin.

Nay in respect of Temporal punishments, our consciences are of so large
extent, that they bid us fear sometimes, when our conceit tells us, that others
offend. For Deli^ant reges, plectuntur Achivi, the pestilence may invade all
Israel upon David's offense; and though it were the Son of Kish only, that
unjustly flew the Gibeonites, yet may the famine starve all Judah, in the reign
of the son of Ishai, for that offense.

Upon this conscience of sin does our English Letany, not without good cause,
give entertainment to that petition, Remember not, Lord, the offenses of our
Forefathers; although I confess, vehemently opposed by that sort of men, who
profess themselves enemies to our whole Liturgy; and whose zeal in this, as in
diverse other cases of like nature, is manifestly of great prejudice to their
judgment. But I have no occasion to speak more of them at present.

It Is true, Jeremy has long ago censured that murmuring proverb of his people,
the Fathers have eaten the sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on
edge; and not without cause: for it was as false, as common. For Judah her self
never eat more sour grapes, than in the time of that weeping Prophet; and
whereas sometimes she tasted only, and set her teeth on edge, now she eat and
surfetted.

The sin then of the Fathers was punished in their posterity, but not without
the childrens offense; and when they also cease not to continue their Fathers
sin, they may justly expect a severer punishment; now which of us dare say I
am innocent? I have utterly declined my Fathers sins? It we dare not, or
cannot say thus; if our own consciences would fly in our faces and give us the
lie, in case we should, what mervail is it, yea what obstinate perverseness
were it, if we should refuse to make our petition to God, in those words of the
Prophet Daniel; O Lord let thine anger be turned away, le^t because of our
sins, and the sins of our Fathers, Jerusalem and thy people be made a
reproach.

For as in the eyes of that Allseeing Majesty, a Thousand years are but as one
day, so are as many generations but as one man. Now in a single offender, it is
mercy that expects repentance a long time, though for neglecting it, the
punishment be infflicted afterward with greater severity. So is it in respect
of whole Nations; it is the goodness of God, that throughout so many ages
attends their conversion; yet must that Kingdom dread the more fearful ruin,
which has enlarged her transgressions by perpetuity.

Amalek rebelled in the time of Moses, and was then threatened with eternal
hatred, as appears Exodus 17th. at the 14th. verse; but succeeding ages, and
the sins of Amaleks posterity, brought down that horror of punishment, of
which Saul, 1 Samuel 14. was ordained to be Executioner.

Nor was posterity then punished for the Fathers sin alone; for as it is
evident, Amalek still maintained enmity against Israel, the people of God:
whereas had they from a conscience of their Fathers sin, sued out pardon for
those first offenses, probably the punishment had not been of so high a nature,
where the transgression should have been found of less continuance.

Neither may this conscience of sin past, arise only from a fear of Temporal
afflictions. No: unhappy and Frail men that we are, we may be again and again
perplexed with the guilt of those very transgressions, which we once thought
and verily persuaded our selves were forgiven.

For the infant-issue must needs faint, when the Mother languisheth; and when
our Faith is so mixed with doubting, our joy must needs be subject to much
inconstancy; and if in the case of eternal salvation it self, our confidence
may be buffetted sometimes with contrary fears, and almost degenerate into
despair; much more, as to the matter only of Forgiveness of sin, may our
peace be again molested with perplexity.

In the 51th. Psalm, while David entreats pardon of God for that complicate
sin, which he committed, in the case of Bathshebah and Vriah, that is,
murdering the Husband, and defiling the Wife, see, he becomes burdened on the
sudden with the conscience of all his former transgressions; there he makes
confession of his original guilt, and humbly entreats pardon for all his Actual
offenses. Dele omnes iniquitates meas, says he, at the 10th. verse. Lord blot
out all mine iniquities whatsoever, and at the 12th. read mihi laetitiam, etc.
O give me the comfort of thy help again, and Stablish me with thy free Spirit.

And if a justified man may not be again troubled with a conscience of sins
past, whence came that prayer of this same Prophet, ^s. 25th. at the 6. verse,
Remember not, O Lord, the sins of my youth? shall we think David so
careless, as not to have long before this time, entreated pardon for his
youthful transgressions? or that God himself so little regarded his prayer,
whom his very soul loved, as that though he had begged, yet he had not obtained
pardon for them? no doubt he had of a long time felt good assurance, and a
sensible Testimony, that such his sins were forgiven him: and yet upon
consideration of those many miseries, which befell him from Saul's malice, and
Doegs treachery, he groans again under the former burden, and begins to accuse
the sins of his youth, as cause, that his riper years were exposed to such
afflictions.

But what? do you say a man once purged may be so many ways burdened again
with a conscience of sin? may his past offenses again, after purgation, after
his being justified and acquitted from them by the blood of Christ, affright
him with fear, sometimes of Temporal, sometimes of eternal punishment? where is
then the Truth of my Apostles Doctrine, worshippers once purged, have no more
conscience of sin?

To answer you briefly, it holds in these two senses. First and absolutely in
respect of that conscience of sin, which we called ex part victimae, they
that are once purged in the blood of the lamb, do not with those Hebrews, which
my Apostle deals with in the Text, again thirst after any further sacrifice;
but their consciences rest fully assured, that all sins whatsoever may be
perfectly done away by Christ's one and great oblation.

Secondly, it may be understood also in some sense, in respect of that
conscience of sin, which we called ex part reatus; but not so absolutely
here, as in the other; because not at all times, nor upon all occasions. For
the Saints have many fallings; there is no man living, that sins not, even
the just man himself, as the Scripture speaks, falls, that is, sins,
more or less grievously, seven times a day, and by consequence wounds and
loads his conscience with the guilt of sin: however, it is certain, that at
some times also the true servants of God, men truly justified and regenerate,
have their hearts so sprinkled with the blood of Christ by faith, and are so
united with God by a full assurance of the forgiveness of sin, and sense of
Gods love and favor toward them, that they have no conscience, that is, no
sense, no fear of guilt at all for any of their offenses whatsoever. For as
they are at some special times assured of their salvation, so are they
likewise, in the same hours of comfort, assured of the remission of all sin.

Fear not then thou fainting Christian, fear not, nor be dismayed, although thy
tender and timorous conscience affrights thee sometimes perhaps, with the
remembrance, even of those transgressions, whose pardon thou have heretosore,
upon sure grounds, no way distrusted; be not much troubled at them, seeing thou
have the remedy almost in thine own hands. Whenever thou find them thus to
return upon thee, distracting thy thoughts, and disturbing thy repose, cast thy
self upon God, confess them again, wash them both in the blood of Christ by
Faith, and in thine own tears, by contrition and hearty sorrow: so shall thy
good God, who doubtless upon thy first repentance did truly remit and pardon
them unto thee, upon thy second confession and tears, make thee become a second
time, and much more, certain of thy absolution.

I say confess them again. For although the Jesuit, Salmeron I mean, be
pleased to give us such an observation as this in his commentaries upon this
chapter, ad iterandas confessiones nulla lege arctamur aut Evangelica aut
Apostolica. There Is no Law ties us to make often confession of the same sin,
viz. which we have once already duly confessed; yet though laws be silent, I
think, I have showed examples, namely of that man after Gods own heart, that
royal penitent and Prophet King David* of the Prophet Daniel, and diverse
others that might be alleged; which although they tie not our belie^e, perhaps,
as to a matter of Faith or Divine precept, as the Jesuit pretends, yet I
suppose, their bare practice deserves our Imitation better, and is more safely
followed, than his opinion, especially in ca^es of great distress, and where
special comfort is necessary to quiet and allay the Agony of Spirit.

But I shall not enter into surther controversy with him. God, who comfort
Jerusalem, comfort the mourners that are in Israel: comfort all such as groan
under the conscience and guilt of sin^ne; restore True peace unto their souls;
give them all necessary and full assurance of the remission of their sins here,
through Faith in the blood of Christ, and afterward advance them to Glory, and
to the Fruition of those comforts, which shall never fail, by the same Jesus
Christ our Lord, to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, three Persons, one
Eternal, Almighty, and most merciful God, be all Honor and Adoration given of
all creatures now and for ever,

Amen.
THE END.

