Reformation of Manners, the true way of Honoring God. With the necessity of
putting the Laws in Execution against Vice and Profaneness.

IN A SERMON Preached At White Hall.

By the late Right Reverend Father in GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

And Published by Their Majesty's Special Command.

The Second Edition.

Not Printed in any of the Volumes of his Lordship's SERMONS.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Bennet, at the Half Moon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1700.

The way of honoring God by a Reformation of Manners.
IN A SERMON Preached At White Hall.
1 Samuel 2. 30. For them that honor me I will honor; and they that despise
me shall be lightly esteemed.
THese Words were spoken by, a Prophet of the Lord to Eli^ at that time, the
High Priest and Judge over Israel, upon Occasion of the Wickedness of his Sons,
and the Hishonour brought upon Religion thereby; which was so great that it is
said, v. 17.
they made the People abhor the Offering of the Lord. But that we may the
better comprehend their Scope and Design, there are some remarkable particulars
to be considered; with respect to the Circumstances that attend them.

(1.) That their Sins were of a high and scandalous Nature, being an open
Affront both to the Ceremonial and Moral Law. The Offering of the Lord was that
which himself had appointed in the Law of Moses; wherein it was expressly
required, that the Fat of the Sacrifices of Peace Offerings must be burnt upon
the Altar, Lev. 7. 31.
and after that, the Joints were to be divided, and the Priest was to have his
share, v. 33, 34.
and the People that offered them the rest. But these Sons of Eli thought
themselves too great to be tied up to such a strict observance of the Niceties
of the Law; and therefore they sent their Servants to demand what they pleased,
v. 13, 14, 15, 16.
without any Regard to that Order which the Laws appointed. It is possible,
they might think (although such lewd and and profane Persons are not much given
to thinking) that the matter was not great, how, or in what manner, they took
the share which belonged to them; but God, who best knew what was pleasing to
himself, says, The Sin of the young Men was very great before the Lord. v. 17.
For God will and ought to be served in his own Way, and they, who thought to
be Wiser than his Laws, smarted for their Folly. Lev. 10. 1.
Thus Nadah and Abihu (two brisk young Men) had a mind to try the Experiment of
offering strange Fire before the Lord (not taking it from the Altar as God had
appointed.) Lev. 1. 7. chapter 6. v. 12. chapter 16. v. 12.
And what came of this Presumptuous violation of God's Law? They were
immediately consumed by a strange Fire themselves; for, chapter 10. v. 2.
it is said, A Fire went out from the Lord and devoured them, and they died
before the Lord; i. e. they were struck dead with Lightning upon the Place, and
their dead Bodies were carried forth from before the Sanctuary out of the Camp;
v. 4.
that all the People might observe the Truth of what Moses said to Aaron on
this Occasion: v. 3.
This is that the Lord spoke, saying, I will be sanctified in them that come
nigh me, and before all the People I will be glorified. It is true, God did not
punish Hophni and Phinehas in the same manner, who added great Lewdness and
Immorality to their other faults; v. 22.
but He severely threatens the whole House of Eli for their Sins; and as a sign
of the rest, he declares, that these profligate Wretches should both be taken
off the same Day; v. 34.
Which was accordingly accomplished with dreadful Circumstances; ^^. 4. v. 11.
For, the Ark of God was taken at the same time.

(2.) That the House of Eli was advanced to that Dignity which it then enjoyed
by an Extraordinary Method of Providence: For, when Nadab and Abihu the Sons of
Aaron were destroyed, Lev. 10. 6. 1 Chr. 24. 2.
there remained Eleazar and Ithamar, (for the other died Childless,) from them
descended two Branches of Aaron's Family. Number. 3. 4.
Eleazar was of the Elder House; but Eli, who descended from Ithamar, was in
possession of the High Priesthood by God's Approbation. And when Abiathar in
Solomon's time was put by the High Priesthood, 1 Chr. 14. 2. 5.
it is said, that he descended from Ithamar, 1 Kings 24. 27.
and was of the House of Eli; and he was therefore thrust out that God might
fulfill his Word, which he spoke concerning the House of Eli in Shiloh. By which
we find, that God had raised up the House of Eli after an Extraordinary manner;
and no doubt, according to the Wise Methods of Divine Providence for an
Extraordinary End; and we find no ill Character fixed upon Eli himself,
although he had judged Israel forty years; 1 Samuel ^ 18.
but there were those about him, and very near him, who were loose, profane and
dissolute Persons, and although, those who are most concerned, do commonly hear
the last of the Miscarriages of those related to them; yet the Cry was so great
that it came to his Ears, and he took notice of it, and reproved them for it;
chapter 2. v. 22, 23, 24, 25.
And he said to them, why do ye such things? etc. The good old Man seems to be
heartily concerned and troubled for his Sons Follies; but this did not answer
God's End; for the Reason He gives of the heavy Judgments denounced against his
Family, chapter 3. v. 13.
was, because his Sons made themselves vile, and he restrained them not. God
expects something more than mere Words, or bare Reproofs, where his Honor, and
that of Religion, are so much concerned. But when Profaneness, Looseness and
Irreligion, crept in among them, and grew too hard for the Government, God
threatens to do such a thing in Israel, chapter 3. v. 11.
at which both the ears of every one that hears it shall tingle. I need go no
farther.

(3.) That although God was justly provoked by the Sins of the House of Eli;
yet there was a concurrence of the Peoples Sins in bringing down such severe
and astonishing Judgments. There was no great loss in Hophni and Phinehas,
unless they had been better; but it was a terrible Judgment to have the Ark of
God taken, and carried Captive; and thereby their whole Religion exposed to
scorn and contempt among their Neighbors, who hated them for the sake of their
Religion. For when the Idolatrous Nations about them had corrupted themselves
and the Worship of God, He was pleased, by the Ministry of Moses, to set up a
Form of Worship among the People of Israel according to his own Will. This gave
great Dissatisfaction to all their Neighbors, and increased their Spite and
Malice against them; which they were ready to show on all Occasions; but never
more than when the Ark of God was taken Captive and carried about in Triumph
among them: For this was the Symbol of God's particular Presence among the
People of Israel. The Tabernacle, with all its Rich and admirable Furniture,
was as his Court; but the Holy of Holies, as his Chamber of Presence; and there
the Ark was the Place where God gave his Answers to his People on great and
Solemn Occasions. And what could be more grievous and dishonorable to them,
than to have this Ark of God carried away by their Enemies? For, then the Name
of the whole Nation might have been Ichabod, chapter 4. v. 22.
for the Glory was departed from Israel. But was all this merely for the Sins
of Hophni and Phinehas? No; the Punishment on that account related to the House
of Eli; but this was a Judgment on the whole Nation: And God himself gives a
sad Account of it, but it was such, as reached to the Nature and Extent of the
Judgment. Go ye now, says God in the Prophet Jeremiah, Jer. 7. 12.
unto my Place which was in Shiloh, where I set my Name at the first, and see
what I did to it for the wickedness of my People Israel. So that here was a
Complication of the Sins of all sorts to bring down so heavy a Judgment upon
them.

And thus I have endeavored to clear the way toward the right apprehending
the full Scope and Design of these Words, Them that honor me I will honor;
and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. Wherein are two things to
be spoken to;

I. The Nature of that Honor which is due to God.

II. The Rules and Measures whereby God bestows Honor on Mankind. Them that
honor me I will honor; and they that despise me, etc.

(1.) The Nature of that Honor which is due to God.

There are three sorts of Men to be considered with Respect to the Honor due
to God;

(1.) Such as despise him instead of honoring him.

(2.) Such as pretend to Honor him but do not.

(3.) Such as give him that real Honor which is due to him.

(1.) There are such as despise him instead of honoring him. Such as the Sons
of Eli here mentioned, who are said to be the Sons of Belial, who knew not the
Lord. 1 Samuel 2. 12.
A strange Character of such, who had not only the general Advantages of the
People of Israel to know God above all Nations of the World; but a particular
Obligation to serve and Worship him! But those do not know God who despise his
Service. It is impossible to despise Infinite Goodness and Power and Wisdom;
for those are things, which all that understand them cannot but Reverence and
highly Esteem. For a poor Creature to despise his Creator; or one that lives
upon the Bounty of another to despise his Benefactour, seems to be such an
Inconsistency in Morality, as if humane Nature were incapable of it. But not
withstanding, God himself, who knows the most secret Thoughts of Men's Hearts,
says here, They that despise me shall be lightly esteemed; Although God cannot
be despised for his glorious Perfections; yet his Authority may be despised,
when Men presumptuously break his Laws; when they do not regard what he has
Commanded or forbidden; Tit. 1. 16.
When they profess to know God, but in Works they deny him; when they own a
God, and yet live as if there were none, giving themselves over to a profane
and irreligious Temper of Mind, if not to all sorts of Wickedness in their
Lives. And if once such a Temper prevails, there is nothing to be expected but
an Inundation of the other. For those who despise God and Religion can have
little Regard to the Differences of Good and Evil; and when once the Awe of God
and Conscience is gone, there is nothing can be effectual enough to restrain
the violence of Natural Inclinations.

There are two sorts of Profane Persons too easy to be observed in the World.
Some are Profane in their Practices; who give way to their Sensual Inclinations
and pursue them, as they see Occasion, without Reflection or Consideration.
These do not presently shake off the Principles of Religion and Virtue,
although they Act against them. They know they ought to Fear God and to Abstain
from Evil; but they do neither, leading a loose, dissolute, and wicked Life,
although if they would but consider what they do, they might soon be convinced
of the Folly of their Actions; because they Act against those Principles which
they have seen no Reason to question, but they have not the Grace and
Resolution to Observe them. While they continue thus, there is some hold to be
taken of them; and although their Sins be against Conscience, yet they are not
past Hope; because there is some Life left, but under great Struglings and
Decays.

But there are others (I wish I could only say there had been) who are Profane
out of Principles; who not only Neglect Religion, but Despise it; and Affront
and Ridicule it, as far as they dare with regard to their own Safety. The other
are Mischievous to the World by Example, but these by Design; Those are Enemies
to themselves and to such as follow them; but these ought to be looked on, as
the Subverters of all that is Good, and the Promoters of all Evil and Mischief,
and therefore as the truest Enemies to Mankind, and the Pest and Bane of Humane
Society; The Dishonor and Reproach of their Age and Country; And not merely
Enemies to Mankind, but to God himself, the best and wisest Being in the World;
whom as far as in them lies, they endeavor to Dethrone from his Sovereignty
over it. And where such Monsters of Impiety grow numerous and bold, they bode
the most fatal Consequences to such a People, where they appear without a
Public Detestation of them.

(2.) There are such who pretend to Honor God, but do not. Honor is an Act of
the Mind, (if it be spoken of real and inward Honor, and not of the external
Signs of it) and it is in Him that gives, and not in him that receives it. But
yet those who intend to give Honor to another, may do it in such an improper
and unsuitable manner, that He for whom it is intended, may look on it as an
Affront and Dishonor to him. Therefore he that would give true Honor to
another must have a just Apprehension of his Worth and Excellency, and give it
in such a manner as is most becoming and agreeable to him.

Now, there are two ways whereby Men may be guilty of Dishonouring God under a
pretense of Honoring him.

(1.) By entertaining false Notions of God in their Minds, and Worshipping their
own Imaginations instead of Him.

(2.) By doing Honor to him, not according to his Nature and Will, but
according to their own Intentions and Imaginations.

(1.) By false Notions of God in their Minds, and by Worshipping their own
Imaginations instead of him; i. e. when Persons form in their Minds false
Imaginations or Conceptions of Him; and so give their Worship not to the true
God, but to an Idol of their own Fancy. But there is a great deal of difference
between such Conceptions of God in our Minds, which fall short of the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, (as all ours must do for want of Faculties to
comprehend him) and such which attribute something to him which is unworthy of
him. Not, that if any happen to be mistaken in their Conceptions of God, we
must presently charge them with Idolatry; for the Scripture makes that to lie
in an open and public Dishonouring of God, by giving that Worship which is
alone due to him, to any thing besides himself; It is the setting up of another
Interest among Mankind in opposition to his Power and Sovereignty; It is such
an Exposing the proper Object of Divine Worship as to render it mean and
contemptible: For nothing can be a greater Disparagement to the Divine Nature,
than to be supposed to be like the Work of Men's hands; or to have any of his
own Creatures to have that Worship given to them which belongs to himself; And
so it takes away the due Apprehension, which ought to be always maintained of
the Infinite Distance between God and the Workmanship of his Hands. But these
Consequences do not reach to inward false Conceptions of God; yet they ought by
all possible Means to be avoided by those who would give unto God in their
Minds the Honor which is due unto him. And to avoid all wrong Apprehensions
concerning him, we must settle in our Minds such a fixed Notion of him, as
results from those Evidences which prove his Being. Romans 1. 20
For, the invisible things of God, says the Apostle, are understood by the
things that are made; i. e. the visible frame of the World does afford such
plain Evidence of the Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of the Maker of them, that
from thence we may form a distinct and clear Notion of God in our Minds, as a
Being Infinitely Wise, Powerful and Good. This is the most natural, easy, and
orderly Conception we can have of God in our Minds; because it arises from the
same Arguments which prove his Being. And when our Minds are fixed and settled
herein, the next thing is to exclude all mean and unworthy Thoughts of him, as
inconsistent with his Divine Perfections. Therefore, whatever savours of
Impotency or Cruelty; whatevertends to abate our Reverence, to lessen our
Esteem, to damp our Affections, or to cool our Devotion toward him, cannot be
agreeable to those just Conceptions we ought to have always in our Minds
concerning him. For the Honor of God does not lie in having such terrible
Apprehensions of his Majesty and Power and Justice as may drive us into Horror
and Despair; but in entertaining such an Opinion of his Wisdom, Goodness and
Loving kindness as may incline us to Love him and to Trust in his Mercy. And
then God is truly honored by us, when we preserve a deep Sense and Awe of him
upon our Minds; When we Adore him for his Infinite Perfections; When we Esteem
him as the most proper Object of our Love, as well as of our Fear; When we put
our Trust and Confidence in him, and depend upon him as to the Conveniences of
this Life and the Happiness of another; when the desire of our Soul is toward
him, and our Meditation of him is frequent and serious and delightful to us;
when we set him always before us, and direct the Course of our Lives and
Actions to the Pleasing him; When we dare not wilfully do any thing to offend
him; but make it our chief study and business to do what tends to his Honor,
and to promote it in the World.

It is therefore of very great Consequence, as to the whole Course of Religion
to keep up in our Minds, such a true and settled Notion of God, as may influence
our Devotion, reform our Disorders, inflame our Affections, and keep us from
being led aside by the violent and impetuous Heats of Imagination. For this is
the true Source of most of the Extravagancies of Mankind about Religion; They
have no true Notion of God in their Minds, but they dread his Power, and know
not how to please him; and so run from one thing to another, through the
several Methods of Superstitions, or Enthusiasm, as agrees best with their
Fancies; which is so unstable and uncertain a Principle, that no steady Course
of Religion can be steered by it. A Man who Acts by Imagination, is like a Ship
at Sea without Anchor or Compass, which Rouls up and down just as the Wind and
the Waves carry her. But Reason and Understanding is a steady and uniform
Principle, and being well fixed from a due and thorough Consideration of the
Nature and Will of God, keeps the Mind even and constant, and goes on its
Course as well as it can, and makes its way, notwithstanding the Force of the
Current and Tide of Natural Inclination be against it; and that the Clouds and
Vapors of Imagination often hinder the Freedom of its Motion. Nothing is so
uncomfortable, nothing so ungovernable as a restless Imagination; and when it
is oppressed with a Religious Melancholy, then every thing seems dark and
confused; we neither know God nor our selves as we ought to do, and we must
judge amiss when we judge by such a false Light: And therefore our wisest
course in such a case is to be Humble and Patient; to suspend any Peremptory
Judgment as to our selves till we have clearer Light, and those Mists and
Vapors are dispersed, which darken and perplex our Thoughts.

(2.) Men dishonor God, when they pretend to honor him, not according to his
Will, but their own Intentions and Imaginations. There are some things
practiced and defended in the Christian World, which one would hardly think
possible to have ever prevailed, had it not been that they thought to do Honor
to God by them. I shall not insist upon the pretenses in the Church of Rome of
Honoring God against his Will, by giving Divine and Religious Worship to
Images, Saints and Angels, etc. because though there be a great deal of Folly
and Superstition, and real Dishonor to God in them, yet there is no such
Mischief to the rest of Mankind, unless they take up an Imagination that God
will be honored by rooting out and destroying all such as cannot comply with
them in their Superstitious Follies. But as the true Spirit of Religion wears
off, that of Persecution often comes in the place of it, like Wasps and Hornets
out of a dead Carcass. Thus in the Jewish Church in our Savior's time, there
was the same outward show and Pomp of Religion, which had been in their best
times; and our Savior himself frequented both the Synagogue Worship and the
Solemn Festivals at the Temple; Luke 4. 16. Mat. 23. 2.
nay he allowed that the Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses's Chair, and that
his Disciples should observe what they taught agreeable to the Law; but yet, he
elsewhere charges them that by their Traditionary Doctrines they had enervated
the Force of the Law; and therefore they did honor him with their Lips, Mat.
15. 8.
but their Heart was far from him; i. e. they had no true Love of God or their
Neighbor, but they thought to make amends for all that, by a wonderful zeal
for their own Traditions and the lesser things of the Law; which they showed
not only by an unwearied diligence to gain Proselytes, but by dedestroying all
such as opposed their Designs; and that not in an ordinary way of Passion and
Revenge, but they would needs have all this to be done for the Honor and
Service of God. Whosoever kills you will think that he does God service. Joh.
16. 2.
A strange kind of Service indeed, to take away the Lives of his best and most
useful Servants! But although no Religion in the World be so directly contrary
to all Acts of Cruelty an Inhumanity as the Christian is, yet upon the
Degeneracy of that, the same kind of Spirit has risen up and prevailed over
too great a part of the Christian World. But especially the very same Jewish
Spirit of Zeal and Hypocrisy and Cruelty had entered in these last Ages into a
Society of Men (whom I need not Name) who have undermined the genuine
Principles of Morality, inflamed the Spirits of Princes to all the Effects of a
Cruel War and a Merciless Persecution; and used their utmost Endeavors to root
out all such as dare not Sacrifice their Consciences to the Will of a Prince
under their Direction: And which adds to all this, they have the Impudence to
assume that Motto to themselves, Ad majorem Dei Gloriam; as though they aimed
at nothing but doing greater Honor to God. Such as these go beyond Hophni and
Phinehas; for their Wickedness, although great, was confined to a narrow
Compass, but these disperse themselves into all States and Kingdoms, and carry
on the same uniform Design, viz. to do all the Mischief they can under the
pretense of Advancing the Honor of God.

(3.) But certainly there is a Way left to give to God that Honor which is due
to Him; otherwise, it were to little purpose to say, Them that honor me I will
honor. But I shall not take in here all the ways how we may Honor God, but
consider that which is most proper to the Design of these Words. For which we
are to observe, that the External Worship and Service of God was in general,
well enough kept up and observed in the Tabernacle at Shiloh. There the High
Priest attended, the Daily Sacrifices were offered, and the People resorted
thither at the Solemn Feasts from all parts of the Land: But the great Examples
of Wickedness in the Sons of Eli had spread themselves so far, that the People
were generally corrupted, and the best Part of their Religion, which lies in a
Reformation of Manners, was almost gone. There were some Pious and Devout
Persons, such as Eli himself (a Good Man but a Bad Magistrate, being Remiss and
Careless in the Execution of his Office) and no doubt, many among the People,
as well as Elkanah and Hannah, were devout and serious in the Service of God,
and other Duties of Religion; but yet God himself takes notice of the
Wickedness of his People Israel, at the time when the Ark was removed from
Shiloh. And therefore we have Reason to take particular Notice of that Passage
to Eli, concerning the Reason of the Punishment of his House, Because his Sons
made themselves vile and he restrained them not. For, their Sins were of a very
Contagious Nature, and by not restraining them, the People were run into a
great degree of Looseness and Profaneness. So that it was not for Eli's
Personal Miscarriages, that God thought himself so dishonored by him, but for
want of taking due Care for the Suppressing Profaneness and Corruption of
Manners in others. And this shows the true way how God may and ought to be
Honored by those who are bound to take Care of others; viz. by giving all due
Encouragement to true Religion and Virtue, and by making use of the most
effectual Means for suppressing Irreligion and Profaneness.

And this indeed is a Great and Noble Design fit for the greatest Minds and
Persons of the highest Station to to be Employed about. I cannot deny, that it
is a Difficult Work; for it is easier to subdue the Bodies than the Passions of
Men; and how many will rather venture their Lives than mortify their Lusts? And
let them pretend what they will, we find that they will sooner part with any
thing than with their Sins. Do we not daily see that they will let go Honor,
Reputation, Interest, Health, and the hopes of Heaven, rather than those Vices
they have been accustomed to the Practice of? How can we then imagine, that the
mere Fears of the Execution of Humane Laws should presently restrain those,
whom no Fear of Hell or Damnation could hitherto Reform? But yet a stop may,
and ought to be put to the insolent Growth of Profaneness; for if it be
suffered to be too hard for our Laws, it will in time be too hard for all sort
of Government. Yet how shall a stop be put to it under such Difficulties? For
it cannot be denied, that we have Excellent Laws against Vice and Debauchery,
and that Magistrates have had sufficient countenance from Authority for the due
Execution of them. But yet the Complaints are great of a mighty overflowing of
all sorts of Wickedness still among us; I hope they are not all true; but yet I
am afraid, there is too much ground for them. What is the Reason of such a
complaint of Profaneness and Irreligion among us at a time we pretend so much
to Reformation? It is no wonder that the bad Examples of those who ought to
Reform others bring Vice into Fashion; but when that cannot be alleged, what
is the Reason that good Examples do so little toward the Reforming others? It
is easy to resolve all into the Corruption of Humane Nature; but that is a
General Answer which serves for all Times and Places, and must suppose them
alike: And if it be a good and sufficient Answer, it is to little purpose to
talk of Laws, Religion and Reformation: For unless they may have some Power to
alter and amend the Course of Men's Actions, they signify very little to the
real Benefit of Mankind, no more than Sea-Marks do toward hindering the course
of the Tide; But mere Examples, although of excellent use to all Ingenuous
Minds, yet to others they are but like Statues of Mercury in the Road, which
point to the right way, but Men will go which way they please notwithstanding.

Therefore to Laws and Examples the Magistrates Power must be added, which was
appointed for this purpose, to be Terror to those that do evil, Romans 13. 3.
as well as an Encouragement to those that do well. And then the Apostle
supposes the Sword is born in vain, ver. 4.
when the Magistrate is not the Minister of God in this respect; a Revenger to
execute Wrath upon him that does evil. It was the Great and Just Honor of
Princes of Old, that by their means, Mankind was reduced from a rude and
disorderly kind of Life, to the Practice of Civility and Good Manners; and it
is as great a Foundation of Honor still, when Men are so much Apostatized from
them, to bring them back again to the due Order and Decency of Living. The Case
is much harder of those who are Degenerate under Laws, than of those who were
so without them; For they have learnt to despise their Remedy, and by Arts and
Subtilties to avoid the Force of that, which was intended for their Good.

But, however, none ought to be discouraged from so Excellent a Design; which
Recommends it self to all Wise and Good Men, and will never want the Assistance
and Prayers of all that are so; and God himself will in an especial Manner give
Honor to Those who thus Honor him in his own Way; by using the most Effectual
Means for the Reforming the Manners of Men.

But what are those ways which may be called Effectual? It Is true, that depends
upon the Favor and Blessing of God; but it is no hard Matter for us to judge
what are the most likely Means to be Effectual. Such as,

(1.) An Universal Discountenancing of all sorts of Vice and Profaneness, be
the Persons of what Rank or Quality soever. For, if those of the House of Eli
be suffered to transgress, the People will follow their Examples; although the
Good Old Man did not like their Doings, but he did not take Care enough to
Restrain them.

(2.) An Even, Steady, Vigorous and Impartial Execution of the Laws against
Looseness and Debauchery; so that it may not look like a sudden Heat or Design
of Popularity, but proceeding from a due and well-tempered Zeal for God and
Religion.

(3.) A Wise Choice of fit Instruments to pursue so Good an End; I mean such as
Jethro recommended to Moses, Men of Courage and Integrity, Fearing God and
hating Covetousness. Exodus 18. 21.
And such I hope are to be found in the several Parts of the Nation.

(4.) Lastly, A diligent Inspection into the Behavior of those who are the
proper and immediate Instruments for carrying on so good a Design. For, if
there be no Inspection afterward, it will be looked on as a mere matter of
Form, or an Order given out to satisfy the Importunities of some and the
Clamours of others. It were to be wished, that all who are Employed in such a
Work had an Equal Mixture of Wisdom and Zeal; but it is not possible to hinder
some from having unequal shares of these; And it is great Pity so Good a Cause
should Miscarry through the Indiscretion of any who are Zealous for it. On the
other side, It is possible that some who pretend to an Equal Zeal for it in
general, may Use such Artifices and Fair Pretenses, as may effectually baffle
and undermine it, while they seem to be concerned to promote it. So that, what
through the Intemperate Heats of some, the Coldness and Indifferency of others,
and the certain Averseness all bad Men have to any real Design of Reformation,
there is a Necessity for such an Affair to be often looked into, and an Account
taken of the Management of it, if any great Advantage be expected by it.

And surely no greater Advantage can be expected as to this World, than from
such a Design managed, as it ought to be. For, what can we propose to our
Selves, that can tend more to promote the Honor of Almighty God, which we
ought above all other things to be concerned for. For, the Righteous God loves
Righteousness; and he abhors all kind of Wickedness: What then can be more
Pleasing to him, than to have all sorts of Impiety and Profaneness
discountenanced, punished, and if it be possible, rooted out? What can tend
more to the Honor of his Vicegerents, than to show so much of a Resemblance to
Him, as to Love what God Loves, and to hate what he hates; and to employ their
Power for the same End which God himself does his, viz. to Advance his Glory
and to do Good to Mankind? What can tend more to the Honor of our Church and
Nation, than to let the World see by such Good Works as these, what the
Reformation is, which we aim at; Not merely of some disputable Points, as to
Doctrine and Practice, (which we have earnestly contended for, and with great
Reason,) but a true and serious Reformation of the Hearts and Lives of Men;
without which all our other Pretenses will fall infinitely short of what God
expects from us, and the very Name of Reformation will be a Reproach to us.

II. I now proceed to the second Particular, viz. the Rules and Measures which
God observes in distributing Honor among Men, Them that honor me, I will
honor; but they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed.

Which may be understood two ways;

I. As to the Societies of Men which have one Common Interest. II. As to the
Interests and Honor of Particular Persons.
I. As to such Societies of Men, which have one Common Interest. And so it
implies, that the Welfare and Reputation, and flourishing Condition of such,
depends upon their Zeal and Concernment for God and Religion. But here, we meet
very great Difficulties; for Reason and Experience seem to contradict each
other about it. On the one side, it seems most agreeable to the Justice of
Divine Providence to Reward and Punish those in this World who will not be
Capable of being rewarded or punished in another; for there will be no
Communities in another World. But on the other side, we cannot deny matter of
common Experience; for, how long have the Turkish and Papal Monarchies (to name
no other) flourished, when the seven Churches of Asia, and the Churches of
Africa have been long since destroyed? How strangely has Mahometism spread in
the Eastern Parts of the World? And what a Check has there been, upon the
Reformation in these Western Parts? With what a mighty Torrent did it prevail
at first? Then it stood at a stand, and has of late Years gone so much
backward, and suffered so very much in many Parts of it: And yet we think, and
that very justly, that the Honor of God is concerned in all this. What shall
we say to the Insolent Oppressors of Mankind who make no Conscience of ruining
Cities and Countries, and offering Violence to the Bodies and Consciences of
Men to Advance and Support their own Grandeur; and yet have been suffered to
prevail so far as to be made an Argument against Providence by Atheistical Men?
It is to be hoped that God in his own time will vindicate his Honor and clear
this point to the Satisfaction of all reasonable Men; but yet, we cannot
penetrate into the Wisdom and Secrets of Providence. God will (no doubt) take
Care of his own Honor; but he is not bound to give such Men an Account of the
Ways and Methods and Seasons of his doing it. He often raises up a Nation fit
for his purpose, and makes them as a Scourge to Neighbor Nations; and when
they have done his Work, he suffers them to be humbled, if not destroyed, by
the same Methods they have used to others. Sometimes he raises up one Kingdom
and Nation against another, when their Sins make them ripe for Vengeance; and
so he takes the Potsheards of the Earth and breaks them upon one another; and
thus, by their mutual Punishment, they both become the Executioners of his
Wrath; and we cannot determine by the Event which was in the greater Guilt. So
that God takes Care of his own Honor, by Methods we are not able to
comprehend. For who can weigh the Nations in a Balance, and determine how far
the Sins of one does exceed the other? And if we cannot know the Number and
Aggravation of a People Sins, we can never fix the Measures and Degrees of
their Punishment.

But, however, some things are certain;

(1.) That the Sins of a Nation do naturally tend to the Weakness and Dishonor
of it. Thus a factious, seditious, turbulent Temper, not only is the Reproach
of a People; but the ready way to destroy it. And yet it has so happened, that
when the Factions have been almost equally poised, as at Rome and Carthage,
they have raised such an Emulation between them, which by their endeavors to
outvie each other, has for some time preserved their Country. Who can deny
that Luxury and Debauchery, and all sorts of Intemperance, not only sink the
Reputation of a People, but effeminates and softens them, and makes them
Careless and Idle, Regardless of any thing but what makes for their own Ease
and Voluptuousness? And in all humane probability, such a Nation must sink,
when a People of more Wisdom and Courage and Resolution, makes it their
business to overcome them. So that these sorts of Sins are Natural Causes of
weakening the Power and Interest of a Nation. But there are other Sins, as
Profaneness and Contempt of God and Religion, Hypocrisy, Idolatry, etc. and of
such which Work as Moral Causes, God himself is the only Judge, when the
Measure of their Iniquity is filled up.

(2.) Sometimes God steps out of his Ordinary Method and Course of Providence,
either in a way of Judgment or Mercy. And then he more particularly shows, that
those that Honor him, he will honor; and those who despise him shall be
lightly esteemed. These things are not every days Experience, but when they do
happen they deserve to be taken Notice of, in a more than Ordinary Manner.
Eudem. l. 7. c. 14.
Aristotle, who was no great Friend to Providence, as to Humane Affairs,
professes, that he did not know what to make of the extraordinary Success some
Persons had in their Affairs, without any extraordinary visible Causes. It is
possible, he might have the Success of his Macedonian Friends in his Thoughts;
who swallowed up the Commonwealths of Greece, as so many Morsels, and then
destroyed the mighty Persian Monarchy. But in these Cases, he allows a Divine
Impulse, carrying them on beyond the Ordinary Measures of humane Prudence; and
overruling so many things in Order to Success, as nothing but a Divine Hand
could manage. And when great Advantages come to a Nation in such a manner, a
more than Ordinary Degree of Thankfulness is justly expected, that God may be
honored in a particular manner for the Deliverance he Works by such Means, and
the Mercies he bestows or continues thereby.

(2.) As to particular Persons; how far this holds, will appear by these things:

(1.) That Esteem and Honor naturally follows the Opinion of another Desert
or Excellency. For it is not an Arbitrary thing, but is founded on the
Supposition of something that deserves it. It is like the Assent given to
Mathematical Evidence, which is not because they will do it, but because they
cannot help it.

(2.) The Sincere Practice of Piety and Virtue does command Esteem and
Reverence. Hypocrisy indeed lessens it to the utmost degree; because it argues
a mean and false Temper of Mind; but there is nothing in true Religion but what
tends to raise Esteem, For it implies all the things which are allowed by all
Persons to gain Honor among Men. For one that is truly Religious is a true
Lover of God and of Mankind; He is grateful to his Benefactour, and always owns
in the most solemn manner his Dependence upon him, both by Prayers and Praises;
He is ready to do Good to all Men, as far as is consistent with his Duty to
God; He is just, righteous, and merciful, sober and temperate in the whole
Course of his Life; He acts not by Chance, or for by Ends; but by a fixed
Principle of being and doing Good; He keeps himself within the Bounds which God
has set him; and with Cheerfulness and Resolution sets himself to do and
suffer his Will; and has so much Courage, as to dare to do his Duty, and is
afraid of nothing so much as Offending God. And now let any one judge, whether
there be any thing Mean or Contemptible in all this; whether every one that
hears this Character does not wish it belonged to himself. And that is a
certain token that it brings Honor and Esteem with it.

Let me then, for a Conclusion of all, Recommend the Practice of Reliligion and
Virtue to all such as are the most concerned for Honor and Esteem. The World
is always vain enough to flatter Greatness, either out of Weakness or Design;
but true Greatness of Mind despises Flattery; and where that is wanting in any,
this very Flatterer despises them. But this is a Way to be above the reach of
Contempt, Micah 6. 8.
To do Justly, and to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with God; and these are
the things which God himself assures us are the main Parts of our Duty. If we
be Careless of God's Honor and Service now, the time will shortly come, when
we shall heartily wish we had been otherwise. For, how great soever your Honor
be now, you and that together must in a little time be laid in the Dust. And
then the main Difference will be according to the Honor we have done to God;
For, although the Text does hold good, as to this World, as I have already
showed; yet the most glorious Accomplishment of it will be made Evident to all
Mankind, that Those that honor him, God will honor; and they that despise him
shall be lightly esteemed.

FINIS.

