Origines Britannicae, OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF The British Churches. WITH A
PREFACE Concerning some pretended ANTIQUITIES Relating to BRITAIN, IN
Vindication of the BISHOP of St. Asaph.

By ED. STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Dean of St. Paul's, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
His MAJESTY.

LONDON, Printed by M. Flesher for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
THE Design of the following Book is to give as clear and distinct a View of
the State and Condition of the British Churches, from their first Plantation to
the Conversion of the Saxons, as could be had at so great a distance, and by
such a degree of Light as is left us concerning them. When I first undertook
this Subject I intended no more than an Introduction to something else; but
being entered into it, and laying the several parts of it before me, I found so
many obscure and doubtful passages to be cleared, so many common mistakes to
be rectified, so many considerable parts of Church History which tended to
illustrate it, that either I must give a very imperfect Account of it, or so
much exceed the proportions of a Preface, that I concluded I had better alter
my design and with more Pains and Materials make it an entire Work of it self.
To this end I laid aside whatever related to the first Occasion of my
undertaking it, reserving that for its proper Place and Season; and then I
resumed the consideration of this present Argument, with larger and freer
thoughts, and resolved to attempt something toward the rescuing this part of
Church History, wherein we are so much concerned, from those Fabulous
Antiquities which had so much debased the Value and eclipsed the Glory of it.

This I knew was a Work, not only of much Labor and Industry in searching and
comparing good and bad Authors Printed and MS. foreign and domestic; but
which required more than ordinary care and judgment in separating the Oar from
the Dross; which being done as it ought, the question might be, whether it
would not fall out here as in some Mines, that the quantity of good Oar would
be so small as hardly to compensate for the Pains of digging and refining it.
But this was not all the difficulty to be foreseen; for some Men's Eyes are
still so tender as not to be able to bear the strong impressions of Light;
especially in what relates to the Antiquities of their own Country.

For whatever the reason be, of that Love Mankind do naturally bear to the
Country they are born in, we find it so universal, that even the Laplanders
and Samoyeds admire no Country like their own; and are impatient of any
contradiction to their Fancies of the Beauties and Conveniences of it. And it
is pity to rob Men of any such false Idea's, not entrenching upon Religion or
Morality, which tend so much to the Ease and Comfort of their Lives. For, if
Men will be in love with a cold Air and a barren Soil, with Ice and Mountains,
with living in Caves and Hutts, and traveling upon the hardened Snow, to what
purpose should any go about to confute them, by proving that the Elysian Fields
are more pleasant than those Northern Climats? And so strong is the inclination
that is rooted in Mankind to the Love of their Country, that some learned and
witty Men, who have been born in none of the most tempting Climats have used
great Art and Industry to represent them with such advantage to the World, as
though Paradise were but another Name for their Native Country. Of which we
have a remarkable instance in the late Work of an ingenious Person, who with
mighty pains has endeavored to prove not only that Plato's Atlantic Island,
Ola Rudbeck. Atlantic. c. 7.23.
but the Elysian Fields themselves are to be found in one of the remotest
Northern Countries.

And it is to little purpose to go about to alter such Men's opinions, which are
not so much founded on Reason, as on an over bearing Passion for their native
Soil, which hurts no other Part of the World, and makes their own seem more
pleasant to themselves. Some will be apt to think, the greatest punishment to
such Persons, is to let them live at Home and enjoy their own Opinions; but I
rather look on it as an effect of the Wisdom of Divine Providence to make Men
contented with the Places of their Habitations: For if all Mankind should love
and admire one and the same Country, there would be nothing but destroying one
another in hopes to enjoy it; whereas now, since the true Paradise is lost, it
seems to be most convenient for the World, that every Nation should believe
they have it at Home.

If therefore any of our Neighbor Nations should think their own the richest,
the pleasantest, the fruitfullest Country in the World, I should by no means
think it fit to dispute it with them, no more than I would the Wisdom or
Goodness of their Parents. For, however the Truth of things be, it is best for
Children to believe well of them; and it may prove of very ill consequence to
alter a mistaken good Opinion in them; for it makes them less contented and
less fit to be governed than before; and living under such a mispersuasion can
never do them so much hurt as the unseasonable discovery of their Error does.
From hence I look on all National Quarrels as very foolish and mischievous, it
being reasonable that all Persons should love their own Country as they do
their Parents; and no Man ought to suffer in his esteem for that which it was
never in his Power to help. But whosoever fixes an ill Character upon a Person
on the account of his Country, makes a whole Nation his Enemies, which no wise
Man will ever do; and whoever does it will one time or other see cause to
repent his Folly.

But is it not possible for learned and ingenuous Men to enquire into and
debate the several Antiquities of their Nations without making a National
Quarrel about them? In matter of Self-defence there is a Moderamen inculpatae
tutelae to be observed; and so there ought certainly to be in the defense of
our Country; especially when the Dispute relates neither to the safety, nor
Profit, nor the true Honor or esteem of it, but only to a mere point of
Antiquity; wherein wise and learned Men may differ from each other that are
Natives of the same Country. And these matters are not to be decided in the
Field, nor at the Bar, nor by a majority of voices, but depend upon the
comparing of ancient Histories, the credibility of Testimonies, and a sagacity
in searching, and skill in judging concerning them. It is not every one that
can plead eloquently at the Bar, or quote Authors at second Hand, or dispute
warmly out of common Places, that is presently fit to judge about such things;
for he that takes upon him to do that ought not only to have a general skill
in Antiquity and the best Authors, but to compare the Histories and Annals,
the successions and the settlements of the Neighbor Nations together, and then
with great impartiality to deliver his judgment; but by no means to espouse any
particular Interest, as though he were retained on that side. Which he plainly
discovers if he appear resolved to maintain one side against the strongest
evidence, and to cry down the other in an ignominious and reproachful manner;
as though nothing but particular Piques and Animosities, or which is far worse,
ill Will to the Government, could lead Men into such debates; nay as though it
were a degree of Lese-Majesty, (as it is termed) to call in question some very
remote and very uncertain Traditions about the first Succession of the Kings of
a Neighbor Nation. This I have particular reason to take notice of, from the
usage the very learned and judicious Bishop of St. Asaph has lately met with
in this kind, Historical Account of ancient Church Government in Great Britain
and Ireland.
merely because in his late excellent Book he rejects the long Succession of
Kings from Fergus the Son of Ferquard, from the time of Alexander 's taking of
Babylon; which he does chiefly on these two grounds, 1. Because he proves from
good Authorities in his Book, that the Scots could not be so early settled in
Britain. 2. Because those Scottish Historians who have asserted it are not of
sufficient Authority to be relied upon; which he shows at large in his Preface.

Now upon this occasion, His Majesty's learned Advocate in Scotland, has been
pleased to think it a part of his Duty to answer this part of the Bishop's
Book, not without some kind of sharpness and unhandsome Reflections on a Person
of his Character and Merit; but none like this, That he admires that any of the
Subjects of Great Britain did not think it a degree of Lese-Majesty to injure
and shorten the Royal Line of their Kings. Letter to Lord Chancellor, p. 11.
But there is more Reason to admire at the strangeness of this Accusation,
unless it were intended to show that he could as well prosecute as write
against the Bishop by virtue of his Office, for disputing their Antiquities. As
though the fundamental Constitution of the British Monarchy were at all
concerned in the Credit of Hector Boethius, for upon it, as I shall presently
show, the main stress of this matter does rest.

But because these are dangerous insinuations, and may as well be urged against
some part of the following Book, I shall here make it clear how very unjust and
unreasonable they are. For it is not the Antiquity of the Royal Line which is
in dispute, but the Succession of it in such a Place; the Irish Antiquaries
carrying the Succession much farther back than Hector Boethius, or Lesly, V.
Gratian. Lucium in Cambr. Evers. p. 248, 249.
or Buchanan do. And therefore they charge others far more with shortning the
Royal Line, making it to begin with Fergus; when they derive it long before by
a continued Succession from Simon Brek, and Herimon, and Gathelus, who they say
was but six Descents from Japhet. But if there be any degree of Lese-Majesty
(for I am very unwilling to put these hard Words into proper English) in those
who debate any thing wherein the Honor of the Royal Line is concerned, let
them clear themselves of it, who lay the foundation of the Monarchy in the
Election of Fergus. For that is truly the State of the case; those who contend
so earnestly for the Succession of the Royal Line from Fergus the Son of
Ferchard, placing his Title to the Monarchy in the choice of the Heads of the
Tribes; which will appear from the Words of Hector Boethius, who is in truth
the main support of all this Tradition.

For, although Fordon does mention the Succession of many Kings from Fergus the
Son of Ferquard to Fergus II. yet he professes he could find nothing particular
concerning them; although he quotes several Chronicles, and we are told he had
the View of their Annals, such as they were, of Paslay, Scoon and other Places.
He names indeed 45. Kings, A primo quidem hujus Regni Fergusio filio Ferchardi
ad hunc Regem Fergusium filium Erch inclusive, 45. Reges ejusdem gentis and
generis in hac Insula regnaverunt: sed and horum sigillatim distinguere tempora
principatuum ad praesens omittimus, nam ad plenum Scripta non reperimus. Fordon
Scotichr. l. 4. c. 2.
but he desires to be excused as to the several times of their Reigns, for he
had not met with them written at large, but from the time of Fergus II. he
promises to be very distinct and particular. Yet after him comes Hector
Boethius, of whom the learned Advocate tells us that Erasmus said he could not
lie; Defense of the Antiquity, etc. p. 29.
(which comes very near to Infallibility in matter of Fact) and he is as
distinct and particular in the first Succession as he is in the second. From
whence comes this mighty difference? Of this he informs us from Hector Boethius
himself (and can we have a better Authority than his that could not lie?) That
he had several Books from Icolmkill, which he followed in writing his History.
I cannot now enter upon the consideration of the Authority of these Books, (of
which afterward) but, as far as yet appears, it depends upon the Credibility
of Hector.

But that which I am now to show is, that if Hector Boethius his Authority be
allowed, those who lengthen the Royal Line do more injury to the Monarchy than
those who shorten it. For the first Account he gives of it is this, l. 1. f. 6.
That the Scots in Britain being pressed by the Picts and Britains, they sent
over into Ireland for assistence; Ferquard sent his Son Fergus with Supplies;
who, says he, left it to the choice of the Heads of the Tribes, what
Government they would have, whether a Monarchy, Aristocracy or a Commonwealth;
and they pitched upon a Monarchy, and made Fergus their King: which he says
was just 330 years before Christ's Nativity. After which he sets down Fergus
his owning that he received his Authority from the People; and their
Fundamental Contract to adhere to him and to his Line, f. 10.2.
which if he may be believed, was engraven in Marble Tables, and then the
Agrarian Law followed. And (which is very observable) the first Design we find
laid for altering the Succession of the Crown and excluding the next Heir, p.
6. l. 19.
is in Hector Boethius his account of the immediate Successor to Fergus the
Son of Ferquard. f. 10.2.
For notwithstanding the binding Oath to the Posterity of Fergus, yet
immediately after his Death, he says, Feritharis was chosen King, although
Fergus left Ferlegus his Son and Heir; and not only so, but a Law, says he,
was past excluding the next Heir from any right to Government till he attained
to such an Age. The effect whereof was, that Ferlegus attempting to recover his
Right from Feritharis was banished and utterly excluded. Hector himself
confesses he was at just Age when he demanded the Crown, f. 15.
but he was put by and severely rebuked, quod injussu Patrum petiisset Regnum,
but he did it without the Authority of the Senate; upon which they imprisoned
him, but he made his escape and fled first to the Picts, then to the Britains,
and after Feritharis his Death Main was chosen to succeed. This is the just and
true account of this matter, as it is delivered by Hector Boethius, and after
him by Lesly, Leslae. l. 2. p. 81.
who speaks more plainly of Ferlegus his exclusion; sed Ferlegum recusavit
Populus. Buchanan says, Buch. l. 4. p. 29.
that he was condemned in his Absence; but he would fain reconcile this
practice to their former Oath; (although the Advocate himself says, p. 245.
this Oath did in Law and Reason bind them to obey the Lineal Successor
according to the proximity of Blood) but Buchanan's pretense is because the
present King during the Minority of the Heir, was but a King in trust, and the
Heir at such an Age was to succeed. But how well that was observed appears by
this first instance, and in truth, Hector Boethius and the rest after him do
put the whole power as to these Matters, in the hands of the People, or at
least of the Heads of the Clanns; as will appear more afterward.

It cannot therefore but be very surprising to us to see his Majesty's Advocate
so zealously defending this History of the first Succession of their Kings,
Defense, etc. p. 110.
and reflecting upon a Bishop of our Church for calling it in question. And yet
he cannot deny that this Law was the Occasion of many bloody Civil Wars between
the Uncles and Nephews; and he calls it the Dispute betwixt such as were for
the Crown and such as were for Popular Elections. From whence it follows, That
Hector Boethius his History of the first Succession from Fergus is to set up
the popular Claim. And quite through that first Race Hector makes the supreme
unaccountable power in all cases of Male Administration to be lodged in the
Heads of the People, and the Ministerial in the Monarch.

And therefore, we should have thought it had better become his Majesty's
Advocate to have overthrown such pernicious Principles to Monarchy, as are
contained in this account of the first Race of their Kings from Fergus the Son
of Ferquard. And although Buchanan, among the half-learned, bear the blame of
these Antimonarchical Principles, Just Right of Monarchy, p. 26.
yet it is evident that he only built on the Foundations laid by those who set
up this first Race, as the Advocate himself confesses, whose Words are, All
Buchanan 's Arguments for restraining Kings being founded on the Authority of
our Historians, who, as he says, assert that King Fergus was first elected
King by the People. Leslae. Hist. p. 77.79.
And therefore those Historians who set up this Succession in such a manner had
no kindness to Monarchy, as appears by what Lesly himself says about King
Fergus and his Successors.

It is true that the learned Advocate has, according to his duty, published a
Just Defense of the Monarchy of Scotland; but I must crave leave to say that it
can never be defended upon good grounds unless the Account of Fergus the Son of
Ferquard, and the Succession of Kings from him as delivered by Hector Boethius
and Lesly as well as Buchanan be rejected. And this is too plain from the
Answers he gives to this Consent of their Historians.

1. He says, That Gathelus was not at all elected by the People. p. 27.
Whither are we now carried? The question was concerning Fergus in Scotland,
the answer is concerning one who is supposed to have lived I know not how many
Ages before him, and we know not where: And it had been to as much purpose to
have said, Adam was not chosen by the People. But who was this Gathelus? In
very truth, he was no other (according to these Historians) than a Son of a
certain King of Athens, who went into Egypt and married Scota the Daughter of
Pharaoh, who was drowned in the Red Sea, and afterward settled in Portugal,
from him called Portus Gatheli, p. 26.
(as the Advocate observes) from whence a Colony of that Race transported it
self into Ireland, and another into Scotland. p. 28.
Now, says he, all those who are descended from his Colonies were by Law
obliged to obey the eldest Son and Representative of that Royal Family. What!
by the Law in King Fergus's time? For there is none so much as mentioned before
that fundamental Contract; and was it not well kept after Fergus's death? But
if there had been any precedent the other had been needless. However the
question is not concerning Gathelus and his Posterity in Ireland, but Fergus
and his Successors in Scotland.

p. 27.
2. He answers, That the Heads of their Tribes acknowledged Fergus for their
King. But do not these Historians say expressly, That they chose him, and that
he left it to them to choose what Government they pleased? And the Words of
Fergus in Hector Boethius are these, Hect. Boeth. Hist. l. 1. f. 62.
vestrum erit in hoc Negotio, quid utilius ad vestram Rempublicam sit
discernere, nostrum vestra capessere imperia. Did ever Man more own the Supreme
Authority of the People than Hector Boethius makes Fergus to do in these
Words? Whether these very Words were spoken by him, even Hector dares not say;
but he is sure they were such like. And afterward he says, tandem Fergusio
Regnum decernunt; And to the same purpose Lesly, Leslae, Hist. Scot. p. 77.
Fergusio Regnum ab omnibus decernitur. Is all this a bare acknowledgment of
him for their King? what more emphatical Words could be used to express a free
Election, and that the People gave Fergus the Power, than these Historians do
use?

3. He goes on to give a farther Answer, which is very remarkable in his
Majesty's Advocate, p. 29.
viz. that we read nothing at all of the consent of the People, but of the
Heads of the Tribes, who had no Commission from the People, each of them having
by his Birthright a Power to command his own Tribe, and consequently the Royal
Power was not derived from the People. What is the meaning of all this, but
only to show that the Royal Authority was not derived from the Rabble, but
from the Nobility or Heads of the several Clanns; and consequently the Power of
calling their Kings to account lay only in them? No, says he, Fergus
succeeded in the Right of those Chiefs to command their respective Families.
Then Fergus had no more Power, as Monarch, than the Heads of the several Clanns
had before. But did they, according to these Historians, part with their Rights
of Government to Fergus and his Posterity? By what Authority then did they take
upon them to imprison and depose Hect. Boeth. l. 3. f. 36. l. 40. Leslae. p. 92.
Euenus III. and set up Cadalanus as King? By what Authority did they take Arms
against Hect. Boeth. l. 4. f. 59. Leslae. p. 97.
Dardanus and set up Galdus, who took away his Life, communi omnium Ordinum
consensu, says Lesly? By what Authority did they assemble against Hect. Boeth.
l. 5. f. 75. Leslae. p. 101.
Lugtachus, Galdus his Son, and s^^t Soldiers to dispatch him? By what
Authority did they rise against Hect. Boeth. l. 5. f. 79. Leslae. p. 103.
Mogallus his Successor, with a design to destroy him, as Hector confesses,
which they did effectually, as Lesly agrees? How came they to take upon them to
imprison Hect. Boeth. l. 5. f. 81. Leslae. p. 103.
Conarus and set up Argadus in his room? And to dispose of the Government in
the time of Hect. Boeth. l. 5. f. 90. Leslae. p. 109.
Ethodius II. and according to Lesly commit him to Prison, where he was killed?
How came they, notwithstanding the Law of Regency to set up Hect. Boeth. l. 6.
f. 90. Leslae. p. 110.
Athirco, while he was incapable by it? I meddle not with those Kings who were
killed by secret Conspiracies, nor with open Usurpers, such as Nathalocus and
Donald of the Isles; but I only set down what these Historians deliver, as to
the Right and Authority which the Nobles assumed to themselves in case of
Maladministration, to show that if these Men's Accounts must be received, the
Heads of the Clanns did not part with their share in the Government so much,
but upon occasion they did resume it. And therefore I have been apt to suspect
(from the Controversy about Regency at the time when Hector wrote) that all
this History of the first Race of Kings was framed on purpose out of ill will
to the Monarchy, Leslae. p. 392, 396.
and with a design to advance the Power of the Nobility. And now let any true
friend to the Monarchy judge, whether those who shorten the Royal Line, or
those who so earnestly contend for this Story of Fergus and his Successors, be
more liable to be charged with any degree of Lese-Majesty.

p. 28.
4. But after all, the Advocate says, That Fordon the most ancient of their
Historians affirms, that Fergus made himself King. Scotichron. l. 1. c. 36.
Indeed Fordon does say, That Fergus the Son of Ferard, (as he calls him)
hearing there were many Scots in the Northern parts of Albion, living without
order and Government, and hearing a good account of the Country, he was
prompted by his Ambition to go over to them, and taking with him a good number
of young Men, he gathered together the dispersed Scots, and joining them all
together in the Western parts, he made himself King over them. Which is no
improbable Account, but Fordon says not a word of all the former passages in
the other Historians. And if Fordon be the most ancient of their Historians,
what becomes of Veremundus and Cornelius Hibernicus, the two great supporters
of Hector Boethius his History? If they were after Fordon, how come they to be
so well instructed in so many particulars in the first Succession, which Fordon
was wholly unacquainted with?

Scotichron. l. 10. c. 2.
I cannot deny that Fordon speaking of the Coronation of Alexander III. (as he
calls him) mentions an old Highlander, who in the Irish Tongue repeated the
Genealogy of their Kings backward as far as Fergus the Son of Ferquard. But
therein he comes not up to the number, either in Fordon or Hector Boethius; and
has very considerable differences from the Accounts either in him, or in Lesly
and Buchanan. For after Fergus he leaves out Feritharis, and makes Main his
next Successor; the next he calls Arindal whom they call Dornadilla; his Son,
Roveyn, they Nothatus; and his Rether is the same with their Reuther; but here
they interpose a Reutha to make their Story agree with Bede's Reuda. But this
Genealogist next names There, whom they call Thereus, and his Son Rosin; but
they say Josina succeeded Thereus, being his Brother. After this, we find a
greater difference, for instead of Finnanus, Durstus, Euenus, Gillus, Euenus
II. Ederus, Euenus III. Metellanus, Caratacus; we find there only Dethach,
Jaw, Aliela, Even, Ederskeol, Comermore; Some agreement there is, but a far
greater diversity, and Hector's famous Caratacus quite omitted. Then succeeded
Corbre, whom they call Corbred, after him Daradiamore, by them styled Dardanus;
then another Corbre instead of their Galdus; and then Luthach, Lugtacus in
them; then Mogalama, their Mogallus; Coner their Conarus; Ethath their
Ethodius; Fiachrath their Satrahel; then another Ethath, whom they call
Ethodius II. before whom they place King Donald in whose time, they say,
Christianity was first received in Scotland, who is utterly excluded by this
ancient Genealogy. For after this Ethodius follows in it Athirkiwr, which is
their Athirco, then Findachar, which is their Findocus, and so Nathalocus is
shut out; and so after him are the two Donalds, for the next that follows is
Thrinklind, whom they call Crathlintus; then Fencormach their Fincormacus,
after him Romaich, their Romachus; then Enegussa, which is plainly their
Angusianus, and Fethelmech their Fetelmachus; then Engusafich and Etheat,
instead of which they put Eugenius and Ethodius his Brother; whom both make
Grandfather to Fergus II. whose Father they call Erthus, but the ancient
Genealogy and Fordon Eirch.

Now by comparing this Genealogy and Hector Boethius together, I am convinced
that he did not forge all the Names of his first Race of Kings, between the two
Fergusses; but yet from hence it appears, (1.) That Hector did insert many
things contrary to this ancient Genealogy; and when he did so he had some end
to serve in it. As when he puts in Regents which the Genealogy never owns; but
this was to support his Law of incapacity; but in all this Genealogy there is a
direct lineal Descent, and when he puts in Reutha it is to answer Bede's Reuda,
and Galdus for Tacitus his Galgacus, and Caratacus for the famous British King
of that Name; and King Donald to answer our King Lucius, that. they might have
a Christian King in the time of the Pope next succeeding Eleutherius. 2. That
this Genealogy may be allowed without any advantage to the Succession of Kings
in Scotland, from Fergus I. so long before the Nativity of Christ; for it is
very observable, that this ancient Genealogist does very much shorten the
Succession between Fergus II. and this Alexander. For he leaves out Eugenius
II. and makes Dongard to succeed him; after him Cobren, and then Edanius,
whereas here they insert Constantius I. Congallus, Conranus, Eugenius III.
Convallus, Kinnatillus between Dongard and Aidanus: After him he names his Son
Occahebind, Scotichr. l. 4. c. 38.
whom Fordon calls Eothodius-bind, which he says is the same with Eugenius;
and about him, Hector Boethius, as Buchanan observes, Buchan. l. 5. p. 45.
contradicts the Book of Pasly, for this says, he lived in continual Wars, and
the other that he enjoyed a constant Peace; so that Boethius slights the
authority of their Ancient Annals. Next after him they place Ferquard, of whom
the Genealogy says nothing at all; Scotichr. l. 4. c. 41.
Fordon next to nothing. In cujus nihil actum est tempore, says he; but the
other Historians tell sad Stories of his vicious Life and tragical End. After
Eugenius in the Genealogy we find Donewald breck, Fordon says, c. 45.
he died after 14 years Reign; and to him succeeded Ferquard his Brother's Son,
not mentioned in the Genealogy; nor Malduinus Son to Donald; for the next is
Ethac, i. e. Eugenius, and here they put in another Eugenius, Ambirkelethus,
Eugenius VIII. and Mordacus between Ethac and Ethfin, whereas the Genealogist
makes Ethafind Son to Ethdre, to whom succeeded Ethas, i. e. Eugenius VIII. in
their Account, after him follows Alphin; but between these, they have inserted
Fergus III. Solvathius, Achaius, Convallus and Dongallus. They all agree with
the Genealogist, that Kenneth immediately succeeded Alphin; but then follows a
wonderful difference; for here they put in no fewer than 13 Kings between
Kenneth and Malcolm the Son of Kenneth, whom the Genealogist places next after
him; then follows Duncan in all; between whom and Malcolm Canmoir they put in
Machabaeus. After Malcolm he takes no notice of four Kings they insert between
him and David, and where they put another Malcolm he places Henry, and then
they agree in William, Alexander and his Son Alexander; in whom the Genealogy
begins, and so runs backward in a lineal Ascent.

Now it deserves very well to be considered, that this ancient Genealogist has
so much shortened the Succession as will bring the whole into a much less
compass: For the modern Historians have inserted more Kings in the second Race
from Fergus the Son of Erk than are contained in the Genealogy from Fergus the
Son of Ferquard to Fergus II. and so the whole Succession will stand within the
same time that it now does, from Fergus the Son of Erk.

And if the shortening the Royal Line be such an injury to it, as the Advocate
supposes, it is well for this ancient Genealogist that he lived so long since,
or else he might have had a cast of the Advocate's Office.

Neither is the Authority of this Genealogist to be slighted by the learned
Advocate, Defense of the Antiquity of the Royal Line, p. 20, 21.
since himself giving an account how their Tradition might have been, and was
preserved, he brings this very instance of the Genealogy of King Alexander in
the year 1242. before Fordon 's time, and related so by him that his Relation
cannot but be credited; and so he repeats the beginning of it as it is in
Fordon. But if he had taken the pains to compare it, he would have found how
much it overthrew the Credit of their Historians. For if this was the Way their
Tradition was preserved, then by this Way, we are to judge of the Truth of
their ancient Tradition; and consequently we must reject those Kings whose
Names are not preserved in this ancient Genealogy.

And to confirm this we have another said to be more ancient in Fordon, which
the Advocate attributes to Baldredus, Abbat of Melros, (otherwise called
Ealredus, p. 22.
Abbat of Rhieval) in his Lamentation of King David, soon after his death, who
died A. D. 1151. But I confess I do not find, that Fordon attributes this
Genealogy to Baldredus, for he says he had it from Walter de Wardlaw, Scotich
l. 5. c. 59.
Cardinal and the Bishop of Glasgow, who lived in the time of Robert II. says
Lesly: Leslae. p. 250.
(which helps to discover Fordon's Age) And in this Genealogy the first part
from David to Fergus is cut off with an etc. but the other part from Fergus II.
up to Fergus I. is preserved entire, and except in the spelling of some few
Names, exactly agrees with the former Genealogy, leaving out all those Kings
which are omitted in the other. But the latter Genealogy having been corrupted
before Fordon's time, he would not have it stand upon Record against him; which
caution he forgot when he came to Alexander III.

But there is still a third Genealogy in Fordon, which supplies in some measure
the defects in that of King David, and it is the Succession of Kenneth, the
first Monarch of Scotland (the Picts being totally subdued by him) and then he
makes no more between them but Alphin, and then Achai (which seems to be truer
than the other which calls Alphin's Father Ethas) before him he places Ethfin
called Ethafind in the other; next him is Eugenius in the other Ethodac; then
Dongard the Son of Donwald Brek; whereas in the other this Dongard is omitted;
before Donewald-brek in this Genealogy, is Eugenius-bind called Occahebind in
the other; then Aidanus, in the other Edanus; then Gouran called there Cobren,
then Dongard, and so we are come to Fergus the great; and there is but one
difference, i. e. about Dongard, in these Genealogies. And this makes but 10
Kings between Fergus and Kenneth, whereas the common Historians make 28. which
is a very unreasonable Addition to their own most ancient Genealogies. But if
this were not done there would appear no probability, that the first Fergus
should have come into Scotland 330 years before Christ's Nativity. Which the
learned Advocate affirms in the very beginning of his Defense, that all their
Historians are agreed on. And yet farther to confirm these Genealogies he tells
us he had seen an old Genealogy of the Kings of the Albanian Scots, agreeing
with that mentioned at the Coronation of King Alexander II. and which has still
been preserved as sacred there, i. e. at Icolmkill, I suppose, or the Island
Jona. But it is observable that Hector mentioning the Coronation of this
Alexander, Hect. Boeth. Hist. l. 13. f. 295.
takes notice of the Highlander's repeating the Genealogy by heart, and he
carries it as far as Gathelus, but sets down nothing at all of the particulars,
which he knew would by no means agree with his Catalogue of Kings so long
before Christ. And to confirm all these Genealogies, the Irish Genealogies in
Gratianus Lucius agree with them in excluding so many Kings, Gratian. Luc.
Cambr. Evers. p. 248.
which Hector has inserted to make the account of time seem probable. Only
they make Fergus the Son of Erk to be the first who carried the Scots from
Ireland into Albany; and the Ancestors before to have lived in Ireland, and to
have been derived from the Monarchs there.

But when Hector Boethius found 330 years before Christ pitched upon by Fordon
for the Scots coming into Scotland with so much punctuality, Scotichr. l. 2. c.
12.
that he says it was in the sixth year of Alexander, wherein he killed Darius
and took Babylon, Hect. Boeth. l. 1. f. 7.
he thought it by no means fit to omit it, but to it he adds the very year of
the World, and of the building of Rome, and how long it was after Brutus his
first coming to Britain; which are all great Confirmations of the Truth of this
Account. But Fordon quotes no Author for this wild computation; only he
subjoins a passage out of the Legend of S. Congall, which mentions the coming
of Fergus the Son of Ferquard out of Ireland into Britain, and after he
mentions Rether for one of his Successors, the same, he says, with Bede's
Reuda. Suppose all this be granted, yet what shadow of proof is there, that
Fergus came into Scotland so long before Christ's Nativity? Fordon confesses he
knew not how long any of those Kings after Fergus reigned; how then came he to
know so exactly the time of their coming? What certain Note or Character of
time had they to help them in their Calculation? If they could produce any
such, and be able to adjust the times of the Succession of their several Kings
by them, there might be a great deal said for this pretended Antiquity; but
when it is at the same time confessed they had no such thing, how could they
satisfy any reasonable enquirer into these Antiquities?

Things standing thus, and Hector Boethius with the help of his Physician of
Aberdeen, (who, Hist. Eccles. l. 2. ^. 174.
as Dempster says, was so very useful to him in framing his History) set
about the rectifying and curing the Body of their Antiquities; and endeavored
to bring it into better form, and to fill up the vacuities of it, and render it
more agreeable to the Palates of that time, which had more smattering of
Learning than in the Ages before. And so he begins his History very formally in
imitation of the best Roman Authors, with deducing their History from Gathelus
and Scota, deriving their Succession from the Greeks and Egyptians, as the
Romans did theirs from the Trojans. This I do not attribute to his invention,
for it is at large in Fordon; Scotichron. l. 1. c. 9.
who quotes some old Chronicles and Legends for it; especially the Legend of S.
Brendan; an admirable and authentic Record. But to do right to Hector in this
matter, he says ingenuously that their People followed the custom of other
Nations therein. And as I have showed in the following Book at large (where I
treat of these Antiquities) this humor had overspread all the Northern
Nations, Chap. 5.
as soon as they shook off the Roman Yoke, and began not only to be distinct
Kingdoms, but to have some affectation of the Roman Learning, and to have
Persons of their own Nation who began to write their Histories; who thought
they did nothing for the honor of their Country unless they could, some way
or other, derive themselves from the Trojans, or Greeks, or Egyptians, whom
they met with so often in the Roman Authors; and the Romans in most Provinces
mixing together with the Northern People, excited a greater Ambition in them,
either to be like the Romans, or to exceed them in their pretended Antiquities.
And their inventions not being extraordinary, there is very little variety in
their several Accounts, as will appear by comparing them in their proper Places.

In this point Hector Boethius has acquitted himself well enough; but finding
the Succession of their Kings very short and meagre, having no flesh to fill
it, nor nerves to support it, nor color to adorn it; therefore he sets himself
to make up what he found defective, and to put it together under the Names of
Veremundus and Cornelius Hibernius or others; out of these he frames a long
series or Catalogue of Kings, which looked big, and raised Men's expectations,
and seemed well enough contrived to serve the pretense to so great Antiquity.
This being done, he fills up the Story of these Kings, not out of their old
Annals (as far as yet appears) but in a great measure out of his own invention,
so as to mix the Commonwealth-Learning of the Greeks and Romans with the
History of their ancient Kings. Which has done great prejudice to the Rights
of the Monarchy; for Hector's History took so much among the Nobility, (for
very good Reasons to them) that all that have written since him, have depended
upon his Authority, as appears both by Buchanan and Lesly; unless it were where
he grossly contradicted the Roman History, and there Buchanan leaves him, but
for the main of his History he relies upon him; Leslae. Paraen. ad Nobil. Scot.
p. 22.
and Lesly does nothing in effect but abridge him, whatever he pretends as to
Records and the Annals of the Monasteries of Pasly and Scoon; Defense of the
Antiquity of the Royal Line, p. 39.
which the Advocate supposes he saw at Rome, whither he says they were
carried. If so it had been worth while to have procured well attested Copies
from thence; which had not been hard in all this time, so many Gentlemen of
that Nation traveling thither, and seeing all the Curiosities of their
Libraries. But Lesly says no such thing; for he appeals to the public
Archives of the Kingdom, and not to any MSS. at Rome; so that if they were any
where, they were then in Scotland.

But the Advocate seems to have forgotten what he had said before; p. 32.
viz. that the black Book of Scoon was among President Spotswood 's Books;
indeed he says, King Charles I. ransomed it from Rome; but how that appears I
know not; but I know the circumstances he mentions about Col. Fairfax, etc.
relate not to the Book of Scoon, but to a Copy of Fordon, which was presented
by him to King Charles II. And if Buchanan had the use of the Books of Pasley,
and the famous Book of Pluscarden; as the Advocate believes, upon Buchanan's
word, p. 32.
then in his time they were not carried to Rome. For my part, I do not question
that there were MSS. Chronicles in Scotland before Fordon; for I find him
frequently citing them; but by the things he quotes out of them they were not
considerable, nor done by any Authority, as the Annals of the Royal Monasteries
of this Kingdom; his Continuer says were and afterward examined and compared.
I am sorry to find Sir R. Sibbald reckon up among the Books he had never seen,
Prodrom. Hist. Nature. Scot. p. 13.
(having made it his business so many years to illustrate his Country) not
only Cornelius Hibernicus and Veremundus, but the Annals of Pasley and Scoon:
But however, we are glad that the Advocate assures us he has a very old
Abridgment of the Book of Pasley; and may this present heat against the Bishop
of St. Asaph provoke them to procure and publish their ancient Annals, such as
they are, which will be the greatest advantage to the World of this Contention
about their Antiquities. And I am so far from any Pique or Animosity in this
matter, that I should be glad to see those Antiquities, which yet appear dark
and confused, cleared up to the satisfaction of all learned and ingenuous Men.

But I must beg pardon of his Majesty's Advocate, if I take the freedom to say
he has not taken the right method to do it. For he ought first to have proved
the matter in dispute by clear and indubitable Testimonies, before he had made
his severe Reflections and Inferences; but as Cicero said of the Musician who
defined the Soul to be Harmony, ab Art sua non recessit, so this ingenious
Gentleman has managed this whole debate in a way more agreeing to the
Character of an Advocate than of an Antiquary. For why so many insinuations, as
though some injury were intended to the Royal Line, which I dare say, the
Bishop of St. Asaph does really honor and esteem as much as his Majesty's
Advocate himself. For, does any Man of understanding think that it is any
injury to the Royal Line of Britain to have the fabulous Antiquities of
Geoffrey of Monmouth concerning the Succession of British Kings down from
Brutus confuted? And is not this done by Buchanan? And the Advocate in plain
English says, those tempt Men to lie who endeavor to derive themselves from
the Trojans. p. 15.
But why not, as well from the Greeks and Egyptians? But the Bishop of St.
Asaph is so just to Truth, and so little a Friend to popular Fables, that he
fairly gives up Geoffrey before he attacks Hector Boethius; could any thing be
more fairly and impartially done? or more convincing, that he only designed to
find out Truth in these matters, without regard to that fondness some Men still
have for these British Antiquities? For there are and will be some (and those
not wholly unlearned) who are naturally inclined to believe Fables; and have so
passionate a zeal for such things, that they cry out upon all discoveries of
this kind, as injuries to their Country, if not to the Royal Line.

But may it not justly seem strange, that when our polite and learned
Neighbors have endeavored with so much care to reform their Histories, and to
purge away all fabulous Antiquities out of them; we of this Island should grow
angry and impatient when any undertake so generous a design? What injury is it
thought to be to the Royal Line of France, that Hunibaldus his Antiquities find
no longer place in their Histories? And yet nothing seems more glorious, than
to have their Royal Line deduced long before the time that Alexander took
Babylon. For according to Hunibaldus his Account, which he took he says out of
an ancient MS. of Vastaldus (such another Author as Veremundus) the Franks
went from Troy under the Conduct of Francio toward the Palus Maeotis just
about the time that Aeneas went for Italy, where they fixed and built the City
Sicambria, and at last removed into Germany under Marcomir the Son of Priamus,
and Sunno the Son of Antenor. After Francio, Hunibaldus sets down a formal
Succession of Kings of two several Races, 16 in the first, and 31 in the
second. All which he gives a very particular account of, as to the times of
their Reign for above 413 years before Christ's Nativity. And although this
ancient Succession of Kings was a long time received and magnified, as appears
by Lazius and P. Aemilius, and Fordon quotes Sigebert for it; Scotichr. l. 3.
c. 19.
yet now their learned Historians are ashamed to mention it, much more to plead
for it, and to charge those with a degree of Lese-Majesty who call it in
question.

Suffridus Petrus has written the Antiquities of Friseland much in the way
that Hector Boethius has done those of Scotland. Suffr. Petr. de Origin
Frisiorum, l. 3. c. 2.
He tells a very grave Story concerning a Province in the Indies called Fresia,
from whence a Colony was sent under Friso, Saxo and Bruno, who went into
Alexander's Army; and for this he quotes old Frisian Rythms, and one Patrocles,
an old Indian Writer; and besides, he has all the Advocate's Common places of
Tradition, common Fame, c. 3.
the Testimonies of their own Historians, and he names Andreas Cornelius, (it
seems there was a Cornelius Frisius as well as Hibernicus) Solco Fortemannus,
Occo Scherlensis, Joh. Uleterpius, and several others, who with one Consent
deliver these Antiquities. But, says he, ye will object, that in so long a
time and amidst so many Wars such Antiquities could hardly be preserved. To
that he answers, That Friso being admirably skilled in Greek Learning set up a
public School at Stauria near the Temple of Stavo, and in the Temple a Library
on purpose for Antiquities (like that of Icolmkill) and besides a Palace was
built by Uffo, wherein was contained the Effigies of all their Kings from
Friso, (who came to Friseland just 313 years before Christ's Nativity) to the
time of Charlemagn, for 1113 years. And are not these Antiquities very well
attested? yet since Ubbo Emmius has confuted them, no learned Advocate has
appeared in vindication of them.

Is it any disparagement to the Royal Line of Spain to have the first
Succession of Kings there disputed; viz. from Jubal to Melicola the 24th King
from him, who is said to have reigned there, the very year after the
destruction of Troy? So very punctual are the Authors of Fabulous Antiquities.
And if you believe them, they have good ancient Authors and the Tradition of
their Country for them; haec nostri Majores multis Libris tradiderunt, says
the pretended Berosus. And by these helps, we have great light given us into
the Antiquities of Europe; for thereby we understand that Janus, (who was
somewhat elder than Gathelus, being Noah himself) gave Tuysco the Country from
the Tanais to the Rhyne, Italy to Gomer, the Celtick Provinces to Samothes, and
Celtiberia to Jubal. And this was just 131 years after the Flood; Gomer went
into Italy the 10th year of Saturn the Father of Jupiter Belus; in the 12th
Jubal went into Celtiberia, and not long after Samothes, called Dis, founded
the Celtick Colonies; among which were the Britains, and from him their Druids
were called Samothei: after Jubal among the Celtiberians reigned Iberus his
Son, from whom came the name of Iberi; and among the Celtae, Magus the Son of
Samothes in the 51st year of Ninus, who succeeded Jupiter Belus: This Magus in
the Scythian Language is Magog, and from him came so many terminations of the
Names of Towns as Rhotamagum, Noviomagum, Juliomagum, Caesaromagum, etc. In the
34th of Semiramis, Jubelda Son of Iber, succeeded in Celtiberia; in the time of
Ninias, Son to Semiramis, reigned Sarron among the Celtae, from him the learned
Gauls were called Sarronidae, the same I suppose with our Advocate's Sanachies.
In the 20th of Arius, p. 14.
Brigus reigned in Celtiberia, and in the 29th Dryius among the Celtae; nothing
can be more natural than to derive the Druids from him: who being converted,
the Advocate tells us, p. 13.
became their first Monks, and in the Irish Version of the New Testament the
wise Men are translated Druids; therefore the Druids were originally Irish. In
the time of Aralius the seventh King of Babylon, Bardus was King over the
Celtae, and he was the Inventour of Music and Verses; and from him came the
Bards, who were the Poets of their Traditions, as the Advocate styles them. p.
14.
After him succeeded Longo, then Bardus junior, after him Lucus, and then
Celtes, and Galates, Narbon, Lugdus, Beligius, Allobrox, Romus, Paris,
Lemannus, Galatas junior, and Francus.

Must we allow all these noble Antiquities for fear of shortning the Royal
Lines of the Princes of Europe? And yet here is a great appearance of
Exactness, a pretense to ancient Records, and to the common Tradition of the
several Countries; for Berosus appeals both to Tradition and Writing; and so
does Manetho in the continuation of him, quae ex nostris Historicis vel little
relationibus consecuti fumus; so that here we have the two Supporters of
Antiquities, which the Advocate builds upon, viz. Tradition and Records. And
Metasthenes, another pretended continuer of Berosus says, he took all out of
the Royal Library at Susae, where the Persian Annals were preserved. But
notwithstanding all these fair shows and specious pretenses, there is not a Man
of tolerable judgment in Europe, who would venture his Reputation to plead for
these Antiquities.

But the learned Advocate says, p. 2.
That their Antiquities have been received with great applause for many
hundreds of years by all Historians, Antiquaries and Critics of other Nations
who had any occasion to take notice of their affairs. These are very high
expressions, and argue a good assurance in the very beginning of his Book. For
my part, I do not pretend to acquaintance with all Historians, Antiquaries and
Critics for many hundreds of years; and so there may have been some, for any
thing I know, who have applauded their Histories from 330 years before Christ;
but upon my little knowledge in Books, I dare venture to name him ten who have
applauded the Antiquities of Berosus and Manetho, for one who has allowed
theirs. But such has been my misfortune that I have met with Historians,
Antiquaries and Critics, who have been far from applauding them; such a one
was Hoc solum judicamus, quae de Scotis and little Regibus ab anno 330. ante
caput aerae Christianae, cum Alexander Macedo rerum potiretur in Orient usque
ad Fergusium 2. Regem Scotiae quadragesimum, cujus initium conjicitur a Scotis
Scriptoribus in annum Christi 404. qui ejectos e Britannia Scotos dicitur
reduxisse, non ex annalibus vetustis vetustos autores habentibus, sed ex (...)
traditionibus a recentioribus deprompta memorantur, ea nos pro certis habere
non posse. Scimus enim quam lubrico atque instabili fundamento nitantur.
Quinimo ne ista quidem satis certa nobis videntur, quae a Fergusii 2. initio,
and Scotorum reditu in Britanniam in rebus Scoticis recitantur ad A. D. 829.
quo Picti scribuntur in Britannia a Scotis esse deleri 6. scil. anno Kenethi 2.
Regum hujus gentis, ut Traditiones habent LXIX. Vbb. Em. Rer. Chronolog. l. 5.
p. 198.
Ubbo Emmius, who declares his opinion freely, That he could not allow any
Certainty in them, because they depend not upon any ancient Annals, but
unwritten Traditions; and he not only speaks thus of the first Succession of
Kings from Fergus I. to the second, but from Fergus II. to the destruction of
the Picts by Kenneth, which he reckons Anno Dom. 829. But another of the same
Character, both an Historian, Antiquary and Critic, viz. De primorum gentis
regum initiis multa haud dubie fabulosa habent Scotorum, quemadmodum and
aliarum gentium postremis demum temporibus, compositi aut conficti Annals;
itaque fabulosa, quae and tempora ipsa quibus tribuuntur, falsi arguunt, missa
facimus, neque pro nostro ea faciunt instituto. Boxhorn. Hist univers. p. 878.
M. Zuerius Boxhornius has passed a severer Censure upon them, for he says,
without doubt their Antiquities are Fabulous; and their pretended ancient
Annals but lately made. These may serve at present, to show that all
Historians, Antiquaries and Critics have not so much applauded their
Antiquities.

But this is not all, for the Advocate says, they have done it for many
hundreds of years. What! before they were known to the World? For Hector
Boethius was the first Person who pretended to give such a clear account of
them after the Discovery of Veremundus and Cornelius Hibernicus at Icolmkill;
and it is not many hundreds of years since he wrote, his Book being first
printed since the beginning of the sixteenth Century. And what account had they
of their first Antiquities before? Joh. Major indeed was printed about five
years before him, by the same Badius Ascensius, and he was no great Critic,
but a very Scholastic Historian, and a Man of great esteem in his time, as the
Advocate confesses; Defense, etc. p. 37.
but he is so far from applauding the remote Antiquities of his own Country,
that he calls the Story of Gathelus and Scota and their coming out of Greece
and Egypt a mere Figment, Joh. Major, Hist. Scot. l. 1. f. 17. c. 9.
and invented only to match the Britains, who derived themselves from the
Trojans, and he condemns their Annals about Simon Brek; which shows what a
regard he had to their Authority. And when he comes to Fergus he sets down the
old Verses about the time of it; c. 11.
but seems to give very little credit to them; for he first mentions Bede's
Account about Reuda, and then relates what their Annals say, i. e. their old
Verses (for he quotes no other) and then says this does not contradict Bid;
for says he, Regni debile fundamentum Fergusius jecit; he laid a very slender
beginning of a Monarchy, which was after enlarged by Reuda, whom he makes to be
Rether, and therein contradicts Hector's Veremundus and the Catalogues of their
Kings, according to which Reuda succeeds him. So that these Antiquities were so
far from being universally received abroad that they went down very hardly at
home. And this same Historical Schoolman expressly says, that Fergus had no
other Right, l. 4. c. 17.
but what the People gave him; and that it is in their Power to take it away;
which he not only asserts, but endeavors to prove in a Scholastic manner as
far as Septimo and Finaliter. And is not this a degree of Lese-Majesty above
the endeavoring to shorten the Royal Line? And they had far better deny any
such Person as Fergus, than to make him a King upon such terms, which overthrow
the Monarchy.

But who are these foreign Historians, Antiquaries and Critics, who at any
time have so much applauded these Antiquities? Joseph Scaliger did indeed
applaud his own Wit for his Criticism about Scoto-Brigantes in Seneca's Verses.
But what is this to Fergus his coming so soon into Scotland? For Scaliger
himself there grants, Scalig. in Tibull. l. 4.
that these Scoto-Brigantes were still in Ireland; and he believes that
Claudius did make an attempt upon them there, because Juvenal mentions the
Coasts of Iuverna as brought under the Roman Power. Scoti sunt in Hibernia
adhuc, non in Britannia, are Scaliger's own Words. And I wonder to see Buchanan
labor so hard about this passage, Buch. l. 2. p. 22.2.
to so little purpose. But the Advocate says that the same Scaliger in his
Notes on Eusebius has a most learned and full Proof of their Antiquity,
Defense of the Antiquity, etc. p. 80.
too learned to be answered by any Adversary. What does he mean by their
Antiquity? That of the Nation? No one denies it. That of their settlement in
Scotland 330 years before Christ? That is to be proved, for Scaliger does it
not. Scalig. in Eusebius. n. 2060.
He affirms, That the Brigantes were a People of Ireland, and that during the
flourishing of the Roman Empire, they made frequent incursions into Britain,
and for proof he brings the Testimony of Pausanias about Antoninus his beating
the Brigantes in Britain; Pausan. in. Arcad.
and the Inscriptions in Scotland, wherein mention is made of the Leg. 2. which
signify very little to this purpose. For why could not the second Legion fight
against the Brigantes, supposing them to be Britains, as well as supposing them
to be Irish? But Scaliger's opinion was this, The Brigantes and the Britains
were two distinct People; while they continued at home, they were called by no
other Name, but when they made excursions abroad, then they were called
Scotobrigantes and Scotobritanni; and so the word Scot, he says, is not a
proper Name, but Appellative; and not Irish but British, for those who go from
home in hopes of Booty, as the names of Bedwin and Saracen; and so as the Arabs
were after called Saracens, so these Brigantes, when they so much infested
Britain in Claudian's time, and after were called Scoti. Now what there is in
all this, that should so much please the Advocate, I cannot imagine. He is very
angry with the Bishop of St. Asaph for representing their Ancestors as a
company of barbarous Pilferers and Robbers (although he only produces the
Testimony of Gildas) how then comes he to be so much pleased with Scaliger,
Defense, etc. p. 104, 106, 108.
who makes the Name Scot to signify so much? I had thought he should have been
more concerned to have disproved such a reproachful Etymology than to have
magnified this Discourse of Scaliger so highly. But where is it that he
mentions the first Succession of their Kings with approbation, or Fergus his
coming into Scotland before Christ's Nativity? All that he says is, That the
Scots might be a Nation before they were known by that Name, (and who doubts
it) as the Burgundians and Lombards were: and that the Brigantes out of Ireland
might make inroads and excursions into Britain in the flourishing times of the
Empire. And I see no reason to deny this, although it be not sufficiently
proved. But the question is about a standing Monarchy in Scotland from the time
of Fergus I. and of this Scaliger says not a word. For these Brigantes coming
out of Ireland might fix there for some time, and return again to Ireland, as
Gildas says they did afterward, or they might fix as a scattered People not
united under a Monarchy, as Fordon says, they did before Fergus his coming. So
that if their Antiquities be no more applauded by other Antiquaries and
Critics than they are by Scaliger, this Argument will come to very little.

And yet Salmasius and the rest he mentions, Defense, etc. p. 126.
say much less than Scaliger; Salmasius only uses Scaliger's Criticism about
the Scoto-Brigantes without adding any thing. Lipsius unhappily calls Galgacus
a Scot; which was an improper expression, as I have proved in the proper place;
because it is so evident from Tacitus, that the Caledonians were not Scots;
unless it be taken for Scythians, (of which afterward) but by Scots here we
mean such as came out of Ireland to settle in Britain; and such Galgacus and
his Soldiers were not. And the like impropriety Bergier, though a learned
Antiquary fell into, Hist. de grand. Chemins, l. 1. c. 10. n. 9.
when he interprets the Caledonians by Scots; but such as Dempster is
frequently guilty of, when he calls the Britains English, because the English
dwelt in Britain afterward. But improper expressions where they fall from
learned Men by chance ought rather to be passed over with silence than made use
of as Arguments; unless those who use them go about to prove what is implied in
them. Sigonius his Name stands among the rest, being indeed a learned
Historian, Antiquary and Critic; but not one word can I find produced out of
him in his whole Book. What Baronius says rela^es to the Conversion of the
Scottish Nation, and not to these Antiquities; of which I have treated at large
in the following Book. Defense, etc. p. 107, 108.
Andr. Favin and P. Aemilius speak only of an Alliance between Achaius King of
the Scots and Charles the great; and what is this to Fergus and the Succession
of Kings for 330 years before Christ's Nativity? which he says in the
beginning was applauded by all Historians, p. 2.10.
Antiquaries and Critics, and as though this were not extravagant enough, p.
126.
he says afterward, that Baronius, Scaliger, Salmasius, Lipsius, Sigonius,
Favin and others of the first rank (too many to be named) have passionately
defended their Antiquity, and not only sustained but praised their Histories.
Whereas not one of these produced by him speaks any thing to the matter in
question. But we hope to see these things better cleared in the third Part of
Sir R. Sibbald's Scotia Antiqua, where he has promised to give a particular
account of the State of the Scots in Britain before they had Kings, then under
Kings from Fergus I. to Fergus II. and from thence to Malcolm Canmore. If he
does clear these Parts of their Antiquities, he will do a great thing; and for
my part, I shall be as willing to believe Fergus to have come into Britain in
the time of Alexander as any time after, provided there be sufficient Evidence
to prove it; which must be somewhat more convincing than his Majesty's Advocate
has been pleased to make use of; but I remember Scaliger's Censure of
Claudian, addit de ingenio quantum deest materiae.

Therefore from the Testimony of Historians, Antiquaries and Critics, I
proceed to examine the Argumentative part of his Book; and setting aside all
common Places about Historical certainty, Tradition, common Fame, etc. I shall
keep close to the point before us, and examine the force and strength of his
Reasoning, which consists in these things.

p. 6.
(1.) That upon the same Reason we question their Antiquities, we may call in
question the Roman, Jewish, Greek, French, Spanish Antiquities, all which
depended upon Tradition without Records for a long time.

This is indeed a material Objection; for we ought not to give a partial Assent
to some Antiquities, and deny it to others, if there be the same ground either
to give or deny Assent to all. But this must be examined.

(1.) As to the Roman Antiquities, he cites a passage in Livy, Live. l. 6. init.
in which he says, that the use of Letters was not then ordinary; the only
certain preserver of the memory of things past (so Livy's Words are to be
understood, rarae per ea tempora Literae, una custodia fidelis memoriae rerum
gestarum, and not as the Advocate with too much art, has translated them, that
the best Records were the faithful Remembrance of things past. For if this
were Livy's meaning why does he complain of the want of the common use of
Letters, when he says Tradition is the best way to preserve the memory of
things? Which is to make Livy speak inconsequently.) But he goes on saying,
that what Memorials were left by the High Priests, or were in public or
private hands were most part destroyed in the burning of the Town. He does not
say all were lost, but the most part. This Livy alleges to excuse the
shortness and obscurity of his first Books for want of sufficient Records; and
he speaks like a very judicious Historian in it. And when he gives an Account
of the remote Antiquities of Rome, he is far from confident asserting them, but
he speaks with great Modesty and Discretion about them; saying that he would
neither affirm nor deny them; being rather built on Poetical Fables than any
certain Monuments of affairs at that time, that an allowance must be made to
Antiquity; which was wont consecrare Origines suas, to make their beginnings as
sacred and venerable as they could. But as to such things he would be no
Advocate either for or against them. Then he proceeds to deliver the common
Tradition about Aeneas his coming into Italy, and Ascanius succeeding him; but
he cannot tell whether Ascanius the Son of Creusa, or another the Son of
Lavinia; quis enim rem tam veterem pro certo affirmet? Who can be certain in
such remote Antiquities? And yet at that time it was thought a great
disparagement to the Royal Line to have it questioned whether it were the elder
Ascanius, because the Julian Family, as Livy there says, derived themselves
from him who was called Julus. It is true, Livy after this, relates the Roman
Antiquities down to the burning of the City, when so many Records were lost;
but we are to consider, that the Romans had certain Annals before that time,
and that some of them were preserved. That they had Annals both public and
private appears by Livy's own Words, who mentions both the Commentarii
Pontificum and the publica and privata monumenta; De Orat. l. 2. c. 12.
and Cicero affirms that the Romans from the beginning had Annals made up by
the Pontifex Maximus of the transactions of every year; and these were
publicly exposed in a Table in his House that the People might be satisfied
about them; and these he says were called Annals Maximi; which he adds were
continued down to the time of Mucius Scaevola, who was Pontifex Maximus about
A. U. C. 623. These, as Servius says, Serve. in Virg. Aen. l. 1. v. 377.
were after made up into 80 great Books, and were the standing Monuments of
their Antiquities. And it is observable that the Author of the Book de origin
Gentis Romanae, as Vossius and others take notice, Voss. de Hist. Lat. l. 1. c.
1.
inserts several things as taken out of the Pontifical Annals which happened
before the building of Rome; from whence they do justly infer, that matters of
more remote Antiquity were put into them, whether by the first Pontifex Max. in
Numa's time or after it is impossible now to determine. It seems at first the
People were not permitted to view these Annals, as Canuleius in Livy complains;
Live. l. 4. c. 3.
but afterward they were exposed to all. c. 7.
And it appears by Licinius Macer in Livy, that the Libri Lintei (which seem to
have been for the same purpose with the Annals Maximi but composed by the
Magistrates) were preserved in Aede Monetae, c. 20.
and in them the Names of the Magistrates were inserted; and in the same place
Livy takes notice of the Annals prisci, and the Libri Magistratuum for
determining a point about the Consuls of a year long before the burning of
Rome; which shows that Livy did not think all their Records then destroyed. c.
20.
And afterward he says in the same Book, disputing about another Consul, that
Augustus rebuilding the Temple of Jupiter Feretrius, found there in thorace
linteo the name of that Consul. So that the Romans had not only the Pontifical
Annals but Civil too, being made up by the Magistrates, and therefore called
Libri Magistratuum by Livy, which he distinguishes from the Annals Prisci. And
besides these Livy mentions private Records among them; In Bruto, c. 16.
of which Cicero speaks, which belonged to particular Families: and there is no
probability these should be all lost in the burning of the City; for the
Capitol was not burnt, in which probably after the Romans found the Gauls
coming upon them, they preserved their ancient Annals. And it is considerable,
that Dionysius Halicarnasseus quotes a passage of Antiochus Syracusanus,
Dionys. Antiq. Romans l. 1.
(who lived before the burning of Rome, and wrote concerning the affairs of
Italy) wherein he says, that he took his History out of ancient and undoubted
Records: which shows that there were certain written Annals both at Rome and in
other Cities of Italy very early; f. 2.
and the same Dionysius quotes the Domestic Annals of the Sabins, and Festus
the History of Cuma. Fest. v. Roma.
So that the Roman Histories were built on better foundation than the very
uncertain Tradition of the Natives; p. 7.
which the Advocate is pleased to make the surest Foundation of all Histories;
but I am so much of another Opinion, that I think it (since the shortning of
Men's lives) the certain foundation of none. Let now the Reader judge whether
the case of the Antiquities in dispute be the same with that of the Romans; for
here are no ancient Annals pretended near the time of Fergus I. nor in the time
of any King of the first Race; no nor from Fergus II. till after the
Destruction of the Picts; nor any Record yet produced for a long time after
that; how then can any persons pretend that if we reject their Antiquities we
must reject the Roman?

But this is not all, for he goes higher, and says the same objections will
lie,

(2.) Against the Jewish Antiquities. For says he, p. 6.
the Jewish History had no historical Warrant for the first 2000 years but
Tradition, and after that time their transactions were mentioned in very few
foreign Histories; and Annals of their own Priests were thought good Historical
Foundations in the opinion of Josephus even for the Sacred History. And not
long after he says, that the Jewish History was challenged by Apion upon the
same ground that theirs is now quarreled by the Bishop of St. Asaph. p. 9.
p. 132.
This looks somewhat strange among us, for the Antiquities of any particular
Nation so far short of the Jewish, to be paralleled with them in point of
Credibility; since the Records of Scripture are owned to be divine and sacred,
and not merely built on the authority of Tradition, or the Annals of the Jewish
Priests. Whatever Josephus or other Jews might say in defense of their
Antiquities against the Greeks, we that own our selves to be Christians ought
to look on Moses and the Prophets under a higher Character. I know a late
Critic in great Vogue among some, has endeavored to reduce the Sacred
History to the Authority of the ancient Annals of the Jews, but withal adding
that we have only some imperfect Abridgments of them, much like that which the
Rector of Ranfrew made of the Book of Pasley, p. 32, 33.
which the Advocate saw in Sir R. Sibbald's Library. A Doctrine so unreasonable
and mischievous in the Consequences of it, that I wonder it has hitherto
passed so easily through so many hands. But this is not my present business. I
am now only to show the vast disparity of these Antiquities in question, and
those of the Jews. It Is very true that Apion did object against them, because
the Greek Writers took so little notice of them. But how does Josephus answer
him? He shows, That the Greeks were very late Writers of History, and therefore
incompetent Judges of matters of so great Antiquity; and he proves that the
more ancient Nations as the Egyptians, Chaldeans, Phoenicians had a most
lasting way of preserving their Histories, for they had public Annals made by
their wisest Men and kept in sacred Places, but the Greeks were very defective
in these things; having no public Writings in their Temples or elsewhere; and
that they had not the use of Letters in the time of the Trojan War; and their
first Historians were little elder than the Persians War against the Greeks.
And this reason he gives of the dissonancy of the Greek Historians, because
they had no public Annals, which would have prevented Errors, and kept Men
from a power of deceiving. But great care he says from the most ancient times
was taken of such things among the Egyptians and Babylonians. And for their
Ancestors, he says they exceeded all others in their exactness this way,
committing the care of these things to their High Priests and Prophets. But the
authority of Writing was not allowed promiscuously to all, but certain Prophets
were pitched upon who wrote the most remote Antiquities by divine inspiration,
and the matters in their own times plainly and according to Truth; and
therefore says he, we have no such multitude of Books differing from each
other, as the Greeks have, but only 22, containing an account of all times
past, written with great Fidelity and Authority. Afterward their Annals were
continued, but not with equal Authority, the Succession of their Prophets
failing. And to show of how great credit these Books (of the first sort) are
among us; in so long time, says he, no Man has dared either to add, or to
take away, or to transpose any thing. Which is utterly inconsistent with the
Principles of the late Critic; for without a liberty of abridging and
transposing and inserting, his new Inventions come to nothing. But as to the
silence of other Nations about them, he shows, that they were a People who
lived in great retirement, that the Romans themselves were a considerable
People before the Greeks knew them; and after all he shows they were known to
the Egyptians, Babylonians and Greeks, which he proves from many particular
Testimonies. Now what is there parallel to these things in the present case?
Have they produced any such public and sacred Annals written and preserved
with so much care, as the ancient Jews had? Have they had a Succession of
Prophets among them whose Books are preserved to this day with great Veneration
without addition or diminution? What mean then such strange Comparisons? Can
they produce any one Author contemporary with Fergus I. and his Successors,
who mention that Succession? As Josephus brings the Egyptian, Phoenician,
Chaldean Writers to attest the Story of the Scripture.

(3.) As to the Greek Antiquities he says the Greeks could have no Records for
many hundreds of years before they wrote. And what follows, p. 7.
but that therefore there is great uncertainty in the Antiquities of Greece
till that time? For which reason Varro, Censor. de die Natali, c. 21.
that great and judicious Antiquary rejected two Parts in three, of the Times
of the Greeks; the one he said was wholly in the dark for want of Records, and
the other Fabulous; because, as Josephus observes, they had no public Annals,
but their first Writers were Poets, who minded to write rather things
entertaining than true. But we are of late told, Preface to the Prospect of
Ireland.
that this saying of Varro might hold as to the Greek Antiquities; but it is
unjustly applied by Camden to the Antiquities of other Nations; for the utmost
Eastern Nations the Chinese, and the utmost Western the Irish have preserved
their Antiquities far beyond the time which Varro allows for true History. I
grant Varro intended this chiefly for the Greeks, who made the greatest noise
with their Antiquities then; and yet Varro himself, as St. Augustine tells us,
Aug. de Civit. Dei, l. 18. c. 2.
began his Account of the Roman Antiquities, with the Succession of the
Sicyonian and Athenian Kings; not as though he would deliver it for certain
Historical Truth, but as the most common received opinion. And in the Fabulous
times, he might endeavor to pick out what Antiquities he thought came nearests
to History. As to the Chinese, they are very remote from us, and we have had
different accounts of them, as appears by comparing Gonsales Mendoza and
Martinius together; Mendoza de Reg. Chinae, l. 3. c. 1.
and of their Antiquities as delivered by the former, Vbb. Em. Rer. Chronol. l.
5. p. 214.
a learned Man has said that they seem to him like Manetho's Egyptian
Dynasties. However Scaliger thought fit to insert the Succession of their Kings
in his Chronological Canons, Scalig. Canon. Isagog. l. 2. p. 158.
and makes the beginning of that Empire coincident with the end of the
thirteenth Egyptian Dynasty; but in his Notes upon it, he complains of the want
of farther information about them. Which the World has since in great measure
received by Martinius, both in his description of the Country, and the first
Decad of the History from the beginning of the Empire to the Nativity of
Christ. But their way of preserving Antiquities was peculiar to themselves, and
therefore these cannot very well be made a Parallel for the Scottish or Irish
Antiquities. Martinius has indeed given a very plausible Account of the remote
Antiquities of China, Martin. Sinic. Histor. l. 1. p. 12.20.
but in such a manner as shows that even the Chinese had a dark and fabulous
time as well as the Greeks, and he tells us, that themselves acknowledge that
before the Reign of Fohius they have no certain account of things because then
they had no use of Letters; but afterward, they look upon the Succession of
their Kings as delivered down to them with great Fidelity. But there are two
things this certainty of their History depended upon. (1.) A fixed Rule for the
computation of Times, without which it is impossible any Nation should have an
exact account of the ancient Succession of their Kings. And herein lay the
great accuracy of the Chinese that they were very early given to the finding
out the best methods for calculation; and they used a Cycle of 60 years, 2670
years before Christ's Nativity; and therefore Martinius magnifies the Chinese,
especially for their skill and exactness in the Succession of their Princes;
which it is impossible to give a certain account of without a fixed measure of
time; and therefore it has been so often said that the Greeks had no certain
History before the Olympiads. (2.) The Chinese did not suffer any Persons to
write History that would, but some of great Reputation were appointed after the
Emperors decease to write his Life; which being approved, was allowed as the
only authentic History of him, and these being put together made up their
public Annals, which are preserved to this day. For, notwithstanding the
Persecution of their Histories in the time of Chingus, who endeavored to
suppress them, Martin. Sinic. Hist. l. 6. p. 241.
that he might be thought the Founder of the Empire; yet his Son opposing his
design, and many learned Men being banished upon it, there were means used to
preserve their Annals; but Semedo says, Semedo Part 1. chapter 22.
they could never recover a perfect Account of the first beginning of that
famous Empire.

Now before any other Nation can presume to vye with the exactness of the
Chinese in their Antiquities, they must first show us what means they had for
the computation of times, by which we may judge of their Antiquity and
Succession of their Kings; and next they must give an equal Account of the Care
taken time enough to preserve their History of public Annals, as the Eastern
People and the Romans did.

For instance, Prospect of Ireland by P. W. p. 6.
we are told from a late Irish Antiquary Geoffrey Keting, that the Posterity of
Gathelus and Scota, or the Milesian Race settled in Ireland, A. M. 2736. after
the Flood 1086. after Moses passing the Red Sea 192. before Christ's Nativity
1308. from whence the Antiquity of the Irish Nation, p. 15.
is said not to be paralleled, unless by the Chinese only.

Here is a pretense to very great Antiquity, and an appearance of exact
Calculation; but I only ask by what Cycles the Irish proceeded when they
began; how they could adjust the time so well to the Age of the World; or what
other certain way they had which might be reduced to it. If they had none, all
this might be only Fancy and Opinion, unless there were some Characters of
Time fixed and certain by Eclipses and Astronomical observations, or certain
Periods of time, or coincident passages, which might connect the year of their
descent into Ireland, with such a year of the World, or after the Flood. If
nothing of this kind be produced, we must be excused if we do not yet think the
Irish Antiquities parallel to those of China. For if there be no such
Characters of Time which may direct us in comparing one thing with another, it
is possible that there may be one or two thousand years difference in the
Computation, and yet neither able to confute the other. For suppose I should
say that the Posterity of Gathelus, came into Ireland just 308 years before
Christ's Nativity, here is 1000 years difference. That is a small matter, you
will say, in so great Antiquity; but as small as it is, some account ought to
be given of a thousand years. Now I desire to have some evident proof brought
me of some Event in the World which happened 1308 years before Christ's
Nativity, to which the Irish descent must be coincident. To make this more
plain by Example, suppose the Question be in what Age of the World the
Peloponnesian War began; we should by no means think it sufficient for any Man
presently to set down, it was such a year of the World, such a year from the
Flood, so long before Christ; but we demand some certain Character of this
time, i. e. such which agrees to that and to no other; and here, whosoever
intends to give satisfaction, will search Thucydides, Diodorus and Ptolemy to
find out some undoubted Character; as that Thucydides says that Pythodorus was
then Archon at Athens, and it was the year of the Olympic Solemnities.
Diodorus says, this was the 87, Olympiad, and that Apseudes was Archon the
year before; Ptolemy says he was Archon in the year of Nabonassar 316. So by
comparing the Olympiads and the years of Nabonassar with the years of the
World, we may come to a certainty in this matter. And besides Thucydides
mentions a great Eclipse the first year of the War, which the Astronomers say
was 317 of Nabonassar, when Euthydemus succeeded Pythodorus at Athens. Such a
method of proceeding by certain Characters of time, is a Way to convince
reasonable Men; but without any of these to think to impose upon Mankind under
a pretense of exact Calculation, argues too great presumption upon the
Credulity of Mankind. Thus as to the coming of Fergus I into Scotland just 330
years before Christ, which the Advocate says all their Historians affirm; let
them produce any one certain Character of that time out of such Annals as were
written within the compass of knowing the Truth of it, and we will never
dispute this matter more.

But to proceed,

(4.) As to the French Antiquities; p. 7.
which the Advocate says, may be more justly questioned on these Grounds than
theirs, we only desire them to be as ingenuous as the late learned Writers of
their Antiquities have been, who reject all before the Merovingian Race, as
either Fabulous, or so doubtful and uncertain, that they make no Account of
it, unless it be what they find in the Roman Authors concerning the Franks,
Rer. Francis. To. 1.
as may be seen in Hadrianus Valesius, a learned Historian, Antiquary and
Critic.

(5.) As to the Spanish, which are joined with the French; what relates to
their Antiquities before the Romans War in Spain, we grant to be parallel with
theirs. For although Strabo says, Strab. Geogr. l. 3. p. 96.
they had the use of Letters, and had some Records of ancient times among them;
yet they are utterly lost. And although Reinesius de Deo Endovellico seems to
think, that Annius had some Fragments of those Antiquities which he mixed with
his own Inventions, yet I can see no reason for it; because he would then have
alleged the old Spanish Records, and not have fathered his Antiquities on
Persons so remote as Berosus and Manetho.

But if they had the use of Letters and Records among them, might not the Irish
and Scottish derive both from them? I answer, That the coming of the Irish
immediately from Spain and not from Britain is not so evidently proved that any
thing can be built upon it. Camden and Sir James Ware two learned Antiquaries
both think Ireland first peopled from Britain; Camd. Brit. p. 728.

Antiq. Hibern* c. 2. p. 11.


and Camden offers good Reasons for his Assertion, as the agreement of the
British and Irish Languages in very many words; the similitude of Customs and
Manners; it is being anciently called the lesser Britain, and the inhabitants
Britains; the convenience of passage from Britain thither; which seem to be of
far greater moment than any thing brought to prove the Legend of Gathelus and
Scota and their posterity coming out of Spain. But because this opinion does
not seem to give any account of the Scoti in Ireland (from whence they
certainly went into Scotland, as is now confessed on all hands) therefore I
shall endeavor to clear this Matter, by proposing what seems most probable to
me concerning the first Peopling of these Islands.

We are then to consider that the most ancient Geographers, as Strabo observes
out of Ephorus, Strab. Geogr. l. 1. p. 23.
divided the then known World into four Parts, the Eastern they called India,
the Southern Aethiopia, the Western Celtia, and the Northern Scythia. And in
the European Parts they knew but of two Nations beside the Greeks, and those
are the Celtae and the Scythae. Those that inhabited Northward, says Strabo,
Strab. l. 1. p. 22.
were called Scythae, and those to the West Celtae; who were likewise called
Iberi and Celtiberi, as he affirms; and these peopled Spain and Gaul, and from
thence spread into the Neighbor Countries; and among the rest came over into
Britain: Which in the Book de Mundo commonly attributed to Aristotle, but by
Buchanan to Theophrastus, is said, together with Ireland, (which are both there
called the British Islands) to be situate in the Ocean not far from the Scythae
and the Celtae. But the latter were so much nearer in Gaul, that it is very
reasonable to believe the first habitation here was by the Celtae, Vit. Agric.
who came from thence. And Tacitus truly observes, the agreement was so very
great between the Gauls and the old Britains, that although he suspected the
Silures might come immediately from Spain, (or rather from the Iberi, which
Strabo says was a more general Name, and some of these went into Ireland) but
upon the whole matter, he concluded all the Southern parts of Britain to have
been peopled immediately from Gaul. But as to the Caledonians he affirms them
to have been of a German extraction: i. e. taking Germany in the extent he took
it in, which went as far as Sarmatia, and took in Scandinavia; from whence in
probability the Northern Parts of Britain, were first peopled. It is true that
Tacitus calls them Britains as well as the Celtae; and however they were united
in interest against the Romans, as Galgacus shows in his excellent Speech to
them, yet Tacitus, we see, makes them of a different Extraction. And these were
originally from the European Scythae, or from Scandinavia, which was abundantly
peopled, and supplied other Countries, as Jornandes says; Iornand. de Rebus
Get. l. 1. c. 4.
and that they were provided of Shipping very early, I have proved in the
following Book, where I speak of the Original of the Picts. And besides what is
there said to show that those who dwell in those Northern parts, were then
called Scythians, Scymnus Chius lately published out of Holstenius his Papers
affirms that the Scythians extended from the Palus Maeotis to Countries wholly
unknown to the Greeks. Holsten. Not. in in Steph. de Vrbibus, p. 378.
For being tempted by the Rivers, as Olaus Rudbeck conjectures, Atlantic. c. 3.
10.
having no skill in Navigation or Astronomy, and the Woods in the first Ages of
the World being unpassable, the People still went farther and farther by the
Rivers side, till at last finding themselves bounded by the vast Mountains in
those Northern parts and the Sea beyond them, they sat down there, and in time
so replenished those parts, that they were willing to discharge themselves by
sending Colonies abroad. To which end they accustomed themselves to the Sea,
and so from thence these Scythians came into the Northern parts of Britain,
where they had the Name of Caledonians; and upon new Supplies coming after the
Romans had subdued the Southern Parts of Britain, were then called Picts. But
of these things afterward. That which I now design, is to show that some of
these Scythae being encouraged by the Adventures of others who had settled in
Britain, passed by the Northern Islands and went into Ireland; and so the
Celtae from Britain, who were called Iberi in Strabo, and these Scythae met
there as they did in Britain. But Britain still retained its Name; and
therefore to distinguish themselves from those who remained there, their
Country was called Ibernia from the Iberi, and Scotia from these Scythae; for
says Walsingham, Walsingh. in Hypodigm. Neustriae.
Scythae, Schythici, Scoti, Scotici are all one; which he took from Radulphus
de Diceto, Imag. Histor. ad A. 1185. and Nennius expressly calls them Schythae,
and Gildas the Irish Sea Vallem Scythicam; and Alfred in the English
Translation of Orosius calls the Scots Scyttan; and the Germans both Scythians
and Scots Scutten; and the old Britains Yscot, Britan p. ^6.
as Cambden has already observed.

And it is considerable that a late Irish Antiquary tells us that a Part of
their Country in their own Language is called Gaethluighe, Flaherty Ogygi, p.
67.
i. e. Gothland, from the Goths or Scythians who took possession of it, He
rather thinks the Getuli a People of Africa gave the Name; but of their coming
into Ireland there is no probability. And in the same place he says, that
Lamfinnus was the first who brought a Colony thither out of Scythia; which he
proves out of one of their most ancient Monuments. Acta Sanct. Hib. Mart. 6. p.
502. n. 40.
And Colganus observes on the Life of St. Cladroe, that whereas they are said
to be derived from Scota who is said to be Pharaoh 's Daughter, the true Name
he says was Scytha; and that Name was given her because her Husband came from
Scythia. Ogyg. p. 350.
And the same Antiquary confesses that it appears by all their ancient Records,
that they had their original from the Scythians, and Keting himself he says at
last yields it, and that the Name of Scota was given because the Milesian Race
came out of Scythia.

And to confirm the peopling of Ireland from Britain and Scandinavia, Ogyg. p.
171. c. 8, 9. part 3.
we are to observe that the Irish Antiquaries from their best Records do speak
of two great Colonies which came thither from Britain, the one of the Belgae,
of which Slangius or Slanius was the Head, who was the first Monarch of
Ireland; wherein Giraldus Cambrensis is confessed to agree with their own
Antiquities; Cambrens. Evers. c. 8. p. 57.
and another of the Dannanae from the Northern parts of Britain under Nuadus.
Ogyg. part 3. c. 10.
But besides both these, and long after them they place the Dynasty of the
Scots or Scythians under Herimon; Part 2. p. 85, 86.
and the Psaltir Na-rann, a Book of great Authority among them says that
Herimon was the first King of the Scots in Ireland. War. Antiquit. Hibern. c. 2.
And in his time, they say, the Picts followed them thither, But that seems to
be too soon. However that they came from the same parts will appear very
probable from what Bid speaks of the Picts coming from Scythia (i. e.
Scandinavia) in their long Boats, Bed. l. 1. c. 1.
and being carried by Tempest to the Northern parts of Ireland, he says they
there found gentem Scotorum, i. e. their Countrymen the Scythians; and they
would fain have settled there with them. And when they came to treat, we find
no difficulty as to their understanding one another, which there would have
been, if the Scots had come out of Spain and the Picts out of Scandinavia. I
know Bid there makes the Picts and Scots Languages to be different; but so
they might be in continuance of time, although at first of the same original;
as appears by the several Languages now in Europe, derived from the Original
Gothic or Scythick Tongue, which is Mother to most of them; only the Celtick
and Latin being mixed with it. But to return to Bid, he says, the Scots
persuaded the Picts to go to Britain, and take Possession of the Northern
Parts, as the Britains had done of the Southern. After this they obtained Wives
from the Scots in Ireland; which shows familiarity and mutual confidence (as
being of the same extraction) and the Picts engaged that in a disputable Case,
the Scottish Line should be preferred to their own. In process of time, says
Bid, some of the Scots themselves, hearing of the Goodness of the Western
parts of Scotland, went thither under the Conduct of Reuda, and either by Force
or Friendship took possession of them; and from thence they were called
Dalreudini, from this Reuda and Daal which signifies a share or portion. This
is all the Account Bid gives of this matter; wherein there is not a Word of
Gathelus and Scota, or of Fergus his coming in the time of Alexander, or any
time after. And it is somewhat strange, that such a Man as Bede, so inquisitive
into these matters, so well acquainted with the Story of Icolmkil, or of the
Monks of Hy or Jona should say nothing of all this. For he seems to have
concealed nothing he knew or had heard of; and stuffs out his Books with some
not very probable Relations. And therefore it is not likely he would have
omitted the former Stories if he had heard of them.

(2.) The second Argument of any seeming force in the Advocate's Discourse is,
p. 13.
That their Histories were first transmitted to Posterity by the Druids in
Verses; and it is probable some of these Druids being converted, became their
first Monks, and so it was easy for them to inform their Monasteries, and that
the Monks at Iona or Icolmkill kept the Records there from the foundation of
the Monastery about A. D. 560. where their Kings were buried until the Reign
of Malcolm Can-more; that they had Annals in other Monasteries, as at Scoon,
Paslay, Pluscardin and Lindesfern, p. 24.
Abercorn and Melross; and that they had Historians who compiled Histories from
them; p. 25.
among whom he reckons as the most ancient Veremundus a Spaniard, A. D. 1076.
who dedicated his History to Malcolm Can-more; and Joh. Campbell, Turgott and
Alredus Rivallensis, who wrote of their affairs before Fordon. p. 29.
And he goes about to prove Veremundus could not be counterfeited by Hector
Boethius, because he is cited by Balaeus, Holinshed, Gesner, Chambers; and
because Hector gives an account to James V. that he was sent him from
Icolmkill. Which is the substance of what he says about their old Histories
before Fordon.

To which I answer,

(1.) That here we have a very formal Pedigree of Historians, which might with
equal probability have been carried back to Gathelus his first coming out of
Egypt. For it is very hard to suppose so great a Prince, and Son to a King of
Athens, should be without his Druids, or Sanachies, or Bards, who would
transmit to Posterity his famous Actions; and therefore I cannot but wonder,
that the learned Advocate should seem to stick at their ancient Origination and
Descent; p. 15.
and be so unwilling to go any farther back than their first settlement in
Scotland. For no doubt the History of Gathelus and Scota were transmitted to
Posterity the very same way that the other was; and the same Arguments will
indifferently serve for both. Nay, why should the British History be
questioned? since no doubt the Britains had Druids, Sanachies and Bards as well
as the Scots or Irish. And yet the Advocate will by no means allow the British
Antiquities, although they pretend to the very same Grounds which he makes use
of to support the Scottish. If the Druids were good Historians in Scotland, why
not much rather among the Britains; where Caesar says they had their Original
Institution and the most sacred Authority. But Buchanan absolutely denies that
the Druids ever wrote Histories; Buchan. l. 2.
and he affirms from Caesar, that when he came hither they had no Records or
way of preserving the memory of things past; and Tacitus and Gildas could meet
with no certain Account from Domestic Histories. And as to his Sanachies and
Bards, I shall only give him Buchanan's Answer in his own Words. Quod autem ad
Bardos and Seneciones veteris memoriae custodes quidam confugiunt, prorsus
perridicule faciunt. Which he proves, because the Bards were an ignorant sort
of People, that had no Monuments of Antiquity; and the Sanachies were Men
wholly without Learning, and who lived by flattering great Men; and therefore
no certain Account of things can be expected from them. And withal, says he,
since we find Historians liable to so many mistakes after all the pains and
care they take to search after the Truth of things, what credit can be given to
those who pretend to deliver History merely by their Memories?

But the Advocate objects, p. 16.
that the Laws of Lycurgus were preserved in the Memories of Men for 600 years,
as Plutarch observes; and the Scots and other Nations have preserved Laws for
much longer time, without the help of Letters.

But is there no difference between Laws of daily Practice, and Antiquities,
which depend merely upon Memory, where there is no use of Letters? And as to
Laws themselves I shall only desire the learned Advocate to give an Account of
their Macalpine Laws, Scotich. l. 4. c. 9.
which Fordon says were composed by Kenneth, who subdued the Picts. I know
that Hector Boethius, Hect. Boeth. Hist. l. 10. f. 207.
who stands out at nothing, pretends to deliver them as exactly as if he had
lived at that time; and Lesly who follows him very carefully, Lesla. de Orig.
Scot. l. 1. p. 71.
sets them down as he found them in him. But what ancient Copy do they produce
for these Laws? Not one Word of that. But was it not fit that he who had so
many Kings should make a Body of Laws too? Fordon never pretends to know them,
only he thinks there were some of them still remaining. Joh. Major takes no
notice of them; Buchanan just mentions them, and says they continued long
after him, but how long he could not tell. But it is observable, that when he
comes to mention the Laws of Alexander III. so long after him (for he died A.
D. 1285. and the other, according to him, A. D. 854) he says they were all
antiquated by the negligence of the People and the length of Time. Buch. l. 7.
p. 71.2.
Now if the Laws so much later were quite forgotten, how come the Macalpin Laws
to be so exactly preserved? But it may be there was another Chest of Laws at
Icolmkill, besides that of MSS. which Hector Boethius says Fergus brought from
the Sacking of Rome in the time of Alaric. Yet even that would prove that
Records are the best preservers of Laws; and one would think no Advocate in the
World could be of another opinion.

(2.) From the Druids I proceed to the first Monks of Scotland, who are said to
have left Records in their Monasteries of the History of former times. The
first Monastery there, is confessed to be that of the Island Iona, p. 23.
or Hy, or Icolmkill, i. e. Hy the Cell of Columba, founded about the year 560.
and there, the Advocate says, their Records were kept from the Foundation to
the Reign of Malcolm Can-more. Now we are fallen into an Age of some Light,
such as it is, but whether it will be to the Advocate's satisfaction I know
not. For Cummeneus Albus and Adamnanus, both Abbats of Hy not long after
Columba, have given an Account of Columba the Founder of that Monastery; and
both wrote before Bede's time. By them it appears that Columba came out of
Ireland thither; and Adamnanus says, he was the Son of Fedlimid the Son of
Fergus, which Fergus, Ogyg. p. 471.
say the Irish Antiquaries, was second Husband to Erica Daughter of Loarn,
Brother to Fergus, who carried the first Colony into Scotland; and that Fergus,
Grandfather to Columba, was Son to Conallus, Grandchild to Niellus Magnus King
of Ireland about A. D. 405. in whose time St. Patrick was carried captive into
Ireland. And so from the time of Columba's coming, and his Relation to the
Kings both of Scotland and Ireland, they have endeavored to fix the time of
Fergus his coming with the first Colony into Scotland. Cambrens. Evers. p. 69.
The account they give in short is this, that Carbre Riada was one of the Sons
of Conar II. King of Ireland, about A. D. 165. from him the Family and Country
where they lived was called Dalrieda (and they while in Ireland were styled
Kings of Dalrieda) from him descended Eric the Father of Loarn, Ogyg. p. 468.
and Fergus who went into Scotland. To this Fergus succeeded Domangardus,
Comgallus, Gauranus and Conallus, the Son of Comgallus, in whose time Columba
came into Scotland; for Adamnanus says he conversed with Conallus the Son of
Comgill; who according to Tigernacus and the Ulster Annals gave the Island Hy
to Columba. But Bid says it was given by the Picts whom Columba converted to
the Christian Faith. Bed. l. 3. c. 3. c. 4.
Which must seem strange, if the Scots then had the possession of those Parts;
and therefore the learned Primate of Armagh inclines to the former opinion.
Primord. p. 703.
The same Tigernacus in the Irish Annals makes Fergus the Son of Eric to have
carried over the Dalredians into Britain six years after the death of St.
Patrick; p. 610.
and the old Author cited by Camden confirms the Succession of Fergus from
Conar, Camd. Britan. p. 707.
and his being the first King of Albany; which agrees with the Irish
Antiquaries saying that Carbre Riada the Ancestour to Fergus, was the Son of
Conar Monarch of Ireland.

But suppose all this, that Columba was descended from one Fergus and related
to the other, who went over with the Dalredians into Scotland; and that he was
there in the time of Conallus Son to Comgill, Grandchild to this Fergus, how
does it hence appear that there was not another Fergus long before, and a
Succession of Kings in Scotland from him?

To this the Irish Antiquaries reply, that their ancient Annals do give a clear
Account of this Fergus his Race and Time of going into Scotland, but although
they have the Succession of the Kings of Ireland long before, and the
remarkable things done in their time, yet there is no mention at all of any
Fergus or his Successors going to settle in Britain before this time. They do
believe that there were Excursions made by some of the Kings of Ireland before;
and I see no reason to question it, Ogyg. p. 464.
even before the times mentioned by Gildas; but they utterly deny any
foundation of a Monarchy there by Scots going out of Ireland before the time of
Fergus the Son of Eric, and that 100 years later than the Scottish Antiquaries
do place his coming; p. 472.
for they make the first coming of this Colony to be A. D. 503. just the time
which the Bishop of St. Asaph had pitched upon; but according to their
Antiquities, Loarn the elder Brother was first King, and he dying Fergus
succeeded A. D. 513. and because his Race succeeded in that Kingdom, therefore
Fergus is supposed to have been founder of the Monarchy.

The Question now comes to this, whether the Irish or the Scottish Antiquaries
go upon the better Grounds? For, here the Advocate's Common Places of
Historical Faith, Common Fame, Domestic Tradition, etc. can determine nothing
since these are equal on both sides, and yet there is a contradiction to each
other about a matter of Fact. We must then appeal to the Records on both sides;
and those who can produce the more Authentic Testimonies from thence are to be
believed. The Advocate pleads that it is very credible that they had such,
because they had Druids and Sanachies and Monks as well as those in Ireland;
and that Columba founded a Monastery at Icolmkill, and their Kings were buried
there for a long time. But where are the Annals of that Monastery? Or of any
other near that time? To what purpose are we told of the Monasteries that were
at Scoon, and Paslay, and Pluscardin, and Lindesfern, and Abercorn, unless
their Books be produced? p. 25.
It is by no means satisfactory to say they had two Books, their Register or
Chartulary, and their Black Book wherein their Annals were kept, for we desire
to see them of what color soever they be, and to be convinced by Testimonies
out of them, if they appear of sufficient authority. But if these cannot be
produced, let them print the full Account of Irish Kings, which the Advocate in
his Advertisement says, he had lately seen in a very old MS. brought from
Icolmkill, written by Carbre Lifachair, who lived six Generations before St.
Patrick and so about our Savior's time. St. Patrick died about the end of the
fifth Century, being above 100 years old, if the Irish Historians may be
believed; but how six Generations will reach from his birth to about our
Savior's time, is not easy to understand. For although the ancients differed
much in computing Generations; yet Censorinus says they generally called 25 or
30 years by the Name of a Generation. Censor. de die Natal. c. 17.
Herodotus indeed extends a Generation to 100 years, yet even that will over
do here. But who was this Carbre Lifachair, who wrote so long since? I find
one of that Name among the Kings of Ireland, Cambr. Evers. p. 71.
about A. D. 284. and therefore I am apt to suspect that some body not very
well versed in the Irish Language, Ogyg. p. 341.
finding this Name among the Kings, made him the Author of the Book. And the
Irish Antiquaries speak with some indignation against those Scottish Writers who
pretend to debate these matters of Antiquity relating to the Irish Nation, p.
464.
without any skill in the Irish Language. For this Debate does not concern the
Saxons in Scotland (as all the Lowlanders are still called by the Highlanders)
and many of the best Families of their Nobility settled there in the time of
Malcolm Canmoir, Camd. Brit. p. 85.
after he had married the Sister to Edgar; but it relating wholly to those who
came out of Ireland, the Irish Antiquaries think it reasonable it ought to be
determined by the Irish Annals.

But will not the same objections lie against the Irish Antiquities which have
been hitherto urged against the Scottish? For why should we believe that the
Original Irish were more punctual and exact in their Annals than those who went
from thence into Scotland?

I answer, that a difference is to be made concerning the Irish Antiquities.
For they either relate to what happened among them before Christianity was
received in Ireland or after. As to their remote Antiquities, they might have
some general Traditions preserved among them, as that they were peopled from
Britain and Scythia, and had Successions of Kings time out of mind; but as to
their exact Chronology, I must beg leave as yet to suspend my Assent. For
Bollandus affirms that the Irish had no use of Letters till Saint Patrick
brought it among them; Actae Sanct. Mart. 17. Vit. Patric. 4.
at which their present Antiquary is much offended; and runs back to the
Druids, as the learned Advocate does. But neither of them have convinced me
that the Druids ever wrote Annals. All that Caesar says is, Ogyg. part 3. c.
30. p. 214.
that in Gaul they made use of the Greek Letters; which they might easily
borrow from the Greek Colony at Marseilles; but how does it appear that they
used these Letters in Ireland or Scotland? Or that they any where used them in
any matters of Learning; which seems contrary to the Institution of the Druids,
who were all for Memory, as Caesar says, and thought Books hurtful to the use
of it. So that nothing could be more repugnant to their Discipline, than the
150 Tracts of the Druids, which St. Patrick is said to have cast into the Fire.
p. 219.
But I do not deny that they might have Genealogies kept up among them by their
Druids and Sanachies and Bards, who made it their business; and so it was in
Scotland, as appears by the Highlanders repeating the Genealogy of Alexander
III. by heart. But the great Error lay in fixing Times and Places, and
particular Actions according to the Names of those Genealogies. And this was
the true Reason of the mistake as to the Scottish Antiquities. For the
Genealogists carrying the Pedigree of Fergus the Son of Erk, so much farther
back, some afterward either imagined themselves or would have others think,
that all those mentioned before him were Kings in Scotland, as Fergus was;
which by degrees was improved into a formal Story of forty Kings. And I am very
much confirmed in this conjecture, because I find in the Genealogy in Fordon,
the descent of Fergus, the Son of Erk from Conar the Irish Monarch, as it is in
the Irish Genealogies, and that by Rieda, called by them Carbre Riada, by the
other Eochoid Ried, and several other Names are the very same we now find in
the Genealogy of the Irish Kings; as Eochoid, Father to Erc, Aengus, Fedlim,
Conar, the Son of Ederskeol, and so up to Fergus, called in the Irish Catalogue
of Kings Fergusius Fortamalius, (whom the Author of the Synchronism makes
contemporary with Ptolemy Philometor. Ogyg. p. 114.
) From whence I conclude, that the original mistake lay in applying the Irish
Genealogy to the Kings of Scotland.

But if we go beyond these Genealogies in Ireland, and come to examine the
matters of Fact relating to their remote Antiquities, we shall find no more
certainty there, than we have done in Scotland. And it is ingenuously confessed
by Tigernacus in his Annals, Ogyg. p. 258.
that all their Antiquities to the Reign of Kimbaithus, their 73. King, are
very uncertain; but he might have gone farther, and done no injury to Truth.
However we cannot but acknowledge it to be a great piece of Ingenuity to own so
much in those times when fabulous Antiquities were so much cried up and
believed. But what becomes then of Caesarea, Baronna and Balba, with fifty
other Women and but three Men coming from Ireland just forty days before the
Flood; Ogyg. Domest. Part 3. c. 1, 2.
and the fifteenth day of the Moon? What becomes of Partholanus and his
Company, who arrived in Ireland the 312 th year after the Flood, in the Month
of May, 14. of the Moon, and upon Wednesday? Is not this wonderful exactness
at such a distance of time? And the late Antiquary confesses he does not know,
how they came to understand the day of the Week and the Month so well. How come
they to understand, c. 6.
that the second Colony under Nemethus came to Ireland, when it had been 30
years desolate; and after the destruction of that Colony that it remained so
200 years? c. 7.
As to the Milesian Colony from Spain, I discourse at large afterward of it,
and the Authority of those Annals these Antiquities depend upon.

But then as to later times, since Christianity was among them, and some kind
of Learning did flourish in Ireland for some time, there is greater reason to
have a regard to the Testimony of their most ancient Annals. Such are those of
Tigernacus, who died A. D. 1088. and the Synchronisms of Flannus, who died A.
D. 1056. the Historical Poems of Coemannus, who is celebrated as their chief
Antiquary, and he deduces his Historical Poem of the Kings of Ireland to A. D.
1072. which is supposed to be the time he lived in; Modudius continues the
History of their Kings from A. D. 428. to A. D. 1022. and he lived A. D. 1143.
But besides these, Ogyg. p. 466.
the Irish Antiquaries have found an Irish Poem of the Kings of Scotland, in
the time of Malcolm Canmoir, with their Names and the time of their Reigns.
Which Poem begins with Loarn, and Fergus the Son of Erc as the first Kings of
Scotland, but takes notice of Kings among the Picts before; without the least
intimation of any among the Scots; which being joined with the Testimony of
their Genealogies and the Annals of Tigernacus, and of Jocelin in the Acts of
St. Patrick, they conclude sufficient to prove that there was no Monarchy in
Scotland, till the time of this Fergus of the Dalredian Family. And it is not
improbable that Bid should understand this Colony under the Conduct of these
Brethren, by his Duce Reuda; because they being equal, the Denomination was
taken from the Head of the Stock; who was Rieda or Reuda; and Daal the Irish
Antiquaries say, originally signifies a Stock and only by consequence a Share
or Portion.

But the Advocate still insists upon it, that in their chief Monasteries they
had ancient Annals kept; which must be of greater Authority than these Irish
Historical Poems. This is a matter of Fact, and there can be no Argument drawn
from the bare probability that there were such Annals; but when they are
produced and compared with the Irish Annals of Tigernacus the Annals of Ulster,
Ynisfallin, Dungall and others which the Irish Antiquaries quote so often,
besides their Historical Poems, we shall then be able to judge better between
them in point of Antiquity and Credibility. At present it does not seem so
probable, that they have any such that are considerable, since they have not
been alleged by so learned an Advocate for their Antiquities, who would not
omit so material an evidence for his Cause. And there is a passage in the
Conclusion of the Continuation of Fordon which makes it more than probable,
they had no ancient authentic Annals in the Monasteries. For there it is said,
Scotich. l. 16. c. 39.
That in other Countries, and as he heard in England, in all their Monasteries
of Royal Foundation, there was a certain Person appointed to write the passages
of the present times, and after the King's death, at the next great Council all
these Writers were to meet and to bring in their Papers, which were to be
compared and examined by skillful Men appointed for that purpose, and out of
all one Authentic Chronicle was to be made, which was to be laid up in the
Archives of the Monasteries as such, from whence the Truth might be known: The
like he wishes were done in Scotland. From whence it follows, that there were
no Authentic Annals in their Monasteries before that time to his knowledge.
Buchanan, Buchan. p. 392.45.1.50.2.
I know, does several times quote the Book of Paslay, but it had been far
better to have printed the Book it self, since Dempster says it was in the
hands of the Earl of Dumferlin, Dempst. Hist. Scot. l. 15. n. 1011.
that others might have been better able to judge concerning it. Scotich. l. 8.
c. 13.
But Fordon tells us, that Monastery was founded A. D. 1168. (or a year after,
says the Chronicle of Melros) now, the very foundation of the Monastery is
here so late, that no great matter can be expected as to remote Antiquities. l.
5. c. 36.
That at Scone, as Fordon says, was founded not much sooner, A. D. 1107. As to
Abercorn, though mentioned by Bid, yet Buchanan says no one could find out so
much as the footsteps of it; Buch. l. 5. p. 40.2.
and so we are not like to expect much light from thence. It is very strange
that Buchanan only should see the famous Book of Pluscardin: For Books do not
easily grow famous by one Man's seeing them. But no great matter of Antiquity
is to be expected from thence, since that Monastery at the soonest was founded
by Alexander II. in the thirteenth Century; Apparat. ad Hist. Scot. l. 1. p. 78.
but Dempster rather thinks, it was 200 years after. I never heard that Aidan,
Finan and Colman left any Annals at Lindesfern; nor Columba or his Successors
at Icolmkill. If any such be ever found, it will be a great favor to
inquisitive Men to oblige the World by publishing them, that if we are guilty
of mistakes, we may rectify them upon such great Authorities when they
vouchsafe to let them see the light.

As to the Chronicle of Melrosse, lately published at Oxford, we find no
advantage at all to the Advocate's Cause by it. p. 24.
But here is an odd kind of Reflection either on the MS. or the worthy Publisher
of it, as though it were very unfaithful in the things relating to the Scottish
Nation. Whereas I have frequently perused the Original MS. in the Cotton
Library, which is a very fair and ancient one. And those Verses he speaks of,
which are omitted, are not there in the same hand, but added in the Margin by
another, and seem transcribed from some other Book; such Verses being frequent
in Fordon, and it may be are the greatest Monuments of Antiquity they have,
being agreeable to the Irish Historical Poems. But seeing the first produced by
the Advocate go no farther back than Alpin the Father of Kenneth who subdued
the Picts, they can afford very little light in these matters. And it had been
but a reasonable piece of justice in the Advocate, before he had charged such
unfaithfulness upon the MS. Copy of Mailros, as it appears in the Oxford
Edition, to have looked either on the Beginning or the End of the Book; and
then he might have spared his Censure. For in the Preface an account is given
of the Verses relating to the Succession of the Kings of Scotland: And in the
end the very Verses themselves are printed, and more at large than he quotes
them.

From the Annals of their Monasteries I proceed to their Historians; and the
first mentioned by the Advocate, p. 25.
is Veremundus a Spaniard, Archdeacon of St. Andrews, A. D. 1076. who dedicated
his History to Malcolm Canmoir; p. 16.
and in his Epistle appeals to the Druids and Monks and the Monuments of
Antiquity kept by them in the Isles of Man and Icolmkill. This is an Evidence
to the purpose, and speaks home to the point. But the Bishop of St. Asaph has
unhappily questioned, whether there ever were such a Writer; and I do not think
the Advocate has cleared the point. There may be two things in dispute, with
respect to this Veremundus; first, whether there ever were such a History
appearing under the name of Veremundus: And then supposing there were, whether
it were genuine, or made under his Name by Hector Boethius, or rather by his
Physician of Aberdeen, who was so helpful to him, says Dempster, in texenda
Historia, i. e. in weaving the Materials for his History? I will not dispute so
much the former, and the Testimony of Chambers, p. 26.
a Lord of Session and learned Man, as the Advocate tells us, who wrote A. D.
1572. goes no farther, nor any other produced by him. But as to the second
point I am very much unsatisfied, for these Reasons.

(1.) It is very well known that it was no unusual thing in that Age to publish
Books under the Names of ancient Authors, which cost the Critics a great deal
of Pains to discover the Imposture, as is apparent in the Berosus, Manetho,
Metasthenes (or Megasthenes) Philo, Cato, Xenophon, Archilochus, Sempronius,
published by Annius, who lived in the fifteenth Century, and was buried during
the Popedom of Alexander VI. And not only Authors, but other Monuments of
Antiquity were then counterfeited, as appears by many in Gruter's Collection of
Inscriptions, by those of Annius in Italy; and by the Tuscan Inscriptions
published by Inghiramius under the Name of Prosper Fesulanus; which were the
Invention of Thomas Foedrus, who lived at the same time with Hector Boethius.
For, in that Age Men began to be inquisitive into Matters of Antiquity; and
therefore some who had more Learning and better Inventions than others set
themselves to Work, to gratify the Curiosity of such who longed to see
something of the Antiquities of their own Country. And such things were so
greedily swallowed by less judicious Persons, that it proved no easy matter to
convince such of the imposture. For even Annius and Prosper Fesulanus, as well
as Veremundus have had their Advocates to plead for them.

(2.) We find as to the Scottish Antiquities many such Authors pretended to,
who never wrote concerning them. As for instance, three Books of the History of
Scotland by St. Adam Bishop of Cathnes. Dempster. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. n. 2.
Auminus of the Right of the Culdees. n. 45. n. 52.
King Achaius his History of his Predecessor. Aldarus his History of Scotland
and Ireland. n. 92.
n. 259.
St. Convallanus his History of the Kings of Scotland. The Chronicle of
Dumfermlin. n. 415. n. 490. n. 530.
Elvanus Avalonius his History of Scotland. St. Fastidius his Chronicle of
Scotland. n. 532.
Fergus the great his Epistles to the Scots. n. 547.
Fulgentius his Epistle to Donald King of Scotland in the time of Severus. n.
561.
St. Glacianus his History of Scotland. St. Glodianus his Chronicle of the
Picts, n. 567.
cited by Veremundus, says Dempster. n. 592.
Galdus his Epistles to the Britains. Hunibertus his Scottish Chronicle. n. 667.
Kenneth's Epitome of his Laws. n. 761. n. 839. n. 849.
St. Machorius of the Destruction of the Picts. St. Minnanus of the Union of
the Scots and Picts. n. 881.
Marcerius of the coming of the Scots into Albion: He is said to be their first
Author, and out of him Veremundus, says Dempster, took the Foundation of his
History; but I do not find that any Man besides ever saw him. n. 1065.
King Reuther's Scottish History. n. 2057.
Salifax Bardus his Genealogy of their Kings in King Reuther's time. Here we
have no less than 20 Authors relating to their Antiquities, every one
mentioned as genuine by Dempster; and yet as far as we can find, not one of the
whole number was so. Is it then any wonder, that Veremundus should be reckoned
among the rest?

(3.) No such Author was known to Fordon, as far as appears by his History;
and he is very punctual in quoting the Authors he makes use of, and sometimes
transcribes large passages out of them; as out of Baldredus, as he calls him,
and Turgot's Life of Malcolm, etc. Jocelin de Furnes, Vincentius, Adamnanus,
and any old Legends or Chronicles he could meet with, as Chronica de Abernethy,
and variae Chronicae upon many occasions. I do not therefore deny that Fordon
does appeal to Chronicles before him; but I think the Argument so much stronger
against Veremundus; when one who gathered all he could meet with never once
takes notice of him, as far as I can find.

(4.) William Elphinston, (Chancellor of Scotland, Hist. Scot. l. 11. f. 254.
Bishop of Aberdeen, and Founder of the University there, a Man highly
commended by Hector Boethius) did, as Hector himself tells us in his Epistle to
James V. search all Scotland for Monuments of Antiquity, and gave the first
intimation of Veremundus in the Island Iona, and followed him exactly in
writing his History. l. 7. f. 118.2.
Now as it happily falls out, this very History of Elphinstoun is in being
among us, and I have at this time by me eight Books of it, which go as far as
the thirteenth Century. He tells the Story of Gathelus and Scota, l. 1. c. 8.
as others had done before him; or rather, just as Fordon had set it down. For
there is very little variation from him in all the first Book, only the eighth
Chapter in Fordon is very much contracted; the fifteenth about Gathelus his
building the City Brigantia in Spain is transposed, another Chapter being set
before it. In the seventeenth he follows Fordon exactly about the Posterity of
Gathelus coming into Ireland; and whereas Fordon only quotes Grossum Caput for
saying that Scotia had its Name from Scota, the most noble Person in that
Colony; he says it was in some Chronica; but what Chronica was ever written by
Grosthead, Scotichron. l. 1. c. 14.
deserves to be enquired. For it is certain Fordon quotes him in other Places
about Scota and the Scots. Which makes me wonder that Dempster does not put him
among his Scottish Writers; but as far as I can perceive, he never read Fordon;
nor saw Elphinston. In Chap. 20. where Fordon quotes an old Chronicle which
affirms that Gaithelus gave the same Laws to his People which Phoroneus did to
the Greeks; and that the Scots to this day glory that they have those Laws:
this last Clause Elphinstoun left out; and he passes over Chap. 21. where the
miserable condition of the Posterity of Gathelus in Spain for 240 years is set
down. In some following Chapters he confutes Geoffrey of Monmouth in the very
words of Fordon, and uses his very expressions about the first peopling of
Scotland from Ireland, the coming of the Picts, and the hard usage of the Scots
by them, and Fergus his going over out of Ireland; in all which not one
Authority is cited which is not in Fordon, and not the least intimation of any
such Author as Veremundus.

In the second Book he follows Fordon, not only in other things before, but
when he describes the Islands of Scotland, and particularly Jona; only he
leaves out Fordon's Hebrew Etymology, making Iona and Columba the same;
Scotichron. l. 2. c. 10.
and he says not one word of any Library or Records kept there, or any old
Histories and Annals to be there found, as Hector Boethius affirms; all that he
says is, that there was a Sanctuary for Transgressors. About Fergus and
Rether he varies not a tittle from Fordon, and never mentions any other Kings
of that Race; which he would never have omitted if he had known such an Author
as Veremundus. And he does not suppose that Rether succeeded Fergus in the
Kingdom of Scotland, but that he came afresh from Ireland; and so makes this
the second coming of the Scots out of Ireland: Which plainly overthrows the
constant Succession of the Monarchy from Fergus in Scotland: And he names no
one King of Scotland from Rether to Eugenius, who was banished with all the
Scots.

In the beginning of the third Book he gives an account after Fordon of Fergus
the Son of Erk coming into Scotland, and he reckons 45 Kings between the two
Fergusses, just as Fordon does; and he desires to be excused, as he did, for
not setting down distinctly the times of their several Reigns, because he could
not then find any Writings about them; his words are ad praesens non in
Scriptis reperimus. Now from this expression I thus argue against Hector
Boethius his Veremundus: He says, that Elphinstoun gave the first intimation
of him, and that followed him in his History; either therefore Veremundus gave
no account of this first Succession, which Hector pretends to have from him;
and so his Authority signifies nothing at all in this matter; or Elphinston
never saw him; for he says, he never could find any History of this first
Succession. And therefore if ever there were such a Book under the Name of
Veremundus, it was after Elphinston's days. For having searched the whole
Nation for ancient Writings, and particularly Jona, as Hector testifies, and
finding no History of the Succession from Fergus, as himself declares, it is a
plain Evidence, that Hector Boethius has given a false account of Elphinston
in relation to Veremundus, and in all probability of Veremundus too. But this
is not all, for Elphinston does not only say, that he could not find any Books
relating to the Succession of the Kings from Fergus, but he refers his Readers
to the old Irish Annals; his Words are, ad antiquos Hiberniae Libros referimus.
So that according to Elphinston's judgment the most certain account of their
Antiquities is to be taken from the Irish Authors. And so we may observe both
in him and Fordon, the Irish Legends of S. Brendan and others, served them for
very good Authorities.

And so much for the Advocate's ancient Historian Veremundus the Spaniard. For
I suppose the mention of him by Bale, Gesner, Hollinshed, etc. after he was so
much celebrated by Hector Boethius, f. 12.
deserves no farther consideration. Vo^s. de Hist. Lat. l. 3. c. 13.
But Vossius did not think him worth mentioning; and although he blames Luddus
(as the Advocate calls him) or Humphry Lhuyd, for being too severe upon Hector
Boethius, yet it is evident that he looked on him as a fabulous Writer, and so
durst not set him down on his authority. p. 31.
The Advocate would excuse this Censure of Vossius, as though it related only
to his credulity in point of miracles, whereas there is not the least
intimation that way; and Vossius says that Leland on the account of his
fabulousness wrote sharp Verses upon him. What! for his having believed too
many Miracles? No certainly, but for his fabulous Antiquities. But he hopes to
bring Hector Boethius better off from the Censure of Bishop Gavin Douglas,
which the Bishop of St. Asaph takes notice of from Polydore Virgil, p. 30.
because Bishop Douglas died A. D. 1520. and Boethius his History was not
published till 1526. and he had not his Records from Icolmkill till 1525. To
which I answer, that this looks like one of the Miracles the Advocate confesses
that Hector did too easily report. For if he had the Records on which this
History was built but in 1525. how came his History to be published the
following year? For he makes use of Veremundus his Authority in the very
beginning of his History, Hect. Boeth. Scot. Hist. l. 1. f. 12.
for the Scottish Antiquities both in Spain, Ireland and Albany. In his second
Book he says, l. 2. f. 22.2.
whatever he had written of the ancient Kings of Scotland, he had taken out of
Veremundus, Campbell and Cornelius Hibernicus; all which he pretended to have
had from Icolmkill. l. 3. f. 35.
In his third Book about Caesar's Expedition, he still pretends to follow
Veremundus. And in his seventh Book he declares he had kept close to him in the
whole series of his History. l. 7. f. 118.2.
Now how was this possible if he had never seen Veremundus till A. D. 1525. and
his History was published by Badius Ascensius at Paris, A. D. 1526. It would
take up that year in sending it thither, and revising and correcting and
publishing so large a Volume as his History makes. So that there must be some
great mistake, as to the year of his receiving those Records, if he ever did.
But if this were not the History Bishop Douglas censured, what other was there
at that time which could deserve it? It could not be Joh. Major, for his Book
was printed by Badius Ascensius after Douglas his death: (if he died, as he
says, A. D. 1520.) and he pretends to no new Discoveries, as Boethius does.
But why should the Advocate imagine his History was not known by the learned
Men at home, Leslae. l. 9. p. 3^8. Dempster. Hist. Eccl. l. 4. n. 405.
such as Bishop Douglas was, before it was printed?

But to return to Vossius, who is not sparing in mentioning any of our MSS.
Historians which he found well attested: and particularly Aelredus, Abbat of
Rhieval, who wrote the Life of David King of Scots. p. 22.
But the Advocate tells us some news concerning him, viz. that he was Abbat of
Mailros, which was called Ryval before King David 's time. But Fordon expressly
distinguishes the two Monasteries of Rieval and Melros; the one, Scotich. l.
5. c. 43.
he says, was founded by King David, A. D. 1132. and the latter four years
after. And in the Chronicle of Melros it appears that Richard was the first
Abbat there; to whom Waltheof succeeded, Uncle to King Malcolm, A. D. 1148.
(who succeeded King David A. D. 1153.) After Waltheof William was Abbat of
Mailros, A. D. 1159. after him Jocelin, A. D. 1170. In the mean time Aelredus
dies Abbat of Rieval, A. D. 1167. and Silvanus was chosen in his place. From
whence it is plain that the Abbeys of Melros and Rieval were always distinct
from their first foundation, and that Alredus was never Abbat of Melros. This
Aelredus may be called a Scottish Historian, for his Lamentation of King David
extant both in Fordon and Elphinston; but I can find nothing of his writing
relating to the Scottish Antiquities. I know he wrote a Chronicon, which Boston
of Bury (who calls him Adelredus) says was deduced from Adam to Henry I. but
if there had been any thing in it to their purpose, those Authors who cite a
great deal out of it, relating to our Saxon Kings, would never have omitted
what had been much more material to their History.

Turgott is likewise mentioned by Vossius, though a MS. Historian; Voss. de
Hist. Lat. l. 2. c. 48.
because he saw very good evidence for his writing some part of the Scottish
History. He lived says the Advocate A. D. 1098. I grant that he is frequently
cited by Fordon and Elphinston, for the Acts of Malcolm and Margaret which he
wrote; but I can find no more out of him than out of Aelred as to their remote
Antiquities; although they seem to have left out very little of what Turgott
wrote. But I wonder how the Advocate came to discover Turgott to have been
Arcshbishop of St. Andrews; p. 35.
when Dempster could have informed him that there was no Archbishop of St.
Andrews till 300 years after. Dempst. Hist. Eccles. l. 18. n. 1143.
And he might have found in Fordon, that there was no Archbishop of St. Andrews
till after James Kennedy, Scotich. l. 6. c. 48.
who was Bishop of St. Andrews, A. D. 1440. and was Nephew to James I. but
after his death Patrick Graham first obtained the Metropolitan Right to the Sea
of St. Andrews, but it was not quietly enjoyed till his Successor Will. Sheues
came into possession of his place. Leslae. l. 8. p. 304, 306. Dempst. Appar. l.
1. p. 63. Scotichron. l. 6. c. 24.


But there is in Fordon an account of the Succession of the Bishops of St.
Andrews from the time of the expulsion of the Picts; which is wholly left out
in Elphinston; and there Turgott is said to be consecrated Bishop A. D. 1109.
and to continue there seven years. St. Andrews was before called Kilremont, as
appears by Fordon, who calls them the Bishops of St. Andrews de Kilremont; Kill,
as appears by the Scottish Historians, was a place of Devotion; Kilruil was the
Church of Regulus (as Hector says St. Andrews was called in the time of the
Picts) and Kilremont, as being the Royal Seat and the principal Church, for
Remont is Mons Regis; and from hence the Clergy of this Church were called
Killedees (from which title the fiction of the ancient Culdees came, as the
Bishop of St. Asaph has truly observed. Scotich. l. 6. c. 42.
) These Killedees had the ancient Right of choosing the Bishop, and were first
excluded, as Fordon says by William Wishart, A. D. 1273. and next by William
Fraser, c. 4^.
after him by William Lamberton; upon which William Cumyng Keldeorum
Praepositus, i. e. Dean of the Church appealed to Rome, but was overruled
there. But the learned Primate of Armagh following Dempster too much, V^ler.
P^imord. p. ^59.
calls him Auminus; and yet Dempster quotes the Scotichronicon for it, where it
is plainly William Cumyng. But that the Killdees were nothing but the Dean and
Chapter of St. Andrews, not only appears by their Right of Election of the
Bishop, but by the exercise of the jurisdiction in the vacancy of the Sea,
which Fordon says was in them.

I should not so much have insisted on this mistake of the Advocate in making
Turgott Archbishop of St. Andrews if he had not so severely reflected on the
Bishop of St. Asaph for making Fordon a Monk, p. 34.
as though he did it merely for his own convenience to show him interested for
the independency of Monks and Caldees from the Bishops. I grant it was a
mistake but not designed, and a very pardonable one, since Dempster says some
thought him a Monk, Dempst. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. n. 543.
and he could not find of what condition he was; and yet he says he read him;
and Vossius makes Joh. de Fordon a Monk in King John's time, Voss. de Hist.
Lat. l. 2. c. 56.
Author of the Scotichronicon.

This Book of Fordon the Advocate says was so esteemed that there were Copies
of it in most of their Monasteries; p. 34.
and he says did agree with their ancient Annals; which I think will appear by
the precedent Discourse, not to be much to the advantage of his Cause.

And so much for the Authority of their Annals and Historians, from the
Original Druids and Bards to Fordon and Elphinston.

Having thus gone through the most material points, which I have not distinctly
answered in the following Book, there remain only some few things, which stand
in need of being farther cleared. As,

(1.) The Testimony of Eumenius in his Panegyric to Constantius, from whence
the Advocate proves that in the time of Caesar there was another Nation besides
the Picts who then inhabited Britain, p. 68.
and were a Colony of the Irish; and these must certainly have been Scots. The
question is not, whether there were not, according to Eumenius, Picts and Irish
which the Britains fought with in Caesa^'s time (just as Sidonius Apollinaris
says that Caesar conquered the Picts and Saxons in Britain, Carm. 7. v. ^0.
which is such another Prolepsis as Sirmondus observes, who makes the coming of
the Scots into Britain after the Saxons; and he was a judicious Critic and
Antiquary) but the true question is, whether Eumenius affirms that those Irish
then dwelt in Britain? Yes, says Buchanan, Buch. Rer. Scot. l. 2.
soli Britanni, are to be understood in the Genitive Case, and so these words
relate to the Picts and Irish of the British Soil. No, says the Bishop of St.
Asaph, they are to be understood in the Nominative Case; and so they set forth
the advantage in Constantius his Victory over a Roman Legion above that of
Julius Caesar, who fought only with the Britains, a rude People and accustomed
to no other Enemies but Picts and Irish, a half naked People. The words are
thus printed in the late Paris Edition, after the comparing of several MSS. by
Claudius Puteanus, and therefore more correct than the Plantin Edition. Ad hoc
Natio etiam tunc rudis, and soli Britanni Pictis modo and Hibernis assueta
hostibus, adhuc feminudis, facile Romany armis signisque cesserunt.

The design of the Orator, was to lessen the Reputation of Caesar's Victory in
comparison of that of Constantius; and to that purpose it was very material to
show, that he fought with the Britains alone, who were themselves a rude
People, and had no other Enemies but such as were as rude as themselves, the
Picts and Irish. Now to what great purpose was it for him to say that the
Britains fought with the Irish of the British Soil? Were they so much better
disciplined and so much more famous among the Romans for deeds of Arms than the
original Irish, that such an Emphasis must be laid upon that? But the Advocate
says the comparison lies in this, p. 72.
that then they had been used only to the Picts and Irish, but Constantius
overcame them when they had been long trained up in War. But if he had been
pleased to have read the next Paragraph he would have found the Orator taking
no notice of the Britains greater experience in War, but of a Roman Legion
corrupted, foreign Soldiers and Gallican Merchants drawn out of the Provinces
to strengthen Carausius and Allectus in their Rebellion; so that the Comparison
lies* between the Britains alone in Caesar's time, and the strength of a well
disciplined Roman Army in the time of Constantius. And it is to be observed,
that according to Eumenius his own manner of speaking, if he were to be,
understood in Buchanan's sense, it should have been Soli Britannici for the
British Soil. For so he has Victoria Britannica at the end of the same
Oration; and in another Britannica Trophaea. So that neither Sense nor Grammar
do favor Buchanan's Construction. p. 70.
But he says Joseph Scaliger approves Buchanan 's Construction in his Notes on
Tibullus. I have searched the place and can find no such thing; but I am afraid
he mistook his own Notes; for there Scaliger speaks about the Scoto-Brigantes,
and which is more, he says, the Scots were yet in Ireland. And because he is
so accustomed to Maxims of Law, I shall put him in mind of one; that a Witness
which a Man brings for himself, he is bound to receive against himself.

(2.) As to Claudian's Expression, Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne. he
says this is not to be understood of Ireland, p. 85.
but of a Country of Scotland of that Name, near to which the Romans had a
Camp, the remainders whereof are still discernible; and in which there are
Stones found with Roman Inscriptions designing the stations of the Legions; and
Strathern in Scotland is more subject to long Frosts than Ireland is.

This I confess is ingeniously observed. But I do not understand what the Roman
Inscriptions prove as to the Scots being in those parts of Britain; if the
question were about the Romans they would be of some use. I do not deny that
Strathern had its Name from the River Ern, and the Country might in Latin be
called Ierne from thence. But how does it appear that Claudian or the Romans
knew it by that Name? We are certain that Ierne commonly passed for Ireland
among them; and that it was then accounted the Country of the Scots; as
appears by the express Testimony of Orosius, Oros. Hist. l. 1. c. 2.
who lived in that Age. And Dempster, Dempst. Appari l. 1. c. 3.
who fixes the Scots in Britain long before, yet is so convinced by these words
of Claudian that they were in Ireland, that he supposes them driven thither by
Theodosius, and there destroyed by him. And Claudian explains himself
elsewhere, when he says, De laud. Stilich. l. 2. v. 251.
-- Totam cum Scotus Iernen
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Tethys.
Where it seems ridiculous to say, that the Scots put all Strathern into
commotion; and this Ierne had the Sea lying between it and Britain, in whose
Name Claudian speaks; and Buchanan understands this of Ireland. Buch. l. 2. p.
16.


p. 101, 103.
(3.) He urges the great improbability that the Scots should manage so long a
War, for 600 years, and not settle in Britain. But this is that which is called
begging the Question; for the dispute is how long the Scots in Britain did make
War upon the Britains? Claudian says in his time, the Scots came from Ierne,
and made the Sea foam with their Oars; Gildas says the Irish usually returned
home, Gild. Epist.
intending to come back, and the Picts then rested for a time in the
farthermost parts of the Isle. Why should not Gildas have said that the Irish
and Picts went back to the remote parts of the Island, if they both inhabited
there at that time?

If Gildas his Authority be allowed in this case, I think it is clear enough to
decide the Controversy. Gild. Epist. p. 13. Ed. Iossel.
For, (1.) Upon Maximus his withdrawing the Roman Legions and British Infantry
which never returned, he says the Britains were then first infested with two
cruel transmarine Nations, the Scots from the Southwest, and the Picts from the
North. If there had been a War of 600 years from before Julius Caesar's time,
as the Advocate says, how comes Gildas to be so extremely mistaken as to say
the first War began after Maximus his withdrawing the Roman Militia? p. 14.
(2.) He still speaks of their coming by Sea, and carrying away their
anniversary Prey beyond the Seas; and trans Maria fugaverunt, says he, of the
Roman Forces driving them back. How comes Gildas still to mention the Seas if
they then inhabited the same Island?

p. 102, 103.
But the Advocate says that by Seas the Friths are understood; and that in
their old Laws the Frith of Forth is called Mare Scotiae, the Sea of Scotland;
and the Frith of Dumbritton is called one part of the Mare Scoticum by the
English Authors; and this passage to and fro he makes to be easy, but the
other home to Ireland almost impossible with their Boats in the Irish Seas;
from whence he says, that the Bishop of St. Asaph 's Hypothesis is absurd and
incredible, but his very consistent.

To clear this we may observe, (1.) That to make these Friths to be called Seas
not improperly, he says, p. 103.
they are 40 Miles broad in some places; and so makes the passage more
difficult over them than from Ireland to Scotland; for, as Camden observes,
Camd. Brit. p. 706.
there is hardly 13 Miles distance between some part of Scotland and Ireland.
But this is to demonstrate the consistency of his own Hypothesis, and the
absurdity of the Bishop's. (2.) The Irish Writers say, Ogyg. part. 3. c. 34. p.
254.
their Curroghs or light Boats covered with Leather were very convenient for
transporting an Army, though not so proper for a Sea Fight. Adamnanus in the
Life of St. Columba describes one of them in which St. Cormac went to Sea,
Adamn. Vit. Columb. l. 2. apud Canis. To. 5. Antiq. Lection.
with all the Parts of a Ship, and with Sails and Oars, and a Capacity for
Passengers; and he says, he was out at Sea 14 Days Northward in it. Now what
absurdity or incredibility is there in it, that such Vessels should convey the
Irish forwards and backwards over so narrow a passage as that between Ireland
and those parts of Scotland which lay nearest to it? Why might not the Irish
pass those Seas as well in these as the Britains did in Caesar's time the Sea
between Gaul and Britain; for he says they gave Assistence to the Gauls, and
they had then no other kind of Ships? And Caesar himself was so far from
despising them, Caesar. de Hall. Gallic. l. 3.
that he thought them a very useful invention and made use of them himself in
Spain to transport his Soldiers. The Keel and Masts, he says, were made of
the lightest Wood, De Bell. Civ. l. 1.
and the Bodies of them of Wicker, covered over with Leather; which he had
learnt from the Britains. Lucan calls them little Ships, and not a miserable
little kind of shapeless Boats, as the Advocate does. p. 101.
Primum cana foelix madefacto vimine, Lucan. l. 4.
parvam
Texitur in Puppim, caesoque induta juvenco, etc.
and in these he says the Britains were wont to pass the Ocean. -- fusoque
Britannus
Navigat Oceano. --
In the old MSS. Glossaries in the Margin of Josselin's Gildas, Curuca is
rendered by Navis, and not a little shapeless Boat. And Solinus expressly says
(even in the place quoted by him) that it was common to pass between Ireland
and Britain with these Curroghs. Solin. c. 35.
And such kind of Vessels covered with Leather were not only used by the
Britains and Irish, but by the Aethiopians, Egyptians, Sabeans, Romans, and
Spaniards; as might be showed from the Testimonies of Agatharchides, Strabo,
Virgil, Pliny and others. How comes it then to be almost impossible for the
Irish to pass the Seas in such Vessels? And wherein lies the Absurdity and
Incredibility of the Bishop's Hypothesis, when he makes them to cross but 13
Miles from Ireland to Britain in these Curroghs, and the Advocate allows the
Friths over which they were to pass to be 40 Miles broad in some places? And
how could they be secure they should not be driven into the broadest places? If
these Vessels then could convey them safely over the Friths, why not as well
from Ireland to the nearest parts of Scotland?

But I have another Argument from Gildas that the Seas cannot be understood of
the two Friths, viz. that Gildas says, Gild. Epist. p. 13.2.
when the Roman Legion first defeated the Picts and the Scots, they commanded a
Wall to be built between the two Seas to hinder their Incursion: which is
confirmed by Bid, Bed. l. 1. c. 12.
who says this Wall began at Penneltun not far from Abercorny and ended at
Alcluith, and was designed to keep out their Enemies. Now I desire to know to
what purpose this Wall was built between the two Friths to keep out the Scots
and Picts, if their Custom was, as the Advocate supposes, to cross over the
two Friths and to land on this side the Wall? Did the Romans and Britains so
little understand the Way of their Enemies coming, to put themselves to so much
pains and trouble for no purpose at all? And Buchanan thinks the last Stone
Wall made by the Romans for the Security of the Britains, Buch. p. 40.2.
mentioned by Gildas and Bid, Gild. p. 15. Bed. l. 1. c. 12.
was made in the same place where he thinks Severus his Wall stood before. And
it had been madness to erect a Stone Wall there to keep out the Scots and
Picts, if they came out of Scotland over the two Friths and landed where the
Wall could do the Britains no Service. But Gildas and Bid say they attempted
the Wall and forced themselves a passage over it; irrumpunt terminos says
Bid; and with their Iron hooks drew the Britains from the Wall, says Gildas.
What need all this if they came over the Friths, and so left the Wall between
the two Friths behind them? But from hence it is very plain, that Gildas knew
nothing of their passing the Friths and therefore must be understood of their
crossing the Seas from Ireland to Scotland, and there joining with the Picts,
and so marching toward the Wall between the two Friths in order to their
passing into the Roman Province. And it is observable that Gildas says after
the making the second Wall, the Scots and Picts upon the Romans withdrawing
grew more confident and took possession of the Northern part of the Island as
far as the Wall, pro indigenis, in the Place of the Natives; which shows that
he looked on them as late comers, and then newly entered into possession there.

The last thing I shall take notice of is concerning the early Conversion of
the Scottish Nation to the Christian Faith. And here I am particularly concerned
to answer his Arguments, Chapter 2. p. 52, 53.
since in the following Book I have rejected the Tradition of the Scots
conversion under King Donald, and assert Palladius to have been sent to the
original Scots in Ireland. p. 112.
But the Advocate thinks it so clear that they were converted before A. D. 503.
that from thence he concludes that they were settled in Scotland before that
time. And it were a piece of very ill Nature to deny this Conclusion, if the
Premises be well proved.

(1.) As to the Conversion under King Donald; he shows,

1. That it is very probable the British Christians being persecuted by the
Roman Emperors in the Southern parts, p. 113.
would go into the Northern and propagate their Religion there. But this proves
only the probability of the Conversion of the Northern Britains and not of the
Scots.

p. 114.
2. He says, the Druids were prepared to receive Christianity, and so would be
easy to be converted themselves and ready to convert the People. He speaks
soon after of a double Conversion of their Nation from Paganism and
Pelagianism. p. 117.
Methinks these words do not argue the latter Conversion to have been such, as
to have left no Dregs behind it. For how came the Druids natural improvements
to facilitate their Conversion more than the Philosophers at Athens or Rome?
And the Irish Antiquaries say the Druids there were the great opposers of the
Gospel. Ogyg. p. 203.
But still these Druids might be among the Britains and not the Scots.

p. 118.
3. He says, That Donald was their first Christian King, A. D. 203. seems most
fully proved. Not by any thing yet said. But what then is the full Proof? In
short it is this. It was a matter of Fact. Very true; Matters of Fact must be
proved by Witnesses. True again. But who are these Witnesses? Even the
Historians of their Country, and the Annals of their Monasteries. And so we
are thrown back upon the debate of their Authority, which I have gone through
already. Let it therefore rest upon their Credibility; only remembering that no
such King as Donald does appear in their most ancient Genealogies.

p. 115.
4. He affirms, That Baronius allows their Conversion by Pope Victor, and he
made Ecclesiastic History more his Task than the Bishop of St. Asaph, and was
more disinterested. It is possible, the Bishop of St. Asaph may have considered
Ecclesiastic History with as much Care as Baronius himself; but I dare say,
with greater judgment and impartiality. And of all things I cannot but wonder
at the Advocate's looking on Baronius as more disinterested, when the
Conversion from a Pope was in question. Which shows him to be such a stranger
to Baronius, that one would think he had never looked into him. For Dempster is
displeased with Baronius, Dempst. Appar. l. 1. c. 6.
as one injurious to their Nation, as to this first Conversion, saying that
there were no Christians in Scotland before Palladius but such as fled thither
out of this part of Britain because of persecution. And Baronius does wonder
that such a Conversion should be omitted not only by Bid but by Marianus
Scotus. Bar. A. D. 429. n. 2.


5. The Magdeburgian Centuries, he says, p. 117.
agree with Baronius; and these are the Standards of Ecclesiastic History to
the Professors of both Religions. He had as good have said they were the
Hercules Pillars and there is no passage beyond them. But no learned
Professors of either Religion allow these to be Standards. How many Errors in
Baronius have been discovered by the learned Antiquaries of his own Communion?
What Complaints have been made of his partiality to the Court of Rome, not
only by the Sorbonists but by the King's Advocates in France? And as to the
Magdeburgians, we commend them for their noble attempt and great diligence and
industry; but matters of Ecclesiastic Antiquity are extremely improved since
that time. More ancient Authors having been published out of MSS. and better
Editions by comparing the Authors before printed with MSS. and many
counterfeit Authors discovered and far greater Enquiries have been made into
all parts of Ecclesiastic Antiquities; so that after so many new discoveries
to make these the Standards, were almost as absurd as to make Ptolemy the
Standard for modern Geography. We do not disparage what he has done, when we
say many things have been found out since his time.

(2.) As to the mission of Palladius into Scotland, p. 114.
the Advocate insists on these three things, 1. That Bid affirms that he was
sent to the Scots in Britain. 2. That there is no probability in the
Circumstances of his being sent into Ireland. p. 119.
3. That Dr. Hammond yields that the Scots were converted before Celestine 's
time; p. 122.
and therefore it is more probable that Palladius was sent Bishop to them.

To these particulars I shall give a distinct Answer.

(1.) To Bede's Testimony, he affirms, l. 1. c. 13.
that in the eighth of Theodosius the younger, Palladius was sent by Celestine
the first Bishop to the Scots believing in Christ. Wherein Bid only applies
Prosper's Words to the eighth of Theodosius, which he had placed under Bassus
and Antiochus Consuls; but he does not determine whether these Scots were in
Ireland or in Britain. But the Advocate says, all that which Bid says before
and after concerning the Scots relates to the Scots in Britain, and therefore
these Words are so to be understood. Whereas Bid in the very beginning
declares, that Ireland was the proper Country of the Scots; l. 1. c. 1.
and that Dumbritton Frith did anciently separate the Picts and the Britains;
but the Scots coming afterward to the Northern part of that Frith, there
settled themselves. Which Words do evidently prove that Bid did not look on the
Scots as ancient Inhabitants there; for then he would have said that the Frith
did antiquitus gentem Britonum a Scotis secernere; but he never mentions the
Scots but the Picts as the ancient Inhabitants on the Northern part of the
Frith. But, says the Advocate, p. 60.
Bid 's Title of his Chapter is of the ancient Inhabitants of Britain, and he
mentions the Scots among them. Very true; but shall not Bid explain himself
whom he means by the ancient Inhabitants, viz. the Britains and Picts? For, by
the Advocate's reasoning the Saxons will be proved to have been in Britain
before Julius Caesar, as well as the Scots; for they make up one of the five
Nations spoken of in that first Chapter. And so Bid does not only settle the
Scots and the Picts in this Country, by his first Chapter, but the English
too. And it is an extraordinary sagacity that can discover this Chapter in
Bid, p. 65.
to be clear to a Demonstration that he makes the Scots to be ancient
Inhabitants in Britain; whereas to my dull apprehension Bid is clear the other
Way.

p. 146.
But the Advocate proceeds to show, that the Name of Scots does originally
belong to the Scots in Britain, and only by way of communication to those in
Ireland. This were indeed to the purpose if it were proved. And there ought to
be the more care in doing it, since it is so new and singular an opinion. For
even Buchanan says that the Irish were at first called Scots; Buch. l. 2. p.
16.
and from thence they passed into Albany; p. 18.2.
and that by the Name Scots their coming from the Irish is declared. Joh. Major
says, Major. Hist. Scot. l. 1. c. 9.
that Scotia among their Ancestors was the common Name for Ireland. And if
their ancient Annals may be believed, the Name of Scot came from Scota the Wife
of Gathelus, whose Posterity went first into Ireland, and then carried the Name
into Scotland. In Fordon and Elphinston there is another Scota mentioned, as a
Leader of the first Colony into Ireland, who gave the Name to that Country of
Scotia; and Joh. Major says She was the Mother of Hiber. But whichsoever of
these stands, unless the Advocate will at last give up the Cause of their
Ancient Annals, which he has contended so warmly for, he must renounce this
opinion of his, that the Name of Scots does originally belong to the Albian
Scots, and only by way of communication to the Irish; so that there is no need
to produce the plain Testimonies of Orosius, Bid and Isidore, Oros. l. 1. c.
2. Bed. l. 1. c. 1. Isidor. Orig. l. 14. c. 6.
which make Ireland the proper Country of the Scots. But it is a wonderful
subtilty from hence to infer, p. 151.
as the Advocate does, as if it might have been justly doubted, and were not
true in all senses. Does he mean proper or improper senses? Their words are
plain that Ireland in a strict and proper sense was the Country of the Scots,
i. e. the Patria Originis, though the other might afterward, be Patria
incolatus and Domicilii; as the Advocate himself does distinguish; p. 152.
but that which follows from hence is, that if the Scots came originally from
Ireland, then the Name of Scots does not originally belong to the Scots in
Britain but to those in Ireland, unless he can show that the Reason of the Name
does agree to them only upon their removal into Britain. As; to take his own
instance; no one will question that the Colony of Virginia are called English,
because the Inhabitants of the Country from whence they came are so called.
But were not the Irish called Scots before they went into Scotland? If not,
that could not be proprie Scotorum Patria, as Orosius and Bid and Isidore
affirm; as England could not be said to be the proper Country of the English
unless the Inhabitants were called English; and the Colony of Virginia received
its denomination of being English because they came from hence. Unless
therefore the Advocate be pleased to show, that the Name of Scots does so
belong to the Irish upon their remove into Britain that it could not agree to
them in Ireland it will be impossible for him to make out, that the Name of
Scots does originally belong to the Irish in Britain, and only by way of
communication to those in Ireland. I have already showed that Jos. Scaliger
does assign such a Reason of the Name of Scoti as agrees only to those who
came over upon Expeditions; but I believe the Scots will take it far better to
receive their Name from the Irish Scots, than to have had the original Name
given them on such an Account.

(2.) As to the Circumstances of Palladius his Mission the main difficulty
objected, p. 119.
is from St. Patrick's being sent so soon after into Ireland; which needed not
have been if Palladius were sent before thither and not rather into Scotland,
whither Bale says he went and died not, A. D. 431. but 434. This is the force
of what the Advocate says upon this matter. But the Bishop of St. Asaph had
proved from Prosper, that Palladius was sent to the Scots in Ireland; because
he distinguishes the two Islands, the one he calls Roman, i. e. Britain, the
other barbarous where the Scots lived, to whom Palladius was sent; which could
be no other than Ireland. To which the Advocate answers, p. 116.
that the Northern part of Britain was by Tacitus and Bid said to be reduced
into an Island by the Roman Wall from Sea to Sea; and Bid in other places
calls the Scots Islanders. Tacitus indeed says, that by Agricola's
Fortifications between the two Friths, the Britains were driven as into another
Island; but this is a very different way of speaking from that of Prosper, who
makes a distinction between two proper Islands. And Prosper could not be
ignorant that Festus Avienus not long before, viz. in the time of Theodosius
had distinguished the two Islands, the one inhabited by the Hiberni, and the
other he calls Insula Albionum, which takes in all that we now call Britain.
But according to the old Geographers, Ireland was accounted one of the British
Islands; as appears by the Testimonies of Pliny, Apuleius, Ptolemy, Diodorus
Siculus and Marcianus Heracleota, which have been produced by others, Vsser.
Primord. p. 722, etc. War. Antiq. Hib. c. 1.
and need not to be repeated here. But no one ever mentioned Scotland as a
distinct Island, and therefore it is unreasonable to understand Prosper in that
Sense. Bid mentions the Insulani in the Chapter referred to; Bed. l. 1. c. 12.
but nothing can be plainer, than that he speaks of the Britains on this side
the Wall; who raised up the Wall of Turf between the two Friths for their own
security against their Enemies beyond the Wall. In the other place of Bid, l.
4. c. 26.
the Insulani are to be understood of those of Ireland, as Bede clearly
expresses himself, misso in Hiberniam exercitu. But the ingenious Advocate
has a fetch beyond this, for he says that Bid by Ireland meant Scotland,
which he sets himself to prove from this very passage. For, says he, p. 153.
the same thing that is first said to be done in Hibernia is afterward said to
be done in Scotia. And might it not be so if Ireland were then called Scotia,
as appears by the former Testimonies? But that Bid could not mean any other
than Ireland appears from hence, that he says, the Nation which Egfred invaded
had been always kind to the English; and the Irish Annals give an account of
the very Place and Time of Egfred's landing in Ireland and the Captives he
carried away from thence. Ogyg. p. 230.
l. 1. c. 34.
But Bid elsewhere says the Scots in Britain had been great Enemies to them,
as appeared by the Battle at Degsastan, where the whole Army of the Scots was
almost cut off by Edilfredus King of Northumberland, and their King Edan fled;
from which time none of the Kings of Scotland durst appear in the Field against
the English. Which argues no great kindness between them; but Bid says, that
these had been Nationi Anglorum gens super amicissima; and therefore his Words
must relate to the Scots in Ireland.

But does not Bid say, p. 155.
that Columbanus came from Ireland to Hy and so to Britain; and afterward that
Colman returned to Scotland, i. e. to Hy from whence Columba came; therefore
Scotland was called Ireland; or rather, Ireland was called Scotia; which is so
clear in Bid, that I wonder that any that carefully read him can dispute it.
He says indeed, that the Scots had a Kingdom in Britain, but where he speaks
of the Religion of the Scots he then means the Scots of Ireland; as will easily
appear by the series of his Discourse. When he speaks of Laurentius his care
not only of the Britains but of the Scots too, l. 2. c. 4.
he explains himself to mean those who lived in Ireland, an Island near to
Britain. Columba, he says, l. 3. c. 4.
came from Ireland to convert the Northern Picts, and obtained from their King
the Island Hy, where he founded his Monastery, c. 3.
which he says was the chief of all the Northern Scots, not of those in
Scotland but in Ireland, For in the same Chapter he distinguished the Scots in
the Southern parts of Ireland, from those in the Northern; the former following
the Roman Custom of Easter, and the Northern refusing it. From these Aidanus
came, the first Scottish Bishop who settled among the English, c. 3, 5.
being sent for by King Oswald. c. 19.
Furseus, says he afterward, came from Ireland, being of the most noble Race
of the Scots; and there he mentions the Scots of his own Nation, and says he
had preached a great while in Scotia before he came into England; but he never
takes notice, after his coming over, of his being any where, but among the
Britains before he went to the East Angles. c. 25.
After Aidan's death Finan came from the same Scots, who persisted in the old
way of the keeping Easter; after Finan Colman succeeded, who was missus a
Scotia, who maintained the same practice; and afterward he returned home, c.
26.
in Scotiam regressus est; but what he means by it Bid presently informs us,
when he says that Tuda succeeded who had been brought up among the Southern
Scots, i. e. in the Southern parts of Ireland. Tuda died of the Plague, which
Bid says passed into Ireland, c. 27.
whither many English went in the time of Finan and Colman, who were all kindly
received by the Scots. l. 4. c. 4.
When Colman returned Bid, says he went first to Hy, then to an Island on the
West of Ireland; but not a word of the Northern parts of Britain. Afterward he
shows how the greatest part of the Scots in Ireland were brought to
compliance in the point of keeping Easter by means of Adamnanus, l. 5. c. 16.
who endeavored to reduce those of Hy but could not; but upon Egbert's coming
to them from Ireland, c. 13.
the Scottish Monks of the Island Hy or Jona yielded, when Duumchadus was Abbat
there. And now let any indifferent Reader judge whether by Scotia Bid
understands the Northern parts of Britain or Ireland.

p. 156.
But after all, does not Bid say, that the Island Hy did belong to Britain as
a part of it? And what then follows? Does not Bid in the same place say it was
given by the Picts not by the Scots to the Scottish Monks who came from Ireland?
So that upon the whole matter, that which Bid understands by Scotia seems to
be Ireland, although he affirms the Scots to have settled in the Northern parts
of Britain, and to have set up a Kingdom there.

From whence there appears no probability of Palladius's being sent to the
Scots in Britain; Bid saying nothing of their Conversion, when he so
punctually sets down the Conversion of the South Picts by Ninias a British
Bishop and of the Northern Picts by Columba, l. 3. c. 4.
a Scottish or Irish Presbyter.

But if Palladius were sent to the Scots in Ireland, how came St. Patrick to be
sent so soon after him? To this the Bishop of St. Asaph answers, that Palladius
might die so soon after his Mission that Pope Celestine might have time enough
to send St. Patrick before his own death. And this he makes out by laying the
several circumstances of the Story together, as they are reported by Authors,
which the Advocate calls a laborious Hypothesis, p. 120, 122.
and elaborate contrivance to divert all the unanswerable Authorities proving
that Palladius was sent to them in Scotland, A. D. 431. What those unanswerable
Authorities are, which prove Palladius sent to the Scots in Britain I cannot
find. And for all that I see by this Answer, the only fault of the Bishop's
Hypothesis is, that it is too exact, and does too much clear the appearance of
contradiction between the two Missions.

(3.) As to Dr. Hammond's Testimony (who is deservedly called by the Advocate a
learned and Episcopal English Divine) it is very easily answered. For, p. 122.
Vidication of the Dissertation about Episcopacy, p. 160, etc.
1. He looks on the whole Story of the Scots Conversionfs as very uncertainly
set down by Authors. 2. He says, that Bozius applies the Conversion under
Victor to Ireland then called Scotia; for which he quotes Bid. 3. That neither
Marianus Scotus nor Bid do take the least notice of it. 4. That if Prosper's
Words be understood of the Scots in Britain, yet they do not prove the thing
designed by his Adversaries, viz. that the Churches there were governed by
Presbyters without Bishops; for Prosper supposes that they remained barbarous
still, and therefore the Plantation was very imperfect, and could not be
understood of any formed Churches. But the Advocate very wisely conceals one
passage which overthrows his Hypothesis, viz. that they could not be supposed
to receive the first Rudiments of their Conversion from Rome, viz. under Pope
Victor, since the Scots joined with the Britains in rejecting the Roman
Customs. From whence we see that Dr. Hammond was far from being of the
Advocate's mind in this matter; and what he proposes as to some Rudiments of
Christianity in Scotland before Palladius his coming thither, was only from an
uncertain Tradition, and for reconciling the seeming differences between Bid
and Prosper; or rather for reconciling Prosper to himself.

p. 135.
But I remember the Advocate's observation in the case of their Predecessour's
Apology against Edward I. viz. that they designed, as most Pleaders do, to gain
their Point at any rate; and how far this eloquent Advocate has made good this
observation through his Discourse I leave the Reader to determine.

Having thus gone through all the material parts of the Advocate's Book, I
shall conclude with a serious Protestation that no Pique or Animosity led me to
this Undertaking, no ill Will to the Scottish Nation, much less to the Royal
Line, (which I do believe has the Advantage in point of Antiquity above any
other in Europe, and as far as we know, in the World.) But I thought it
necessary for me to enquire more strictly into this Defense of such pretended
Antiquities; both because I owed so much service to so worthy and excellent a
Friend as the Bishop of St. Asaph, and because if the Advocate's Arguments
would hold good they would overthrow several things I had asserted in the
following Book; and withal I was willing to let the learned Nobility and
Gentry of that Nation see how much they have been imposed upon by Hector
Boethius and his followers; and that the true Honor and Wisdom of their
Nation is not concerned in defending such Antiquities, which are universally
disesteemed among all judicious and inquisitive Men. And it would far better
become Persons of so much Ingenuity and Sagacity, to follow the Examples of
other European Nations, in rejecting the Romantic Fables of the Monkish times,
and at last to settle their Antiquities on firm and solid Foundations.

As to the following Book, it comes forth as a Specimen of a greater Design (if
God gives me Life and Opportunity) which is to clear the most important
Difficulties of Ecclesiastical History. And because I look on a General
Church History, as too heavy a Burden to be undergone by any Man, when he is
fit for it by Age and Consideration, I have therefore thought it the better way
to undertake such particular Parts of it which may be most useful, and I have
now begun with these Antiquities of the British Churches; which may be followed
by others as I see occasion. But I hope none will have just cause to complain
that I have not used diligence or faithfulness enough in this present Work, or
that I have set up Fancies and Chimaera's of my own instead of the true
Antiquities of the British Churches. I have neither neglected nor transcribed
those who have written before me; and if in some things I differ from them; it
was not out of the Humor of opposing any great Names, but because I intended
not to deliver other Men's judgments, but my own.

ERRATA.
In the Preface:
PAge 6. line 35. for but he did it read for doing it. p. 23. l. 31. for And
r. Surely. p. 36. l. 32. for but r. yet. p. 38. l. 10. for Cladroe r. Cadroe.
p. 41. l. 39. after had insert made. p. 44. l. 33. for a Generation r. three
Generations, and for overdoe r. not do. p. 61. l. 37. for. foelix r. Salix.

In the Book:
PAge 2. l. 10. dele and. p. 25. l. 19. for under floo r. understood. p. 59. l.
20. for with r. and. p. 70. for Dioclesian r. Diocletian, and so throughout. p.
115. l. 14. for Alexander r. Alexander. p. 137. l. 7. for. put, p. 179. l. 11.
for Council r. Church. p. 194. l. 11. for Frecalphus r. Freculphus. p. 209. l.
39. instead of but r. whereas. p. 241. l. 7, 8. dele But now the Britains were.
p. 256. l. 26. for Edecus r. Ederus. p. 266. l. 35. for Egypt r. Europe. p.
276. l. 37. for Erimthon r. Erimhon. p. 281. l. 23. for Eanus r. Edanus. p.
285. l. 18. for Authemius r. Anthemius. p. 306. l. 29. Scicambri r. Sicambri.
330. l. 12. for when r. whom. p. 338. l. 8. for Island r. Iseland.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. Of the first planting a Christian Church in Britain by S. Paul.
NO Christian Church planted in Britain during the Reign of Tiberius, Page 2.
Gildas his Words misunderstood, p. 4. The Tradition concerning Joseph of
Arimathea and his Brethren coming to Glassenbury at large examined, p. 6. The
pretended Testimonies of British Writers disproved, p. 8. St. Patrick's Epistle
a Forgery, p. 14. Of the Saxon Charters, especially the large one of King Ina.
p. 17. The Antiquity of Seals in England, p. 19. Ingulphus his Testimony
explained, p. 20. All the Saxon Charters suspicious till the end of the seventh
Century, p. 18, 22. The occasion of this Tradition from an old British Church
there, p. 10, 26, 28. The Circumstances about Joseph of Arimathea and Arviragus
very improbale, p. 29. Sir H. Spelman vindicated, p. 30. The state of the Roman
Province about that time, p. 31. No such King as Arviragus then, p. 32. Not the
same with Caractacus, p. 34. A Christian Church proved to be planted here in
the Apostles times, p. 35. The authentic Testimonies of Eusebius, Theodoret,
Clemens Romanus to that purpose, p. 36. St. Paul in probability the first
Founder of a Church here, p. 38. The Time and Opportunity he had for it after
his Release, p. 39. Of Pomponia Graecina and Claudea Rufina Christians at Rome,
and their influence on his coming hither, p. 43. St. Peter and St. Paul
compared as to their Preaching here, and the far greater probability of St.
Paul's, p. 45.
CHAP. II. Of the Succession of the British Churches to the first Council of
Nice.
The Testimony of Tertullian concerning them cleared, p. 50. The National
Conversion of the Scots under King Donald fabulous. p. 51. Of Dempster's old
Annals, p. 52. Prosper speaks not of the Scots in Britain, p. 53. The Testimony
of Severus Sulpicius examined, p. 55. Several Testimonies of Origin concerning
the British Churches in his time, p. 57. The different Traditions about King
Lucius, p. 58. The state of the Roman Province here overthrows his being King
over all Britain, p. 60. Great probability there was such a King in some part
of Britain, and then converted to Christianity, p. 62. A Conjecture proposed in
what Part of Britain he reigned, p. 63. The most probable means of his
Conversion, and the Story cleared from Monkish Fables, p. 66. Of Dioclesian's
Persecution in Britain, and the stopping of it by means of Constantius, p. 70.
The flourishing of the British Churches under Constantine, p. 74. The Reason of
three Bishops of Britain only present in the Council of Arles, p. 75. Of the
great Antiquity of Episcopal Government here, p. 77. Of Geffrey's Flamines and
Archiflamines how far agreeable to the Roman Constitution, p. 78. Maximinus his
Pagan Hierarchy in imitation of the Christian, p. 81. The Canons of the Council
of Arles not sent to the Pope to confirm, but to publish them, p. 83.
CHAP. III. Of the Succession of the British Churches from the Council of Nice
to the Council of Ariminum.
Great Probabilities that the British Bishops were present in the Council of
Nice, p. 89. The Testimonies of Constantine's being born in Britain cleared, p.
90. The particular Canons of that Council explained, p. 92. Especially those
relating to the Government of Churches, p. 95. How far the right of Election
was devolved to the Bishops. p. 96. Of the Authority of Provincial Synods there
settled, p. 99. Particular Exceptions as to the Bishops of Alexandria, Rome and
Antioch from ancient Custom. p. 101. They had then a Patriarchal Power within
certain Bounds, p. 103. No Metropolitans under the Bishops of Rome and
Alexandria. p. 104. The just Rights of the British Churches cleared. p. 108. No
evidence that they were under the Roman Patriarchate, p. 110. The Cyprian
Privilege vindicated from all late Exceptions, p. 106. The Patriarchal Rights
examined; and from them the Pope's Patriarchal Power over the Western Churches,
at large disputed and overthrown, p. 111. Pope Leo's Arguments against the
Patriarch of Constantinople held for the Western Churches against him, p. 132.
The British Bishops present in the Council of Sardica with those of Gaul, p.
135. What Authority granted by them to the Bishop of Rome, and how far it
extends p. 138.
CHAP. IV. Of the Faith and Service of the British Churches.
The Faith of the British Churches enquired into, p. 146. The charge of
Arianism considered, ibid. The true state of the Arian Controversy from the
Council of Nice to that of Ariminum; and some late Mistakes rectified, p. 147.
Of several Arian Councils before that of Ariminum, p. 164. The British Churches
cleared from Arianism after it, p. 176. The Number and Poverty of the British
Bishops there present, ibid. Of the ancient endowment of Churches before
Constantine, p. 177. The Privileges granted to Churches by him, p. 178. The
charge of Pelagianism considered, p. 180. Pelagius and Caelestius both born in
these Islands, p. 181. When Aremorica first called Britain, ibid. What sort of
Monk Pelagius was, p. 185. No probability of his returning to Britain, p. 186.
Of Agricola and others spreading the Pelagian Doctrine in the British Churches,
p. 187. Germanus and Lupus sent by a Council of Gallican Bishops hither to stop
it, p. 189. The Testimony of Prosper concerning their being sent by Caelestine
considered, p. 192. Of Fastidius a British Bishop, p. 194. London the chief
Metropolis in the Roman Government, p. 195. Of Faustus originally a Britain but
a Bishop in Gaul, and the great esteem he had there, p. 197. Of the
Semipelagians and Praedestinatians, p. 199. Of the Schools of Learning set up
here by the means of Germanus and Lupus, p. 202. Dubricius and Iltutus the
Disciples of St. German, and of their Schools, p. 203. Of the Monastery of
Banchor, and the ancient Western Monasteries, and their difference as to
Learning from the Benedictine Institution, p. 205. Of Gildas his Iren, whether
an University in Britain, p. 207. Of the Schools of Learning in the Roman
Cities, chiefly at Rome, Alexandria and Constantinople, and the Professors of
Arts and Sciences, and the public Libraries there, p. 210. Of the Schools of
Learning in the Provinces, and the Constitution of Gratian to that purpose
extending to Britain. p. 215. Of the Public Service of the British Churches;
the Gallican Offices introduced by St. German, p. 216. The Nature of them at
large explained, and their difference from the Roman Offices, both as to the
Morning and Communion Service, p. 217. The Conformity of the Liturgy of the
Church of England to the ancient British Offices, and not derived from the
Church of Rome, as our Dissenters affirm, p. 232.
CHAP. V. Of the Declension of the British Churches.
Britain never totally subdued by the Romans, p. 239. That was the occasion of
the Miseries of the Britains in the Province by the Incursions from beyond the
Wall, p. 240. Of the Picts and Scots their mortal Enemies, p. 242. The true
original of the Picts from Scandinavia, p. 246. That Name given to the new
Colonies, not to the old Inhabitants, p. 241. The Scottish Antiquities enquired
into, p. 248. Fordon's Account of them compared with that of Hector Boethius
and Buchanan, p. 250. Of Veremundus, Cornelius Hibernicus and their ancient
Annals, p. 255. The Modern Pleas for their Antiquities considered, p. 261, 282.
An Account of the Antiquities of Ireland, and of the Authority of their
Traditions and Annals compared with Geffrey's British Antiquities in point of
Credibility, p. 266. A true Account of the fabulous Antiquities of the Northern
Nations, p. 277. The first coming of the Scots into Britain according to the
Irish Writers, p. 280. The first Cause of the Declension of the British
Churches was the laying them open to the Fury of the Scots and Picts, p. 286.
Of Maximus his withdrawing the Roman Forces, and the Emperors sending Numbers
of Picts to draw them back, p. 288. The miserable Condition of the Britains
thus forsaken, and Supplies sent them for a time and then taken away, p. 293.
Of the Walls built for their security, and the Roman Legions there placed, p.
297. The great degeneracy of Manners among the Britains, p. 302. Of intestine
Divisions and calling in foreign assistence, p. 304. Of the Saxons coming, who
they were, and whence they came, p. 305. Bede's Account examined and reconciled
with the circumstances of those times, p. 313. Of the Reasons of Vortigern's
calling in the Saxons, p. 319. Of the dissatisfaction of the Britains upon
their coming, and Vortigern's League with them, p. 320. Of the Valor of
Vortimer and Aurelius Ambrosius against the Saxons, p. 322. The different
Account of the Battles between the Britains and Saxons among our Historians, p.
325. The sad condition of the British Churches at that time, ibid. The
imperfect Account given by the British History, p. 332. Of King Arthur's story
and success, p. 334. Of Persons in greatest Reputation then in the British
Churches, and particularly of St. David, p. 346. Of the Britains passing over
to Aremorica, and the beginning of that Colony, p. 351. Gildas there writes his
Epistle; the scope and design of it, p. 354. The British Kings he writes to, p.
355. The Independency of the British Churches proved from their carriage
toward Augustine the Monk, p. 356. The particulars of that Story cleared, And
the whole concluded. p. 357. (...)
A Catalogue of Books published by the Reverend EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, D. D.
Dean of St. Paul's, and sold by Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
A Rational account of the Grounds of the Protestant Religion; being a
Vindication of the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury's Relation of a Conference,
etc. from the pretended Answer of T. C. wherein the true Grounds of Faith are
cleared, and the false discovered; the Church of England vindicated from the
imputation of Schism, and the most important particular Controversies between
us and those of the Church of Rome thoroughly examined; the second Edition:
Folio.

Sermons preached upon several occasions, with a Discourse annexed concerning
the true reasons of the Sufferings of Christ, wherein Crellius his Answer to
Grotius is considered: Folio.

Origines Britannicae, or the Antiquities of the British Churches, with a
Preface concerning some pretended Antiquities relating to Britain, in
vindication of the Bishop of St. Asaph: Folio.

Irenicum, A weapon Salve for the Churches Wounds: Quarto.

Origines Sacrae, or a Rational account of the Grounds of Christian Faith, as
to the Truth and Divine authority of the Scriptures and matters therein
contained: Quarto.

The Unreasonableness of Separation, or an impartial account of the History,
Nature and Pleas of the present Separation from the Communion of the Church of
England; to which several late Letters are annexed of eminent Protestant
Divines abroad concerning the Nature of our Differences, and the way to compose
them: Quarto.

A Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it, in answer to some Papers of a
revolted Protestant, wherein a particular account is given of the Fanaticism
and Divisions of that Church: Octavo.

An Answer to several late Treatises occasioned by a Book entitled, A
Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of Rome, and the
hazard of Salvation in the Communion of it; the first Part: Octavo.

A second Discourse in vindication of the Protestant Grounds of Faith, against
the Pretense of Infallibility in the Roman Church, in answer to the Guide in
Controversy, by R. H. Protestancy without Principles, and Reason, and
Religion; or the certain Rule of Faith, by E. W. with a particular enquiry into
the Miracles of the Roman Church: Octavo.

An Answer to Mr. Cressy's Epistle apologetical to a Person of Honor, touching
his Vindication of Dr. Stilling fleet: Octavo.

A Defense of the Discourse concerning the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome, in answer to a Book entitled Catholics no Idolaters: Octavo.

Several Conferences between a Romish Priest, a Fanatic Chaplain, and a Divine
of the Church of England; being a full Answer to the late Dialogues of T. G.
Octavo.

The grand Question concerning the Bishops Right to vote in Parliament in Cases
capital stated and argued, from the Parliament Rolls and the History of former
times; with an Enquiry into their Peerage, and the three Estates in Parliament:
Octavo.

Sermons preached upon several Occasions by Edward Stillingfleet, D. D. Dean of
St. Paul's, not yet collected into a Volume. THE Reformation justified in a
Sermon preached at Guild Hall Chapel, Sept. 21. 1673. before the Lord Mayor,
etc. upon Acts XXIV. 14. A Sermon preached Nov. 5. 1673. at St. Margaret's
Westminster, upon Matt. VII. 15, 16. A Sermon preached before the King at
Whitehall, Feb. 24. 1674/3. upon Heb. III. 13. A Sermon preached on the
Fast Day, Nov. 13. 1678. at St. Margarets Westminster, before the Honorable
House of Commons, upon 1 Samuel XII. 24, 25. A Sermon preached before the King at
White Hall, March 7. 1678/9. upon Matt. X. 16. The Mischief of Separation, a
Sermon preached at Guild Hall Chapel, May 11. 1680. before the Lord Mayor, etc.
upon Phil. III. 16. Protestant Charity, a Sermon preached at S. Sepulchre's
Church on Tuesday in Easter Week, 1681. before the Lord Mayor, etc. upon Galat.
VI. 9. Of the nature of Superstition, a Sermon preached at St. Dunstan's West,
March 31. 1682. upon Colos. II. 23. A Sermon preached before the King, Feb. 15.
1683/4. upon Job XXIII. 15. A Sermon preached at a public Ordination at St.
Peter's Cornhill, March 15. 1684/5 upon 1 Timothy V. 22.


THE Antiquities of Nottinghamshire extracted out of Records, Original
Evidences, Leiger Books, and other Manuscripts and authentic Authorities,
beautified with Maps, Prospects and Portraictures; by Robert Thoroton, Dr. of
Physic: Folio.

THE ANTIQUITIES OF THE British-Churches.
CHAP. I. Of the first Planting a Christian Church in Britain by St. Paul.
NO Christian Church planted in Britain, during the Reign of Tiberius.

Gildas his Words mis-understood.

The Tradition concerning Joseph of Arimathea and his Brethren coming to
Glassenbury, at large examined.

No Footsteps of it in the British times.

The pretended Testimonies of British Writers disproved.

St. Patrick's Epistle, a Forgery.

Of the Saxon Charters, especially the large one of King Ina.

The Antiquity of Seals in England.

Ingulphus his Testimony explained.

All the Saxon Charters suspicious, till the end of the seventh Century.

The occasion of this Tradition, from an old British Church there.

The Circumstances about Joseph of Arimathea and Arviragus very improbable.

Sr. Henry Spelman vindicated.

The State of the Roman Province in Britain about that time.

No such King as Arviragus then.

Not the same with Caractacus.

A Christian Church proved to be Planted here in the Apostles times.

The Authentic Testimonies of Eusebius, Theodoret, and Clemens Romanus, to
that purpose.

St. Paul in Probability, the first Founder of a Church here.

The Time and Opportunity he had for it, after his Release.

Of Pomponia and Graecina, Claudia Rufina, Christians at Rome, and their
influence on his coming hither.

St. Peter, and St. Paul compared, as to their Preaching here, and the far
greater Probability of St. Paul's.

IT is an Opinion generally received among our later Writers, as Animadvers. on
the Church Hist. of Britain, p. 5, 6.
one of them tells the World, That the Conversion of the British Nation, to the
Christian Faith, was performed toward the latter end of the Reign of Tiberius
Caesar, i. e. about thirty seven years after Christ's Nativity. But whosoever
compares the Circumstances of those times, and considers the small number of
the years between our Savior's Passion, and the death of Tiberius, will find
very little Probability, of the founding a Christian Church so soon, in a place
so remote as Britain.

To make this appear, I shall not insist upon the Testimony of Apollonius in
Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 18.
Eusebius, concerning the ancient Tradition, That our Savior commanded his
Apostles, not to depart from Jerusalem within twelve Years after his Ascension;
nor on that of the Chronic. Alex. p. 50.
Alexandrian Chronicle, wherein it is said, That the Apostles did not separate,
till after the Council at Jerusalem; nor on that of Hippolytus Thebanus in
Glyc. Annal. p. 3. p. 227.
Glycas, and of Euodius in Niceph. l. 2. c. 3.
Nicephorus, who reckon the Martyrdom of St. Stephen, to be seven Years after
Christ's Resurrection (which some learned Cappel. Cent. Eccles. Christian. A.
D. 38.
Chronologers think more probable, than the common Computation which allows but
one) before which time it is not pretended by any, that the Disciples were
dispersed abroad.

But that which is of greater force and certainty, is, supposing the dispersion
to have been within the Reign of Tiberius, yet the Scripture gives such an
Account of the Extent, and Design of the Disciples preaching upon it, as
utterly overthrows any Probability of their coming hither, for the Words are,
Act. 11.19.
Now they which were scattered abroad upon the Persecution, that arose about
Stephen, traveled as far as Phenice, and Cyprus, and Antioch, Preaching the
Word unto none, but unto the Jews alone. But the nearest of these places, is at
a great distance from Britain, and if they Preached to none but to the Jews,
they were not likely to convert the Gentile Britains. Baron. ad A. D. 35. n. 5.
Baronius grants. A. D. 35. That hitherto the Jews had only the Gospel
preached to them; Although at the same time he pleads for the Tradition of
Lazarus, Mary Magdalen, Martha and Marcella, coming then with Maximinus in a
Ship without Oars to Marseilles, with a design no doubt, to spread the Gospel
among the Gentiles in Gaul, for Bosquet. Hist. Eccles. Gallic. l. 1. c. 3.
Lazarus is supposed to have been Bishop of Marseilles, and Maximinus of Aix.
And he adds out of a Manuscript in the Vatican Library (which not only, like
the Householder in the Gospel, brings forth things New and Old, but sometimes
things New for Old, as happens in the Case of this Manuscript, it being lately
written, as Usser. de Primord. p. 15.
Archbishop Usher has observed) That Joseph of Arimathea did bear them
Company, and came over into Britain, to Preach the Gospel; Which according to
his own Supposition, must be only to the Jews in Britain, if there were any
here; But if it be understood of the Gentiles, Sirmond. de duobus Dionysiis, c.
1.
Jac. Sirmondus says in plain Terms, This Tradition contradicts the Scripture;
For says he, If the People of Marseilles (or Britain) had the Gospel Preached
to them so soon, how comes it to pass, that six Years after, Cornelius is said
to be the first Fruits of the Gentiles? And that upon the Encouragement of his
Example, those of the Dispersion, began to Preach to the Gentiles at Antioch?
Which is confessed by Bar. A. D. 41. n. 15.
Baronius himself. The strength of which Argument has prevailed so much in
France, That the v. Launoii Opusc. de Lazaro, etc. p. 348.
Defenders of this Tradition, have been there contented to let go the Reign of
Tiberius, and to place it a great deal later, Anno Dom. 62. Natal. Alex. Hist.
Eccles. Sac. 1. Part. 2. p. 80.
For they evidently saw, there was no Possibility of defending it upon other
Terms, although hereby they make Lazarus and Joseph of Arimathea of great Age,
when they undertook this Voyage with their Companions: But when such a
Tradition is either wholly rejected there, as disagreeing to the Scripture, or
set so much later, on purpose to reconcile it with the Acts of the Apostles, it
cannot but seem strange among us, that there should be such an Opinion still so
generally received, That the Gospel should be here Preached before the end of
the Reign of Tiberius.

But that which has misled most of our Writers, has been a passage in
Gildas, which they have applied to the particular Preaching of the Gospel in
Britain, whereas it seems only to be understood of the General Liberty of
Preaching it throughout the World, as will best appear by considering, not
barely the Words, but the Circumstances of them. Gild. Epist. ed. Josselin.
1568.
Gildas, having undertaken to give some Account of the ancient British Church
in the beginning of his Epistle, In the first place, sadly laments the want of
any Domestic Monuments, to give him certain information. For, says he, If
there were any such, they were either burnt by our Enemies, or carried so far
by the Banishment of our Countrymen, that they no longer appear, and therefore
he was forced to pick up what he could out of Foreign Writers, without any
continued Series. From hence, he proceeds to speak of the Romans easy Conquest
of Britain, but Difficult keeping of it, the Inhabitants being so unable to
withstand the Romans, and yet so unwilling to obey them. Of which he gives a
remarkable instance, in the Revolt under Boadicea, and the harder usage of the
Britains after it. Interea, says he,

Interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae, and veluti longiore terrarum
recessu, soli visibili non proximae verus ille non de firmamento solum ( L.
Sol) temporali, sed de summa etiam coelorum arce tempora cuncta excedente
universo orbi praefulgidum sui coruscum ostendens tempore (ut scimus) summo
Tiberii Caesaris (quo absque ullo impedimento ejus propagabatur Religio
comminata senatu nolente a Principe morte dilatoribus militum ejusdem) radios
suos primum indulget, id est sua praecepta Christus.. 6.

In the mean time, Christ the true Sun afforded his Rays, that is, the
knowledge of his Precepts to this Island, shivering with Icy-cold, and separate
at a great distance from the visible Sun, not from the visible Firmament, but
from the Supreme everlasting Power of Heaven. For we certainly know, that in
the latter end of the Reign of Tiberius, That Sun appeared to the whole World
with his Glorious Beams, in which time his Religion was propagated without any
impediment against the Will of the Roman Senate, death being threatened by that
Prince, to all that should inform against the Soldiers of Christ.

This I take to be Gildas his true meaning: For it is certain, he speaks of a
double shining of the Gospel, one more General to the World, the other more
particular to this Island: The former, he says, was in the latter end of
Tiberius; The latter was, Interea, In the mean time, of which he first speaks,
and that refers back to the time he had spoken of before, which was the fatal
Victory over Boadicea, and the Britains, by Suetonius Paulinus, and the slavery
they underwent after it. Which happened in the time of Nero, about the middle
of his Reign, almost twenty years after Claudius had sent A. Plautius to reduce
Britain into the form of a Province, to whom succeeded P. Ostorius Scapula, A.
Didius Gallus, and Veranius, in the Government of Britain, before Suctonius
Paulinus came into the Pro vince. For after Claudius his Triumph for his
Victory in Britain, the Romans began to deduce Colonies, to settle Magistrates
and Jurisdictions here, after the manner of other Provinces, and so continual
intercourse was maintained between the Roman City, and the British Colonies;
Cities of Trade were set up, and the Roman Merchants were very busy in
furnishing new Provinces with necessaries, and Superfluities: And the Province
of Britain, in the beginning of Nero's Reign was thought to be in so settled,
and flourishing a condition, that Xiphilin. in Neron.
Dio says, Seneca, had here at one time to the value of 300000. p. as Mr.
Camden computes it. A vast sum for a Philosopher! But that which (...) from
(...) That thi^ wa^ a very probable (...)* which Gildas has pu^ had upon, for
the bringing the Gospel luther, (...) between the (...) of A. Plautius coming
over, in the time of Claudius, and the Battle between Boadicea, and Suetonius
Paulinus, as will more fully appear in the following discourse. As to the more
General shining of the Gospel to the World, he pitches upon the latter end of
Tiberius, as the certain time of it, in which he makes use of the very
Expressions of Eusebius. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. c. 2.
Eusebius, and that passage concerning Tiberius and the Senate differing about
Christ and his followers, which Eusebius took from Tertul. Apolog. c. 5.
Tertullian, who speaks of it with great assurance; And Oros. l. 7. c. 4.
Orosius gives a more particular account of it, all which is very agreeable to
what Gildas had said before, That he must make use of Foreign Writers in so
great a defect of their own.

But to proceed clearly in this matter, there are three things I design,
concerning the first planting a Christian Church here.

1. To examine the Tradition, concerning Joseph of Arimathea, and his Brethren
coming hither to plant Christianity.

2. To show that there was a Christian Church planted here, in the Apostles
times, and within that compass Gildas speaks of.

3. To prove the great probability, that St. Paul first founded a Church here.

1. As to the Tradition concerning Joseph of Arimathea; I confess I look on it,
as an Invention of the Monks of Glassenbury to serve their Interests, by
advancing the Reputation of their Monastery. But because this Tradition has
met with better entertainment than it deserved, among the Generality of our
late Writers, who take it for granted, and believe that it is grounded on the
Testimony of ancient Records; I shall, before I proceed farther, take the pains
to examine it, both as to the Authority, and the Circumstances of it.

It seems to be a little Suspicious, at first view, that so considerable a part
of the Antiquities of this Church should be wholly past by, by the most ancient
and inquisitive Writers of our (...), So that neith^r the (...) Gildas, nor
Bid, nor Asserius, nor Ma^^anus S^^lus, nor any of the ancient Annals should
take the least notice of this Tradition. Sanders, p^^^f. ad Itla. de Schism.
Anglit.
Sanders indeed says, That Polydore Virgil proves it from the most ancient
Gildas, but he never attempted any such thing: For having set down the
Tradition of Joseph of Arimathea, with the best advantage, he only proves from
Gildas, That the Christian Religion was very early received here, which might
be very true, although Joseph had never come from Arimathea. And yet, Bona,
Rer. Liturgic. l. 1. c. 7.
Card. Bona quotes Gildas for this Tradition, on the credit of Sanders, unless
he were deceived by those who produce the Testimony of Gildas Albanius, in his
Book of the Victory of Aurelius Ambrosius to the same purpose. But no such Book
of the true Gildas could ever yet be found by those who have searched after it
with the greatest diligence. Leland, de Scriptor. in Gilda.
Leland particularly relates, concerning himself, What incredible pains he took
to find out this piece of Gildas, and says, That he hoped at last to have met
with it in the Library at Glassenbury, where Gildas is said by William of
Malmsbury, to have ended his days, but not a Leaf of it was to be seen, either
there, or in any of the Old Libraries in Wales, which he searched on purpose.
And after all, he refers us to the credit of Galt. Mon. l. 2. ^. 1. ed. Bad^ As.
Geffrey of Monmouth for it, where it must rest, till some better Authority be
produced for it: Yet Bale, and Pits, keep up the Title of it, as they do of
many others which were never in being, as the Annals of Gildas Cambrius, the
Epigrams of Claudia Rufina, and the Epistles of Joseph of Arimathea, etc. which
Bale thinks probable, that he did Write, and therefore sets them down as
Written: And from him a learned Watts Instrumento Historic. Manuscript.
Antiquary reckons them among our Historical Antiquities. And no better
Foundation can yet be discovered for this Book of Gildas, it being as probable,
that he should write a Book of that Victory of Ambrosius, since Gildas says,
He was born upon the day of his obtaining it, if it were that on Badon Hill.
But such Probabilities are very far from Testimonies. It is true, as the
Primord. c. 5. p. 57.
learned Primate observes, That Gervase of Tilbury, Nauclerus, Trithemius and
many others, say, That Geffrey followed Gildas in such a Book written by him:
But they produce no Authority for any such Book, but Geffrey himself, and
until some better appears, I must suspend my belief: It being common with such
Writers as himself, to pretend to such Authorities, as no one else ever had the
fortune to find. For it being their business to give an account of times long
before their own, it were a vain thing to hope for any Credit, unless they
could produce some Testimonies nearer those times, which might be of some
weight if they were Authentic. And this is the Reason, why these Inventers of
History have still given out, that they met with some Elder Writers, out of
whom they have pretended to derive their Reports. Thus Apud Trithem. Compend.
Annal. l. 1.
Hunibaldus pretends, as much to follow the Old Sicambrian Manuscripts of
Wasthald, for the remote Antiquities of the Franks, as Geffrey does the Old
British Manuscripts, either for the Succession of the British Kings, or the
first bringing of Christianity hither. But which makes this matter yet
stranger, Nen. c. 18.
Nennius himself, who sometimes passes under the Name of Gildas, says nothing
of this Tradition, where he speaks of the first receiving of Christianity in
Britain; and yet Bale says of him, That he collected his Writings out of the
former British Historians, such as Teliesin, Melkin, Gildas, and Elvodugus; and
it is not probable, he would have left it out, if he had found it in any of
them. But Bal. de Script. Brit. l. 1. p. 57.
Bale quotes one of these British Authors, viz. Melkinus Avalonius for this
Tradition about Joseph of Arimathea, and Arviragus; but withal he confesses
him to be a very fabulous Writer. Leland, de Script. in Melkino.
Leland says, That he met with the Fragments of Melkinus in the Library at
Glassenbury, by which he understood that he had written something of the
British affairs, but more especially concerning the Antiquity of Glassenbury,
and Joseph of Arimathea; Which, says Leland, he affirms without any certain
Author, and which himself could not approve, not thinking it at all Credible,
that Joseph of Arimathea should be buried there, but rather some Eremit of that
Name, from whence the mistake first arose. And Leland, in Flaan^.
elsewhere, when he speaks of the Glassenbury Tradition; He says, That twelve
Eremits are reported to have come thither, with one Joseph in the Head of them,
but not be of Arimathea as he supposes. But still the Testimonies that concern
this matter are derived from Glassenbury, insomuch that even the British
Historian has the name of Avalonius from thence. But some make use of this
Testimony however to prove the Antiquity of this Tradition, since this Author
is said to have lived Anno Dom. 550. under King Vortuporius, so Bale; but Pits
places him ten years later, under Magoclunus: They might as well have made him
contemporary with Gildas Cambrius, or to have been Secretary to Joseph of
Arimathea, when he wrote his Epistles, for they have no more Evidence to show
for the one than for the other. The truth is, there was an old Legend which lay
at Glassenbury, which Leland saw, and out of which Capgrave has transcribed
that part which concerns this matter, from whom Bale took it. But it is so
grossly fabulous, that even Capgrave himself (whose Stomach was not very nice as
to Legends) put an etc. in the middle of it, as being ashamed to set down the
passage of Abaddar, a great man in Saphat, and the hundred and four thousand
which were buried with Joseph of Arimathea at Glassenbury. Yet this senseless
and ridiculous Legend is by Spelman. Conc. Brit. To. 1. p. 11.
some thought to be the British History which William of Malmsbury appeals to
for the proof of this Tradition; and, which he found in the Libraries of St.
Edmund and St. Augustine. But Malmsbury, having designed to set the Antiquity of
Glassenbury as high as he could, called that a British History, which is now
found to be written by an English Monk, as Usser. de Prim. p. 107.
Archbishop Usher has evidently proved (having several times perused it in the
Cotton Library) there being the very same passage in it which Malmsbury quotes.
And that he was no Britain is most certain, because he calls the Saxon his
Mother Tongue, and England his Country. And yet after all, there is not a word
of Joseph of Arimathea or his Companions in it; all that is said is, That in
the Western parts of Britain there is a Royal Island called Gleston, large and
compassed about with Waters full of Fish, and having other conveniences of
humane life; but, which was most considerable, it was devoted to the Service of
God. Here the first Disciples of the Catholic Law found an ancient Church, not
built as was reported by men's hands, but prepared by God himself for the
benefit of Men, and which by Miracles was showed to be consecrated to himself
and to the Blessed Virgin. To which they adjoined another Oratory made of
Stone, which they dedicated to Christ and to St. Peter. The question is, Who
are here meant by these first Disciples of the Catholic Law? not Joseph of
Arimathea and his Companions, who are never mentioned by him, and who are never
said to have found a Church there built to their hands, but he speaks of some
of the first Saxon Christians in those parts, who might probably find there
such a low Wattled Church as is described in Sir H. Council. Brit. p. 15.
Spelman; a Remainder of the British Christianity in that Island. And this
Passage affords us the best light into the true Original of this Tradition,
which was after so much heightened and improved, as the Monks of Glassenbury
thought convenient for the honor and privileges of their Monastery.

That which seems most agreeable to Truth from hence is, That in the latter
times of the British Churches, when they were so miserably harassed and
persecuted by the Pagan Saxons, they were forced to retire into places of most
difficult access for their own Security, and there they made them such Churches
as were suitable to their present condition, and lived very retired lives,
being in continual fear of their barbarous Enemies. Such a place this Island of
Avalon, or Glassenbury was; which might be of far greater request among the
Britains, because it was the place where King Arthur was buried; for I see no
reason to question that which Giraldus Cambrensis relates concerning the
finding the Body of King Arthur there in the time of Henry II. with an
Inscription on a Leaden Cross, which in Latin expressed, that King Arthur lay
there buried in the Island of Avalon. For Girald. de Instit. Princ. and in
Specul. Eccles.
Giraldus says, he was present, and saw the Inscription and the Body; which is
likewise attested by the Historians of that time, as Leland, Collec. Vol. 2. p.
14. Assert. Arthuri, p. 28. etc.
Leland proves at large. And the account given that his Body was laid so deep
in the Earth, for fear of the Saxons, farther confirms, That this was a place
of retreat in the British times, but not without the apprehension of their
Enemies Invasion.

This Church, according to the Inscription on the Brass Plate on the Pillar in
Glassenbury Church, was in length 60 Foot, in breadth 26. But that Inscription,
as the learned and judicious Antiquary Council. Brit. p. 14.
Sir H. Spelman observes, was by the Character not of above 300 years
Antiquity, and savours very much of the Legend. In it we read, That the Church
was first built by Joseph and his Companions, but was consecrated by Christ
himself to the Honor of his Mother. This being a very useful point, but not
very agreeing with the simplicity of the primitive Christians, wanted some more
than ordinary confirmation, and such we are told it had. For St. David having a
design to consecrate this Church, our Lord appeared to him in a Dream, and
forbad him, having consecrated both the Church and Churchyard before himself.
And, for a Sign thereof, he thrust his Finger through the Bishop's hand. Which
it seems was to pass for the Token of a former Consecration. But, as much as
this looks like a Monkish Legend, Annal. Eccl. A. D. 63. n. 29.
Alford and Church Hist. l. 2. c. 8.
Cressy are much displeased with Sir H. Spelman for calling it in question. But
they who can in earnest believe, That Christ himself did then consecrate a
Church and Churchyard to the honor of his Mother, are past all Confutation by
reason, having their minds naturally framed to believe Legends; and to such,
one Legend serves to confirm another; which is the way those persons take to
confute Sir H. Spelman. For Cressy, to prove the Antiquity of dedicating
Churches to the blessed Virgin, brings the Tradition of the Temple at Saragoca,
called del Pilar, because the Pillar on which her Image was placed was brought
thither by the Ministry of Angels. Now those things are thought Proofs by
some, which to others look only like bringing one Absurdity to support
another. But as yet we find no Testimony to confirm this Tradition, but what is
taken from Glassenbury, which is not the best Witness in a Cause which so
nearly concerned it self.

But these now mentioned Authors Alford. ib. n. 29.

Cressy, l. 2. c. 7.


at last venture on a considerable Testimony, if it hold good, viz. of Augustine
the Monk, in an Epistle to Gregory, but upon Examination, that which they quote
out of St. Augustin's Epistle is nothing else but the passage already mentioned
by Malmsbury, which he found in a Book taken out of the Library of St. Augustine
at Canterbury; and they might as well have quoted St. Edmund's Epistle to the
Pope to the same purpose. For William of Malmsbury says, He met with the same
passage at St. Edmund 's as well as St. Augustine 's, i. e. in the Libraries of
those Monasteries; I will not dissemble that they cite two considerable Antiq.
Brit. p. 3.

Godwin, de Praesul. p. 12.


Authors of our own for this mistake; I wish they had been as ready to have
followed them where they were in the right, as where they were guilty of an
oversight, which the most careful Writers may sometimes fall into. But it is
an unhappy temper to follow Great men only in their Errors and Imperfections.

So that upon the whole matter, we have not one Testimony which reaches to the
point concerning Joseph of Arimathea, which is not originally taken from the
Glassenbury Legends, where it seems there was great choice of them; For Capgr.
in vita Josephi.
Capgrave mentions several, one, out of which the Life of Joseph of Arimathea
there is extracted, is said to be taken out of a Book which the Emperor
Theodosius found in the Palace of Pilate at Jerusalem; which is a very hopeful
Introduction to a Legend; And there we find the History of Joseph of Arimathea,
very distinctly set down, How he was miraculously delivered out of Prison in
Jerusalemand conveyed to Arimathea, whither the chief of the Jews sent a solemn
Embassy to him of seven Persons, with an Epistle, wherein they beg Pardon for
his Imprisonment, and desire his Company at Jerusalem, whither being come, upon
their request, he gives an account of his Escape, the house being taken up by
four Angels, and Christ appeared to him, and carried him to the place where he
buried him, and showed him the Linen Cloth about his Head, after which he was
baptized by Philip, and was present with him at the Assumption of the Blessed
Virgin, and fifteen years after he came to Philip in Gaul, who sent him over
into Britain with twelve of his Disciples and his Son Josephes. But an other
Tradition says, They were six hundred Men and Women who were to come over,
having taken a Vow of Abstinence till they came to Land, which they did all
break, but one hundred and fifty who passed the Sea upon the Shirt of Josephes,
but the rest repenting, a Ship was sent to convey them over which was built by
King Solomon, and with them came a Duke of the Medes called Nacianus, formerly
baptized by Joseph in the City Saram, with the King of it called Mordraius, who
valiantly killed a King of North Wales, who kept Joseph a Prisoner; After which
he and his Companions preached here in the time of Arviragus. And then follows
the common Tradition, of his giving the Island of Avalon to them, and the
twelve Hydes of Land by the three Pagan Kings, Arviragus, Marius and Coilus.
This is followed by another Tradition out of the Acts of King Arthur, and the
Inquisition of Lancelot de Lac; all which is concluded with the admirable
Legend of Melkinus Avalonius already mentioned. These are the choice Materials
in Capgrave's Collection to confirm this Tradition. And if he had found any
better, he would no doubt have produced them. It must be confessed that Mr.
Cressy, with some scorn, rejects that part of the Tradition taken out of the
holy Graal about the six hundred Companions and the Prince of Media, etc. But I
can find no better Authority for one part than for the other; and for all that
I can see, the holy Graal deserves as much credit as the Book taken out of
Pilat's Palace or Melkinus Avalonius, especially since Pits, de Script. A.D.
720.80.
Pits has given the supposed Author so good a place, among his British
Writers, under the name of Eremita Britannus, and says, he lived about the
time of King Ina, Anno Dom. 720. And Apud Vincent. Spec. histor. l. 23. c. 147.
Helinandus takes notice of the Vision to the British Eremit about that time
concerning Joseph of Arimathea, and the Dish wherein our Savior ate the
Passover with his Disciples, which sort of Dish he says was then called in
French Graal; but others think the true name was Sangreal, being some of
Christ's real blood which he shed upon the Cross, which was said to be
somewhere found by King Arthur. And to confirm this, it is said in the
authentic Writing of Melkinus, That in the Coffin of Joseph were two Silver
Vessels filled with the Blood and Sweat of Jesus the Prophet.

But lest I should seem to expose so ancient a Tradition, by setting down only
the fabulous Mixtures which the Monks thought to adorn it with, I now proceed
from their Dreams and Visions, to what seems to have much more weight and
authority in it, viz. their ancient Records which William of Malmsbury seems
most to rely upon: Among these, In the first place he mentions the Charter of
St. Patrick, as he calls it, which is at large printed in the Monastic. vol. 1.
p. 11.
Monasticon, and both in Alford. A. D. 439. n. 9.
Alford and Cressy 's Hist. l. 2. c. 5. n. 10.
Cressy, and is magnified by them as a substantial proof of the Glassenbury
Tradition, which Cressy says was transcribed out of a very ancient MS.
belonging to Glassenbury by Marianus Victorius; and for this he quotes Vossi.
de Histor. Latinis, l. 2. c. 16.
Ger. Vossius de Hist. Lat. who says only that Bale mentions a piece of his
de Antiquitate Avalonica, but he adds, that Bale deserves no credit in Writers
of great Antiquity. But the person Cressy means (or at least his Author) was
another Gerard Vossius, Dean of Tongres, Miscellan. S. Patr. ad calc. Oper.
Greg. Thaumaturg.
who published part of this pretended piece of St. Patrick among other ancient
Writings, which will have no great authority among considering men, if they
have no other Characters of Antiquity than this Charter of Saint Patrick.
However, Mr. Cressy is pleased to call it, a monument of the goodness of God
toward this Nation, so early, in the very beginning of Christianity; because
therein mention is made of some Writings of St. Phaganus and Diruvianus wherein
was declared that twelve Disciples of the Holy Apostles Philip and Jacob built
the said ancient Church to the honor of the Blessed Virgin, by the appointment
of the Archangel Gabriel. And moreover, That our Lord himself from Heaven
dedicated the said Church to the honor of his Mother. As likewise, That three
Pagan Kings bestowed upon them twelve Portions of Land. If this hold good, it
goes a great way toward the proving the ancient Tradition, although Joseph of
Arimathea be not mentioned. But St. Patrick goes on, and says, That in other
Writings of a later date he found that Phaganus and Diruvianus obtained from
Pope Eleutherius thirty years of Indulgence, as himself likewise procured from
Pope Celestine twelve years: And toward the Conclusion, he grants a hundred
days of Indulgence to those who would clear the way to a certain Oratory there
mentioned: And to make all plain, it begins with the Date, Anno Dom. 425. in
these Words. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. I Patrick the poor humble
Servant of God, in the four hundred twenty fifth year of the Incarnation of our
Lord, being sent by the most holy Pope Celestine into Ireland, etc.

I confess this Charter offers very fair play toward the discovery of it is own
Forgery by such open Marks, and Characters as these. For it is certainly known,
that in St. Patrick's time, no such way of Computation was used from the year
of our Lord. For Dionysius Exiguus, writ his first Epistle to Petronius, Anno
Dom. 525. where he first mentions, The reducing the Cycle to the years of
Christ's Incarnation, that People might be better acquainted with it; after
which it remained a great while in private use with the Paschal Cycle, and was
not publicly received, says Bucherius Belg. Roman. l. 2. c. 8. n. 4.
Bucherius till about the time of Charles the Great. Rer. Aleman. To 3. l. 2.
p. 32.
Joachim Vadianus, says, He never saw the Year of our Lord in any ancient
Charters, of which sort he had seen many: Papebroch. Propyl. ad To. 2. Apr..
102.
Some observe, That it was never used in Charters before the ninth Age, and
therefore the more subtle Pretenders to Antiquity always left it out.
Aventinus Annal. Boior. l. 4. p. 461.
Joh. Aventinus affirms, that the use of it in Epistles and Charters, was
brought in by Carolus Crassus, with whom Chronic. Burg. ad A. D. 885.
Nic. Vignier agrees, as to the Imperial Diplomata. But it seems probable, to
have been brought into England before that time, for in the Spelman. Council. p.
330. c. 9.
Council at Celichyth, Anno Dom. 816. Every Bishop was required to take an
Account of the year of our Lord. And by some Charters in Ingulphus, it appears
to have been used here, before it was used in France, or the Empire, but not
long before the eighth Century; and the first public Acts we find it applied
to, were those of Councils, as in that of Becanceld, under King Withred, Anno
Dom. 694. But the same King does not use it in the Years of his Reign. The like
Instances about Councils, especially in the eighth and ninth Centuries are
produced by Mabillon de Re Diplom. l. 2. c. 2. p. 17.. 23. n. 15.
Mabillon: Who thinks, That Bid was the first who brought it into the use of
History. But that could not be before Anno Dom. 725. at which time he began to
write his History; and he adds, That from him by the means of Boniface, it came
into the use of the French Councils and Histories; and at last of all public
Charters both in France and the Empire, as well as here. But from all this it
appears, that there is no Color for this Charter of St. Patrick, which reckons
from the Incarnation, a hundred years before Dionysius Exiguus first introduced
that way of Computation. Besides, it cannot possibly agree with the time of St.
Patrick's going first into Ireland; for Gul. Malms. de Gestis Pontif. l. 2. p.
145.
William of Malmsbury confesses, He was made Bishop by Celestine, and sent by
St. German into Ireland as an Apostle: But it is on all hands agreed, that
Palladius was sent thither before him; and Prosper, who lived at that time,
fixes the sending Palladius, to the year wherein Bassus and Antiochus were
Consuls, which was Anno Dom. 431. The year of the first Ephesine Council. So
that this Charter of St. Patrick cannot be true, no not although we allow the
different Computation in Capgrave, who reads it, 430. But Alford Confesses,
both Malmsbury and the Glassenbury Antiquities have it, 425. It is strange that
Alford should say, He found no Exception against the Credit of this Charter,
since even Capgr. vit. Patricii.
Capgrave himself mentions it not without doubt, and Suspicion of the truth of
it: And his own Brethren Acta Sanct. Mart. 17. vit. S. Patricii Proleg.. 10. n.
72.
Henschenius, and Papebrochius deride his simplicity for believing it. And
among other Arguments they produce that of the mention of Indulgences against
it, which Name they Confess was not used for the Relaxation of Penance, till
the eleventh Century; a very Competent time after the Date of this Charter. The
question is not as Mr. Cressy would put it, Whether every Bishop, or the Pope
as Chief, has a Power to relax Penance? But, Whether the Name of Indulgences
were then applied to such a Sense, as this Charter uses it? Which those learned
Jesuits deny. Add to all this, that St. Patrick says, He obtained from
Celestine twelve years of Indulgence, which being understood of Glassenbury,
implies a plain impossibility: For St. Patrick is said, to retreat thither
toward the end of his Life, and Celestine dyed soon after his first sending
into Ireland: So that I need not to insist on the Style, or the Names contained
in this Charter, to prove the Forgery of it, it being so manifest by the
Arguments already produced.

I now proceed to the Charters, whereof there are several extant in the
Monastic. vol. 1. p. 12.
Monasticon. The large Charter of King Ina, seems to be most considerable, and
to favor the old Tradition, as it makes the Church at Glassenbury dedicated to
Christ and the Blessed Virgin, to be the Fountain of all Religion, and the
first in the Kingdom of Britain. But upon a strict enquiry into the
Circumstances of this Charter, I see great reason to call in question the Truth
of it, and not merely from the dissimilitude of Style, between this and other
Charters of the Saxon times, which are allowed to be Authentic, such as those
in Ingulphus, William of Malmsbury, the Additions to Matthew Paris, etc. But
for these two Reasons which seem to me to have weight in them.

1. Because it refers to other ancient Charters of that Church, as to the
Exemption of the Monastery. And the Benedictin Monks have a long time lain
under so great a Suspicion, among those of their Religion, as to this matter of
forging Charters of Exemption, that no prudent Persons will think those a
sufficient Foundation to build their Faith upon, as to any ancient History,
which must depend upon their Credibility. I shall not here mention what
Gallonius, Launoy, Naude, and others abroad have said upon this Subject, nor
what insufficient Answers. Mabillon de Re Diplomat. l. 3. c. 3.
Mabillon has lately made to their Objections; but it is reasonable for us to
consider, how much they have been Charged here at home with this Crime, by the
Bishops of this Church, and how ill they have been able to defend themselves.
It appears by the Epistle of Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, to Alexander the
Third, in Petr. Blesens. Ep. 68.
Petrus Blesensis, that there was a general Suspicion of Forgery in the
Charters of Exemptions, which the Monasteries pretended to, Vt falsitas in
omnium fere Monasteriorum exemptione praevaleat, etc. And he there particularly
instanceth in the Bishop of Salisbury, charging the Abbat of Malmsbury, with
producing false Charters for his Exemption from the Bishop's Right of Election:
But which is yet more considerable, in the time of Gregory the ninth, when St.
Edmond was Archbishop of Canterbury, some Monks of Canterbury were Convicted of
Forging a certain Charter of Privileges: But the Pope's Legate took up the
business, and procured a Dispensation from the Pope, which put an end to the
Cause. Which Dispensation Dr. Of Use and Custom p. 93.
Casaubon declares to the World, He read in an Old Manuscript belonging to the
Church of Canterbury, wherein it was Registered: And wherein, as both he and Sr.
Henry Spelman. Council. p. 125.
Spelman, tell us, It is observed, That that Church enjoyed all its Lands and
Privileges, only by Custom and Prescription, sine Cartis vel Munimentis
Regiis, without any written Charters, until Anno Dom. 694. When Withred King
of Kent caused the first to be written, which was the same with the Council of
Becanceld. From hence Sr. Henry Spelman gives a prudent Caution, concerning the
most ancient Charters, which the Monks pretended to, that they be not easily
believed: There being so much Suspicion of Fraud in them. And that not only
now, but was so of Old, as appears by what Gervas. Doro. A.D. 1181. inter 10.
Script. 1458.
Gervase reports of the Monks of St. Augustine, That they produced very
Suspicious, and rased Charters. The Case was this, the Monks of St. Augustine
pretended an Exemption from the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Canterbury,
as those of Glassenbury did from that of the Bishop of Wells; upon an Appeal to
Rome, a Commission was granted to the Bishop of Durham, and the Abbat of St.
Albans to inspect their Charters, and to let the Archbishop examine them: But
after great Tergiversation, they at last produced two Writings, which they
called their Originals; The first was ancient, but rased and subscribed, as if
it were amended and without a Seal, which they called King Ethelbert 's
Charter. The other was of much later Writing, with a Leaden Bull hanging at it,
and the Figure of a Bishop upon it, which they called St. Augustine 's Charter.
Against the First, The Rasure was objected, and the manner of Subscription, and
want of a Seal. Against the Second, The lateness of the Writing, and the
novelty of hanging Leaden Bulls to Charters, especially by Bishops on this side
of the Alps: And besides, the Style was very different from the Roman. Both
these Charters are extant in the Monastic. p. 23, 24, 25.
Monasticon, and a third of Ethelbert, with an Inspeximus of 36 Edw. III. But
another Charter of Ethelbert is set down together with these in the Chronic.
MS. in Bibl. A. T. C.
MS. Chronicle of St. Augustin's, the Author whereof was certainly a Monk
there, being so zealously concerned to defend these Charters, and to answer
some of the former Objections against them. As to the want of a Seal to
Ethelbert's Charter, he answers truly, That hanging Seals upon Wax were not
then used, but only a Subscription of the Name of the person with a Sign of
the Cross before it, in token of their Conversion. For Ingulph. Hist. p. 512.
ed. Sav.
Ingulphus, a very competent Witness, declares, that the ancient English
Charters to the time of Edward the Confessor were attested by Witnesses who
set their Names with Golden Crosses, or other Marks before them. But the
Normans brought in the use of Seals by Impressions upon Wax. But that MS.
Author will not allow the use of such Seals, till after the Conquest, except
in the time of Cnut, who was a stranger. Whereas in the Contest between the
Bishop of Lincoln and the Abbat of St. Albans, before Henry II. When the Vit.
Abbat. S. Alban. p. 79, 80.
Saxon Charters were disputed for want of Seals, the other Party knew not what
to answer; But the King insisted on their Confirmation by Henry I. And the
Monk, who writes the account of this Proceeding, alleges the Seal of Edward
the Confessor to the Church of Westminster: But Edward brought in several
Norman Customs, as Ingulphus shows, against the practice of his Predecessors.
And this the Normans borrowed from the French, whose Seals were generally
affixed on the right side of the Charter, and not pendent with Labels, as they
began to be about the Reign of Lewis VI. as Mabill. de Re Diplonat. l. 2. c.
16. n. 10, 12.
Mabillon has showed at large. And so some of our Learned Antiquit. Britan. in
Anselmo.
Antiquaries have thought, that pendent Seals were not brought into use here,
till the time of Edw. I. For in a Charter of Henry I. granted to Anselm, the
great Seal was affixed on the left side of the Parchment. And Antiquit. Oxon.
l. 1.. 81.
Brian Twyne affirms that he saw a Charter of William the Conqueror so sealed
in the Lumley Library. But that this Observation is not certain, appears by
contrary Instances, as of the Pendent Seal to the Charter of Battle Abbey,
printed by Seld. Not. ad Eadmer. p. 166.
Mr. Seldom; and of the Charter of Henry II. to Glassenbury Abbey, which De
Antiq. Cant. Academ. l. 1. p. 54.
Dr. Caius says he saw with a Seal of green Wax hanging to it by a string of
red and white Silk. But from hence we may see how dangerous it is to make
general Rules, as to these matters, from some particular Examples, when the
Custom might vary. And, notwithstanding the Testimony of Ingulphus, there
might be Seals sometimes used to Charters though not so frequently. Mr. Seld.
of the Office of Lord Chancellor, chapter 2.
Seldom has produced some Instances to that purpose, as in that of King Edgar
to the Abbey of Persore, which he says had plain Signs of three-Labels by the
places cut for their being hanged on; which is attested in a Letter from
Godfrey, Archdeacon of Worcester, to Alex. III. And among the Chartae antiquae,
There are some, says he, cum Sigillo; and one particularly cum Sigillo of King
Cnout, which very much confirms what this Historian observes concerning Canutus
his using a Seal. And our great Inst. f. 7. a.
Lawyer has produced the Deeds of King Edwin, Brother to King Edgar, and of
King Offa, with Seals to them. And therefore, I think, Ingulphus ought not to
be taken in so strict a sense, that there were no Seals in use before the
Norman times, but that Deeds or Charters before were good or valid by bare
Crosses and Marks, with Subscriptions, without Seals; But that the Normans
would allow none that had no Seals to them. And this upon due consideration
will appear to be the true meaning of Ingulphus.

And the same MS. Author commends the discretion of the Saxon way of
confirming Charters, above that of the Normans, a Seal of Wax being so apt to
decay, or to be lost or taken off. And he observes one particular Custom of
the Normans, That they were wont to put some of the hair of their Heads or
Beards into the Wax of their Seals. I suppose rather to be kept as Monuments
than as adding any strength or weight to their Charters. So he observes, That
some of the Hair of William, Earl of Warren, was to his time kept in the Priory
of Jews.

To that of the Leaden Bull appending to the Charter of St. Augustine, he makes
a pitiful Answer, viz. That he, being deputed hither by the Pope, might use
the same Seal which he did at Rome. And so every Legate might grant Bulls with
Leaden Seals, which would not be well taken at Rome. But it is much more to the
purpose which he adds, viz. That when in the time of Henry III. this Privilege
was questioned by the Archbishop of Canterbury, because of this Leaden Bull,
the Earl of Flanders produced such another, given him by a foreign Bishop,
which he and his Predecessors had used; the Fashion whereof he sets down, and
the Bull it self was preserved as a Monument in St. Augustine's. But if this
were then so common a Custom, especially at Rome, why had they no such Bulls
of Gregory the Great, who sent Augustine? To that he gives a frivolous Answer,
viz. That Gregory died the same year of the endowment of St. Augustine 's. But,
did he leave no Successor? And, had it not been more to their purpose to have
produced one Leaden Bull of the Pope's at that time, than twenty of Augustine's
the Monk? But he gives no manner of answer to the Rasure of the first Charter,
nor to the late Writing of the second: And although the using of Leaden Bulls
were not so soon appropriated to the Consistorial Grants of the Bishop of Rome,
but Princes and Bishops might use them, as Sir H. Spelman, and Monsieur du
Cange, and Mabillon have all proved; yet there ought to be better proof brought
of the matter of Fact, as to St. Augustine's Privilege, for it is still very
suspicious, not only on the account of the Leaden Bull (which Polyd. Virg. de
Invent. l. 8. c. 2.
Polydore Virgil could not find so early used even at Rome, and he allows it to
be no elder than Anno Domini 772. and all the Instances brought before by Apud
Leon. Allat. de Consens. Eccles. Orient. and Occident. l. 1. c. 6. n. 2.
Dom. Raynaldus are confessed to be suspicious by Mabillon. de Re Diplomat. l.
2. c. 14. n. 9.
Mabillon himself) but there are several things in it which in Spelman. Council.
p. 124.
Sir H. Spelman's Judgment favor of the Norman times, as the Jus
consuetudinarium, Iudicia intus and foris, and the very Title of Archbishop, as
it is there used, was hardly of that Antiquity in the Western Church, and was
never given to Augustine by Gregory. But according to Isid. Orig. l. 7. c. 12.
Isidore's explication of it, who was Gregory's Disciple, and understood the
Language of that Age, Augustine could not properly call his Successors
Archbishops, for he says, That Title belonged to them who had power over
Metropolitans as well as other Bishops, and it was not before the ninth Age, as
Mabill. l. 2. ^. ^. n. 1^.
Mabillon and others observe, that it came to be commonly used for a
Metropolitan.

It was therefore a judicious Rule laid down by the Learned Author of the
Propulae. ad Monast. Angl.
Preface to the Monasticon concerning the Charters of Monks, that the elder
they pretend to be, the more they are to be suspected; For which he is
deservedly praised by Papebroch. Propyl. ad To. 2. Apr. c. 10. n. 125.
Papebrochius; but Mabillon. l. 1. c. 4. l. 3. c. 2.
Mabillon is very unwilling to allow it, as overthrowing at once the authority
of all their ancient Charters. And therefore he has endeavored with mighty
Industry to defend chiefly the old Benedictin Charters in France; But he cannot
deny many of them to be counterfeited ( Papebrochius says almost all) and at
the Conclusion of his Discourse he vindicates the Monks by the commonness of
the fault in elder times: l. 3. c. 6. n. 10.
which is an Argument of Caution to us, rather than of any credit to be given
to them. And it cannot be denied, that he has laid down many useful Rules for
discerning the true and false, with respect to the Customs of France. But we
are still as much to seek as to our pretended Charters, since the Custom of
making Charters cannot be made appear to be so old here as it was there. He
does indeed endeavor to prove from Bede's Epistle to Egbert, l. 1. c. 4. n. 4.
that in his time there were written Privileges granted to Monasteries among
the Saxons, and something before that, among the Britains, by the Synod of
Landass, Anno Dom. 660. But he cannot prove, nor does he attempt it, that there
were any Charters among the Saxons before that of Withred, Anno Dom. 694. and
if not, all the ancient Charters referred to in this Charter of Ina must be
false and counterfeit.

2. How comes King Ina to have so great authority over all the Kings of
Britain, the Archbishops, Bishops, Dukes and Abbats, as this Charter
expresses? In the beginning of the Charter, he mentions Baldred as one of his
Viceroys. In the middle he speaks of Baldred as one of his Predecessors, and
joins him with Kenewalchius, Kentwin and Cedwalla. But in the end he makes him
to confirm what Ina has granted, Ego, Baldredus Rex, confirmavi. But who was
this King Baldred? In the Kingdom of Kent, Edricus was in the beginning of
Ina's Reign, according to the Savilian Fasti, and Withredus from the sixth to
the end. In the Kingdom of the East Saxons there were Sighardus, Senfredus,
Ossa and Selredus. In the Kingdom of East Angles, Beorna and Ethelredus. In the
Kingdom of Mercia, Adelredus, Kenredus, Ceolredus, Athelbaldus. In the Kingdom
of Northumberland, Alfredus, Osfredus, Kenredus, Osricus, But among all these
not one Baldredus appears. There was indeed one of that Name King of Kent near
an hundred years after; but what is that to the time of Ina? But suppose
Baldred then in being, and only a Viceroy in some part of Ina's Dominions,
how comes Ina to this Universal Monarchy or Power to command all the Kings of
Britain, which is expressed in the Charter? Sed and omnibus Regni mei Regibus,
etc. Praecipio. By what Authority did the King of the West Saxons at that time
make such a Precept to all other Kings in Britain? But, I remember, Galfrid. l.
c. p. 101. ed. Bad. Ascens.
Geffrey of Monmouth makes him Grandchild to Cadwallader. And the LL. Ed.
Confess. c. 35.
Author of the Additions to King Edward's Laws says, he had the Kingdom of
Britain with his second Wife Wala, Daughter of Cadwallader; and then Ina called
a Parliament for the Intermarriage of Britains and Saxons. So that there was an
Opinion among some, that Ina had the Monarchy of Britain, which Opinion was
certainly followed by the Contriver of this Charter. But Mr. Lambard
confesses, that these Passages are not in the ancient MS. of King Edward's
Laws, and it is a wonder they should ever come into them, being so destitute of
any color of authority, and so remote from the design of his Laws.

As to these counterfeit Charters, the Opinion of Propyl. ad To. 2. Apr. c. 8.
n. 103.
Papebrochius seems most probable to me, that they were for the most part
framed in the eleventh Century, when there was Ignorance enough to make them
pass, and occasion enough given to the Monks to frame them for their own
security, against the encroachments of others upon their Lands, and the
Jurisdiction of Bishops over their Monasteries. And William the Conqueror
having given such invidious Privileges to Battle Abbey, as may be seen in his
Charter, the elder Monasteries thought much to be so far behind them, and
therefore made themselves as great Privileges by the favor of Saxon Kings.
From hence in the next Age arose so many Contests about Jurisdiction between
the Bishops and the several Monasteries, of which we read not before, as we
have already observed between the Abbey of St. Augustine and the Archbishop of
Canterbury; between the Abbey of Malmsbury and the Bishop of Salisbury; and the
Abbey of St. Albans and the Bishop of Lincoln. And at that time those Abbeys
were charged with forging their Charters. And when they were so charged were
not able to defend them, as was remarkable in the case of Saint Augustine's, as
it is related by Thorn. Chronic. c. 14. 3.
William Thorn a Monk of that Abbey: He confesses the Archbishop charge
their Privileges with Forgery, and that the Monks appealed to Rome, and that
upon their Appeal several Commissions were granted to examine them; but by his
own relation, they shamefully declined to produce them as long as they durst,
and still continued their Appeal. But when they saw no remedy, they produced
the Charters of Ethelbert and Augustine, the Copies whereof the Delegates sent
to Rome. But before they came thither the Pope died; and the next Pope, Lucius,
sent an Inhibition to the Archbishop, requiring him not to invade their
Privileges till the question of Forgery were determined; and he writes to King
Henry II. in the behalf of the Abbey. Things being at this pass, they fairly
made a Composition with the Archbishop, viz. That he should withdraw his
Accusation of Fraud, in the Court of Rome, and they would yield up to him the
main Points contested as to Jurisdiction. The form of which Composition is at
large extant in Thorn. And the Confirmation of it by Henry II. in the other MS.
Chronicon of that Abbey. Which in effect amounted to the Monks giving up the
Cause of their Charters. Such a Controversy about Jurisdiction there was
between Jocelin, Bishop of Bath and Wells, and the Abbey of Glassenbury, about
Anno Dom. 1215. as appears by the Book called Secretum Domini Abbatis lately in
the Arundell Library, but now in a private hand. So that there appears a
sufficient inducement for them to forge such large Immunities and Exemptions,
with respect to the Bishop's Jurisdiction, as this Charter contains; and that
seems to be the main Point aimed at in it. But in order to it, some
extraordinary matter was to be alleged in favor of this Place, and nothing
served so much in that Age, as to amuse the People with wonderful Stories of
the Antiquity of it, Calling it the Mother of Religion, and the Place of
Visions and Revelations and Miracles, where St. Patrick and St. David dwelt in
former times, before ever the Saxons came (but not a word yet of Joseph of
Arimathea:) which were very plausible Pretenses for extraordinary Privileges,
and so they are alleged in this Charter of King Ina, Ita and ipsa
supereminentem Privilegii obtineat dignitatem, nec ulli omnino hominum
ancillare obsequium faciat in terris, etc. Which words are spoken of the
Blessed Virgin, but, according to the Construction of that Age, to be under
stoo of Glassenbury Abbey, because the Church was believed to be consecrated to
her by our Savior himself.

But it seems strange that such a Charter should ever pass for authentic with
any who compare the Language of it with the History of King Ina, as it is
delivered by the Monkish Historians. For by them it appears what Wars he had
with his neighbor Princes, and how far he was to the last from commanding
Kings and Princes and Archbishops, whose Kingdom was confined to the West and
South Saxons, and had but one Bishop in it till the eighteenth year of his
Reign, when it was divided into two, Daniel having one share, and Aldelm the
other. And some years after Eadbertus was Bishop of the South Saxons, so that
he had but three Bishops at the most, and never an Archbishop in his Dominions:
How then could he call the several Kings, Archbishops and Bishops together to
pass this Charter? The like gross absurdity there is in the Monastic. Vol. 1.
p. 146.
Charter of Evesham Abbey, wherein Brightwaldus is said to draw it up with the
consent of all the Princes in England met in Council, as the Pope Constantine
explains it; which is somewhat hard to believe concerning that Age, wherein
they were under no common Head, but continually fighting with each other, till
the West Saxons prevailed. And the Case of the Abbey of Evesham seems to have
been much the same with that of Glassenbury. For W. Malmsbur. de Gest. Pontif.
l. 4. p. 162.
William of Malmsbury wonders how Bid came to omit the Foundation of it, if it
were so solemnly declared at Rome as the Charters import, when Kenred and Offa
were both there, which is mentioned by Bid. And in truth it is very strange
that so diligent a Writer, especially of such things, as Bede was, should say
not a Word either of Glassenbury or Evesham. But he judiciously imputes the
occasion of founding this Monastery to some old Church of the Britains standing
there in a desolate place, which Egwin, then Bishop of Worcester, took a great
Fancy to, and so raised a Monastery there. But such a plain Story as this would
never do the Monks business, and therefore they must have a Legend of Egwin's
Chains, etc. and the Vision of the Blessed Virgin there, and large Immunities
granted to the Place on these accounts, as they have fully done in the Charters
of Kenred and Offa, the Bull of Constantine and the Privilege of Egwin. But yet
this unlucky charge of Pope Constantine to Brightwaldus, to summon a Council of
the whole Nation, Princes and Bishops, to confirm this Charter, at a time when
there were so many Kingdoms not only divided, but most commonly in actual War
with each other, makes this whole Charter appear to be an undoubted Forgery of
the Monks to obtain great Privileges to themselves.

But to return to Glassenbury; I do not question that King Ina did found a
Monastery there, where before had been an ancient Church in the British times.
But I see no ground to believe, that either Joseph of Arimathea, or St.
Patrick, or St. David had ever been there. But these were great and well
sounding Names to amuse the People with, and by degrees advanced that Monastery
to so high a Reputation, that the very Monks of other places were concerned to
lessen the authority of this Tradition, as is evident by the Chron. S. August.
MS. in Bibl. A. T. C.
MS. Chronicle of St. Augustine's, wherein the Monks of Glassenbury are charged
with pretending to greater authority than they had reason for, that Monastery
being first founded by King Ina, but they give out they had Land given by
Arviragus a King of the Britains. And even Malmsbury. de Gestis Pontif. l. 2.
p. 145.
William of Malmsbury, although when he writes the Antiquities of Glassenbury,
he seems firmly to believe Saint Patrick's being there, yet when he comes
elsewhere to speak of his being buried there, he adds that cooling Expression,
Si credere dignum, and takes not the least notice of Joseph of Arimathea and
his Companions. So much difference he thought there ought to be between writing
the Legend of a Monastery and a true History. And there he plainly affirms,
that King Ina was the first Founder of it. To which Asserii Annals, MS. A.D.
726.
Asserius agrees in an ancient MS. Copy of his Annals. For A. D. 726. he says,
Ina went to Rome, and there died, having built and dedicated a Monastery in
Glassenbury. But what Presumption was it to say, He dedicated it, if it were
dedicated so long before by Christ himself, as the Vision of St. David and the
Glassenbury Tradition affirm? I do not then deny that there was an ancient
Church before Ina's time, which after the Western Saxons became Christians,
grew into mighty Reputation, but all the Succession of Abbats before, either of
Worgresius, or Brightwaldus, or others, I look on as fabulous. For Bed. Hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. 9.
Bid and others say, Brightwaldus was Abbat of Reculver before he was
Archbishop; which is a good distance from Glassenbury. But the first Abbat
there was Hemgislus, to whom Ina granted a Charter; after him Beorwaldus, to
whom King Ina granted several Lands by Charters, far more probable than this
large one, whose authority I have hitherto discussed. Those Charters are short,
and the Style agreeable to those times, and not one Word of Joseph of
Arimathea, or St. Patrick, or St. David, in any of them. And those, I believe,
were the original Charters of that Abbey.

But the Abbey being thus founded and well endowed, then, like a man that has
made his own Fortunes, who pretends to be derived from some ancient Stock, so
this Monastery growing rich betimes, saw it must be cast much behind in Place
and Dignity, unless it could lay claim to some greater Antiquity. And for this,
the old British Church was an admirable Foundation. And St. Patrick and St.
David, being two Saints of wonderful esteem in Ireland and Wales, they first
set up with the Reputation of their being at Glassenbury, the former lying
buried there, and the latter building a little Chapel. The Monks finding the
advantage of these Pretenses, made a farther step toward the advancement of
their Monastery, by giving out that their old Church was the first Church in
Britain, and that all Religion came from thence into other parts, which by
degrees gaining belief, they at last pitched upon Joseph of Arimathea, as the
person who came first hither, being a Man whose Name was every where in great
esteem for the respect he showed to our Savior's Body: And him they thought
they might safely pitch upon, not being pretended to by any other Church. But
it was a considerable time before the Name of Joseph of Arimathea came to be
mentioned, not being found in any of the Saxon Charters, which speak most to
the advantage of Glassenbury; as may be seen by those of King Monastic. Vol. 1.
p. 15, 16.
Edmond and King Edgar in the Monasticon. But by the time of Henry II. the
Tradition was generally received, that the old Church at Glassenbury was built
by the Disciples of our Lord; and that it was the original Church of this
Nation, as appears by the Charter of Henry II. omitted in the Monasticon, but
printed by Harpsfield. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 2.
Harpsfield, and the learned Primate of Usser. Primord. p. 122, 123.
Armagh, by which we see what Authority the Monks of Glassenbury had then
obtained, for not only this Tradition is inserted in the Charter, as a thing
certain, but a Repetition is there made of several other Charters, as seen and
read before the King, which were undoubtedly counterfeit, such as that of King
Arthur, and several others; yet all these went down then, and were confirmed by
the King's Inspeximus. From this time the Monks of Glassenbury were triumphant,
and no one durst dispute their Traditions how improbable soever. This Charter
being confirmed by the Inspeximus of Edw. II. An. 6, 7. of Edw. III. An. 1, 6.
and 1 Edw. IV. And from hence it grew to be the common opinion of the Nation,
and was pleaded for the honor of it in the Councils of Pisa, Constance, Siena
and Basil, of which the Id. p. 23, etc.
Primate has given a full account, and, as things passed among them then, Our
Nation had as just Right to insist on their Tradition of Joseph of Arimathea,
as the Spaniards on that of St. James going into Spain; for certainly one
Tradition was as good as the other.

But having thus far examined the Authority of this Tradition, I now come to
consider the Circumstances of it. And supposing the Testimonies to confirm it
to have been of far greater Authority than I find them, yet the very improbable
Circumstances of the Story it self would be a sufficient reason for me to pass
it over (leaving every one to believe as much of it as he sees cause) viz.

(1.) The Tradition of the Church mentioned by Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24.
Eusebius, Sophron. de Script. Eccles.
Sophronius, Chrysostom. de 12 Apost.
S. Chrysostom, and Hippolyt. de 12 Apost.
Hippolytus Portuensis, That Saint Philip continued Preaching in the Eastern
parts, about Phrygia, and suffered at Hierapolis.

(2) The Eremitical course of their Lives so wholly different from that of the
Apostles, and other Disciples of our Lord, in an Age of so much business and
employment in Preaching the Gospel, who went from one City and Country to
another for that End.

(3.) The building of the Church by a Vision of the Archangel, and devoting it
and themselves to the Blessed Virgin, favors too grossly of Monkish
Superstition to be near the time pretended.

(4.) The Consecrating a Churchyard together with a Church, in order to the
burial of persons in it at that time, is none of the most probable
Circumstances, and yet it is a material one, Quod ipse Dominus Ecclesiam simul
cum Coemeterio dedicarat. Spelman. Council. p. 11.
Sir H. Spelman observes, That the custom of compassing Churches, with
Churchyards, was not so ancient: And withal he adds, That although the
British Cities had Churches from the beginning of Christianity, yet there were
no burying places within Cities, till Cuthbert, Archbishop of Canterbury,
obtained leave for it, about Anno Dom. 758. Upon this Annal. A.D. 63. n. 26.
Alford and Church History, l. 2. chapter 8. n. 5.
Cressy charge him with a manifest mistake and great impertinency. A mistake,
in that Ethelbert and Augustine were both buried in the Church of St. Peter and
Saint Paul. And what then? Does Sir H. Spelman say there was no burying in
Churches before Cuthbert's time? No. But that there was no Burying Place in
Cities before that time. For the Church of St. Augustine, or St. Peter and St.
Paul, was without the City. For so the Chronic. MS. Tit. 12.
MS. Chronicle of St. Augustine 's says, That when the Bodies of the Kings and
Archbishops were carried thither to burial, they followed our Savior, who
suffered without the Gate. And that it was like the children of Israel 's going
out of Egypt, etc. Which is sufficient to prove the truth of Sir H. Spelman's
Observation, which relates to Burying in Cities and not in Churches. And
withal the Reason alleged in one of the Charters of Monastic. Vol. 1. p. 24.
King Ethelbert, why that place was assigned for a Burying place, is, because
the City is for the Living, and not for the Dead. But why do they not prove the
Antiquity of Churchyards to be so great, which was the most to the purpose?
But they say, Sir H. Spelman 's Observation was impertinent, Glassenbury being
then a solitary place, and very far from being a City. It is true, If the
weight had been laid by him only upon that, there being no Evidence of any
Roman City there. But his design was to prove, That Churchyards were not then
adjoining to Churches, because the Cemeteries were without the City, and the
Churches within in the British times; And even in the Saxon times, Spelman.
Council. p. 290.
he says, although they buried in Churches, yet those Churches in which they
buried were without the Cities, till Cuthbert first procured the alteration by
Royal authority, and, some say, by Papal too. But the Monks of St. Augustine's
denied the Pope's confirmation.

But the main Circumstance I shall insist upon, is, the Incongruity of this
Story with the condition of the Roman Province at that time. For there was no
such British King then as Arviragus, and in that Country, as will appear by
the more Southern parts of the Island being reduced into the form of a Province
before Anno Dom. 63. when the Glassenbury Tradition says, Joseph of Arimathea
came first to Britain. For Tacit. vit. Agric. c. 14.
Tacitus says, it was done as to the nearest part of the Island, when A.
Plautius and Ostorius Scapula were Governors here, and between them and
Suetonius Paulinus were Didius Gallus and Veranius. In probability the Belgae
were subdued by Vespasian, of whom Sueton. in Vesp. c. 4.
Suetonius says, That he conquered here two powerful Nations, above twenty
Towns, and the Isle of Wight, By which we find his employment was Westward, and
the Belgae and Damnonii were the two powerful Nations that way. And in all the
Actions afterward, we find no Care taken by the Roman Generals to secure
themselves against the Belgae, as they did against the Brigantes and Silures,
among whom Caractacus commanded; so that there could be no such British King at
that time among the Belgae as Arviragus is supposed to have been. For if there
had been when Tacit. Annal. 12. c. 30.
Ostorius marched Northwards, having suppressed the Iceni, it is not to be
supposed, that he would have fixed his Garrisons on the Severn and the Avon, to
secure the Province. For, as our Camd. Britan. p. 375.
Judicious Antiquary has well observed, The design of Ostorius therein was to
keep the Provincial Britains from joining with the others; and therefore, all
on this side those Garrisons were within the Roman Province; Now the Places
where the Garrisons were placed are by Tacitus said to be Antona and Sabrina.
The latter is certainly the Severn, which parted the Belgae and the Silures.
For Antona, Camden reads Aufona, (although Northanton comes nearer the former
Name, and Southanton had its Name from the River Anton, which there runs into
the Sea; and Ptolemy calls Trisanton, i. e. says Camden, Traith Anton, the
Mouth of Anton) But he chooses Aufona, for this reason, because the two Avons
rise both in the Country of Northampton, and so cut the Island, that none can
pass out of the North, but they must cross one or the other of them, or else
fall upon the Roman Garrisons between, the Remainders whereof he takes notice
of between the rise of the two Avons at Gildsborough and Daintry; by which
means he hindered all intercourse between the Brigantes and the Roman Province,
as the other did between the Silures and them. But if there had been such a
British King as Arviragus among the Belgae, what would the fortifying the
Severn have signified, when the Enemies to the Romans lived on the Roman side?
Tacitus indeed mentions an Expedition of Ostorius against the Cangi, whom
Britan. p. 68.
Camden sometimes thought a small People among the Belgae, but upon better
consideration, Brit. p. 463.
he places them in Cheshire, where he found an Inscription concerning the
CEANGI. And Tacitus says, They were not far from the Sea coast which looks
toward Ireland.

R. Whit. Basing. l. 4. p. 293.
R. White of Basingstoke supposes this Arviragus to bestow the Island on Joseph
of Arimathea, when Trebellius Maximus was Governor here, who succeeded
Petronius Turpilianus the year C. Suetonius Paulinus was Consul at Rome; Which,
according to the Savilian Fasti, was in the twelfth year of Nero, and Anno
Domini 67. (four years after Joseph's coming, according to the Glassenbury
Tradition) but that is no great matter, if at that time we are sure there was
such a King as Arvinagus among the Belgae: But he again contradicts the
Glassenbury Story. For Malmsbury says, That the Barbarous King obstinately
refused to quit his Religion, but, out of pity to them, gave them the Island to
live in; but White says, He was well affected to the Christian Religion, and
was in all respects an admirable Prince. This Arviragus he takes out of the
Galsr. Mon. l. 1. c. 25, 26.
British History, where pleasant Stories are told of him, and from thence in
Matt. West. A. D. 44.
Matthew Westminster, as, of his opposing Claudius, and then marrying his
Daughter Genissa, and the reconciliation between him and Vespasian by her
means, etc. And how his Son Marius succeeded him, and then Coillus who was
wonderfully beloved by the Roman Senate. Here we have found at last the three
Kings of Glassenbury, Arviragus, Marius and Coillus, as they are exstant in
Capgrave and others: So that the Glassenbury Tradition had not its perfection
till it had received these improvements from the British History. For William
of Malmsbury, though he took so great pains in this matter, yet knew nothing of
Arviragus, Marius and Coillus. He speaks indeed of three Pagan Kings giving
twelve portions of Land to the twelve Brethren but he knew not their Names.
Which Grant, he says, was confirmed by King Lucius to twelve others who were
placed there, in imitation of the first twelve. And this continued to the
coming of St. Patrick. And yet toward the Conclusion of this Book he says,
That Anno Domini 601. the King of Dompnonia, i. e. Devonshire and Cornwall,
gave to the old Church in Glassenbury the Land called Ynis Withrin, or, the
Island of Avalon. Who this King was, he says, he could not learn, but he
concludes him to have been a Britain, by calling the Island by the British
Name. But as to Arviragus, that there was a British Prince of that name cannot
be denied, since Juvenal mentions him in Domitian's time.

Omen habes, inquit, magni clarique Triumphi, Satyr. 4. v. 125.

Regem aliquem capies, aut de Temone Britanno
Excidet Arviragus
The Chron. Dover. apud Leland. Collect. vol. 2. p. 50.
Author of the Chronicle of Dover understands this Passage as spoken to Nero;
which agrees much better with the Tradition of Glassenbury, but will by no
means agree with Juvenal, who says plainly enough that Satyr related to
Domitian and his Flatterers. And this was a very insipid Flattery to Domitian,
unless Arviragus were a considerable Prince then living, and an Enemy to
Caesar. For what Triumph could he have over a Subject or a Friend as Aviragus
is supposed after the reconciliation with Vespasian? And no such Enemy could
appear at that time in these parts of Britain. For Tacit. Agric. c. 17, 18, 20.
Petilius Cerealis had conquered the Brigantes, and Julius Frontinus the
Silures, and Agricola after them the Ordovices: And in the time of his
Government, Tacitus says, Even the consederate Cities among the Britains, who
stood upon Terms of Equality before, then submitted themselves to the Roman
Power, and received Garrisons among them. After this Agricola proceeded
Northwards against new People, and destroyed them as far as the Frith of Taus
(Tweed.) Then he fortified the Passage between Glota and Bodotria (Dumbretton
and Edenborough Frith.) So that the Romans were absolute Lords of all this
side, having cast out the Enemy as it were into another Land, as Sir H. Savil
translates the words of Tacitus. From which it is evident, there could be no
such King as Arviragus at that time in these parts of the Island, over whom
Domitian could expect a Triumph.

But suppose there were, what is this to the eighth of Nero, when Joseph of
Arimathea is said to have come hither, at what time Arviragus is said to be
King in Britain? It is possible he might live so long, but how comes he to be
never mentioned in the Roman Story, as Prasutagus, Cogidunus, Caractacus,
Togodumnus and Galgacus are? Arviragus his name was well known at Rome in
Domitian's time; why not spoken of before? D. Powel. in Catal. Reg. Brit.
Some think he was the same with Prasutagus; but this cannot be, for Prasutagus
was dead before the Revolt of the Britains under Boadicea, which was occasioned
by the Romans ill usage of the Britains after his death. And Prasutagus left
only two Daughters, what becomes then of his Son Marius? whom White Hist.
Brit. l. 4. p. 384.
White would have to be Cogidunus. But Marius is said to succeed Arviragus, who
was alive in Domitian's time, and Cogidunus had the Cities conferred upon him
before Suetonius Paulinus came into Britain, as appears by Tacitus; which are
things inconsistent. Alford. Annal. Eccles. A. D. 45. n. 9.
Others say that Arviragus was the same with Caractacus; for this Opinion
Alford contends, and Juvenal, he says, mentions the name by a Poetical
License, although he lived long before. But what reason is there to suppose
that Fabricius Veienti should make such a course Complement to Domitian, that
he should triumph over a man dead, and triumphed over once already, by
Claudius, who was never known at Rome by any other name than Caractacus (as far
as we can find) by which he was so famous for his long Opposition to the
Romans? But it is very probable, that in Domitian's time, after the recalling
Agricola, and taking away the Life of Salustius Lucullus, his Successor, The
Britains took up Arms under Arviragus. And the Usser. Prim. p. 583.
Learned Primate of Armagh mentions an old British Coin in Sir R. Cotton's
Collections with these Letters on it ARIVOG, from whence he thinks his true
name was Arivogus, which the Romans turned to Arviragus. And the old Scholiast
there says, that was not his true name. The Britains being now up in Arms, as
far as we can learn, were not repressed till Hadrian came over in Person, and
built the first Wall, to keep them out of the Roman Province. For, before this,
Spartian. in Hadriano.
Spartianus says, The Britains could not be kept in subjection to the Roman
Power. So that here was a fit season in Domitian's time ( Agricola being
recalled in the beginning of Domitian's Reign) for such a King as Arviragus to
appear in the head of the Britains, and it was then a suitable Complement to
him, to wish him a Triumph over Arviragus. But Alford. A. D. 53. n. 7.
Alford says, that Claudius sent Caractacus home again, and after many years
he dyed in Peace, being a Friend to the Romans. How then comes Tacitus to take
no notice of him, as he does of Cogidunus? Is it probable the Romans would
restore so subtle and dangerous an Enemy as Caractacus had been to them?
Cogidunus had been always faithful to them, but Caractacus an open Enemy, and
the Silures still in being, over whom he commanded, and not over the Belgae, as
he must have done, if he were the Arviragus who gave the Hydes of Land to
Joseph of Arimathea and his Companions.

These things I have here put together to show for what Reasons I decline the
Tradition of Joseph of Arimathea's coming hither to Preach the Gospel. And
although they may not be sufficient to convince others, yet I hope they may
serve to clear me from unexcusable Partiality, which Church History, l. 2. chapter
1. n. 9.
Mr. Cressy charges on all who call this Tradition into question.

(2.) But, notwithstanding, I hope to make it appear from very good and
sufficient Evidence, that there was a Christian Church planted in Britain
during the Apostles times. And such Evidence ought to be allowed in this matter
which is built on the Testimony of ancient and credible Writers, and has a
concurrent probability of Circumstances.

I shall first produce the Testimony of ancient and credible Writers. For it is
an excellent Rule of Baron. A.D. 1. n. 12.
Baronius in such Cases, That no Testimonies of later Authors are to be
regarded concerning things of remote Antiquity, which are not supported by the
Testimony of ancient Writers. And there is a difference in the force of the
Testimony of ancient Writers themselves, according to their Abilities and
Opportunities. For some had far greater judgment than others, some had greater
care about these matters, and made it more their business to search and enquire
into them; and some had greater advantages by being present in the Courts of
Princes or Councils of Bishops, whereby they could better understand the
Beginning and Succession of Churches. And for all these, there was none more
remarkable in Antiquity than Eusebius, being a learned and inquisitive Person,
a Favorite of Constantine, the first Christian Emperor (born and proclaimed
Emperor in Britain) one present at the Council at Nice, whither Bishops were
summoned from all parts of the Empire, and one that had a particular curiosity
to examine the History of all Churches, designing an Ecclesiastical History out
of the Collections he made. The Testimony of a Person so qualified cannot but
deserve great Consideration, especially, when it is not delivered by way of
Report, but when the force of an Argument depends upon it. And Eusebius. Demonst.
Evang. l. 3. c. 7. p. 113.
Eusebius, in his third Book of Evangelical Demonstration, undertakes to prove,
that the Apostles, who first preached the Gospel to the World, could be no
Impostours or Deceivers; and, among other Arguments, he makes use of this, That
although it were possible for such men to deceive their Neighbors and
Countrymen with an improbable Story, yet what madness were it for such
illiterate men, who understood only their Mother Tongue, to go about to
deceive the World by preaching this Doctrine in the remotest Cities and
Countries? And having named the Romans, Persians, Armenians, Parthians,
Indians, Scythians; he adds particularly, that some passed over the Ocean
(...), to those which are called the British Islands. From whence he concludes,
that some more than humane power did accompany the Apostles, and that they were
no light or inconsiderable men, much less Impostours and Deceivers. Now unless
this had been a thing very well known at that time, that Christianity was
planted here by the Apostles, why should he so particularly and expressly
mention the British Islands? It cannot be said that they are only set down to
denote the most remote and obscure places. For, long before that time, the
British Islands were very well known all over the Roman Empire, Britain having
been the Scene of many Warlike Actions from Claudius his time; The Occasion of
Emperors additional Titles and Triumphs; The Residence of Roman Lieutenants
and Legions; The Place of many Roman Colonies, Cities and Ways: But especially,
about Constantine's time, It was the talk of the World, for the Revolt of
Carausius and Allectus; The Victory and Death of Constantius here; The
Succession of Constantine, and his being declared Emperor by the Army in
Britain. So that scarce any Roman Province was so much interested in the
several Revolutions of the Empire as Britain, and therefore Constantine going
from hence, and being so much in the esteem of Eusebius, it is not to be
conceived, that he should speak these Words at random, but that he had made a
diligent Enquiry both of Constantine himself, to whom he was well known, and of
others of his Court, concerning the State of the British Churches, of what
continuance they were, and by whom planted. After all which Eusebius affirms it
with so much assurance, That some of the Apostles preached the Gospel in the
British Islands.

Much to the same purpose Theodoret. To. 4. Sermon. 9. p. 610.
Theodoret speaks, another learned and judicious Church Historian. For among
the Nations converted by the Apostles, he expressly names the Britains; and
elsewhere says, To. 1. in Psalm. 116. p. 870.
That St. Paul brought Salvation to the Islands that lie in the Ocean, after he
had mentioned Spain, and therefore in all probability the British Islands are
understood by him. And in another place In 2 ep. ad Tim. 4. v. 17.
he says, That St. Paul, after his Release at Rome, went to Spain, and from
thence carried the Light of the Gospel to other Nations. What other Nations so
likely to be understood as those which lay the nearest, and are elsewhere said
to be converted by the Apostles, as the Britains are by him? St. Hieron. in
Amos. c. 5.
Jerome says, That St. Paul, having been in Spain, went from one Ocean to
another, imitating the motion and course of the Sun of Righteousness, of whom
it is said, his going forth is from the end of Heaven, and his circuit unto the
ends of it; And that his diligence in Preaching extended as far as the Earth it
self. Which are more indefinite Expressions. But elsewhere he says, De Script.
Eccles.
That St. Paul, after his Imprisonment, preached the Gospel in the Western
parts; By which the British Islands were especially understood; As will appear
by the following Testimony of Clem. Epist. ad Corinth. p. 8.
Clemens Romanus, who says, St. Paul preached Righteousness through the whole
World, and in so doing went (...), to the utmost bounds of the West. Which
Passage will necessarily take in Britain, if we consider what was then meant by
the Bounds of the West. Plutarch, in the Life of Caesar, speaking of his
Expedition into Britain, says, He was the first who brought a Fleet into the
Western Ocean; By which he understands the Sea between Gaul and Britain. And
Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 25, 41. l. 2. c. 2^.
Eusebius several times calls the British Ocean, the Western, and joins the
British Ocean and the Western parts together. And Eusebius. de Martyr Palaest. c.
13.
elsewhere he mentions Gaul and the Western parts beyond it; by which he
understands Britain. And Theod. Hist. Religios. c. 26. p. 881.
Theodoret reckons up the Inhabitants of Spain, of Britain and Gaul, ( who,
says he, lie between the other two) as those who dwell in the bounds of the
West; And among these the Britains must be in the utmost bounds, because the
Gauls lie in the midst. Herod. l. 4. p. 273.
Herodotus says, the Celtae are the most Western of all the Europeans. Now the
ancient Greek Geographers knew of but two Nations in Europe besides themselves,
the Celtae and the Scythae; these latter comprehended all in the most Northern
parts of Europe, and the Celtae the Western; And among these the remotest were
the Britains. Thence Horat Carm. l. 1. c. 35.
Horace calls them, Vltimos Orbis Britannos; As Catull. ad Aur.
Catullus before him, Vltimosque Britannos. For before the discovery of
Britain, the Morini, who lived over against it, were said to be the utmost
People of the Earth. So Aeneid. l. 8.
Virgil calls them, Extremos hominum Morinos. And Plin. l. 19. c. 1.
Pliny, Vltimique hominum existimati Morini. Aethicus says they were, Gentes
Oceani Occidentalis. But Britain being thoroughly made known in the time of
Claudius, The utmost bounds of the West must be understood of Britain,
especially since Catull. ad Caesar.
Catullus calls Britain, Vltimam Occidentis Insulam. And Arnob. in Psalm. 147.
Arnobius setting down the bounds of the Gospel East and West, for the East he
mentions the Indians, and for the West the Britains. I cannot but wonder what
so Learned a man as Launoy de loco Sulpic. Severi, 20. p. 123.
Joh. Launoy means, when, being urged by his Adversaries with this place of
Clemens his Epistle to prove the Apostolical Antiquity of the Gallican
Churches, He fairly rejects the authority of this Epistle, which has been so
universally received by all Learned men since the first publishing of it. But
then he argues well, that if this passage holds for Gaul, it will much more
hold for Britain. So that from this undoubted Testimony of Clemens it follows,
not only, That the Gospel was preached in Britain in the times of the Romans,
but, That St. Paul himself was the Preacher of it. Which is affirmed by Ven.
Fortunat. vit. St. Martini, l. 3.
Venantius Fortunatus, where he describes St. Paul's labors. Transit and
Oceanum, vel qua facit Insula Portum,
Quasque Britannus habet terras quasque ultima Thule.
But because this may look only like a Poetical Expression,

(3.) To make this out more fully, I shall consider the concurrent probability
of Circumstances, together with these Testimonies. And I shall make it appear,
(1.) From St. Paul's Circumstances, that he had Leisure and Opportunity enough
to have come hithe^ (2.) From the Circumstances of Britain, that here was
encouragement and invitation enough for him to come. (3.) From the
Circumstances of the rest of the Apostles, That he was the most likely to come
hither of any of them.

(1.) That St. Paul had Leisure and Opportunity enough to come hither to preach
the Gospel. It is agreed by Eusebius. in Chron.
Eusebius, St. Hieron. in Catal.
Jerome, and others of the Ancients, That St. Paul suffered at Rome, 14 th. of
Nero. Baron. A. D. 69. n. 1.
Baronius says, the 13th. reckoning the years of Nero exactly from the
beginning of his Reign in October; But Petav. de Doctr. Temp. l. 11. c. 14.
Petavius says, That the Ancients reckoned the years according to the usual
custom of a civil year. So that the 13th. of Nero's Reign is the 14th. from
the Calends of January. St. Paul was sent to Rome, when Festus was made
Procuratour of Judaea, in the room of Felix, which was, say Eusebius and St.
Jerome, in the second of Nero; And I see no reason to question it; For although
Felix succeeded Cumanus in the Government of Judaea, who was not condemned till
the 12th. of Claudius (from whence to the second of Nero cannot be reckoned
those many years Act. 24.10.
St. Paul says he had been Governor among the Jews) yet we are to consider,
that Felix was not sent immediately from Rome, as Baron. A. D. 50. n. 8.
Baronius mistakes, but upon Cumanus his Sentence, had his former Government
enlarged. Judaea being then added to his Province, and part of the Province
which he had before being given to Agrippa, as Joseph. de Bell. Iud. l. 2. c.
11.
Josephus says; So that part of Galilee and Samaria having been under his
Government before, Saint Paul might well say, he had been a Ruler among them
many years, although he were dismissed in the second of Nero. And although
Tacit. Annal. 12. c. 54.
Tacitus says, That Felix had been a long time Governor of Judaea, yet it
appears, by the distribution of the Province between Cumanus and him, That
before Cumanus his Banishment, that which was properly Judaea fell not to his
share; And it is not probable that his Government should outlast the Favor of
Pallas with Nero, which mightily declined in his second year. After Saint
Paul's coming to Rome, Saint Luke says, he abode there Act. 28.30.
two years. But Massut. de vit. S. Pauli, l. 13. c. 1.
Massutius observes from the Circumstances of Saint Paul's Voyage, That he
could not come to Rome till the third of Nero. So that he could not have his
liberty till the fifth, upon occasion of the Favors showed, as he conjectures,
to Prisoners and Exiles on the Murder of Agrippina. But from this time to his
returning to Rome, he went up and down Preaching the Gospel. To which time Vie
de St. Paul, l. 2. p. 286.
Godeau, in his Life of Saint Paul, allows eight years: Massut. ib. c. 67.
Massutius rather more; Baron. A. D. 61. n. 2.
Baronius the same; And he says, it was time enough for him to pass through
the whole World; Which Massutius repeats after him. The Question now is, Where
Saint Paul employed all this time? The Ancient Writers of the Church generally
say, in the Western parts; so Clemens, Theodoret, St. Jerome, Athanasius,
Epiphanius, and others. But I need not to insist on particular Testimonies,
since the only Learned L. Cappell. ad Hist. Apostol. Appen. p. 29.
Person who has opposed this Opinion does ingenuously confess it to have been
the common and received Opinion of all the Fathers. And I see no reason, by any
thing he has produced, to recede from it. For suppose we should grant, that he
went back into the Eastern parts, and visited the Churches there, some part of
this time; yet there is enough still left for St. Paul to Preach the Gospel in
Britain and other Western parts, as the Fathers say that he did. And if we
compare the time spent by St. Paul in his former Travels in the East, and allow
him to use an equal diligence afterward, there cannot appear any improbability
that he should come into Britain, and establish a Christian Church here. Three
Peregrinations of St. Paul we have an Account of in the Acts of the Apostles,
before his Voyage to Rome. The Act. 13.14.
first is of him and Barnabas, from Antioch to Seleucia, Cyprus, Perga,
Iconium, Lystra, and Derbe of Lycaonia; from whence they returned back and
settled the Government of the Churches then planted by them. And although it be
said Act. 14.3, 8.
that they abode long at Iconium and Antioch, yet Massut. l. 4. c. 9.
Massutius shows, That this whole Peregrination took up but five years: Which
is as much as Baron. A. D. 46. n. 12.
Baronius allows from the beginning of it, to the Council of Jerusalem. For
that he places in the 4th of Claudius, and this in the 9th. But A.D. 49. n. 1.
he makes their return to Antioch in the 7th, so that he allows but three years
to the founding and settling so many Churches. After the Council at Jerusalem,
Saint Paul takes another Progress from Antioch, and went through Act. 15.41.
Syria and Cilicia, from thence to Derbe and Lystra; and so through Phrygia,
and Galatia, and Mysia; and then from Troas crossed the Sea into Macedonia,
where he first Preached at Philippi, a Roman Colonie: And from thence passed to
Thessalonica, and so to Berrhoea, Athens and Act. 18.11, 18,
Corinth, where he tarried a year and six months and more, and then failed into
Syria, and made haste to Jerusalem, 22.
and so returned to Antioch. This second Progress Baron. A. D. 51. n. 56.
Baronius reckons from the ninth of Claudius to the twelfth, and half the time
was spent at Corinth. The third was again from Antioch over all the Country of
Galatia and Phrygia, to which Baron. A. D. 54. n. 1. Act. 18.23.
Baronius allows a years time; And the next he fixes at Ephesus, where St. Paul
says he Act. 20.31.
tarried three years (not exactly, but the far greatest part of it, having
taught Act. 19.8, 10.
three months in the Synagogue, and two years in the School of Tyrannus.) From
Ephesus he goes into Macedonia and Achaia, and having abode there three months,
he returned through Macedonia to Troas, and from thence went to Miletus,
whither he sent for the Elders of the Church, and took his solemn leave of
them, saying, Act. 20.2^.38.
that they should see his Face no more. From Miletus he passed to Phoenicia,
and so to Jerusalem, where he was kept two years in custody, and then sent by
Festus to Rome. This is a short account of St. Paul's labors and diligence in
Preaching the Gospel before his Imprisonment at Rome. And we cannot suppose a
Person of such indefatigable Industry and Pains, should lie still so many years
after. It is certain he thought he should never return more to the Eastern
parts, when he said so solemnly, I know that ye all, among whom I have gone
Preaching the Kingdom of God, shall see my Face no more. Which Words do not
only concern the Church of Ephesus, but all the other Churches planted by him
in the East; And this he speaks not as his fear or conjecture, but out of
certain Knowledge. And therefore it is not probable he should return into the
East, nor, if he did, would this hinder his coming into these parts afterward,
where he might plant Churches within that time. But it is objected, That there
are no certain Monuments of such Churches planted by him in Italy, Gaul,
Germany or Spain. What certain Monuments are there of new Churches planted by
him in the East after his return? And it is so much less probable, because the
Eastern Writers, who should know best, allot this time to his Preaching in the
West. But it is well observed by the Learned M. Velser. Rer. Vindel. l. 6.
M. Velserus, speaking of the Preaching of the Apostles, St. Peter and St.
Paul, in these Western parts, That we are not to judge of the Planting of
Churches by the remaining Annals and Monuments, because on the one side we are
certain that their sound went out into all the Earth: And on the other, great
care was taken in the several Persecutions, especially that of Dioclesian, to
burn all the Monuments which concerned the Christian Churches. But yet, as to
Britain, we have undoubted Testimony of a Christian Church planted here by the
Apostles, and by none so probably as Saint Paul. For Gildas says, The Gospel
was here received before the fatal defeat of the Britains by Suetonius
Paulinus; which, according to Sir H. Savil's Fasti, was the seventh of Nero,
the eighth says Petavius: And St. Paul being at liberty the fifth, had time
and convenience enough to settle a Christian Church in Britain.

(2.) That there was Encouragement and Invitation enough for St. Paul to come
into Britain, not only from the Infinite numbers of People, which, Caesar. l.
^.
Caesar says, were here in his time, but from the new Settlements that were
daily making here by the Romans, after the first Success, which they had in the
time of Claudius: For then Colonies were drawn over hither; And not only
Military Colonies settled for the security of the Roman Conquests, such as that
of Camalodunum is described by Tacit. Annal. 12. c. 32.14. c. 31.
Tacitus, formerly the Royal Seat of Cynobelin, King of the Trinobantes; but
also Civil and Trading Colonies, such as London was from the beginning, and
therefore commended by Tacitus for its admirable Situation for Trading, and all
Accommodations to that end; and, upon the best enquiry I can make, I very much
incline to believe it of a Roman Foundation, and no elder than the time of
Claudius (as will be made appear in another Discourse:) And that in the time of
Suetonius Paulinus it was inhabited by Romans and Britains together, is evident
from Tacitus; When Suetonius Paulinus drew out the Inhabitants, the City not
being then defensible against the Britains, who in that Revolt destroyed LXX
thousand Romans and their Allies, says Tacitus; But Xiphil. p. 168.
Dio says, two Cities (London and Verulam; for Camalodunum was destroyed
before) and Eighty thousand Men. This was a time of so much Disorder and
Bloodshed, That Gildas with great reason places the Planting of Christianity
here before it. And St. Paul might have some particular encouragement at Rome
to come hither from Pomponia Graecina, Wife to A. Plautius, the Roman
Lieutenant under Claudius in Britain; For that she was a Christian appears very
probable from the account Tacitus gives of her; Tacit. Annal. 13. c. 32.
He says, she was accused of foreign Superstition, and that so far as to
endanger her Life; But her Husband cleared her, sitting as Judge according to
the ancient form; and she lived long after, but in perpetual sadness. If
Tacitus were to describe the Primitive Christians, he would have done it just
after this manner, Charging their Religion with Superstition, and the Severity
of their Lives (abstaining from all the Feasts and Jollities of the Romans) as
a continual Solitude. It was the way of the Men of that time, such as Suct. l.
6. c. 16.
Suetonius, and Plin. Epist. l. 10. ep. 98.
Pliny, as well as Tacit. Annal. 15.
Tacitus, to speak of Christianity as a Barbarous and Wicked Superstition (as
appears by their Writings) being forbidden by their Laws; which they made the
only Rule of Religion. And this happened when Nero and Calphurnius Piso were
Consuls, after St. Paul's coming to Rome, and therefore it is not unreasonable
to suppose her one of his Converts, by whom he might easily be informed of the
state and condition of Britain, and thereby be more encouraged to undertake a
Voyage thither. It is certain that St. Paul did make considerable Converts at
his coming to Rome; Which is the reason of his mentioning Phil. 4.22.
the Saints in Caesar 's household. And it is not improbable that some of the
British Captives carried over with Caractacus and his family might be some of
them; who would certainly promote the Conversion of their Country by St. Paul.
But I cannot affirm, as Moncaeius, de Incunab. Regiis Eccles. Christiana Vet.
Britan.
Moncaeius does, That Claudia, mentioned by St. Paul, was Caractacus his
Daughter, and turned Christian, and after married to Pudens a Roman Senator;
whose Marriage is celebrated by Martial in his noted Epigrams to that purpose.
It is certain that Claudia Ruffina was a Britain, who is so much commended by
Martial. l. 4. ep. 13.

l. 11. ep. 53.


Martial for her Wit and Beauty. But if these Epigrams were written in Trajan's
time, as is very probable, It is somewhat of the latest for the Daughter of
Caractacus who came in Claudius his time to Rome. But Alford Annal. Eccles. A.
D. 53. n. 5, 6.
Alford digests all this well enough, only he is extremely concerned, lest she
should be made the Apostle of Britain, and Preach here before St. Peter. But
the Antiq. Britan. p. 3.
Author of the Antiquitates Britannicae, whom he reflects upon, says no such
thing as he would impute to him. He only says, That if she were a Christian
she would acquaint her Countrymen as much with the Christian Doctrine as she
did before with Martial 's Wit. Wherein there is no Profaneness or Absurdity.
But he adds, that in so Noble a Family, The rest of her kindred who were
baptized with her might be the Occasions of dispersing Christianity in the
British Nation. So that there was no need, for his bidding Claudia to keep at
home, and make room for St. Peter to come to Britain to preach the Gospel. But
if this Claudia were St. Paul's Disciple, why might not she excite that Apostle
to go into her Country, to plant Christianity there, as he had done with so
much Success in other Places? And whether St. Peter or St. Paul were more
probably the Apostle of Britain, is now to be considered. And I affirm,

(3.) That St. Paul was the most likely to come hither of any of the Apostles.
The several Traditions about St. James, Simon Zelotes and Philip, are so
destitute of any ancient Testimony or Probability, that the Competition among
the Apostles can lie only between St. Peter and St. Paul. Some Writers of our
Church History have endeavored for particular Reasons, to prove St. Peter to
have preached the Gospel in Britain; But their Proofs are very slight and
inconsiderable, and depend chiefly on the authority of Simeon Metaphrastes or
other Legendary Writers, or some Monkish Visions, or some Domestic Testimonies
of his pretended Successors, or some late partial Advocates, such as
Eysengren. Cent. 1. part. 7. did. 8.
Eysengrenius, who professes to follow Metaphrastes. All which together are not
worth mentioning in comparison with the Authors on the other side; I shall
therefore examine the Probability of the thing from the Circumstances of St.
Peter, as I did before from those of St. Paul; and I shall endeavor to show,
That his business lay quite another way, and that there is no probable Evidence
of his coming hither.

I take it for granted, that the Apostles were employed according to the Tenor
of their Commissions, viz. That the Apostle of the Circumcision was to attend
the Jews, and of the Uncircumcision the Gentiles. Now St. Paul says, That Gal.
2.7.
the Gospel of the Uncircumcision was committed to him, as the Gospel of the
Circumcision was unto Peter. This, Baron. A. D. 51. 16, 26, 28, 29.
Baronius says, was agreed at the Council at Jerusalem. But he will not have
it to be such a distribution of distinct Provinces, as that the one upon no
occasion should meddle with the Gentiles, nor the other with the Jews: But yet
he grants, that the Apostleship of the Gentiles was in a particular manner
committed to St. Paul, as of the Jews to St. Peter. And whatever they might do
occasionally, This, as he proves from Hieron. in Ep. ad Gal. c. 2.
St. Jerome, was the Principale Mandatum, the Main of the Commission to either
of them. Which being supposed, It necessarily follows, that St. Peter's chief
employment must be where the greatest numbers of Jews were. And from hence Pet.
de Marc. de Concord. l. 6. c. 1. n. 4.
Petrus de Marca infers, That St. Peter, having preached to the Jews in Judaea,
employed himself in converting the Jews abroad both of the first and second
Dispersion. The latter were chiefly in Egypt, at Alexandria, where he settled
Mark the Bishop over the converted Jews. From thence he went to Antioch; from
thence to Babylon, where the Head of the first Dispersion lived; And in this
City, he says, he wrote his Epistle to those dispersed Jews, over whose
Synagogues the Patriarch of Babylon had Jurisdiction. Clemens Romanus takes no
notice at all of St. Peter's Preaching in the Western parts, as he does of St.
Paul's. But Eusebius. Hist. l. 3. c. 1.
Eusebius, from Origin, says, That St. Peter preached to the dispersed Jews in
Pontus, Galatia, Bithynia, Cappadocia, etc. And Epiphan. Har. 27. n. 6.
Epiphanius, even where he says, That St. Peter and St. Paul did both
constitute Bishops at Rome upon their going thence to preach the Gospel in
other places; yet he adds, That St. Paul went toward Spain, but St. Peter
frequently visited Pontus and Bithynia, which was very agreeable to the design
of his Commission, there being so great a number of Jews in those parts. And
Pontus and Bithynia seem to have been reserved as the peculiar Province of St.
Peter; For when St. Paul attempted to go into Bithynia, Act. 16.7.
he was forbidden by the Spirit, which then commanded him to come into Europe.
And so he made for Macedonia. Baron. A. D. 58. n. 51.
Baronius grants, that St. Peter spent the greatest part of his time in the
Eastern parts, but about Anno Dom. LVIII. he finds him employed in the West,
and particularly among the Britains. But what ancient authority, according to
his own Rule, does he produce for it? He names none but Metaphrastes, and yet,
as it falls out unluckily, when the same Metaphrastes his authority is
produced, for St. Paul 's preaching in the Western parts, he is apparently
slighted by him A.D. 61. n. 4.
and for the very same Reason, which holds against the former Testimony, viz.
for quoting things out of Eusebius, which are not to be found in him. And
elsewhere he says, A.D. 44. n. 38.
he is of no authority in these matters. But Metaphrastes his Testimony serves
to a good purpose in St. Peter's Case, viz. to clear a considerable difficulty,
how St. Peter, if then Bishop of Rome, should not be taken notice of by St.
Paul, when he wrote his Epistle to the Romans. To which he answers, That Saint
Peter came to Rome the second of Claudius, but being banished thence with other
Jews the ninth of Claudius, he spent the time then in preaching the Gospel in
other places, and so very conveniently finds him in Britain, when St. Paul
wrote his Epistle to the Romans, which he places in the second of Nero. But it
is by no means probable, says Vales. in Eusebius. l. 2. c. 16.
Valesius, That St. Peter should come to Rome before the death of Herod
Agrippa. And Baron. A.D. 44. 10.
Baronius says, That after his being delivered out of prison, he went to
Caesarea, Laodicea and Antioch (according to his own Author Metaphrastes) and
then into Cappadocia, Pontus, Galatia and Bithynia, and so returned by Antioch
to Jerusalem. So that if Metaphrastes his authority be good for any thing, St.
Peter could hardly come to Rome the second of Claudius: And if the death of
Agrippa followed soon after the delivery of St. Peter, as Valesius thinks, and
St. Luke seems to intimate; then he could not be at Rome till the fourth of
Claudius, for all agree that Agrippa died that year. So that there is no
certainty of St. Peter's coming to Rome the second of Claudius. Yet let that be
supposed, And that St. Peter went from Rome on the Edict of Claudius. What
makes him so long absent from thence as to the second of Nero, when Romans 16.3.
St. Paul in his Epistle to the Romans salutes Aquila and Priscilla as then
present at Rome, who certainly left it before on the Act. 18.2.
Account of that Edict. So that this Edict could be no reason of his being
absent from Rome at the time of this Epistle. But it falls out unhappily, That
though St. Peter be made by Baronius and others Bishop of Rome for twenty five
years, yet he can never be found in his own Diocese in all that time before his
Martyrdom; But one excuse or other is still found for his absence, when there
were several remarkable Transactions which must have discovered him if he had
been at Rome; As not only upon St. Paul's writing this Epistle to the Romans,
but upon St. Paul's coming to Rome, upon his writing so many Epistles from
thence, upon the defense he made for himself, when he says, 2 Timothy 4.16.
that all forsook him. What St. Peter too? So that upon the whole matter, the
Opinion of Lactant. de Mort. Persec. c. 2.
Lactantius in his late published Book, seems most agreeable to truth, That St.
Peter came not to Rome till the Reign of Nero, and not long before his
Martyrdom; And this Baluzius confesses to have been the most ancient and
received Opinion in the Church, since Lactantius never disputes it: And what he
says of the twenty five years wherein the Apostles planted Churches, was in
likelihood the Occasion of that mistaken Tradition concerning Saint Peter 's
being twenty five years Bishop of Rome. So much may suffice to show the greater
probability, That the Christian Church in Britain was rather founded by St.
Paul than by St. Peter or any other Apostle.

CHAP. II. Of the Succession of the British Churches to the first Council of
Nice.
THE Testimony of Tertullian concerning them cleared.

It extends only to Britains.

The National Conversion of the Scots under King Donald fabulous.

Of Dempster's old Annals.

Prosper speaks not of the Scots in Britain.

Tertullian to be understood of the Provincial Britains as well as others.

The Testimony of Sulpitius Severus examined.

Several Testimonies of Origin concerning the British Churches in his time.

The different Traditions about King Lucius.

The State of the Roman Province here, overthrows his being King over all
Britain.

Great probability there was such a King in some part of it, and then converted
to Christianity.

A Conjecture proposed in what part of Britain he reigned.

The most probable means of his Conversion, and the Story cleared from Monkish
Fables.

Of Dioclesian's Persecution in Britain, and the stopping of it by the means of
Constantius.

The flourishing of the British Churches under Constantine.

The reason only of three British Bishops present at the Council of Arles.

The great Antiquity of Episcopal Government here.

Of the Flamines and Archiflamines of Geffrey of Monmouth; how far agreeable to
the Roman Constitution.

Maximinus set up a Pagan Hierarchy in imitation of the Christian.

The Canons of the Council of Arles not sent to the Pope to confirm, but to
publish them.

HAving showed the great probability of the planting a Christian Church here in
the Apostles time, and that by St. Paul; I am now to consider, the Succession
of this Church; of which we have undoubted Evidence from the unquestionable
Testimonies of Tertullian and Origin, who mention it as a thing so very well
known, That they use it as an Argument against the Jews, to prove Christ to
have been the promised Messiah, because the uttermost parts of the Earth were
given for his Possession. Tertullian flourished, as St. Jerome says, under
Severus and his Son; And in the time of Severus he wrote against the Jews, as
Baron. A.D. 210. n. 4.
Baronius proves from several Passages in that Book. In his time the Affairs of
Britain were very well understood in other parts of the Roman Empire,
especially by Men so learned and inquisitive as Tertullian. For Clodius Albinus
having set up for the Empire in Britain, and being beaten by Severus, near
Lions, he took care to secure this Province by sending Virius Lupus, his
Lieutenant, hither. But things growing troublesome here, Severus himself
undertook an Expedition hither, and brought the Britains to such Terms, That
they were contented to live beyond the Wall which Severus built; where
Hadrian's Wall had been before. The part of Britain beyond the Wall was called
Caledonia, as Dio in Sever.
Dio says. And it is apparent, that the Romans were at that time fully
acquainted with the Condition of the Britains, both within the Province, and
without; And therefore Tertullian cannot be supposed to speak at random about
this matter; when Tertull. con. Judaeos, c. 7.
he mentions the Nations of Gaul and the Britains, with as much assurance as he
does his Countrymen, the Moors, for receiving Christianity; And says, The
Kingdom of Christ was advanced among them, and that Christ was solemnly
worshipped by them. Tertullian was a man of too much understanding to expose
himself to the contempt of the Jews, by mentioning this as a thing so well
known at that time, if the Britains were then known to be no Christians; Or, if
they had been such, and were returned to Barbarism, the Argument would have
been stronger against him. When therefore such a Passage does not fall by
chance from such a Writer, but the force of an Argument depends upon it, it is
of so much greater weight. How ridiculous would it appear for a man to prove
that Popery is the Catholic Religion, by instancing not only in Italy and
Spain, as the Nations where it is universally received; but in Great Britain,
and Denmark, and Sweden? No less was the absurdity then to prove Christ's
universal Kingdom by enumerating Gaul and Britain with other Nations where
Christ was worshipped, if there were no Christian Churches at that time in
being among them.

But there are two Objections against this Passage of Tertullian, which must be
removed. (1.) That he speaks of that part of Britain which was not under the
Roman Power, and the Conversion of it is said to be later than to be here
mentioned by Tertullian: For Fordon. l. 3. c. 35.
Joh. Fordon and Mayor de Gest. Scot. l. 1. c. 14.
Joh. Mayor, from an ancient Distick in both of them ( Christi transactis
tribus annis atque ducentis
Scotia Catholicam coepit inire Fidem.)
say, That the Christian Religion was received in Scotland in A. D. 203. about
the seventh of Severus. But this was so little a time before Tertullian's
Writing, that it could hardly be so well known in Africa, as to afford strength
to an Argument against the Jews.

To which I answer, That it is true, Tertullian does add the greater Emphasis
to his Argument by saying, Et Britannorum inaccessa Romany loca, Christo vero
subdita, The Gospel had access to those parts of Britain whither the Romans had
none. Which does prove, that Christianity was then received beyond the Wall,
but not by the Scots, who were not yet settled in those parts; But by the old
Britains, who were driven thither, as appears by the Account given by Xiphil.
in Severo.
Xiphilin out of Dio, who says, that the Britains were divided into two sorts,
the Maeatae and the Caledonii; The former dwelt by the Wall, and the latter
beyond them. These were the Extraprovincial Britains, and were distinct both
from the Picts and the Scots, says Fordon. Scotichron. l. 3. c. 36.
Joh. Fordon, who carefully distinguishes these three Nations when he speaks
of their Wars with the Romans; And he makes Fulgentius the Head of the Britains
of Albany in the time of Severus; But he supposes both the Scots and Picts to
have been in the Northern parts long before, and that the Scots received the
Christian Faith in the time of Severus, Victor being then Bishop of Rome, who
succeeded Eleutherius; To whom, says Hector. Boeth. l. 5. p. 89.
Hector Boethius, King Donald sent Ambassadors, to desire him to send Persons
fit to instruct them in the Christian Faith. And upon this, says he, it was
generally received in Scotland. Dempster. Apparat. ad Hist. Scot. l. 1. c. 6.
Hist. Eccles. l. 15. in Palladio.
Dempster, according to his custom, is very warm in this matter, and says,
all their Annals and Histories agree, that King Donald and the whole Kingdom of
Scotland did then embrace Christianity; And is angry with Baronius for putting
off their Conversion to the time of Palladius. But notwithstanding all his
boasting of the consent of Annals and Histories, the Scotichronicon is the
only Authority he has to produce: And in his Preface he says, That King
Edward I. destroyed all the Monuments of the Kingdom; and it is somewhat
unreasonable to complain of the want, and to allege the consent of them at the
same time. And besides, he produces something out of Fordon concerning
Paschasius of Sicily, being sent by Victor into Scotland, and returning with a
Message from King Donald, which is not to be found in Fordon. But, as Baron. A.
D. 429. n. 2.
Baronius observes, It is strange, that so remarkable a Conversion should be
ommitted not only by Bid, but by Marianus Scotus, who mentions the Mission of
Palladius. And Prosper. cont. Collator. in fine.
Prosper says, Upon the Mission of Palladius, who was made the first Bishop
over the Scottish Christians, the People, who were barbarous before, were made
Christians.

But it is urged by Dempster, not without show of Authority, that Palladius was
sent to those which were already Christians, and therefore Christianity must be
planted among the Scots before the Mission of Palladius; and for this he quotes
Beda, Ado Viennensis, Hermannus Contractus, Marianus Scotus, and others; and he
blames Platina and Ciacconius who make him the Instrument of their Conversion,
wherein he confesses they follow Fabius Ethelwerd and Ingulphus; but he takes
no notice, that Prosper himself, in his Chronicon, affirms the same thing, and
the others have it from him. So that Prosper makes the Scots to be converted by
Palladius, and to have been Christians before his time; which are inconsistent:
But Nenn. c. 55, 56.
Nennius seems to have hit upon the true account of this matter, viz. That
Palladius was sent by Celestine to convert the Scots, but, finding no great
success therein, he was driven on the Coasts of Britain, and there died: And
after his death, St. Patrick was sent on the same Errand. And, if the Writers
of his Life may be believed, Palladius did very little toward the Conversion
of the Scots; And therefore what Prosper says of Celestine's making a
barbarous Nation Christian, must be understood of his Design and good
Intention, and not of the Event, which came not to pass till some time after;
and chiefly, by the means of St. Patrick, who went after the death of
Palladius: Unless we understand the Words of Prosper, of those who were made
Christians at the time of his Writing; the Design whereof being laid by
Palladius is therefore attributed to him, when he wrote against Cassian,
sometime after the death of Celestine: But when he wrote his Chronicon, in the
time of Leo, The Scots being then converted; he says, That Palladius was
appointed to be Bishop over the believing Scots. Not that they did then believe
before Palladius his coming, but that they did now believe when he wrote his
Chronicon. For all the Testimonies of such as Preached there before Palladius
are of very little Credit. But nothing of all this relates to the Scots in
Britain; but to the original Scots in Ireland, who were incapable of a National
Conversion in Britain, so long before they came to settle in it, as will appear
afterward: So that if there were any Conversion of Scots before the Mission of
Palladius, it cannot at all respect this Place of Tertullian, who speaks only
of the Britains, and not of the Scots.

And Dio knew of none but Britains that lived Northward in that Expedition of
Severus, although, he says, he went to the utmost extent of the Island, and at
last concluded a Peace with the Britains upon their quitting no small part of
their Country, although they soon revolted; So that here was a great number of
Britains to be converted in those Places where the Romans never had been before
Severus his last Expedition: Which the Scottish Historians apply to the
Conversion of their Nation, who were not yet come into Britain. But allowing
that there were Churches planted among the Northern Britains, this does not
overthrow the continuance and propagation of the Christian Church among the
Provincial Britains; For now, for a long time, the Christian Religion had a
great Liberty of propagating it self; For, from the time of Hadrian to Severus,
the Christians were generally free from Persecution, excepting what the Rage of
the People brought upon them in some Places, without any Edict of the
Emperors, as in the time of the Antonini both at Rome, in Gaul, and some parts
of the East: But these Persecutions were neither general, nor continued so long
as when the Emperors published Edicts on purpose; and therefore, the
Persecutions under Trajan and the Antonini, ought in reason to be distinguished
from those under Nero and Domitian, Decius and Dioclesian, when the Emperors
made it their business to root out Christianity. But in the former Case, the
Emperors restrained the People by their Edicts, but the People in some Places
by false Suggestions frustrated the design of those Edicts, which Places
excepted, the Christians enjoyed a long time of Liberty; In which they
neglected no opportunities to promote their Religion. And within this time the
Christian Writers say, There was no Nation almost then known, where
Christianity was not planted. So Justin. Dial. cum Tryph. p. 345.
Justin Martyr tells Trypho; so Eusebius. l. 4.^.67. l. 5. c. 21.
Eusebius and Ruffinus speak; Ruffin. l. 4. ^. 8.
and Lactant. de Most. Persec. c. 3.
Lactantius says, That Christianity spread it self into the East and West, so
that there was scarce any Corner of the Earth so remote whither it had not
pierced, no Nation so barbarous that was not reduced by it. As to Britain,
Gildas affirms the continuance of a Church here, from the first Plantation of
the Gospel, though not maintained with equal Zeal to the Persecution of
Dioclesian; and even that was so far from destroying it, that it gained
strength and reputation by the Courage of Confessors and Martyrs; and the heat
of it was no sooner over, but, as Bed. l. 1. c. 8.
Bid and Gild. 8.
Gildas both say, the Christian Church flourished again in great Peace and
Unity till the Arian Heresy gave it disturbance.

(2.) It is objected, That Sulpic. Sev. l. 2. p. 381.
Sulpicius Severus, speaking of the Persecution of Christians in Gaul in the
time of M. Aurelius Antoninus, says, That Martyrdoms were then first seen in
Gaul, the Christian Religion being more lately received beyond the Alps. Which
seems to overthrow the Antiquity of the Britannick as well as the Gallick
Churches. But in my opinion (after so many Discourses written in a neighbor
Nation about this Passage) we are to distinguish that which Sulpicius Severus
absolutely affirms, viz. That there were no Martyrdoms in Gaul before that
time; From that which he supposes to have been the reason of it, viz. That the
Christian Religion was more lately received on this side the Alps. The other
he was certain of, there being no authentic Relation of any Martyrdoms there
before; but that which he assigns as the reason of it, has no such certainty
in it; For the Christian Churches might have been planted there before, and
have escaped that Persecution which befell the Churches of Lions and Vienna in
the time of M. Aurelius: He might as well have argued, that Christianity was
not here received till a little before the Persecution of Dioclesian, because
we read of no Martyrdoms before those of St. Alban, Julius and Aaron, at that
time. But if there were no Edict for Persecution of Christians for above an
hundred years together, viz. from the Persecution of Domitian, Anno Dom. 92. to
the Edict of Severus, Anno Dom. 204. then it was very possible that there might
be Christian Churches in Gaul, and yet no Martyrdoms till the Persecution under
M. Aurelius by a popular Tumult, which, as Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius tells us, was the seventeenth year of his Reign. Baron. A.D. 104. n.
6.
Baronius thinks that M. Aurelius sent private Edicts against the Christians.
But Tertull. Apol. c. 5.
Tertullian says, none of their good Emperors ever persecuted the Christians,
and instanceth in Trajan, Hadrian, Pius, Verus and M. Aurelius. Eusebius. l. 3. c.
33.
Eusebius says, That Trajan abated the fierceness of the Persecution, but left
the Laws in force upon information; l. 4. c. 9.
That Hadrian, in his Rescript to Minutius Fundanus, Proconsul of Asia, forbad
a general Persecution of any as Christians; c. 13.
That, Antoninus Pius, not only pursued the same method, but threatened severe
punishment to all Informers: the same he says of M. Aurelius. In Commodus his
time, l. 5. c. 5.
he says, the Christian Churches flourished very much in all parts; c. 21.
So that till Severus his Edict there was no Persecution, by virtue of any
Edict of the Emperors; by the account which Eusebius gives. And Lactant. del
M^rt. Persec. c. 3.
Lactantius hardly allows any Persecution at all from Domitian to Decius. Not
but that the Christians suffered very much in some Places, through the Rage of
the People, and the Violence of some Governors of Provinces; But there was no
general Persecution countenanced by the Emperors Edicts, and therefore, where
the People were quiet or intent upon other things, there might be Christian
Churches where there were no such Martyrdoms as those of Lions and Vienna.

It is certain that Iren. l. 1. ^. 3.
Irenaeus mentions the consent of the Celtick Churches, and those of Germany
and the Iberi, with the Eastern and Libyan Churches. All the Question is,
Whether this ought to be restrained to the Churches planted among the Celtae,
as they were one Division of the Gauls in Caesar's time, or whether he took the
Word in the larger sense, as comprehending all the Gauls. This latter seems
much more probable, because Irenaeus, in none of the others mentioned by him,
takes any particular Division of the People, but the general Name, as of the
Germans and Iberi, and why not then the Celtae in as large a sense? Since
Strab. l. 1, 4, 7.
Strabo, Plutarch. in Caesare, in Crasso.
Plutarch, Appian. 2. Civil. Bell.
Appian, and others, call the Gauls in general by the name of Celtae; and
Tertullian manifestly rejects that sense of Celtae for one Division of the
Gauls, when he mentions the several Nations of the Gauls which had embraced
Christianity. But I will not insist, as Pet. de Marc. Epist. ad. H. Vales.
Petrus de Marca does, That Tertullian by the Galliarum diversae Nationes means
the four Provinces of Gaul into which Augustus did distribute it: But I say,
that there is no reason to limit the sense of Tertullian to one Division of the
Gauls, supposing the different Nations do comprehend those of Gallia Cisalpina
and Transalpina; although I see no ground to understand Tertullian so, Launoy
Ep. c. 7.
since the name of Gallia Cisalpina was much difused; especially after the new
distribution of the Empire by Hadrian. So that from the Testimonies of Irenaeus
and Tertullian, we see no reason to question the greater Antiquity of the
Celtick Churches than Sulpicius Severus intimates, much less to overthrow the
Antiquity of the Britannick Churches. For, besides this Testimony of Tertullian
concerning the British Churches; We have another of Origin. in Ezekiel. Dom. 4.
Origin, not long after, who says, When did Britain before the coming of
Christ consent in the Worship of one God? Which implies, that the Britains were
then known to be Christians; and, by being so, were brought off from the former
Idolatry. And unless so learned a Man as Origin had been fully satisfied of the
truth of this, having choice enough of other Instances, he would not have run
as far as Britain to bring an Argument to prove, that all the Earth does praise
the Lord; Which, he says, is fulfilled in the Christian Churches dispersed
over the World. But I wonder what should make two such learned Antiquaries as
Camd. Brit. p. 47.
Mr. Camden and Godwin. de Praesul. p. 23.
Bishop Godwin, so far to mistake the sense of Origin, to understand him as if
he had said, That Britain, by the help of the Druids, always consented in the
belief of one God, whereas it is very plain, That Origin speaks of it as a
great alteration that was made in the Religion of the Britains after the coming
of Christ. And Origin does not only speak of the belief, but of the Worship of
one God, which it is certain from Caesar, That the Druids did never instruct
the People in. But the Christian Religion altered the whole Scheme of the
Druids Worship, and instead of their Taranis and Hesus, and Teutates, and
Belenus, and Andate, it taught them to believe and worship one true God, and
Jesus Christ, whom he has sent to be the Savior of the World; Whose Power,
Orig. in Luc. c. 1. (...).
Origin says elsewhere, was seen in Britain as well as Mauritania.

Thus far I have endeavored to clear the Apostolical Succession of the British
Churches, which those have rendered more doubtful, who have derived our
Christianity from King Lucius his Message to Pope Eleutherius, and the Persons
he sent over to convert him and the whole Nation, as the Tradition goes, to the
Christian Faith. But there is a considerable difference to be observed about
this Tradition, not merely about the time of the Conversion of this King Lucius
(of which Usser. de Primord. c. 3.
Archbishop Usher has given so full an account, that to his diligence therein,
nothing material can be added) but concerning the means and manner of his
Conversion, and the Persons employed in it. For Pet. de Natal. l. 1. c. 24.
Petrus Equilinus says, That he was baptized by Timothy, a Disciple of St.
Paul; and he had it from a much better Author, for Notker. Martyrol. 8 Calend.
Junii.
Notkerus Balbulus says, That King Lucius was baptized by Timothy; not the
Timothy to whom Saint Paul wrote his Epistles; But the Brother of Novatus,
whose Names are extant in the old Martyrology published by Rosweyd, 12 Call.
Julii; who were both, says Baron. A.D. 166. n. 2.
Baronius, Sons to Pudens a Roman Senator; the same who is supposed to have
been married to Claudia Rufina the Britain; and therefore his Son might not
improbably be employed in this work of converting a British King. Naucler.
Chron. Vol. 2. Genesis 6.
Nauclerus takes notice, That this Relation agrees best with the Tradition of
the Church of Curia, a noted City of Rhaetia. And Pantal. de Viris illustrib.
Germ. p. 1.
Pantaleon calls Lucius the Disciple of Timothy; out of the Annals of that
Church. From whence M. Velser. Rer. Vindel. l. 6.
Marcus Velserus shows, that he did not die here in Britain, but went over into
those parts of Rhaetia to preach the Gospel, and there suffered Martyrdom: or,
at least, ended his days; For they are not agreed about the manner of his
death. Tschud. Descript. Rhaet. c. 18.
Aegidius Tschudus says the former, who adds, that there is a place near Curia
called Clivus S. Lucii still; and Munster. Cosmograph. l. 3. p. 518.
Munster says, near the Episcopal Palace, there is Monasterium Sancti Lucii.
And Ferrar. Nova Topograph. p. 44.
Ferrarius in his new Topography to the Martyrologium Romanum, reckons King
Lucius of Britain one of the Martyrs of Curia, which the Germans call Chur, and
the Italians Choira. And the Romans Martyr. 3 Non. Dec.
Roman Martyrology says, That there his memory is still observed. Notker.
Balbul. 8 Calend. Iunii.
Notkerus Balbulus says, That he converted all Rhaetia, and part of Bavaria.
If so, they had great reason to preserve his Memory, and the British Church, on
the account of King Lucius his converting their Country, has as much right to
challenge Superiority over Bavaria and Rhaetia, as the Church of Rome has over
the British Church on the account of the Conversion of Lucius by Eleutherius.
If this Tradition hold good, the other cannot; which differs as to time,
Persons, and the remainder of his Life, which our Writers say, was spent here;
And Galfr. Monu. l. 2. c. 2.
Geffrey, from the British History says, That he died at Gloucester, and left
no Heir to succeed him. Wherein he is followed by Fordon. Scotichron. l. 3^. c.
36.
John Fordon, who says, That after the death or disappearance of King Lucius
the Royal Stock failed, and then the Romans appointed Governors instead of
Kings. But, by that Expression, Vel non comparente, Fordon seems to doubt,
whether he did not withdraw in his old Age, according to the German Tradition.

Nenn. c. 18.
Nennius says, That Anno Domini 164. Lucius, King of Britain, with all the
inferior Kings of Britain, were baptized upon an Embassy sent by the Roman
Emperors and Pope Evaristus. But the old MS. in the Cotton Library has it,
Post 167 annos post adventum Christi. One of the Cambridge MSS. post 164 annos.
In the margin whereof it is said, That Nennius is grievously mistaken, because
Evaristus his time cannot agree to either of the Computations, Evaristus dying,
according to the old Catalogue of the Bishops of Rome made about An. D. 354.
when Trebonius Gallus and Metilius Bradua were Consuls, which, according to the
Fasti both of Onuphrius Panvinius and Sir H. Savil, was Anno Dom. 109. But
Archbishop Usher observes, that in one Copy of Nennius he found the name of
Eleutherius, therefore I pass it over: And yet the time of Eleutherius will not
agree with either of these Computations: For he was made Bishop of Rome,
according to the same Catalogue in the Consulship of Severus and Herennianus,
which, according to those Fasti, is Anno Dom. 172. But it will be too hard to
press the point of Chronology too far, when Bed. Hist. l. 1. c. 4. Epit. Histor.
Bid, according to different Computations, sometimes puts Anno Dom. 156. and
at another time Anno Dom. 167. But as long as it is generally agreed to have
been in the time of M. Aurelius and Lucius Verus, and the beginning of
Eleutherius his Popedom, I shall urge this matter no farther; since it must
come within a very little compass, if the Characters of time must suit with it,
which, Marianus Scotus says, was when Pollio and Aper were Consuls, the
sixteenth of M. Aurelius, and Anno Dom. 176. according to the Dionysian
account, although Marianus follow another himself. Which falls out to be the
year before the Persecution of the Churches of Lions and Vienna, which, as
Eusebius. l. 5. c. 1.
Eusebius says, was the seventeenth of M. Aurelius, when Irenaeus was sent by
them on a Message to Eleutherius. Baron. A. D. 183. n. 3.
Baronius places the Conversion of Lucius somewhat later, in the beginning of
Commodus, Anno Dom. 183. But therein, as Archbishop Usher observes, he has all
the more ancient Historians against him; and it is only his own mistake in the
Chronology of the first Bishops of Rome, which makes him say, the time of
Eleutherius, will not agree to M. Aurelius and Lucius Verus, wherein he is too
much followed by our Camd. Brit. p. 47.
learned Antiquary.

Having then found no such inconsistency in the point of time, but that if
there were such a King as Lucius in Britain then, he might well send to
Eleutherius such a Message; I now proceed to consider, how far this Tradition
of King Lucius can agree with the State of the British Affairs at that time.
The Britains being impatient of the Roman Yoke in Hadrian's time, he comes over
and brings new Legions with him; And settles the whole Province in quietness,
and built his Wall, to keep the other Britains in order. Notwithstanding this,
in Antoninus his time, the War broke out more fiercely; and not only the
Capitol. in Antonin.
other Britains forced their Passage into the Roman Province, but, as Pausan.
in Arcad.
Pausanias says, The Brigantes rebelled, who, for that cause, had part of
their Country taken from them. But Lollius Vrbicus being sent hither, he drove
the Britains back, built another Wall farther Northwards, where Agricola
formerly had placed his Garrisons, as appears by the Camd. Brit. p. 650, 699.
Inscriptions there taken up: So that Lollius Vrbicus drove the Britains 100
miles Northward; For so much is the distance between the Walls of Hadrian and
Antoninus. For all this, the Britains brake out again with so much violence in
the beginning of Jul. Capitol. in M. Aurel.
M. Aurelius Antoninus his Reign, that Calphurnius Agricola was sent against
them, and from that time we read of no disturbance here till the time of
Commodus, when Dio in Commodo.
Vlpius Marcellus was Roman Lieutenant. This being the true State of Britain at
that time, what place is here left for such a King over Britain as Lucius is
represented? He must either be over the Britains beyond the Wall, which
overthrows one main part of the Tradition as to his settling the Churches here
after his Conversion; or, he must be the Head of the Revolting Britains who
were repressed by Calphurnius Agricola; or, he must be a subordinate King to
the Romans, such as Cogidunus and Prasutagus had been. But then, how comes he
to command all Britain? To have several Kings under him? To change the Affairs
of Religion as he thought fit? Were these Privileges ever allowed to such
Titulary Princes? It is very true, That the Romans did often suffer Kings to
govern Provinces under them; But then they were Provinces wholly subdued and
compassed about with the Roman Forces on all sides: But no Instance can be
given where they suffered an Hereditary King of the same Country to enjoy full
power over his Subjects, whilst a great part of the Country was in Arms
against them, and ready to break out into a War, wherein the Romans were in
continual fear, that the Natives within the Province should join with those
without for their destruction. For them, in such a case as this, to trust such
a King as Lucius with the Government of the Province, is to suppose them, to
have utterly lost those Arts whereby they attained so vast an Empire. The Case
of Antiochus in Asia, Herod and his Children in Judaea, Dejotarus in Galatia,
Ariobarzanes in Cappadocia, and of many others that might be named, will not at
all make it probable, where the Circumstances were so different, and especially
in such an Island as Britain was then accounted, being encompassed with a Sea,
which the Romans thought dreadful and almost unpassable, Catalect. a Jof.
Scalig. ed.
Semota and vasto disjuncta Britannia Ponto
Cinctaque inaccessis horrida Littoribus,
whither Supplies could not come without difficulty; and where the Inhabitants
despised Death and Danger, as they found by so tedious a War, which was kept up
so long here: And, after all, they were forced to keep out their Enemies by
Walls from Sea to Sea, in several places: So that the Romans never had the
whole Island in subjection. And therefore it is very improbable, that they
should trust the Power over it in the hands of a Native of the same Country;
Which Consideration makes me very hard to believe the Monkish Traditions
concerning King Lucius.

But I do not deny, that there was such a Person in this Island, or that he had
Royal Authority in some part of it, or that he was converted to Christianity at
that time, or that the Christian Church here flourished by his means. That
there was such a Person, who was a King and a Christian, is proved, besides the
concurrence of so many Authors from Bede's time, from the two Coins mentioned
by Usser. de Prim. p. 39, 40.
Archbishop Usher, one Silver, and the other Gold, having an Image of a King on
them, with a Cross, and the Letters of LVC, as far as they could be discerned.
But if it be farther asked in what part of Britain this King Lucius lived, I
shall only propose my Conjecture, and leave it to the Judgment of others. It
is well known that the Romans were so well satisfied with the fidelity of
Cogidunus, that they bestowed some Cities upon him. And Tacitus says, he
continued firm to the Roman Interest to his time. And where Kings were
faithful to them, the Romans were kind to their Posterity, and kept them up in
the same dignity as long as they behaved themselves as they expected from them.
Of this we have a clear instance in Herod's Posterity; For Archelaus, Herodes
Antipas and Philip, his Sons, succeeded into their shares of his Kingdom. Then
Herod Agrippa, his Grandchild by Aristobulus, was made King by Caius Caligula,
whose Government was enlarged by Claudius, and his Brother Herod had the
Kingdom of Chalcis given him: Sometime after his Father's death, Claudius
bestowed first the Kingdom of Chalcis upon his Son Agrippa, then the Tetrarchy
of Philip, which was enlarged afterward by Nero, and he continued till the
War, and was the last King over the Jews. Now from hence we observe, That the
Romans thought it no ill policy in some Cases to continue the same Royal
dignity to the Children of those who deserved so well of them as Cogidunus had
done. And it seems most probable to me, that where Ptolemy places the Regni,
were the Cities which Cogidunus had the rule over; not from the Name, but from
the Circumstances of those places, which have fewer Roman Monuments or Towns
than any other in Britain, and therefore were most likely still under their own
Prince, who kept up the British customs. Wherever the Romans inhabited, they
may be traced by their Ways, by their Buildings, by their Coins, by their Urns,
by their Inscriptions: But scarce any thing of this nature could be found in
Surry or Sussex by the most diligent Enquirers. Leland. Itiner. p. 398.
Leland indeed discovered some Roman Coins near Kingston upon Thames, where
others have been taken up since: (but Camden could hear of no Roman Antiquities
thereabouts.) And Burton. on Antonin. Itiner. p. 77.
some suppose the place where those Coins were taken up, to have been a Station
of the Roman Soldiers under Asclepiodotus, when he marched that way from
Portsmouth to London, in the Expedition against Allectus. If so, it was too
late for the days of King Lucius. All that Camd. Brit. p. 213.
Camden pretends to, is only a Military way near Ockley, which was necessary
for the convenience of the Roman Soldiers passing to the remoter parts of the
Province, p. 216.
and some Coins about Gatton; but as to his Noviomagus which he will have to be
Woodcote in Surrey, Somner. Antiq. Canterb. p. 24.
Mr. Somner has well proved from the course of the Roman Itinerary, that it
must lie in Kent, in the Road to Portus Rutupis: and Woodcote is as far from it
as London. In all Sussex there is no remainder of any Roman Building, or Way,
or Colony, or Coins yet discovered to the World, except toward the Sea side,
which the Romans kept to themselves. In Antoninus Pius his time D. tit. ad.
S.C. Trebell. l. 46.
Seius Saturnius was Archigubernus in Class Britannica; Which shows, that the
Romans had then a Fleet here, and that he was Admiral of it. And in
aftertimes, the Comes litoris Saxonici per Britanniam, had several Garrisons
on the Sea side for Security of the Coasts, as appears by the Notit. Imper.
Occid. c. 72.
Notitia Imperii where the Places are set down, among which two were on the
coasts of Sussex Anderida and Portus Adurni; By the former our learned
Antiquaries Camd. Brit. p. 247.
Camden and Seldom. Mare claus. l. 2. c. 6.
Seldom understand Newenden in Kent, but that stands too much within Land. Mr.
Somner in a MS. discourse of the Roman Ports and Forts in Kent, rather thinks
it to be Pemsey in Sussex, or Hastings, as more agreeing with Gild. Epist. 14.
Gildas, who says, that the Romans placed their Forts for Security of the
Coasts in litore Oceani ad Meridionalem Plagam, upon the very Coasts; And so
the rest of them stood, as Reculver, Richborough, Dover, Lim, which were all in
Kent; and the Portus Adurni was Aldrington near Shoreham in Sussex. From hence
it appears, that the Romans, being secure of the Coasts, and having their
Soldiers dispersed in the Colonies about, and being so near the Metropolis at
London, where the chief Governors of this part of Britain resided; They might
better permit a British King to govern these parts of the Country. And this is
the most probable account I can think of, as to this King Lucius within the
Roman Province.

Spelman. Council. To. 1. p. 36.
Sir H. Spelman would bring him to his Iceni, but without any color of
Probability; Lucius, says he, was the son of Coilus, Coilus of Marius, Marius
of Arviragus. And what then? Some, he says, would have him to be Prasutagus,
who was King over the Iceni. But does not Tacit. Annal. 14. c. 31.
Tacitus say, that Prasutagus died before the Revolt of the Britains under
Boadicea? And that he left Nero his heir, and his two Daughters, hoping thereby
to secure his Kingdom? If he were Arviragus, he was dead before the Revolt of
the Iceni. And if Marius were his Son, how comes he never to be mentioned in
the Story afterward; no, not in that most remarkable Battle between his Mother
and Suetonius Paulinus? But Hector Boethius calls Arviragus one of the Iceni,
as though his authority were to be mentioned against Tacitus, who was the
Geffrey of Scotland, so many and so improbable are his Fictions. Baron. A. D.
183. n. 6.
Baronius, after trying several ways to reconcile the Tradition of King Lucius
with the Roman Story, concludes with that as the most probable, Baron. in
Martyr. Romans Maii 26.
That he was a King under the Roman Power in Britain, such as Prasutagus was.
But he was only King over the Iceni, and not over all Britain, and although
among the Britains there were many Kings over particular Cities (as they then
called the People under one Government) yet there was no one King over the
whole Island. But in Cases of great difficulty they pitched upon one as
Supreme, as on Cassibelan, upon the Invasion of Caesar: So that the old British
Government was neither Popular as some pretend, nor under one Monarchy; but the
People were governed by several petty Monarchs, as appears by the
unquestionable Testimonies of Diod. Sic. l. 4.
Diodorus Siculus, Strabo, l. 4.
Strabo, and Mela, l. 3. c. 6.
Pomponius Mela; Fert populos and Reges populorum, says Mela; Olim Regibus
parebant, says Tacit. vit. Agric.
Tacitus; which prove both the Antiquity and Number of British Monarchs. And
what Dio in Severo.
Dio says of a Democratical Government among the Britains is only spoken of
the Maeatae and Caledonii, in their great Confusion, when all the Reins of
Government were cast off, and the People did what they list, as Tacitus
describes them in his time, saying, That they were drawn off from their former
obedience to their Kings, by the Heads of several Factions among them. So that
although in the most ancient times here was Monarchical Government, yet it was
not extended over all Britain, as the Monkish Tradition pretends concerning
King Lucius, and I know not how many Predecessors of his, even from the coming
of Brutus to his days. But neither our Religion, nor our Government need such
Fictions to support them.

Supposing then that King Lucius succeeded Cogidunus, though not immediately,
in the Government of that part of Britain committed to his care; I see no
inconvenience in allowing, that King Lucius hearing of the Christian Doctrine,
either by the old British Christians, such as Eluanus and Medwinus are supposed
to have been; or by some of M. Aurelius his Soldiers coming hither, after the
great deliverance of the Roman Army by the Prayers of the Christians (which had
then lately happened and occasioned great discourse every where, the Emperor
himself, as Tertul. Apolog. c. 5. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 5. Oros. l. 7. c. 15.
Tertullian says, giving the account of it in his own Letters) might upon this
be very desirous to inform himself thoroughly about this Religion, and there
being then frequent Intercourse between Rome and Britain, by reason of the
Colonies that were settled, and the Governors and Soldiers passing to and
fro, he might send Eluanus and Medwinus to Eleutherius to be fully instructed
in this Religion; And either the same persons alone, or two others with them
(called Faganus and Duvianus commonly) coming into Britain, might have so great
success as to baptize King Lucius, and many others, and thereby enlarge the
Christian Church here.

The Monastie. Angl. vol. 3. p. 188.
old Book of Landaff gives a much more modest account of this whole matter than
either Geffrey of Monmouth, or any of his followers. There we find only that
King Lucius sent Eluanus and Medwinus to Eleutherius the twelfth Bishop of
Rome, to desire that he might be made a Christian through his Instruction; Upon
which he gave God thanks, that such a Heathen Nation did so much desire
Christianity; And then, by the Advice of the Presbyters of the City of Rome,
they first baptized these Ambassadors; and, being well instructed, they
ordained them, making Eluanus a Bishop and Medwinus a Teacher; And so they
returned to King Lucius, who with the chief of the Britains were baptized; And
then, according to the Instructions of Eleutherius, he settled the
Ecclesiastical Order, caused Bishops to be ordained, and the Christian Religion
to be taught. There is nothing in all this account but what seems to have great
probability in it. The same account is in Capgrave, out of John of Tinmouth, in
the Life of Dubricius, and this seems to have been the original Tradition of
the British Church: Which Geffrey of Monmouth has corrupted with his Flamins
and Archiflamins; and others afterward made an Epistle for Eleutherius to King
Lucius, but could not avoid such Marks in the way of Writing as evidently
discover the Imposture; and when the Monks hands were once in, they knew not
how to give over. For some of them carry Faganus and Diruvianus (as some call
him) to Glassenbury; others make them Consecrate the Church at Winchester, to
which they say King Lucius had a particular kindness, and gave all the Lands
and Privileges which the Flamins had, to the Bishop and Monks. (A Gift that
would never make them the richer or the safer.) Others make King Lucius to
found St. Peter's Church at Westmister, the Church in Dover Castle, St.
Martin's by Canterbury, St. Peter's in Cornhill, where the Metropolitan Church,
they say, was placed by him, and Theanus made the first Bishop, who was
succeeded by Eluanus, who went on the Embassey to Eleutherius; and, besides
these, they make him to found and endow so many Churches, with such unlikely
Circumstances, as has made others question, whether there was ever such a
Person in the World as King Lucius: That being the common effect of saying much
more than is true, to make what is really true more doubtful and suspicious.

But there is one Difficulty yet to be cleared; For all this Story, in its best
Circumstances, seems to imply, that there was no Christian Church here before.
For, if there had been, what need he to have sent as far as Rome to be
instructed? unless the Bishop of Rome were then known to be the Head of the
Church, which were a sufficient Reason for it. To this I answer, That if the
Contest lay be^ween these two things, Whether it be more credible, that
Christianity was planted here before King Lucius; Or, that King Lucius was
baptized by order from Eleutherius; I should very much prefer the former,
because the Authority of Gildas, as to the British Christianity, is to be
relied on before the later Writers; and Gildas asserts the one; and although he
had as much reason as Bede, or any after him; he never takes the least notice
of King Lucius and Eleutherius. And, if a Negative Argument will hold any
where, it is where a person has as much reason to know as any that follow him;
and as great occasion to discover what he knows; both which will hold in the
case of Gildas compared with Bid or later Writers. It were worth while for us
to know whence Bid had his first Information of this matter; for he professes
to follow other Writers about the British Affairs, and in many places he
follows Gildas exactly, but in this he passes by what Gildas says about the
Primitive Christianity of Britain, and instead thereof puts in this Story of
King Lucius. Bal. de Script. Cent. 1. n. 27.
Bale says, that Eluanus Avalonius was a Disciple to those who were the
Disciples of the Apostles, and that he preached the Gospel in Britain with good
Success; But King Lucius, being persuaded by his Druids, would not come to any
resolution; but to satisfy himself, lest he should be deceived by his
Countrymen, he sent Eluanus and Medwinus to Eleutherius. And Eluanus upon his
return wrote a Book De Origin Ecclesiae Britannorum; Of the first beginning of
the British Church. And Pits is sure to follow him where he has no reason: But
Leland never mentions this Book, nor the Writings of Medwinus Belgius, and of
King Lucius himself, all relating to this matter: But Leland. de Script. in
Eluano.
Leland only takes notice, that Eluanus and Medwinus were employed upon an
Embassey to Eleutherius, that by his means he might become a Christian, which,
says he, is very unreasonable to suppose, unless he were first informed what
Christianity was, which he thinks was preached to King Lucius by them, being
two of the old British Christians. And there he relates how by chance he met
with an old MS. of the British Affairs joined with Geffrey of Monmouth, wherein
this Story is told exactly as it is in the Book of Landaff: and no mention is
made of any other Persons sent back but those that went. And, as far as I can
judge, Bid followed this old British Tradition, only leaving out the Names of
the Persons sent, and the Establishment of the British Churches after the
Baptism of King Lucius. Forbid says as little as he well could that tended
to the honor of the British Churches. So that according to this, which seems
the truest account of this Embassey, Eluanus and Edwinus were British
Christians themselves, and therefore sent to Eleutherius, having been probably
the Persons employed to convince King Lucius; but he knowing the great Fame of
Rome, and it being told him, not only that there were Christians there, but a
Bishop in that City, the twelfth from the Apostles, had a desire to understand
how far the British Christians and those of Rome agreed; and he might
reasonably then presume, That the Christian Doctrine was there truly taught, at
so little distance from the Apostles, and in a Place whither, as Iren. l. 3. c.
3.
Irenaeus argues in this case, A resort was made from all places, because of
its being the Imperial City. These were reasonable Considerations, which might
move King Lucius to send this Embassy to Rome, and not any opinion of St.
Peter's having appointed the Head of the Church there, of which there was no
Imagination then, nor a long time after in the British Churches, as appears by
the Contest of the British Bishops with Augustine the Monk; of which in its due
place.

If any credit were to be given to King Caj. de Antiq. Cantabe. Acad. l. 1. p.
69.
Arthur's Diploma to the University of Cambridge, this matter would be fully
cleared; For there it is expressly said, That King Lucius was converted by the
preaching of the Doctors of Cambridge, for which reason he gave large
Privileges to that University, which were confirmed by King Arthur. And in the
MS. Annals of Burton it is said, That Anno Domini 141. nine of the Doctors and
Scholars of Cambridge were baptized. I am not ignorant what Objections have
been made by learned Antiquaries against both these Passages, and how hard it
is to reconcile them to the Language and History of that time; Nor that this
Passage in the Annals of Burton was put into the MS. Copy by another hand, as
the learned Usser. de Prim. p. 51.
Primate observed, by comparing the Copy of them in the Library of C. C. C. But
on the other side, it is justly pleaded, that in the Bull of Honorius I.
bearing date An. Dom. 624.20 Febr. there is mention made of the Privileges
granted to the University of Cambridge by Pope Eleutherius; and that withal he
takes notice of Doctors and Scholars there. And that this Bull of Honorius is
allowed to be authentic in the Bull of Eugenius IV. upon the Controversy
about Jurisdiction between the Bishop of Ely and the University of Cambridge,
bearing date An. D. 1433. 14 Call. Oct. Which is a sufficient Proof to all that
rely on the Pope's Authority, that in the time of King Lucius and Eleutherius
there might be a sufficient number of learned Men in Cambridge to have
instructed King Lucius in the Christian Faith; And that it is not improbable,
that Eluanus and Medwinus might be of that number, especially considering that
Camboritum, or, as many Copies have it, Camboricum, was a Roman Colony, and
mentioned in the best Copies among the 28 Cities of Britain, and the Roman
Colonies had their Schools of Learning, wherein the several Professors of Arts
and Sciences did instruct both the Roman and British Youth. Of which I may have
occasion to discourse afterward.

After this time, we meet with little concerning the British Churches, till the
Persecution of Dioclesian, in which they had a considerable share, for the time
it lasted here: For although the Names of no more are preserved than only of
St. Alban, Aaron and Julius; yet both Gild. 8.
Gildas and Bed. l. 1. c. 6, 7.
Bid say, That many more suffered Martyrdom then in Britain, as Baron. A.D.
3^3. n. 144.
Baronius acknowledges. And although Dioclesian being a Prince of infinite
Ambition, as appeared by his commanding himself to be worshipped as God, and
therefore had so great an Antipathy to Christianity, that his whole Reign might
be called, as Velser. Com. in S. As^am.
M. Velserus says, One perpetual Persecution, yet he had so much Art, as to
throw off the odium of it upon others; To which purpose he first made choice of
Maximianus, a Brutish and Fierce Man, who stuck at nothing for the Shame or the
Cruelty of it, as he is set forth by Eutropius and Victor; and therefore was a
fit Instrument, as occasion served, to execute Dioclesian's Malice against the
Christians; which he did not fail to perform, as appeared by the Thebean Legion
which suffered in the first Expedition against the Bagaudae, for refusing to
take an Oath, to extirpate the Christians as well as the Rebels, as Sigon. de
Occid. Imper. l. 1.
Sigonius and Velser. Comment. in Convers. Afrae.
Velserus relate the Story. But the great Persecution under Dioclesian, of
which Gildas and Bid speak, did not certainly begin till Anno Domini 303.
Dioclesian and Maximianus being one the eighth the other the seventh time
Consuls, as Lactant. de Morte Persec. c. 12.
Lactantius has evidently made to appear: But in the next year, upon the
Resignation of these two, Galerius Maximianus and Constantius Chlorus were
declared Emperors; and it is generally said by the Ecclesiastical Writers,
that Constantius stopped the Persecution in the Provinces under his Government.
So that either the Persecution in Britain must be before the other, or it could
continue but a little time. To solve this, Alford. Annals Eccl. A.D. 286. n.
5, etc.
Alford says, there is no other way, but to make this Persecution to have been
in the third of Dioclesian and the first of Maximianus. At which time, Baron.
A.D. 286. n. 30, 31.
Baronius says, a very sharp Persecution was begun against the Christians at
Rome. Which was about the time when Maximianus began his Expedition into Gaul
against the Bagaudae, and in his Passage over the Alps, the Thebean Legion
suffered. The Circumstances of which Story are so agreeable in all respects,
that I see no reason to call in question the truth of it, it being not only
preserved by Eucherius, but by Venantius Fortunatus, Helinandus, Beda, Vsuardus
and Ado. But Maximianus made then no long stay in Gaul, and for several years
after, both Dioclesian and he were so taken up in Warlike Expeditions, that
they had no leisure for a sharp and long Persecution. And I can however see no
ground for any Persecution in Britain about that time by Dioclesian or
Maximian. For when he came against the Bagaudae, Carausius was employed to
secure the Seas against the Franks and the Saxons; But, understanding
Maximian's design to take him off, he watched his opportunity, and with a good
Fleet and considerable Army comes for Britain, and takes possession of the
Government here, and Maximian had no Fleet left to pursue him hither. This
Revolt of Carausius happened within few years after Dioclesian and Maximian
were joint Emperors, viz. An. Dom. 286.

But Alford says, the old Writer of Saint Alban 's Life pitches upon Anno Dom.
286. for this Persecution. And a MS. Copy of Beda which he had met with agrees
with that time. But he urges farther, that after the Rebellion of Carausius,
when Constantius was made Caesar, the Provinces beyond the Alps were committed
to him, and that was Anno Dom. 292. And if there were no Persecution under
Constantius, this must be before he was Caesar. But, for any thing Alford
says, the Persecution might have been under Carausius, or Allectus, before
Constantius came to the Possession of Britain. For Carausius, as appears by
Aur. Victor. in Dioclesian.
Aur. Victor and Eutrop. l. 9.
Eutropius, was let alone with the Government of Britain; which, says Oros. l.
7. c. 25.
Orosius, he enjoyed seven years, and after him Allectus, three years more; So
that for several years after Constantius his being Caesar, he had no influence
on the Affairs of Britain: At the end of those ten years, Allectus being
killed, and his Army routed by Asclepiodatus, Constantius came over, as appears
by Eumen, Paneg. n. 17, 19.
Eumenius, in the very nick of time to preserve the City of London from being
pillaged by the Franks, and then he was received with wonderful joy by the
Inhabitants, being delivered from the Tyranny they underwent in the times of
Carausius and Allectus; And after his Death Medals were coined in London to
testify the City's gratitude to him; whereon was the Effigies of Constantius
of one side, and on the other a Temple between two Eagles, with this
Inscription, Memoria felix; and under the Temple P. L. N. Pecunia Londin.
Notata, as some explain it. For by the Eagles and Inscription it appears that
these Coins were intended for the Apotheosis of Constantius; And so Joseph
Scaliger and Camden understand them. Zosim. l. 2.
Zosimus says, That Constantius, while he lived, had his chief residence in
Britain; And if a Persecution happened here, he must be Accessory to it, which
is contrary to what is constantly affirmed of Constantius. For Eusebius. l. 8. c.
13. Vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 13.
Eusebius says, he never joined with the other Emperors in destroying
Churches. Sozom. l. 1. c. 6.
Sozomen and Hist. Tripart. l. 1. c. 7.
Cassiodore say, That he gave full liberty to the Christians, and that their
Churches flourished under him; And Optat. l. 1.
Optatus says, That the Donatists made their Application to Constantine, to
appoint Judges out of Gaul, and give this Reason, Because there was no
Persecution under his Father's Government. And accordingly the Council of Arles
consisted of Bishops chiefly out of Gaul and Britain.

That which upon the whole matter appears most probable to me, is, That the
Persecution was begun while Dioclesian and Maximianus had the Empire in their
hands; and although Constantius and Galerius had the Titles of Caesar's; yet the
supreme Government was in the others hands, as appears by what Orosius says of
Dioclesian's usage of Galerius, upon his return from the Persian War; And by
the Inscriptions in Spain (if they be authentic) produced by Baron. A.D. 304.
n. 8.
Baronius, Velser. Not. ad Conversion. Afr.
Velserus and Gruter. Inscript. p. 280.4.
Gruterus. In one of which Dioclesianus and Maximianus are only mentioned; And
this must be after the Persecution, for there it is said, Nomine CHRISTIANORVM
DELETO. And in the other SVPERSTITIONE CHRISTI VBIQ; DELETA. And there
Dioclesian is only named Augustus, and Galerius as adopted by him. Baronius
thinks such Inscriptions were set up every where, but time has only preserved
those in Spain. But if they were set up in Spain, under the Government of
Constantius, it is an Argument, that while Dioclesian and Maximianus held the
Empire, they did what they pleased in these matters: For although the name of
Caesar carried in it something of supreme Authority, yet Victor. in Trajano.
Aurelius Victor, when he takes notice of the first beginning of the difference
of the Titles of Augustus and Caesar, He says, Though they were both Titles of
Sovereignty, yet they who enjoyed them did not differ less in their Power than
they did in their Titles. And therefore Lactant. de Mort. Persec. c. 9.
Lactantius says, when Dioclesian called Galerius by the name of Caesar after
his Persian Victory, he cried out, Quousque Caesar? How long should he continue
Caesar? And the Impatience of this made him force Dioclesian to resign the
Empire, as Lactantius, c. 18.
who was upon the Place, assures us; Nay, when Dioclesian offered him, That all
four should be declared Augusti, he refused for this reason, Because he knew,
while Dioclesian continued in Power, he should have only the Name. And
Lactantius farther says, c. 15.
That the Edict against the Christians was sent to Constantius without asking
his consent; and he confesses, Constantius complied so far as to pull down
their Churches. But his kindness, when declared Augustus, made them willing to
forget the rest. So that the Persecution was general till their Resignation;
But upon Constantius being declared Augustus, it ceased in all these parts; in
which, Eusebius. de Martyrol. Pal. c. 13.
Eusebius affirms, it did not last two years, although it continued ten years
in the East. And within that time the Persecution took away St. Alban, Aaron
and Julius, and other Martyrs here, as Gildas and Bid relate, who give a more
particular account of the Sufferings of the first, not without some mixture of
Improbabilities or Interpolations; but, as to the rest, we have nothing but
their Names preserved and the Places they belonged to. The first is said to
have been a Roman Officer at the Municipium of Verulam, the first British Town
which had Roman Privileges; and the other, Citizens of Caerleon, where there
was a Roman Colony.

Constantius dying at York, his eldest Son, Constantine, was declared Caesar by
the Army in Britain. For although Constantius did what in him lay to secure the
Succession to him, as Eusebius. Vit. Constant. l. 1. c. 9, 21.
Eusebius says, yet that did not signify much without the Concurrence of the
Legions. And Lactant. de Morte Persec. c. 24.
Lactantius says, That he commended him to the Soldiers, and so delivered the
Empire to him. This Consent of the Army is expressed by Eumen. Paneg.
Eumenius, and by the Emperor Julian. Orat. 1. ad Constant.
Julian; and Aurelius Victor says, All that were present promoted his being
Emperor; But he was not declared Caesar by Galerius Maximianus till
afterward, as Baluzius has clearly proved out of Lactantius and others, who,
when he saw he could not help it, sent him the Purple Robe. Thus Constantine,
being firmly settled in the Throne, took care in the first places of the
Tranquillity of these parts, where he was proclaimed Emperor, and, as
Lactantius says, The first thing he did was, to secure full Liberty to the
Christians. And now, we may well suppose, all that Gildas and Bid say, to have
been accomplished, viz. That the Christians rebuilt their Churches, destroyed
to the ground, and therein celebrated their Holy Sacraments, and kept solemn
Festivals in memory of so great a Deliverance. And from this time we may date
the flourishing condition of this Church, which before must labor under great
difficulties; the Governors of Provinces before Constantius, and the
Generality of the People, being set against the Christians.

But the first Evidence we meet with of the settled Condition of the British
Churches, is, the number of Bishops which went from Britain to the Council at
Arles, Anno Domini 314. where we find three Bishops subscribing to it, Eborius,
Bishop of York; Restitutus, Bishop of London; and Adelsius, de Civitate Colonia
Londinensium: So it is in Sirmond. Council. Gallic. To. 1. p. 9.
Sirmondus his best Copy. And although Seldom. in Eutych. p. 118.
Mr. Seldom seems to question the Antiquity of it, yet the other vouches it to
be very good and ancient. But what then is the Civitas Colonia Londinensium?
The Learned Usser. de Prim. p. 60, 195.
Primate thinks it to be Colchester; that being called in Antoninus Colonia.
Seld. in Eutych. p. 118, 119.
Mr. Seldom takes it to be Camalodunum, and so written Camalodon, which the
ignorant Scribes made Col. Londinensium: Spelman. Council. To. 1. p. 39.
Sir H. Spelman likewise supposes it to be the old Colony of Camalodunum. But,
I think, a far more probable sense may be given of it, if we consider the way
of summoning Bishops to Councils at that time: For it is unreasonable to
imagine that every Roman Colony or City sent a Bishop: For then every Council
would have been as full as the Arabic Writers say the Council of Nice was (of
which Mr. Seldom has discoursed at large) or at least as Epist. Hibern. 11.
Cummianus and Ado in Chro.
Ado thought this Council of Arles was, which they made to consist of 600
Bishops: An unreasonable number to be called together on such an occasion, as
the giving way to the restless importunity of the Donatists to have their Cause
heard over again. It is not to be presumed that Constantine would summon so
great a number to make up a Court (Episcopale Iudicium St. Augustine often
calls it) wherein the main thing to be done was, to hear the Parties and to
give Judgment; And in the former Judgment but 19 Bishops were summoned. It is
said, Augustine. ad. Ep. Parm. l. 1. c. 5.
That St. Augustine makes the number of Bishops at Arles to be 200. But I see
no sufficient ground to understand those words of this particular Council; but
of all the Bishops which had condemned them in several Councils, among whom he
reckons the Italian, Spanish and Gallick Bishops, who met at Arles. But when I
compare the Subscriptions to that Council published out of the most ancient MS.
with a Passage in Hilary, I am apt to believe, that excepting those that were
very near about Arles, there were no more than a Bishop out of a Province with
one or two Presbyters. So it is expressly in the Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5.
Summons to Chrestus Bishop of Syracuse in Sicily, (the only one remaining,
and which Baron. A. D. 31^. n. 43.
Baronius thinks was the same that was to the rest) wherein he is required to
come out of that Province, and to bring two Presbyters with him, as Valesius
shows against Baronius and Sirmondus the words are to be understood. And Hilar.
de Synod.
Hilary, speaking of the Councils of his time, says, That one or two Bishops
were sent for out of a Province, and he instanceth in the Council of Ancyra,
and the great Council at Ariminum: So here we meet with Chrestus out of the
Province of Sicily, Quintasius out of the Province of Sardinia, and so in most
of the rest, the distinct Provinces are set down out of which they came: And at
that time there were 18 Provinces of Gaul and Britain, and so many Bishops
appeared at Arles, besides Marinus the Bishop of the Place. But to supply the
defect of some other Provinces there were more out of that Province wherein
Arles stood than out of any other. In Britain there were then three Provinces
according to the MS. Copy of Sextus Rufus says Mr. Camden: therefore in all
probability, since the other two Bishops were out of the other two Provinces,
Maxima Caesariensis and Britannia Prima; The third Bishop was out of the third
Province of Britannia Secunda, wherein there were two noted Colonies, the one
called Colonia Divana in the Coin of Septimius Geta, and Civitas Legionum in
Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
Beda, now Chester; the other, Civitas Legionis ad Yscam, where was a Colony of
the 11. Legion, which Province is sometimes called Britannica Secunda. And
therefore this Bishop Adelphius came ex Civit. Col. Leg. 11. which the ignorant
Transcribers might easily turn to ex Civit. Col. Londin. The only Objection is
that which is suggested by the Learned Usser. de Prim. p. 96.
Primate of Armagh, viz. That there were four Provinces of Britain at that
time, and that Flavia Caesariensis was one of them; having its name from
Constantine, who assumed the name of Flavius; But Goltzius his Copy deserves
not to be so much preferred before Camd. Brit. p. 111.
Camden's; And the name of Flavia Caesariensis might either be taken from
Flavius Valentinianus, as Bert. Pithar. Diatr. 1. c. 5. p. 64.
Berterius thinks, or from Fl. Theodosius, before whose time Camden says we
never met with Britannia Flavia.

There being then but three Bishops present at the Council of Arles, is so far
from being an Argument that there were no more in Britain, that it is rather an
Argument to the contrary; since it was the Custom to send but one or two out
of a Province where they were most numerous. And I see no reason to question a
Succession of Bishops here from the first founding of a Christian Church. To
prove this, I shall not rely on the Testimony of the Anonymous Apud Patric.
Jun. Not. ad Epist. Clem.
Greek Author of the Martyrdoms of Peter and Paul, who says, Saint Peter here
ordained Bishops, Priests and Deacons; But upon the Reason of the thing, there
being no other Church in the Christian World which derived from the Apostles,
which had not a Succession of Bishops from them too; And we cannot trace the
History of other Churches farther than we can do that of their Bishops. As for
instance. The first Conversion of the Churches of Africa is much in the dark,
but as soon as we read any thing considerable of them, we meet with a Council
of Bishops, viz. of Cypr. Ep. 71.
Agrippinus and his Brethren, out of the Provinces of Africa, Numidia and
Mauritania, and he was not the immediate Predecessor of St. Cyprian, who
suffered in the Persecution of Valerian, Anno Dom. 258. And Tertull. de
Praeser. haeret. c. 32.
Tertullian puts the proof of Apostolical Churches upon the Succession of
Bishops from the Apostles: which were a senseless way of proceeding, unless it
were taken for granted, that wherever the Apostles planted Churches, they
appointed Bishops to take care of them. Although therefore, by the loss of
Records of the British Churches, we cannot draw down the Succession of Bishops
from the Apostles time (for that of the Bishops of London by Jocelin of Furnes
is not worth mentioning) yet we have great reason to presume such a Succession;
When upon the first summoning a Council by Constantine three British Bishops
appeared; one out of every Province; as they did in other Parts.

But some pretend to give a more punctual and exact account of the settling of
our Church Government here, viz. That there were twenty eight Cities among the
old Britains, That in these there were twenty five Flamins and three
Archiflamins, in whose places, upon the Conversion of the Nation by King
Lucius, there was the like number of Bishops and Archbishops here appointed;
And for this, besides the Rabble of our Monkish Historians, who swallow Geffrey
of Monmouth whole without chewing; I find two of my Predecessors, men
considerable in their times, produced to the same purpose, viz. Mason. de
Minister. Angl. l. 2. c. 3.
Radulphus de Diceto, and Rad. Baldock. Others say, Animadvers. on Church Hist.
of Brit. p. 18.
That these twenty eight Cities were not all furnished with Bishops in King
Lucius his time, but that the honor of it belongs to him because he began it:
But this is making a new Story, and in effect denying the truth of the old
Tradition. However I deny not, but that it is as certain that King Lucius
settled Bishops here, as that he was converted by Eluanus and Medwinus; For the
same Authors deliver both. But how far his Power extended, and consequently
how many Cities had Episcopal Government then settled in them, is now
impossible to be known. As to the twenty eight Cities among the Britains, the
Tradition does not depend upon the Credit of Geffrey or Nennius; Forbid and
before him Gildas say the same thing, viz. That there were so many Cities among
the Britains, while the Romans had Power here, which I see no cause to doubt
but they were Cities made by the Romans, or by the Britains in imitation of
them, as I shall prove in another Discourse. But that which follows from hence
is, viz. That the Government here settled being in Roman Cities, the
correspondence must not be to the British Druids, but to the Roman Colonies.
That there was some Subordination among the Druids is unquestionable. For
Caesar affirms, That there was a Prince of the Druids, and the last Age has
discovered a famous Urn of one Chyndonax, Chief of the Druids; concerning which
whole Le Reveil de L'antique Tombs de Chyndonax.

Licet. Resp. ad Quaest. per Epist. l. 1. ep. 25.


Books have been written, and several Discourses published, without any great
satisfaction to me; But it is not to any purpose to tell why, since I yield the
thing it self. And it is improbable there should be a Prince of the Druids,
without an intermediate Subordination, and the Druids being so far dispersed,
it was a reasonable thing, That the superior Druids should have their
particular Limits assigned them, that they might the better understand and give
account of those under them, and not interfere or entrench one upon another. As
far then as we suppose them to be reasonable and prudent, these things may
justly be supposed concerning them, so that setting aside the name of Flamins
and Archiflamins, for which there is no foundation at all (as to either among
the Druids, and not for the latter word among the Romans) yet the thing itself
has no such absurdity or improbability in it. But the Cities here being Roman,
as I suppose, the Government must be suitable to that of Roman Colonies, and
they that know any thing of the nature and constitution of them, do know that
they exactly followed the Pattern of the City of Rome, having a Senate,
Consuls, Praetors, Censors, Aediles, Quaestors, etc. And, besides the rest,
they had their several Flamins and Pontifices too. But there were many of these
Flamins in each City or Colony; thence Pacat. Paneg. 37.
Latinus Pacatus, in his Panegyric to Theodosius, mentions, Reverendos
municipali purpura Flamines, insignes apicibus Sacerdotes, speaking of a Roman
Colony; But there can be no resemblance between a multitude of Flamins in a
City, and one Bishop over a Diocese. The Flamins were the Priests of some
peculiar Deity, from whom they took their denomination, as may be at large seen
in Gruter's Book of Roman Inscriptions. But among them there was a certain
order of Place and Dignity; for we read of a Primus Flamen in Inscrip. 29, 12.
Gruter. But Jac. Guther. de veteri Iure Pontificio, l. 1. c. 6.
Jac. Gutherius has an Observation which will tend to clear this matter. For
among the Roman Inscriptions, we meet with one extraordinary of this kind, viz.
Inscript. p. 359.3.490.2, and 31.
Flamini Divorum omnium; Now says he, The name Flamen was common to all the
Priests in the Roman Cities; But the Flamen Divorum omnium was the Chief Priest
among them. And so there is no such mighty absurdity as has been imagined in
supposing these Flamins to be put down, and the Christian Bishops to succeed in
their Places; Especially if we could have made out that there were Flamines
Provinciarum, as at first appearance seemed very probable in the Roman
Inscriptions. And Sertor. Ursat. Monum. Patav. l. 1. 6. p. 239.
Sertorius Vrsatus seems to make no doubt concerning it in this Inscription,
DIVO AVGVSTO ALBINVS. ALB. F. FLAMEN DIVAE. AVG. PROVINCIAE LVSITAN.

But it is an easy mistake for a Flamen D. Aug. one of Augustus his Flamins,
in that Province. Of which sort there are many Examples. But there are other
Gruter. Inscript. p. 373.7, 8.
Inscriptions wherein we read of FLAMINICA PROVINCIAE LVSITANIAE

But all that Sertorius Vrsatus infers from hence is, That there were Temples
dedicated to Municipia and to Provinces, and these Temples had their Flamines
and Flaminicae. But this does not prove, that the Flamins had any Jurisdiction
over a Province; Which had been indeed to the purpose. Among the Romans,
although there were none called Ar^hiflamines, yet there were Flamines majores
and minores, as appears by Festus and others. The lesser are thought by some to
be called Veflamines in the Inscriptions both of Gruter. These. p. 364.1.498.8.
Gruter and Reins. Inscript. p. 385.
Reinesius. Festus says, the Majores Flamines were the Patricians; the
Minores, the Plebeians: but the late Publisher of Festus says, That the
Majores Flamines were the Dialis, Martialis and Quirinalis; the rest of the
fifteen who were added afterward, were the Minores; The Flamen Martialis and
Quirinalis were of the College of Pontifices, as appears by Cicero de Arusp.
Resp.
Cicero: And the Pontifices themselves were divided likewise into Majores and
Minores, as appears both by Festus and the Inscriptions: These lesser were at
first Assessours in the College or Court of Pontifices; But afterward became
only Officers to them; And among these there was a Pontifex Maximus too: But,
as Festus says, he was only the first in the College: But all this relates
only to the City. That which comes nearer to our business is the Consideration
of the Sacerdotes Provinciarum, as they are called in the C. Theod. Tit. de
Dec. l. 46, 75, etc.
Theodosian Code. J. Gothofr. ad C. Theod. 12. Tit. 1. de Dec. l. 21, 112.
Jac. Gothofredus says, The difference between the Flamins and these was; That
the Flamins belonged to particular Cities; But these had whole Provinces under
their Care; and so, in the Law, the Honor Flaminii was distinct from the Honor
Secerdotii; this latter is called Archierosyne in the same Code; And the Title
and Office still continued in the time of Theodosius M. And it is there
described to be a Care that Divine Offices were performed in their Temples; and
such as these were Philostr. vit. Sopel.
Sopelianus in Asia, and Eunap. in Chry.
Chrysantius in Lydia, and Julian. Ep. 49.
Arsacius in Galatia, to whom an Epistle of Julian is still extant, giving him
charge to look after his Office with great Care, and to warn and punish the
inferior Priests if they neglected their Duty. So that we have now found out
what did bear a great correspondence among the Romans to our Bishops and
Archbishops.

But it still remains a Question, Whether they did not rather borrow this from
the Christians, than the Christians from them? For Julian in that Epistle makes
it his business to persuade Arsacius to take all things commendable from the
Christians; and no doubt this was thought so by his Predecessors, who first
set up this Sacerdotal Government of Provinces among them. And, if I mistake
not, it began much later than the first Settlement of Episcopacy in the British
Churches; For Eusebius. l. 8. c. 14. l. 9. c. 4.
Eusebius says, That Maximinus appointed not only Priests in the Cities, but
(...), Chief-priests in the Provinces, where Valesius mistakes his meaning; for
he thinks all the Innovation of Maximinus was the appointing them himself,
whereas they were wont to be chosen by the Decuriones in the Cities: But he
speaks of it as a new thing of Maximinus, to appoint such an Order and Office
among the Priests which had not been known before: And that which puts this
matter out of doubt is, That Lactant. de Morte Persec. c. 36.
Lactantius, in his excellent Piece lately published out of MS. by Baluzius,
says expressly of Maximinus, Novo more Sacerdotes maximos per singulas
Civitates singulos ex primoribus fecit, i.e. That by a new Custom he appointed
Chief Priests in the several Cities, of the greatest Persons in them, who were
not only to do the Office of Priests themselves; but to look after the
inferior Priests, and by their means to hinder the Christians from their
Worship, and to bring them to punishment: But, as though this were not enough,
He appointed other Priests over the Provinces, in a higher degree above the
rest. Although then Valesius asserted that such were elder than Maximinus, yet
Lactantius, whose authority is far greater, has determined the contrary.

I am not ignorant that, long before Maximinus his time, Tertull. de Spectac.
c. 11.
Tertullian mentions the Praesides Sacerdotales, but those do not relate to
this matter, but to the Spectacula, as appears by the place. Alb. Piccoli de
antiquo Iure Siculae Eccles. c. 11.
Some insist on the Sacerdotes Provinciales in Tertull. de Idololat. c. 18.
Tertullian; but Rigaltius shows there ought to be a comma between them, it
being very unlikely the Provincial Priests should have Golden Crowns when those
at Rome had not. And in a Cod. Afric. c. 97.
Canon of the African Code we find the Sacerdotes Provinciae, but that Council
was long after, Anno Dom. 407. And these seem to be no other than Advocates,
who were to appear for the Causes which concerned the Temples and Sacrifices
throughout the Province. According to which method, the African Bishops there
desire, That the Churches might have Advocates too, with the same Privileges:
Which Request was granted by C. Theod. 16. Tit. 2. l. 38.
Honorius; and was the first Introduction of Lawyers into the Service of the
Church, who were called Defensores Ecclesiarum, and were afterward Judges in
Ecclesiastical Causes. But that which comes nearer to this matter is, the
Authority of the Asiarchae, who in some Coins, mentioned by Spanhem. de Numism.
p. 692.
Spanhemius, are said to be Priests over thirteen Cities; And this in the Law
is called L. 19. de Mun. and Honor.
Sacerdotium Asiae: But these seem to have been no other than those who took
care of the public Solemnities in the common Assembly in Asia, when the People
met out of these Cities to perform them either at Ephesus or Smyrna, or any
other of the Cities within this combination, as is observed by many Cujac.
Observe. l. 2. c. 13. Pet. Fabr. Sen. l. 3. c. 1.

Albasp. Obs. l. 1. c. 22.

Seld. ad Marm. Arund. p. 164.


Learned Men. And although there were but one Chief at a time, yet the Office
seemed to have passed by turns through the several Cities; And he in whose City
the Solemnities were to be kept, was the President for that time, and had the
Title of Asiarcha. But Alb. Ruben. de Vrb. Neocoris, p. 246.
Alb. Rubenius shows from Aristides and Dio, That the Asiarchae had a
Superintendency over the Temples and the Priests within the Community of the
Asian Cities; But these were only, he says, For the Temples erected to the
Caesar's out of the common Stock; The Temple of Diana at Ephesus belonging to
the Ionian Community, and not to that of Asia. Herodes Atticus is called in the
Inscription at Spons Voyage, Tom. 3. p. 220.
Athens, (...), Caesar 's High Priest. But that seems to be only a Title,
without Power. But it appears by the Id. p. 114.
Inscription at Thyatira, That the Asiarcha was called the High Priest of Asia,
and had Power to place Priests in the Cities under his Care. But still this
falls short of such Chief-priests in the Provinces as Maximinus appointed.

And thus I have endeavored to clear the Antiquity and Original Institution of
Episcopacy here, by showing that it was not taken up, according to the Monkish
Tradition, from the Heathen Flamins and Archiflamins; But came down by
Succession from the first planting of Apostolical Churches. For although we
cannot deduce a lineal Succession of Bishops, as they could in other Churches,
where Writings were preserved, yet as soon as through the Churches Peace they
came to have intercourse with foreign Churches (as in the Council of Arles)
they appeared with a proportionable number of Bishops with those of other
Provinces; And their Succession was not in the least disputed among them, they
subscribing to the Sentence and Canons as others did. And what Canons did then
pass, did no doubt as much concern the British Churches to observe, as any
other Churches whose Bishops were there present. Which Canons were passed by
their own Authority; For they never sent to the Bishop of Rome to confirm, but
to publish them, as appears by the Synodical Epistle which they sent to him;
Their words are, Quae decrevimus Communi Concilio, Charitati tuae significamus,
ut omnes sciant quid in futurum obser^are debeant. Baron. A. D. 314. n. 68.
Baronius had good luck to find out the necessity of the Pope's confirmation
here; Whereas they plainly tell him, they had already decreed them by common
consent, and sent them to him to divulge them, i. e. As Pet. de Marca de
Concord. l. 7. c. 14. n. 2.
Petrus de Marca says, As the Emperors sent their Edicts to their Praefecti
Praetorio. Was that to confirm them? It is true, they say, the Pope had a
larger Diocese; But if these words had implied so much as a Patriarchal Power
over the Bishops there assembled, how could they assume to themselves this
Power to make Canons; And only to signify to him what they had done, and to
desire him to communicate these Canons to others? Would such a Message from a
Council have been born, since the Papal Supremacy has been owned? Nay, how
fancily would it have looked in any Council within the Patriarchats of the East
to have done so? But these Bishops of Arles knew no other Style then, but
Charitati tuae; And they signify to the Bishop of Rome what they had already
decreed, but not what they had prepared for him to confirm. And they are so far
from owning his Authority in calling them together, That they tell him, They
were assembled at the Emperor's Command, Communi copula charitatis and unitate
Matris Ecclesiae Catholicae vinculo inhaerentes ad Arelatensium Civitatem
piissimi Imperatoris voluntate adducti --

Quos and Dei nostri praesens Auctoritas and Traditio, ac Regula veritatis ita
respuit --

Judice Deo, ac Matre Ecclesia quae suos novit aut comprobat, aut damnati sunt
aut repulsi.

Et utinam, Frater dilectissime, ad hoc tantum spectaculum interesses --

Et te pariter nobiscum judicante Coetus noster majori laetitia exultasset.


and were so far from expecting Directions from him, that they tell him they
had a Divine Authority present with them, and a certain Tradition and Rule of
Faith; They wished indeed, he had been present with them, and to have judged
together with them. Was this to make him sole Judge? or could they believe him
at the same time to be their Supreme Head? They could have been glad of the
Company of their Brother of Rome, as they familiarly call him; But since his
Occasions would not permit his Absence from home, they acquaint him what they
had done, and so send him an Abstract of their Canons, as may be seen at large
both in Sirmondus and Baronius. By this we see what Opinion the British Bishops
and their Brethren had of the Pope's Supremacy.

But now to their Canons; Those may be reduced to three Heads; Either to the
Keeping of Easter; Or to the Discipline of the Clergy; Or to Lay Communion.

(1.) As to Easter, That Council decreed, Can. 1. That it should be observed on
the same day and time throughout the World. And that the Bishop of Rome should
give notice of the day, according to custom. But this latter part was
repealed, as Binius confesses, by the Council of Nice, which referred this
matter to the Bishop of Alexandria.

(2.) As to the Clergy, There were Canons which related to Bishops, Priests and
Deacons. (1.) To Bishops, and those were four: (1.) That no Bishop should
trample upon another, Can. 17. which Albaspineus well interprets of invading
another's Diocese. (2.) As to traveling Bishops, that they should be allowed
to perform Divine Offices in the City they came unto, Can. 19. (3.) That no
Bishop should consecrate another alone, but he ought to take seven with him, or
at least three, Can. 20. Which shows the number of Bishops then in the Western
Provinces and so in Britain at that time. The Nicene Canon, C. 4. takes notice
only of three Bishops as necessary to be present, because many Eastern
Provinces had not seven; as Christianus Lupus observes on that Canon. In an
African Council in Cresconius we find, That because two had presumed to
consecrate a Bishop, they desire that twelve may be present; But Aurelius,
Bishop of Carthage, refused it for this reason, Because in the Province of
Tripolis there were but five Bishops. Therefore when the Council of Arles
appoints seven, it does suppose these Provinces to have a greater number of
Bishops. (4.) That if any were proved to have been Traditores in the Time of
Persecution, i. e. to have given up the Sacred Books or Vessels, or to have
betrayed their Brethren, and this proved by Authentic Acts; Then they were to
be deposed. However their Ordinations are declared to be valid, Can. 13.

(2.) As to inferior Clergy; (1.) Excommunication is denounced against those
that put out money to use, Can. 12. (2.) That they were not to forsake the
Churches where they were ordained, Can. 2. And Deprivation is threatened on that
account, Can. 21. (3.) The Deacons are forbidden to celebrate the Lord's
Supper, there called Offering, Can. 15.

(3.) As to Lay Communion: (1.) Those that refuse to continue in their
Employment as Soldiers, now the Persecution was over, were to be suspended
Communion, Can. 3. The words are, de his qui Arma projiciunt in Pace. Of which
some do hardly make tolerable sense. Binius says it must be read in Bello. But
nothing can be more contrary to Peace than War; How then should such a mistake
happen? Albaspineus says, It is against those who refuse to be Soldiers in
time of Peace: Baronius says, It is against them that apostatize in time of
Peace; But if a Metaphorical Sense will be allowed, that which seems most
probable is, That many Christians, now the Persecution was over, neglected that
Care of themselves, and that Strictness of Discipline which they used before;
And therefore such are here threatened, if not to be thrown out, yet to be
debarred Communion till they had recovered themselves. And much to this purpose
Josephus Aegyptius and Joh. Antiochenus do understand the 12. Can. of the
Council of Nice. But if a Metaphorical Sense be thought too hard; Then, I
suppose, the meaning is, against those who renounced being Soldiers, as much
now in time of the Churches Peace, as under Persecution, when they could not be
Soldiers without committing Idolatry, as appeared in the Persecution of
Licinius and others. Constantine, as Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 33.
Eusebius says, gave them all leave to forsake their Employment that would.
But the Council of Arles might well apprehend, That if all Christians renounced
being Soldiers, They must still have an Army of Heathens, whatever the
Emperors were; And therefore they had reason to make such a Canon as this,
since the Christians ever thought it lawful to serve in the Wars; Provided no
Idolatrous Acts were imposed, which was frequently done on purpose by the
Persecutours, as Maximianus, Licinius, Julian, etc. And this I think the true
meaning of this difficult Canon. (2.) For those who drove the Chariots in
Races, and acted on Theaters, as long as they continued so to do; There being
so many Occasions of Idolatry in both of them, They were to be cast out of
Communion, Can. 4, 5. (3.) That those who were Christians and made Governors
of remote places should carry with them the communicatory Letters of their own
Bishop, and not be debarred Communion, unless they acted against the Discipline
of the Church. This I take to be the meaning of Can. 7. (4.) That those who
were received into the Church in their weakness should have Imposition of hands
afterward, Can. 6. (5.) That those who brought Testimonials from Confessors
should be bound to take communicatory Letters from their Bishop, Can. 9. (6.)
That those who found their Wives in Adultery, should be advised not to marry
again while they did live, Can. 10. (7.) That those young Women who did marry
Infidels should for a time be suspended Communion, Can. 11. (8.) That those who
falsely accused their Brethren should not be admitted to Communion as long as
they lived, Can. 14. (9.) That none who were excommunicated in one place should
be absolved in another, Can. 16. (10.) That no Apostate should be admitted to
Communion in Sickness; But they ought to wait till they recovered and showed
amendment, Can. 22. (11.) That those who were baptized in the Faith of the Holy
Trinity should not be rebaptized, Can. 8. And this was the Canon which Saint
Augustine on all occasions pressed upon the Donatists, as Sirmondus and Launoy
think; And therefore they suppose this Council to be called so often a Plenary
and Universal Council, not from the number of Bishops present, but from the
Provinces out of which they came; And so it was the first General Council of
the Western Church.

CHAP. III Of the Succession of the British Churches from the Council of Nice
to the Council of Ariminum.
GReat Probabilities that the British Bishops were present in the Council of
Nice.

The Testimonies of Constantine's being born in Britain cleared.

The particular Canons of the Council of Nice relating to the Government of
Churches explained.

How far the right of Election was devolved to the Bishops.

Of the Authority of Provincial Synods there settled.

Particular Exceptions as to the Bishops of Alexandria, Rome and Antioch from
ancient Custom.

They had then a Patriarchal Power within certain bounds.

No Metropolitans under the Jurisdiction of the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria.

The just Rights of the British Churches cleared.

No evidence that they were under the Roman Patriarchate.

The Cyprian Privilege vindicated from all late Exceptions.

The Patriarchal Rights examined; And from them the Pope's Patriarchal Power
over the Western Churches at large disputed and overthrown.

Pope Leo's Arguments against the Patriarch of Constantinople held for the
Western Churches against him.

The British Bishops present in the Council of Sardica.

What Authority granted by them to the Bishop of Rome, and how far it extends.

HAving deduced the Succession of the British Churches down to the Appearance
of the British Bishops at the first Council of Arles, I now come to the famous
Council of Nice; And although the Subscriptions still remaining which are very
imperfect and confused in the best Copies, do not discover any of the British
Bishops to have been there present, yet there are many Probabilities to induce
us to believe that they were. For (1.) Constantine declares, that his Design
was, to have as full an Appearance of Bishops there from all parts as he could
well get together. To that end he sent forth an universal Summons for the
Bishops to come out of all Provinces, (...) is the word used by Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. l. 3. c. 6.
Eusebius. And presently after he says Constantine's Edict was divulged (...),
in all Provinces of the Empire. How can this be, if there were no Summons in
the Provinces of Gaul and Britain? And to prevent all Objections, as to
difficulty and charges of Passage, Eusebius adds, That he had given order to
have the public Carriages ready, and all Expenses to be defrayed for them. To
this purpose Tractoriae were to be given them by the Emperor's Order, which
secured their Passage and Provision in all Places; The form of which is exstant
in Baron. A.D. 314. n. 48.
Baronius. And the Classis Britannica lying near to Britain to secure these
Coasts from the Franks and Saxons, who were then troublesome, (and over which
Carausius so lately was appointed Admiral to clear these Seas) the Bishops here
could not want convenience to transport them. (2.) Constantine expressed great
satisfaction in the Numbers that did appear from all parts. So that there is no
reason to question, That they did answer his expectation. For in his Epistle to
the Church of Alexandria, Socrat. l. 1. c. 9.
he says, He had brought together a great number of Bishops; But more fully in
his Epistle to the Churches; That to the Settlement of the Christian Faith it
was then necessary, that all the Bishops should meet together, or at least the
greatest part: Therefore he had assembled as many as he could. But when it
appears by the Council of Arles, what numbers of Bishops there were in these
Western Provinces, how could Constantine use such Expressions as these, if they
were not summoned to appear? And Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 6, 7.
Eusebius says, Those that were summoned did come according to appointment
with great readiness, not only for the sake of the Council, but of the
Emperor; And he after says, That the most eminent Bishops of all Churches, as
well those of Europe as Asia and Africa did come to Nice. Did not Eusebius know
of the Churches of Britain? Yes, most certainly, For he mentions their early
conversion to Christianity, as I have already showed; And in that very Book of
the Life of Constantine, Eusebius. vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 19.
he mentions the Churches of Britain, as well as those of Gaul and Spain: And
there Constantine insists upon the consent of the Western and Northern Churches
about Easter, as well as the Southern and some of the Eastern. Now if their
Consent were so considerable as to add weight in this matter, It is not to be
supposed they should be left out, when he designed an Ecumenical Council, as
far as it was in his power to make it so, which certainly extended to all the
Provinces within the Empire. (3.) It is not probable the Churches of Britain
should be left out, considering Constantine's relation to Britain. For he was
not only proclaimed Emperor here on the death of his Father; But, if the
Panegyrist who lived in that time may be believed, He was born here. For,
comparing Panegyr. Max. and Constant.
Constantius and him together, he says, That his Father delivered Britain from
Slavery, Tu etiam Nobiles illic oriendo fecisti: The question now is, Whether
these words relate to his Birth, or to his being proclaimed Caesar here?
Livineius is for the latter, after Lipsius de Mag. Romans l. 4. c. 11. in Notis.
Lipsius; But I see no reason to decline the most natural and proper sense,
viz. That he brought a great honor to Britain by being born in it. Eumen.
Panegyr. Constant. * 9.
Eumenius, in another Panegyric, applauds the happiness of Britain, That had
the first sight of Constantine Caesar. This is likewise capable of both senses;
But he immediately falls into a high commendation of Britain, for its Temper,
Fertility, Riches and Length of days. If this were Constantine's own Country,
this was done like an Orator; If not, to what purpose is all this? And then he
parallels Britain with Egypt, where Mercury was born; Which shows that he spoke
of the Place of Nativity. Besides, the former Panegyrist made his Oration to
Maximianus and Constantine together, upon his Marriage of Theodora his
Daughter; But it is not so probable that he would to him so much own
Constantine's being made Caesar in Britain; For that was not according to the
Rules of Government, in the Court of Maximianus and Dioclesian; for as Galerius
told Dioclesian when he would have had four Augusti; No, says he, That is
against your own Maxim, which is to have only two Augusti, and for them to
name two Caesar's. Therefore it is not likely, That the Orator should, to
Maximianus his face, own him to be made Caesar, without the consent of those
who were then Augusti: But if he speaks of his being made Caesar by Galerius,
it is very doubtful whether he were then in Britain. For Lactant. de Morte
Persec. c. 25.
Lactantius says, he took time to consider about it, and was very hardly
brought to it: But Nazar. Paneg. n. 16.
Nazarius, and Phot. Cod. 62.
Praxagoras, both say, That Constantine went into Gaul soon after his Father's
death; And therefore Gaul first saw him Caesar, according to the constitution
of the Empire at that time. So that this one Testimony of the Panegyrist weighs
more with me than ten Cedrenus's or Nicephorus's who say he was born in the
East. But I produce this only as an argument of the improbability, That the
British Churches should be omitted by Constantine in the Summons to his
Ecumenical Council; or, That they being summoned should neglect to go. (4.)
They were certainly summoned, and did go to the Councils of Sardica and
Ariminum after, and to that of Arles before, and why should we believe them
left out in that of Nice? This argument alone prevailed with Mr. Seldom. in
Eutych. p. 117, 123.
Seldom to believe them present at the Council of Nice. And we are now forced
to make use of the best Probabilities, since Athanasius his Socr. l. 1. c. 9.
Synodicon has been so long lost, wherein all their Names were set down who
were then present; And that Catalogue of them, if it were distinct, which
Epiph. har. 69.
Epiphanius had seen.

There being then so much reason to believe the British Bishops present in the
Council of Nice, we have the more cause to look into the Constitution of the
Ecclesiastical Government there settled, that so we may better understand the
just Rights and Privileges of the British Churches. After the Points of Faith
and the Time of Easter were determined; The Bishops there assembled made twenty
Canons for the Government and Discipline of the Church, in which they partly
reinforced the Canons of the Council of Arles, and partly added new. Those
that were reinforced were, (1.) Against Clergy-mens taking the customary Usury
then allowed, Can. 17. (2.) Against their removing from their own Diocese, Can.
15. which is here extended to Bishops; and such removal is declared null. (3.)
Against Deacons giving the Eucharist to Presbyters, and in the presence of
Bishops, Can. 18. (2.) As to Lay Communion; The Canon against re-baptizing is
reinforced by Can. 19. wherein those only who renounced the Trinity are
required to be rebaptized, and the Canon against being excommunicated in one
Church, and received into Communion in another, Can. 5. whether they be of the
Laity of Clergy.

For the New Canons about Lay Communion, they chiefly concerned the Lapsed in
times of Persecution. As (1.) If they were only Catechumens, that for three
years they should remain in the lowest Form, not being admitted to join in any
Prayers of the Church, but only to hear the Lessons read, and the Instructions
that were there given, Can. 14. (2.) For those that were baptized, and fell
voluntarily in the late Persecution of Licinius, They were for three years to
remain among those who were admitted only to hear, for seven years to continue
in the state of Penitents, and for two years to join only with the People in
Prayers, without being admitted to the Eucharist, Can. 11. (3.) For those
Soldiers who (in that Persecution when Licinius made it necessary for them to
sacrifice to Heathen Gods if they would continue in their Places) first
renounced their Employments, and after by Bribery or other means got into them
again, for three years they were to be without joining in the Prayers of the
Church, and for ten years to remain in the state of Penitents; But so as to
leave it to the Bishop's Discretion to judge of the sincerity of their
Repentance, and accordingly to remit some part of the Discipline, Can. 12. (4.)
If persons happened to be in danger of Death before they had passed through all
the methods of the Churches Discipline, they were not to be denied the
Eucharist; But if they recover, they were to be reduced to the state of
Penitents, Can. 13. But there was one Canon added of another nature, which
concerned Uniformity, and that is the last of the Genuine Canons. It had been
an ancient Custom in the Christian Church to forbear kneeling in the public
Devotion on the Lord's days, and between Easter and Whitsontide, but there were
some who refused to observe it; And therefore this Canon was made to bring all
to an Uniformity in that Practice, Can. 20.

But there are other Canons which relate more especially to Ecclesiastical
Persons, and those either concern the Discipline of the Clergy, or the
Government of the Church.

(1.) For the Discipline of the Clergy, they are these.

(1.) None who had voluntarily castrated themselves were to be admitted into
Orders, Can. 1. For it seems Origen's Fact, however condemned by some, was as
much admired by others, and Christian. Lup. Not. in Council. Nicaen. Can.
Christianus Lupus thinks the Sect of the Valesii, who castrated all, came from
him; But I do not find that Origin did propagate any Sect of this kind; And
Epiphanius makes one Valens the Author of it; However this great Council
thought fit to exclude all such from any Capacity of Church Employments; But it
is generally supposed, and not without reason, that the Fact of Leontius, a
Presbyter of Antioch, Baron. A.D. 325. n. 146. Vide Athan. ad solit. vit.
agent. p. 812, 828, 827.
castrating himself because of his suspicious Conversation with Eustolia, gave
the particular Occasion to the making this Canon. (2.) None who were lately
Catechumens, were to be consecrated Bishops or ordained Presbyters, Can. 2. For
however it had happened well in some extraordinary Cases, as of St. Cyprian
before, and others after this Council, as St. Ambrose, Nectarius, etc. yet
there was great reason to make a standing Rule against it. (3.) None of the
Clergy were to have any Women to live in the House with them, except very near
Relations, as Mother, or Sister, etc. Can. 3. For some, pretending greater
Sanctity, and therefore declining Marriage, yet affected the familiar
Conversation of Women, who made the same pretense. For Bud. Com. L. Gr. p. 148.
Budaeus has well observed that (...) is a Companion of Celibacy; So that when
two Persons were resolved to continue unmarried and agreed to live together,
one of these was (...) to the other. And Tertull. de Ma^g. c. 16. De Exhort.
Castit. c. 12.
Tertullian, writing against second Marriages, seems to advise this Practice,
Habe aliquam Vxorem spiritualem; adsume de Viduis Ecclesiae, etc. And it soon
grew into a Custom in Africa, as appears by Cypr. Ep. 4. ed. Oxon.
St. Cyprian who writes vehemently against it, and shows the Danger and Scandal
of it. And that this Conversation was under a Pretense of Sanctity appears by
Hieron. ad Rustic. ad Gaudent. ad Eustoch.
St. Jerome's words, speaking of such persons, Sub nominibus pietatis
quaerentium suspecta consortia; and again, Sub nomine Religionis and umbra
Continentiae. But elsewhere he calls it Pestis Agapetarum, for it spread like
the Plague, and was restrained with great Difficulty; And at last Laws were
added to Canons, these being found ineffectual. (4.) If any persons were
admitted loosely and without due Examination into Orders, or upon Confession of
lawful Impediments had Hands notwithstanding laid upon them, such Ordinations
were not to be allowed as Canonical, Can. 9. which is more fully expressed in
the next Canon as to one Case, viz. That if any lapsed persons were ordained,
whether the Ordainers did it ignorantly or knowingly they were to be deprived,
Can. 10. (5.) If any among the Novatians returned to the Church, and subscribed
their Consent to the Doctrine and Practice of it, their Ordination seems to be
allowed. Justellus, and some others, think a new Imposition of hands was
required by this Canon; If any of the Novatian Clergy were admitted into the
Church. And so Dionysius Exiguus and the old Latin Interpreter do render it.
But Balsamon, Zonaras and others understand it so, as that the former
Imposition of hands, whereby they were admitted into the Clergy were hereby
allowed. If the words of the Canon seem to be ambiguous, and their Sense to be
taken from the Practice of the Nicene Fathers in a parallel Case, then they are
rather to be understood of a new Imposition of hands. For in the Case of the
Meletians who were ordained in Schism too, they determined in their Synodical
Epistle that they should be received (...), with a more sacred Imposition of
hands; But it is not agreed whether this implies a Reordination or not. Vales.
Not. in Socrat. l. 1. c. 9.
Valesius thinks it does, but others take it only for a simple Benediction, or
the Laying on of hands upon Reconciliation to the Church. And Lavie de S.
Athan. l. 2. c. 13. in no^.
Godfrey Hermant has at large proved Reordination in this Case to have been
against the sense of the Church; wherein he has the advantage of Valesius: as
is evident to any one that reflects on the Occasion of the Luciferian Schism;
which began upon the Council of Alexandria's allowing the Ordination of the
Arian Bishops. And it would be very strange if Schism were more destructive to
Orders than plain Heresy. But the Novatian Bishop was to have no Jurisdiction
where there was one of the Catholic Church; Can. 8.

Among the Canons which relate to the Settlement and Polity of the Church,
these three are very material. (1.) About Election and Consecration of Bishops.
(2.) About Provincial Synods. (3.) About the Bounds of Jurisdiction. For the
seventh Canon is but a Complement to the Bishop of Jerusalem, giving him the
honor of a Metropolitan without the Jurisdiction.

(1.) About Election and Consecration of Bishops. The Canon is, That a Bishop
ought chiefly to be constituted by all the Bishops in the Province; But if this
be too difficult, either through urgent Occasions, or the length of the way,
yet three must be present for that purpose, and have the Consent of the absent
under their Hands, and so to make the Consecration. But the Confirmation of all
things done in the Province must be reserved to the Metropolitan, Can. 4. By
this Canon the Government of the Church came now to be settled under
Constantine, and with his Approbation. And here we find, That every Province
had a number of Bishops within it self, who were to take care of the
Ecclesiastical Government of it, but so as the consent of the Metropolitan
were obtained: So that the Rights of Metropolitans, as to the chief
Ecclesiastical Government of every Province, are hereby secured; For the last
Clause does not merely refer to the Consecration of Bishops; But takes in that,
with other Ecclesiastical Affairs of the Province. The only difficulty lies in
the first Clause, What is meant by the Bishops of the Province, constituting a
new Bishop; Whether the right of Election is hereby devolved to them, or
whether it be only the right of Consecration upon the Election of the People?
Which is therefore here fit to be enquired into, because the ancient Practice
of the British Churches may from hence be gathered; which we may justly presume
was agreeable to the Nicene Canon. And because the signification of the Greek
word is ambiguous, we shall first see, what Sense the Greek Writers do put upon
it. Balsamon interprets (...) by (...) which is choosing by Suffrage; And he in
plain terms says, by this Canon, the right of Election was taken from the
People, and given to the Bishops of the Province. And it is not Balsamon alone,
as some imagine, that was of that Opinion, but Zonaras, Aristenus, Matthaeus
Blastares, as any one may find. But we are told, If they are all of that mind,
they are greatly mistaken, because this Council, in their Synodical Epistle to
those of Alexandria and Egypt, declare their Judgment, Socrat. l. 1. c. 9.
That if any Bishops decease, others reconciled to the Church may be admitted
in their room, if they be worthy, and the People do choose them, (...). One
would think by this, That the Council of Nice had put this matter wholly into
the Peoples hands, but if we look into that Synodical Epistle, we shall find it
much otherwise. For the case was this. The Council declares their tenderness
toward those that had been made Bishops and Priests in the Meletian Schism,
allowing their Orders upon due Submission, but not to exercise any Jurisdiction
to the prejudice of those in Possession; But if any Bishops died, those
Meletian Bishops might succeed, but with these three Provisoes. (1.) That they
be judged worthy; By whom? by the People? No certainly; For then there had been
no need of the following Clause, but this Judgment belonged to the Bishops of
the Province, according to this Canon. (2.) If the People choose them? What
People? The Meletian party? No; They are excluded, because of their being in
Schism, from having any thing to do in the Choice, although they were admitted
to Communion. For they are forbidden before (...), to put up the names of the
Persons to be chosen, or to hold up their hands; And so all right of Suffrage
was taken from them on the account of their Schism; So that what right of
choice was in the People, it was only in the sound and untainted Party, and,
after all, it was no more but a Nomination by the People; For the true right of
Election was still in the Bishops. For (3.) all this signified nothing without
the consent of the Bishop of Alexandria, which immediately follows the other.
And is it a fair thing to mention that Clause only in the middle, and to leave
out the two other, which reduce it to a bare Nomination, and the Meletian party
excluded too? Would those who contend among us for popular Elections like them
upon these terms? It is one thing for the People to propose or nominate Persons
to be chosen; And another for them to have the right of Election: And it is one
thing for a Person chosen to have the consent of the People, and another for
them to have the Power to reject him, because he does not please them: And
again, it is one thing for the People to be allowed to enjoy some Privileges
till the Inconveniences of them have made them be taken away by just Laws: And
another for them to challenge such a right as inherent in themselves, and
without which there lies no obligation on them to submit. If these things were
better understood, it would allay some men's heats about these matters; For
granting that in the time of the Council of Nice, the People had the liberty of
proposing names, or objecting against the Persons to be chosen; And although
their consent were generally desired, yet all this does not put the right of
Election in them; For all that they could do signified nothing without the
Consent of the Bishops and Metropolitan; and none are properly said to choose
but those upon whose Judgment the Determination depends, the rest do but
propose and offer Persons to be chosen. So that the utmost the People could
have by this Canon was a right of Nomination; Which upon Seditions and Tumults
was justly altered: And there can be no Plea for resuming it, unless it be
proved to be a divine and unalterable Right, which can never be done, nor is it
so much as pretended by those who seem to court the Peoples favor, by pleading
for popular Elections at this day from the Precedents of former times.

But I will not deny the People then had a farther Right of Exception against
the Persons chosen, but therein they were considered as Witnesses, and not as
Judges: If their Exceptions were just and well proved, the Bishops as Judges
were to proceed canonically against them, and then they went to a new
Nomination, but still the Judgment rested in the provincial Synod. So in the 16
Canon in the Council of Antioch it is provided, That although all the People
choose one actually a Bishop, yet if he takes Possession of his See without a
perfect Provincial Synod, the Metropolitan being present, he is to be cast
out. This Canon does more fully explain the fourth Canon of the Council of
Nice; for here the Case is put of the Peoples choice, which is there only
implied: And here it is put concerning one actually a Bishop, and so needing no
new Consecration, but being out of employment in his own See, by some
extraordinary accident, is chosen into another by consent of the People. Now if
the People had there the Power of Election, what hindered this Bishop, from
being fully possessed of his Bishopric? And yet this Canon determines, that
such a one was to be cast out, if he did not come in, by the full consent of
the Metropolitan and a Provincial Synod; And to show the force of this Canon,
by virtue of it, Bassianus was rejected from being Bishop of Ephesus, by the
general Council. Chalced. Act. 11.
Council of Chalcedon, where 630 Bishops are said to have been present. The
Case was this, Bassianus was consecrated Bishop of Euaza, by Memnon Bishop of
Ephesus, but it was against his Will, and he never went thither. Basilius, who
succeeded Memnon, sends another Bishop to that City in a Provincial Synod, but
leaves Bassianus the dignity of a Bishop; Basilius being dead, Bassianus is
chosen by the People of Ephesus, and enthronized by Olympius without a
Provincial Synod. But after four years, Stephanus is put in his room, because
he came not in canonically. The Case was heard at large by the Council of
Chalcedon, and this Canon of Antioch was alleged against him, and so he was
thrown out by the Council. From whence I infer; (1.) That the choice of the
People at that time was not allowed, but the main force of Election lay in the
Provincial Synod. And so Maximus Bishop of Antioch, Julianus Coensis, Diogenes
Cyzicensis declared that it belonged to the Bishops of the Province to appoint
a new Bishop, as being most competent Judges, and this was the way to prevent
disorder in the City. (2.) That the Bishops appointing was not mere ordaining
or consecrating, as some say. For this Canon of Antioch speaks of a Bishop
already consecrated, and so likewise the 12 Canon of Laodicea is to be
understood; The same case being supposed which is mentioned in the Canon of
Antioch. And if he were unconsecrated before, the Laodicean Canon refers the
whole matter, as far as I can discern, as to the Capacity and fitness of the
Person, to the Provincial Synod. And if the following Canon 13. be understood
of Bishops, the Consequence will be, that the People will be wholly excluded
from their Election, till it can be made appear, that at that time the
generality of the People were shut out, and the Election restrained to the
Common Council; which is contrary to the Examples brought for Popular
Elections, as appears by the instance of Alexandria in the choice of
Athanasius, where the whole multitude is mentioned, and the Suffrages of the
whole People, and afterward the Plebis Vulgique Iudicium in St. Jerome, the
Vota Civium in Leo is as much spoken of as the Honoratorum Arbitrium; and by
the same reason, any of the People may be excluded, the rest may; or at least
it shows, that the People have no inherent and unalterable Right, without which
all other Pretenses signify nothing, where Law and Customs have determined the
contrary. And that the Customs even then differed appears from St. Jerome ad
Rusticum, where he mentions either the People or the Bishop choosing.

(2.) Another Canon is, about the frequency of Provincial Synods. For in the
fifth Canon, it is Provided, That no person excommunicated by one Bishop,
should be received into Communion by another; according to the Council of
Arles; but then no Provision was made for the Case of Appeals; If any Person
complained, that he was unjustly excommunicated, which it is natural for men to
do. For this purpose, the Nicene Council decrees, That Provincial Synods be
held twice a year, in Lent and Autumn, which was confirmed by many other
Council. Antioch. cap. 20. Chalced. c. 19. African. c. 62. Regiens. c. 7. Araus.
c. 19. Agath. c. 71. Emerit. c. 7.

Ferrand. tit. 143. Mart. Bracar. tit. 28.

Innocent. ad Vict.

Leo ad Anastas. Hincmar. ep. 47. c. 20.


Canons. And at these all such Causes were to be heard and determined, and
Persons excommunicated were to be held so by all, unless the Provincial Synod
repealed the Sentence. And although the case of Bishops be not here mentioned;
Yet the African Fathers with great reason said, it ought to be understood,
Since Causes are to be heard within the Province, and no Jurisdiction is
mentioned by the Council of Nice, beyond that of a Metropolitan, those only
excepted whose Rights are secured according to the Prescription then in use in
the following Canon. For if any other superior Authority had then been known,
that was the proper place to have inserted it, where the right of Appeal is
determined, that being the most plausible Pretense for removing Causes to a
superior Court. And it is impossible that the Nicene Fathers should have stopped
at Provincial Synods, if they had known or believed, that Christ had appointed
a Vicar upon Earth, who was to be Supreme Judge in all Ecclesiastical Matters;
For it would have been as absurd as if our Judges should declare, that all
Causes are to be determined in the Country Courts, when they know there are
superior Courts of Judicature appointed in Westminster Hall.

It has been thought a matter of some difficulty to state the difference
between the Rights of a Patriarch and a Metropolitan. But there are two things
chiefly, wherein the distinction lies, viz. a greater extent of Jurisdiction
founded on the Consecration of Metropolitan Bishops in several Provinces; and
a Power of receiving Appeals, or, Judicium in majoribus causis, even after
Provincial Synods have determined them. And since in matters of Appeal, there
must be a stop somewhere, the only question before us is, Where the Council of
Nice fixed it. I say, in a Provincial Synod by this Canon; for I am certain, it
takes notice here of no Ecclesiastical Iudicatory beyond this. In matters of
Faith, or upon extraordinary Occasions, by the Summons of an Emperor, or a
general Concurrence of Christian Princes a general Council is the highest
Court; But in the standing and ordinary Method of Proceeding, (where there have
been no. ancient Privileges to the contrary, of which the following Canon is to
be understood) a Provincial Synod is the last Court of Appeal, according to the
Council of Nice. So that all foreign Jurisdiction is excluded by this Canon;
And the British Churches had a full Power within themselves to end all Causes
that did arise within their own Provinces. And it was mere usurpation in any
Foreign Bishop to interpose in any differences in the British Churches, Because
the Council of Nice had circumscribed the Liberty of Appeals to Provincial
Synods. And this was it which made the African Fathers so stout in defense of
their just Rights, against the manifest encroachments of the Bishop of Rome;
and the British Churches had as great Privileges and as just Rights in these
matters as the African Churches.

(3.) About settling the ancient Bounds of Jurisdiction as to Patriarchal
Churches in the famous sixth Canon. Which has been the occasion of so many
warm Debates. In the former Canon, the Nicene Fathers fixed the general Right
of Appeals; And in this Canon they settle the particular Bounds of Patriarchal
Jurisdiction, according to ancient Custom: So that none ought to violate the
Privileges which Churches had hitherto enjoyed. The Words are, Let ancient
Customs prevail, for the Bishop of Alexandria to have Jurisdiction over Egypt,
Libya and Pentapolis; Because the Bishop of Rome has a like Custom; Likewise
in Antioch, and other Provinces, let the Privileges of Churches be preserved;
Let no man be made a Bishop without the consent of his Metropolitan. If
Differences arise, let the Majority of Votes determine. In this Canon there are
three things principally designed. (1.) To confirm the ancient Privileges of
some of the greater Sees; as Rome, Alexandria and Antioch. (2.) To secure the
Privileges of other Churches against their encroachments upon them. (3.) To
provide for the quiet establishment of Metropolitan Churches, which last is so
plain that it will need no farther discourse; But the other two are of great
consequence to our design. (1.) To confirm the ancient Privileges of some of
the greater Sees; which had gotten the extent of more than a bare Metropolitan
Power to themselves, as is plain in the case of Alexandria, which seems to have
been the occasion of this Canon. Not merely from the Schism of Meletius (as is
commonly thought) which the Council took care of another way, in the Theodor.
l. 1. c. 9.
Synodical Epistle to the Churches of Egypt. But because so large a
Jurisdiction as had been exercised by the Bishops of Alexandria, and Rome, and
Antioch, seemed repugnant to the foregoing Canon about Provincial Synods. It is
true that Meletius after the Schism did consecrate Bishops in Egypt, in
opposition to the Bishop of Alexandria; But the question between them was, not
concerning the Bounds of Jurisdiction, but about the Validity of Meletius his
deposition by Peter of Alexandria; Which Meletius, not regarding, fell into a
Schism, and, to maintain this Schism, he consecrated near Thirty Bishops, as
appeared by the list he gave in to Alexander, after the Council of Nice extant
in Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 789.
Athanasius. Whereby it is evident, That Meletius his Schism could not be the
Occasion of this Canon; Vide Athanas. ib. p. 777.
For that Schism did not at all relate to the several Province^ of Egypt here
mentioned, which would have continued, if the Bishop of Alexandria's Authority
had been confined to a single Province, and what stop could it put to the
Schism, to say, his Authority extended over all the Roman Provinces in Egypt?
For, the question was, Who had the Authority? not, How far it extended? But,
upon the former Canon about Provincial Synods, there was a very just occasion,
to add this concerning the Bishops of Alexandria and Rome: For if no Salvo had
been made for them, as to the largeness of their Jurisdiction, the next thing
had been for all the Provincial Synods to have immediately cast off all respect
to them; except only those of their own Province. Now in Egypt here are three
distinct Provinces mentioned as subject to the Bishop of Alexandria, viz.
Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis; And so the Nicene Fathers reckon them in their
Epistle to the Churches of Egypt, and in these At^anas. Ap^l. 2. p. 788.
Athanasius mentions an hundred Bishops; But sometimes he names only Egypt and
Libya, as in his Epistle to the African Bishops; sometimes Egypt, and the two
Libya's; and in both comprehending Thebais under Egypt; sometimes he names
Thebais; and several times, as it is here, only Egypt, Libya and Pentapolis.
Which, as Justellus says, comprehend the whole Egyptian Diocese; But Am.
Marcel. l. 22. c. 16.
Ammianus Marcellinus reckons them otherwise, viz. Egypt, Thebais and Libya, to
which Posterity, he says, added Augustamnica and Pentapolis: But Pentapolis
was not comprehended under Libya, being always a distinct Province, and by the
Division of Augustus, was under the Proconsul of Crete, by the Name of
Cyrenaica. However Epiph. haer. 68. n. 1.
Epiphanius takes in Libya, Pentapolis, Thebais, Ammoniaca and Mareotis: And
says plainly, That all the Provinces of Egypt were under the Jurisdiction of
the Bishop of Alexandria. And this, he says, was the Custom before the
Council of Nice. For he speaks of the quarrel between Peter, Bishop of
Alexandria, and Meletius, then Bishop of Thebais; of whom he says, That he was
next to the Bishop of Alexandria, but in subjection to him, all Ecclesiastical
matters being referred to him. For it is the Custom for the Bishop of
Alexandria to have the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over all Egypt. By which it
is plain, that the Bishop of Alexandria had then a true Patriarchal power by
ancient Custom, i. e. an Ecclesiastical Authority over the Bishops in several
Provinces, answering to the Power which the Praefectus Augustalis had over them
in the Civil Government. It is not at all material whether the name of
Patriarch or Diocese (in that sense as it takes in the extent of Patriarchal
Jurisdiction) were then in use, for it is the thing we enquire after, and not
the use of words: And if the Bishop of Alexandria had at that time the Power of
Consecration of Bishops, of calling Councils, of receiving Appeals throughout
all Egypt, no men of Sense can deny, that he had a true Patriarchal power. I
grant he had no Metropolitanes then under him in the several Provinces. But,
what then? the manner of Administration of the Patriarchal power might be
different then, from following times; but the extent of the power is the thing
in question. Either then the Bishop of Alexandria had a barely Metropolitical
power or Patriarchal. If barely Metropolitical, then it could not reach beyond
one Province; If it extended to more Provinces, with full Jurisdiction, then it
was Patriarchal. And it is a wonder to me, some learned men in their warm
Debates about this Canon could not discern so plain a Truth. But it is often
said, That there were no such things as Patriarchs at this time in the Church,
nor any Dioceses here taken notice of, as they imply an Union of several
Provinces under a Patriarchal Jurisdiction. Suppose there were not under those
Names; but a Jurisdiction over several Provinces there was in the Bishop of
Alexandria: which is a true Patriarchal power; and Appeals were brought to him
out of the several Provinces, as appears not only by the plain Testimony of
Epiphanius in the case of Meletius, but by the Jurisdiction exercised by
Dionysius over Pentapolis, long before the Council of Nice. And Athanas. de
sent. Dionys. p. 552.
Athanasius says, the Care of those Churches then belonged to the Bishop of
Alexandria. If it be said, That there were then no Metropolitanes under the
Bishop of Alexandria, but he was the sole Metropolitan, and therefore this was
no Patriarchal, but a Metropolitan power. I answer, (1.) This does not solve
the difficulty, but rather makes it greater; because it does more overthrow the
Metropolitan Government of the Church here settled by the Council of Nice. For
then there were several Provinces without Metropolitanes; How then could the
Canons here made be ever observed in them, as to the Consecration of Bishops
and Provincial Synods? (2.) I do confess there was something peculiar in the
case of the Bishop of Alexandria. For all the Provinces of Egypt were under his
immediate care, which was Patriarchal as to Extent, but Metropolitical in the
Administration. And so was the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome at the time,
which is the true reason of bringing the Custom of Rome to justify that of
Alexandria. For as it is well observed by Lup. in Canon. Part. 5. p. 808.
Christianus Lupus, The Bishop of Rome had then no Metropolitanes under him
within the Provinces subject to his Jurisdiction; and so all Appeals lay
immediately from the several Bishops to him. And therein lay the exact parallel
between the Bishops of Rome and Alexandria. So that, I do not question, but the
first part of this Canon, was brought in as a Proviso to the former, which put
the last resort into Provincial Synods. For Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria,
could not but think himself extremely concerned in this matter, and although he
prevailed against Arius in matter of Doctrine, yet if he had gone home so much
less than he came thither, having great part of his Authority taken from him by
Provincial Synods, this would have weakened his Cause so much in Egypt, that for
his sake the Nicene Fathers were willing to make an Exception as to the general
Rule they had laid down before; Which proved of very ill consequence
afterward: For upon this encouragement, others in following Councils obtained
as large Privileges, though without pretense of Custom, and the Church of
Rome, though but named occasionally here, to avoid envy. yet improved this to
the utmost advantage; And the Agents of the Bishop of Rome had the impudence in
the Council. Chalced. Act. 16.
Council of Chalcedon to falsify the Title of this Canon, and to pretend a
Supremacy owned by it, which was as far from the intention of this Council as a
limited Patriarch is from being Head of the Church. And it is impossible for
them with all their Arts and Distinctions they have used, to reconcile this
Canon with an universal and unbounded Supremacy in the Bishop of that Church.
For it would be like the saying that the Sheriff of Yorkshire shall have
Jurisdiction over all three Ridings, because the King of England has power
over all the Nation. What Parallel is there between these two? But if the
Clause be restrained to his Patriarchal power; then we are certain the Council
of Nice did suppose the Bishop of Rome to have only a limited power within
certain Provinces; Which according to Ruffinus, who very well understood the
Extent of the Bishop of Romes Jurisdiction was only to the Suburbicary
Churches; Which is the greater Diocese mentioned by the Council of Arles, it so
very much exceeding the Diocese of any Western Bishop besides; And it is
observable, that Athanas. ad solit. vit. agent. p. 832.
Athanasius, as he calls Milan the Metropolis of Italy, i. e. of the Italick
Diocese, so he calls Rome the Metropolis of Romania, i. e. of the Roman
Diocese. But the Council of Nice fixing the last Appeal to Provincial Synods in
other Places, utterly overthrows a patriarchal as well as unlimited
Jurisdiction; where ancient Custom did not then prevail.

(2.) This Canon was designed to secure the Privileges of other Churches. For
that is the general nature of Exceptions to make the Rule more firm in cases
not excepted. So that all Churches are to enjoy their just Rights of having the
last resort to Provincial Synods, that cannot be brought within these
Exceptions allowed by the Council of Nice. And here we fix our Right as to the
British Churches, that they were not under any Patriarchal Jurisdiction of the
Bishop of Rome before the Council of Nice, i. e. That he never had the
Authority to consecrate the Metropolitanes or Bishops of these Provinces; That
he never called them to his Councils at Rome; That he had no Appeals from
hence; That the British Bishops never owned his Jurisdiction over them, and
therefore our Churches were still to enjoy their former Privileges of being
governed by their own Provincial Synods. It was upon this ground, the Cyprian
Bishops made their Application to the Council of Ephesus; Because the Bishop of
Antioch did invade their Privileges contrary to the Nicene Canons pretending to
a Right to consecrate their Metropolitan, which they knew very well was a
design to bring their Churches in subjection to him. The Council upon hearing
the Cause declared their opinion in favor of the Cyprian Privilege; and not
only so, but declared it to be a common Cause that concerned other Churches
which were bound to maintain their own Rights against all Usurpations; And that
no Bishops should presume to invade another Province; And if they did usurp
any authority over them, they were bound to lay it down, as being contrary to
the Canons; Savouring of Worldly ambition; and destructive of that Liberty
which Jesus Christ has purchased for us with his own Blood. And therefore the
Council decreed, That every Province should enjoy its own Rights pure and
inviolable, which it had from the beginning, according to the ancient Custom.
This important Canon is passed over very slightly by Baronius and others, but
Geograph. Sacr. Patriarch. Antio^hen.
Carolus a Sancto Paulo says it proceeded upon a false suggestion, although
the Bishops of Cyprus do most solemnly avow the truth of their ancient
Privilege. Lupus in Can. Ephesians. p. 368.
Christianus Lupus imputes the Decree to the Partiality of the Council against
the Bishop of Antioch; although he confesses, they insisted upon the Nicene
Canons. Which even Leo Epist. 78, 79, 80. ed. N^v.
Leo I. in his eager Disputes with Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople pleads
for as inviolable, and as the Standard of the Rights of Churches. And by the
Decree of the Council of Ephesus, all Churches are bound to stand up for their
own Rights against the Usurpations of foreign Bishops.

But Morin. Exercit. Eccles. l. c. 4.
Joh. Morinus apprehending the force of this consequence, makes it his business
to overthrow it by showing that this was a particular and occasional thing, and
therefore not to be made an Example to other Churches. A twofold occasion he
assigns; First, the difficulty of Passage by Sea from Cyprus to Antioch,
especially in Winter, when it was very possible a Metropolitan might die, and
rather than live so long without one, they chose to set up one themselves;
Another is the forty years Schism in the Church of Antioch, between Euzoius,
Meletius and Paulinus. But these are only slight and frivolous Evasions. For
the Cyprian Bishops never alleged the first Inconveniencie, nor did the Bishop
of Antioch the second: No, not when Alexander was unanimously chosen, as
Morinus confesses, and made his Complaint of the Cyprian Privilege to
Innocentius I. as may be seen by his 18 Epistle; To whom the Pope gave an
ignorant Answer, as appears by Morinus himself: For he pretends that the
Cyprian Bishops had broken the Nicene Canons, in consecrating their own
Metropolitan, because, says he, The Council of Nice had set the Church of
Antioch, not over any Province, but over the Diocese; By which he must mean the
Eastern Diocese, within which Cyprus was comprehended: But there is not one
word of the Diocese in the Nicene Canons, and these things are referred to
ancient Customs, as Morinus acknowledges; And he says, the Diocese of the
Orient, as distinguished from Asiana and Pontica was not settled at the time of
the Nicene Council. And yet he brings the Testimony of Innocentius to disprove
the allegation of the Cyprian Bishops; when he confesses, that he was so
mistaken in the Nicene Canons, on which he grounds that Right; And the Cyprian
Bishops had the Nicene Canons to plead for themselves, as the general Council
of Ephesus thought, who understood them far better than Innocentius seems to
have done. If what he says had been true, it is not to be thought that the
Council of Ephesus would have determined in favor of the Cyprian Bishops. But
Morinus urges against them. (1.) That they named only three Bishops, Troilus,
Sabinus and Epiphanius. But do they not air that it had been always so from
the Apostles time? (2.) That no one pleaded for the Bishop of Antioch. What
then? If they were satisfied of the truth of their Allegation, the Nicene
Council, had already determined the case. (3.) They only do it conditionally,
if it were so: But they enjoyed their Privilege by virtue of it; which shows it
could not be disproved. (4.) The Cyprian Privilege was granted in Zeno's time,
upon finding the Body of St. Barnabas. But it is evident they enjoyed it
before; by the Decree of the Council of Ephesus. And it was not properly a
Privilege; For that implies a particular exemption; But it was a Confirmation
of their just Rights: And not only as to them, but as to all Provincial
Churches. So that this Decree is the Magna Charta of Metropolitan Churches,
against any Encroachments upon their Liberties: And so the Council thought it,
when it appoints all Metropolitanes to take Copies of it, and voids all Acts
that should be made against it.

It is necessary now to enquire, whether the Bishop of Rome had a Patriarchal
power over the British Churches, before the Council of Nice: And the only way
to do that, is to examine the several Patriarchal rights which were allowed in
the Church. And if the Marks of none of them do appear; We have reason to
conclude, he had no Patriarchal power. For however some urge the Conversion of
Britain by Eleutherius as a Pretense to the Bishop of Rome's Authority, yet,
allowing it to be true, no man of understanding can pretend to derive a
Patriarchal power from thence, unless there were a concurrence of Jurisdiction
from that time. Neither were it of force, if Saint Peter himself had preached
the Gospel here; and settled the Bishops of these Churches. For, by the same
reason, there could have been no Patriarchates at Antioch or Alexandria, (where
he is supposed to have placed Saint Mark) but if notwithstanding, the Bishops
of those Churches had a true Patriarchal power; Then so might the
Metropolitanes of the British Churches have their proper Rights. Although Saint
Peter himself had founded these Churches. Morin. Exercit. Eccles. l. 1. ^. 29.
Morinus says, The Patriarchal power consisted in these four things. (1.) In
the Consecration of Metropolitanes, and the Confirmation of other Bishops. (2.)
In calling Councils out of the several Provinces under his Jurisdiction. (3.)
In receiving Appeals from Provincial Synods. (4.) In the Delegation of persons
with authority from him to act in the several Provinces. The first is that upon
which the rest are founded: As we see in the case of the Bishop of Antioch and
the Bishops of Cyprus; For if he could have carried the Point of Consecration
of the Bishop of Constance, he knew all the rest would follow. In the
Patriarchate of Alexandria it appears by the Epistles of Synes. Epist. 67, 76.
Synesius, That the Bishops of Pentapolis, although then under a Metropolitan
of their own, yet had their Consecration from the Bishop of Alexandria. When
Justinian advanced the Bishop of Justiniana prima to the dignity of a
Patriarch, by giving him power over seven Provinces, he Novell. 131. c. 3.
expresses the Patriarchal power by this; That all the Bishops of those
Provinces should be consecrated by him, and consequently be under his
Jurisdiction, and be liable to be called to his Council, as Justinian elsewhere
determines: And when the Novell. 123. and 137.
Bishop of Justinianopolis removed from Cyprus thither, he not only enjoyed
the Cyprian privilege there, but was allowed for a Patriarch by the Council in
Trullo, and consequently, the Consecration of the Bishops in the Province of
Hellespont belonged to him.

And when the Patriarchal power was settled at Constantinople, that was the
chief thing insisted upon, at least as to Metropolitanes. The first attempt the
Bishop of Constantinople made toward any true Patriarchal power (for all that
the Council. Constable. c. 3.
Council of Constantinople gave him was a mere honorary Title) was the
Consecrating Bishops in the Dioceses of Asiana, and Pontica, and Thracia: And
this was charged on St. Chrysostom as an Innovation in the Synod Phot.
Biblioth. Cod. 59.
ad Quercum, i. e. in the Suburbs of Chalcedon. And his Soz. l. 8. c. 6.
actings in the Council at Ephesus, and Consecrating of many Bishops in that
Diocese, could not be justified by the Canons of the Church: The best excuse is
what Pallad. vit. Chrysostom. p. 133.
Palladius makes, viz. That his going into Asia, was upon the great importunity
of the Bishops and Clergy there: For what Morin. Exercit. Eccles. l. 1. c. 14.
Morinus says, That he did this by the Pope's authority, is ridiculous; It
being not once thought of by St. Chrysostom or his Friends. And for a Bishop
of Constantinople to act by authority from the Bishop of Rome, was then as
absurd, as for the Czar of Muscovy to act by Commission from the Emperor of
Germany. For it is plain, That one stood upon equal Privileges with the other;
As fully appears by the Council of Chalcedon, and the warm Debates which
followed it, between the two Sees. And what could have served Leo's turn better
against Anatolius, than to have produced St. Chrysostom's Delegation from one
of his Predecessors? But in the Council of Chalcedon, where the Right of the
Patriarch of Constantinople was at large debated, this Act of St. Chrysostom
was alleged as a remarkable Precedent to prove a Patriarchal power: And there
Council. Chalced. c. 28.
a Canon was passed, That the Metropolitanes of those three Dioceses should be
consecrated by the Bishop of Constantinople, which was the establishment of his
Patriarchal authority over them. Upon this Pope Leo insisted on the Council of
Nice and the Canons there made, and pleaded strongly, That this was an unjust
Invasion of the Rights of those Churches which ought to be inviolably
preserved. And we desire no better Arguments against the Pope's pretended
Patriarchal power over these Western Churches, than what Leo insisted on for
the Dioceses of Asia, Pontus and Thrace, against the Patriarchal power of the
Bishop of Constantinople. For we plead the very same things; That all Churches
ought to enjoy the Rights of Provincial Synods: And that no Person can be
excused in violating the Nicene Canons. But if it be pretended, That the Bishop
of Rome had always a Patriarchal power over the British Churches; Let any one
Instance be given of it: Let them tell us when he consecrated the
Metropolitanes or Bishops of the three Provinces of Britain; or summoned them
to his Councils; or heard their Causes; or received Appeals from hence; or so
much as sent any one Legate to exercise Authority in his Name; And if they can
produce nothing of this kind, there is not then the least appearance of his
Patriarchal power.

We do not deny that the Bishop of Rome had any Patriarchal power in those
times; But we say, It was confined within the Roman Diocese; As that did
comprehend the Churches within the Suburbicary Provinces; And within these he
exercised the same Authority that the Eastern Patriarchs did, i. e. He
consecrated Bishops, called Synods and received Appeals, which are the main
Patriarchal rights. But if we go beyond these Provinces, Pet. de Marca de
Concord. l. 1. c. 7. n. 7.
Petrus de Marca himself is extremely put to it to prove the exercise of a
Patriarchal power; He confesses the matter is not clear either as to
Consecrations or Councils, but he runs to References, Consultations and Appeals
in greater causes; And yet he Id. c. 10. n. 1.
confesses, as to Appeals (which only do imply a just Authority) There is no
one certain evidence of them before the Council of Sardica. So that by the
confession of the most learned and judicious of those who plead for the Pope's
being Patriarch of the West; No proper Acts of Patriarchal power can be proved
beyond the Roman Diocese, before the Council of Nice. And the same L. 6. c. 4.
n. 6, 7, 8, 9.
learned Archbishop does grant, that the Bishop of Rome did not consecrate even
in Italy out of the Roman Diocese, as appears by the Bishops of Milan and
Aquileia; Nor in Africa, nor in Spain, nor in Gaul. And, after these
Concessions, it is impossible to prove the Bishop of Rome Patriarch of the
Western Churches. Which some late Writers of that Church have been much
concerned at, and have endeavored to show the contrary. Lup. in Canon. Part.
5. p. 764.
Christianus Lupus has written a Dissertation on purpose; But the greatest
thing he says to prove it is, That to affirm, that the Bishop of Rome had no
such authority, is an Eusebian and Schismatical Error, and came first from the
Council of Philippopolis; yet he grants, p. 790.
That in the Western Provinces, the Metropolitanes did consecrate their
Suffragans, and they their Metropolitanes. But all this he says, was done by
special privilege. But where is any such privilege to be seen? It is evident by
the Nicene Canons, every Province had its own just Rights for these things. And
if there were any privilege, it must be produced on the other side. He does not
deny, That Leo Ep. 89. c. 8.
Leo disowned having any thing to do in the Consecration of the Gallican
Bishops, in his Epistle to the Bishops of Vienna, or that Hincmar. Ep. 47. c.
21.
Hincmarus says, The Transalpine Bishops did not belong to the Consecration or
Councils of the Bishop of Rome. And therefore Ecclesiastical Causes were to be
heard and determined by Provincial Synods: But he thinks to bring off all at
last, by saying, Lup. ib. p. 813.
That these were privileges indulged, because of distance from Rome. Which is a
mere Shuffle, without any color for it, unless such privileges could be
produced, for otherwise it will appear to be common Right, And yet this is the
main, which a late Author, Council. Antioch. Can. 9. cap. 14. p. 473.
Emanuel a Schelstraet has to say about this matter. But this has been the
common Artifice of Rome; Where any Bishops insisted on their own Rights and
ancient Customs, and Canons of Councils, to pretend that all came from
privileges allowed by the Sea of Rome; And the Defenders of it are now
shamefully driven to these Arts, having nothing else left to plead for the
Pope's Usurpation. But this last Antiquit. illustr. Dissert. 2.
Author (the present Keeper of the Vatican Library, which makes so great a
noise in the World for Church Records) having endeavored, in a set Discourse,
to assert the Pope's Patriarchal power over the Western Churches, I shall here
examine the strength of all that he produces to that purpose. He agrees with
us in determining the Patriarchal Rights, which he says lie in these three
things: (1.) In the right of Consecration of Bishops and Metropolitanes. (2.)
In the right of summoning them to Councils. (3.) In the right of Appeals. All
which he proves to be the just and true Patriarchal Rights from the seventeenth
Canon of the eighth General Council. And by these we are contented to stand or
fall.

(1.) As to the Right of Consecration of Bishops and Metropolitanes throughout
the Western Churches. C. 4. Act. 1. n. 94.
He confesses, That such a Right was not exercised, Because the Metropolitanes
in the several Provinces were allowed to consecrate the Bishops belonging to
them, upon the Summons of the Provincial Synod; And for this he produces the 4
th Canon of the Council of Nice. Here then is a plain allowance of the
Metropolitan Rights by this General Council; But how does this prove the
Patriarchal? Or rather, is it not a plain derogation from them? No, says he,
The Patriarchal Rights are preserved by the sixth Canon. I grant it; But then
it must be proved, That the Patriarchal Rights of the Bishop of Rome, did at
the time of the Council of Nice extend to all the Western Churches, which I
utterly deny. Yet I grant farther, That the Bishop of Rome had all the
Patriarchal Rights, within the Provinces, which were then under his
Jurisdiction, and were therefore called the Suburbicary Churches. But these
were so far from taking in all the Western Churches, that they did not
comprehend the Provinces of Italy properly so called: But he offers to prove
out of Gratian, and from the Testimony of Pelagius, Bishop of Rome, n. 96.
That by reason of the length of the way, the Bishops of Milan and Aquileia did
consecrate each other. But is such Authority sufficient to prove that the
Bishops of Milan and Aquileia were of old subject to the Roman Patriarchate? We
have nothing to prove this, but the bare word of one who was too much concerned
to be a competent Witness; and too much alone to be a sufficient Witness in
this matter. The length and difficulty of the way was no hindrance afterward
for obtaining the Pope's consent for the Consecration of the Bishop of Milan,
as appears by the instance of Gregory produced by him; Why then should that be
alleged as the Reason before? For the Ways were not one jot shorter or easier
to pass. But if we compare the Election and Consecration of St. Ambrose at
Milan, with that of Deus dedit in St. Gregory's time; We shall see an apparent
difference in the Circumstances of them. For at the first there was a
Provincial Synod by the Emperor's appointment, as Theod. l. 4. c. 5, 6.
Theodoret relates it, who referred the choice to the Emperor; But he
declining it, and the City falling into great heats about it, St. Ambrose was
of a sudden chosen, being then Governor of the Province, and so was
Inthronized, by the Bishops there present. Not one word here of the consent of
the Bishop of Rome required, or so much as mentioned; And yet Pope Damasus was
as ready to assert any thing that looked like a Right of his See, as Pelagius
or Gregory. But at that time St. Ambrose, at Milan, had as great authority as
Damasus at Rome; And the Italick Diocese was as considerable as the Roman. If
the length and difficulty of the Way were the true Reason why St. Ambrose did
not go to Rome; yet why no Messenger sent? Why no Agent from the Pope to
declare his consent? But then the Extent of the Roman Diocese was better
understood, wherein all the Bishops were to receive Consecration from the
Bishop of Rome, having no Metropolitan of their own; But this did not reach so
far as Milan. This Roman Diocese was truly Patriarchal, having several
Provinces under it, and was therein peculiar and made a Precedent for the
Bishop of Alexandria, all the other Western Churches being then governed by
their several Bishops and Metropolitanes. Les Occurres de Leschassier, p. 454.
Jac. Leschassier thinks that five of the eleven Provinces of Italy made up
this Diocese; I mean the Provinces of Augustus, and not of Constantine; And
within these were about seventy Bishops who belonged to the Consecration of the
Bishop of Rome, having no other Metropolitan; And with this, as he observes,
the old Notitia of the Vatican, produced by Baron. A. D. n. 23.
Baronius, agrees; wherein the Suffragans of the Bishop of Rome are said to be
the Bishop of Campania, the Marsi, Tuscia, Vmbria and Marchia: which Notitia is
the same with the Provinciale Romanum, published by Mirae. Notit. Episcop. p.
64.
Miraeus, and compared by him with four MSS. wherein are set down all the
Bishops of the Roman Province, as it is there called. Ughell. Ital. Sacr. To. 1.
Ferd. Vghellus reckons up seventy Bishops of those who were immediately under
the Bishop of Rome 's Jurisdiction, and had no Metropolitan over them; These
were within the Provinces of Latium, Valeria, Tuscia, Picenum and Vmbria; which
neither answering exactly to the Jurisdiction of the Roman Prefect, nor to that
of the Vicarius Vrbis; We are not to judge of the Extent of this Diocese from
that of the Civil Government, but from ancient Custom, to which the Council of
Nice does expressly attribute it. In the Diurnus Romanus, lately published by
Garn. Diurn. Romans c. 3. p. 52.
Garnerius out of an ancient Manuscript, there is one Title, De Ordinatione
Episcopi Suburbicarii a Romano Pontifice, where the whole Process, as to the
Consecration of a new Bishop, is set down, but from thence it appears, that
none but the Suburbicary Bishops belonged to his Consecration. We freely grant
then, That the Bishop of Rome had a Patriarchal power over several Provinces;
as the Bishop of Alexandria was allowed to have by the Council of Nice in
imitation of him; And that within this Diocese he did exercise this as a
Patriarchal right to consecrate Bishops within those several Provinces, as the
Bishop of Alexandria did: But we deny that ever the Bishop of Rome did exercise
this part of his Patriarchal power beyond the forementioned Provinces.

But to prove the larger Extent of the Pope's Power as to Consecrations the
Epistle of Siricius to Anysius Bishop of Thessalonica Schelstraet. n. 97, etc.
is urged, whom the Pope makes his Legate in the Part of Illyricum, and charges
him, that no Consecrations should be allowed which were made without his
consent: And the same appears by the Epistles of Boniface to the Bishops of
Thessaly and Illyricum, and of Leo to Anastasius. All which are published
together by Holstenius out of the Barberine Library; or rather out of his
Transcripts by Card. Barberine (but H. Alexander. de Region. suburbic. Diss. 2.
p. 167.
Hieron. Alexander cites a Passage out of the same Collection as in the Vatican
Library) but from whencesoever it came, the Objection seems to be the more
considerable, because, as Holsten. Not. ad Coll. Romans p. 295.
Holstenius in his Notes observes, Primau^e p. 393.
Blondel had denied that it could be proved by any Monument of Antiquity, That
the Bishop of Thessalonica was Legate to the Pope before the time of Leo.

But, to give a clear account of this matter, Leo himself, in his Epistle to
Anastasius, derives this Authority no higher than from Siricius, who gave it to
Anysius Bishop of Thessalonica, certa tum primum ratione commisit, ut per illam
Provinciam positis, quas ad disciplinam teneri voluit, Ecclesiis subveniret.
Siricius immediately succeeded Damasus, who died according to Holsten.
Diagrammat. Chronog. Pontif. Damasi.
Holstenius, 11 Dec. 384. Three years after the Council of Constantinople had
advanced that See to the Patriarchal dignity; which gave great occasion of
Jealousy and Suspicion to the Bishops of Rome, that being the Imperial City as
well as Rome; And Socr. l. 5. c. 8.
Socrates observes, That from that time Nectarius the Bishop of Constantinople,
had the Government of Constantinople and Thrace, as falling to his share. This
made the Bishops of Rome think it high time to look about them, and to enlarge
their Jurisdiction, since the Bishop of New Rome had gained so large an
accession by that Council; And to prevent his farther Encroachments Westwards,
his Diocese of Thrace bordering upon Macedonia, the subtilest Device they could
think of, to secure that Province and to enlarge their own Authority, was, to
persuade the Bishop of Thessalonica to act as by Commission from the Bishop of
Rome: So that he should enjoy the same privileges which he had before. And
being backed by so great an Interest, he would be better able to contest with
so powerful a Neighbor as the Bishop of Constantinople. And if any objected,
That this was to break the Rules settled by the Council of Nice; They had that
Answer ready; That the Bishop of Constantinople began: and their Concernment
was, to secure the Rights of other Churches from being invaded by him; By which
means they endeavored to draw those Churches bordering on the Thracian
Diocese, first to own a Submission to the Bishop of Rome as their Patriarch;
Which yet was so far from giving them ease, which some it may be expected by
it, that it only involved them in continual Troubles, as appears by that very
Collection of Holstenius. For the Bishops of Constantinople were not negligent
in promoting their own Authority in the Provinces of Illyricum, nor in
withstanding the Innovations of the Bishop of Rome. To which purpose they
obtained an Imperial Edict to this day extant in both Theod. 16. l. 45. t. de
Episc. C. Just. de SS. Eccl. l. 6.
Codes, which strictly forbids any Innovation in the Provinces of Illyricum,
and declares, That if any doubtful Case happened, according to the ancient
Custom and Canons, it was to be left to the provincial Synod, but not without
the advice of the Bishop of Constantinople. The occasion whereof was this,
Perigenes being rejected at Patrae, the Bishop of Rome takes upon him to put
him into Corinth, without the consent of the provincial Synod: This the Bishops
of Thessaly, among whom the chief were, Pausianus, Cyriacus and Calliopus, look
upon as a notorius Invasion of their Rights; and therefore in a provincial
Synod they appoint another Person to succeed there. Which Proceeding of theirs
is heinously taken at Rome, as appears by Collect. Romans p. 54, 65, 69.
Boniface's Epistles about it, both to Rufus of Thessalonica, whom he had made
his Legate, and to the Bishops of Thessaly, and the other Provinces. But they
make Application to the Patriarch of Constantinople, who procures this Law, in
favor of the ancient provincial Synods, and for restraint of the Pope's
Encroachments, but withal, so as to reserve the last resort to the Bishop of
Constantinople. At this Boniface shows himself extremely nettled, as appears by
his next Epistle to Rufus, and incourages him, to stand it out to the utmost;
And gives him authority to excommunicate those Bishops, and to depose Maximus,
whom they consecrated according to the ancient Canons. But all the Art of his
management of this Cause lay, in throwing the Odium of it upon the Ambition of
the Bishop of Constantinople; And thus the Contention between the Bishops of
the two Imperial Cities proved the destruction of the Ancient Polity of the
Church, as it was settled by the Council of Nice.

It is said by De Concord. l. 4. c. 2. n. 1.
Petrus de Marca and Holstenius, That all this attempt of Theodosius was to no
purpose; Because afterward the Bishops of Macedonia submitted to the Pope's
power; And that Rescript was revoked by another of Theodosius published in the
Roman Collection. It cannot be denied, That for some time the Bishop of Rome
prevailed, but it appears, that it was not long, by the sad Complaint made to
Boniface II. of the Prevalency of the Patriarch of Constantinople in those
parts made by Stephen, Bishop of Larissa, the Metropolis of Thessaly, and his
Brethren Theodosius, Elpidius and Timotheus: And our Council. Antioch. c. 13.
act. 1. n. 2. p. 421.
Author himself confesses, that it appears by the Notitiae, That these
Provinces were at last wholly taken away from the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of
Rome, and made subject to the Patriarch of Constantinople.

From which account of the matter of Fact we have these things very observable.
(1.) That there was no Precedent could be produced as to the Pope's interposing
in their Consecrations before the time of Siricius. It is true, Damasus his
Epistle to Acholius is mentioned sometimes by the following Popes; But any one
that reads both his Epistles in the Collect. Romans p. 37.
Roman Collection will find, that neither of them do relate to this matter: And
the former is not only directed to Acholius, but to several other Bishops; And
the Design of it is, To advise them to take care, that a worthy person be put
into the Sea of Constantinople in the approaching Council; And to the same
purpose is the following Epistle to Acholius. p. 42.
But what is this to the Pope's power about Consecrations in the Provinces of
Illyricum? And how was Acholius more concerned than Euridicus, Severus,
Vranius, and the rest of the Bishops? (2.) That the Bishop of Rome's
interposing in their Consecrations was disliked and opposed as an Innovation by
the Bishops of those Provinces. Which appears by the Epistles of Pope Boniface
about the Case of Perigenes: For by the Canons of the Church, the Consecration
and Designation of the Bishops of the Province was left to the provincial
Synods: And therefore they did not understand on what account the Bishop of
Rome should interpose therein. (3.) That the Law of Theodosius was principally
designed to restore the Canonical Discipline and the Authority of provincial
Synods. For the words are, Omni innovatione cessante, vetustatem and Canones
pristinos Ecclesiasticos, qui nunc usque tenuerunt, per omnes Illyrici
Provincias servari praecipimus. Which cannot be well understood of any other
Canons than such as relate to the Ecclesiastical Government of Provinces, and
not of any peculiar Customs there, as Gothofred mistakes the meaning of them:
And in case any difference did arise, it was to be left Conventui sacerdotali
sanctoque Iudicio, i. e. To the provincial Synod, and not to any Legate of the
Bishop of Rome; Whose incroachment was that Innovation which was to be laid
aside: as is now plain by the Roman Collection, without which this Law was not
rightly understood, as appears by the several attempts of Baronius, Peron and
Gothofred. (4.) That although by the means of Honorius, upon the importunity of
the Bishop of Rome this Rescript was recalled by Collect. Romans p. 81, 83.
Theodosius: Yet the former only was entered into the Codes both of Theodosius
and Justinian; which has all the formality of a Law, being directed to the P.
P. of Illyricum, and has the date by Consuls annexed; but the Revocation is
only a Rescript from Theodosius to Honorius, and refers to an Edict sent to
the P. P. of Illyricum; which not appearing, the other being entered into the
Code, gives great ground to believe that this Revocation was voided, and the
former stood as the Law; Which ought rather to be presumed to be the Act of
Justinian himself, the Privileges of Constantinople being concerned herein,
than merely the Pique of Tribonian and the Collectours of the Laws against the
Roman See, as Holsten. Not. ad Collect. Romans p. 284.
Holstenius suggests. So that from this whole matter it appears what Opposition
the Pope's interposing in foreign Consecrations met with, not only from the
Bishops of those Provinces, but from the Imperial Laws.

But let us now see what Patriarchal Authority, as to Consecrations, the
Bishops of Rome exercised in these more Western Churches. As to Gaul, our
Antiquit. illustr. Dissert. 2. c. 4. act. 1. n. 101.
Author confesses, That the Bishops of Rome did not challenge the practice of
Consecrations to themselves, as appears by the Words of Leo to the Bishops of
the Province of Vienna, which he produces. Non nobis Ordinationes vestrarum
Provinciarum defendimus: (for so he understands these Words of Consecrations,
although they are capable of another meaning, viz. That he did not take upon
him to manage the Affairs of the Gallican Churches, but only took care that
they should do it themselves according to the Canons, which was Leo's Pretense
in that Leo, Epist. 10. c. 8. ed. Nov.
Epistle) but then he distinguishes between the Right it self, and the
Exercise of it, which may be parted with by particular privileges granted, but
the Right it self may be still reserved; And the same he after says in general
of the Schelstr. ib. n. 105. 106.
Western Provinces, wherein he can trace no Footsteps of the practice, and
therefore concludes, it must be from privileges granted by the Bishops of Rome,
by reason of distance, which the Patriarch of Alexandria would not grant. But
we are now proving the Right by the Practice, and therefore it is unreasonable
to allege a Right without it; For this way of proving is ridiculous; viz. to
prove that the Pope had patriarchal Rights, because he did exercise them; And
then to say, Though he did not exercise them, yet he had them; And so to prove
that he had them, because he was Patriarch of the West. Yet this is in truth
the way of proof this late Author uses; He shows from Lupus, That all
Consecrations of metropolitan and provincial Bishops belong to the Patriarch:
Then to prove a patriarchal Power, it is necessary to prove, that all the
Consecrations within the Provinces do belong to that See. But how does this
appear as to the Western Provinces? Did all the Consecrations of Bishops within
them belong to the Bishops of Rome? If not, then they were not within the Roman
Patriarchate: If they did, we expect the proof of it by the practice. No, he
confesses, the practice was different; But still they had the patriarchal
Right. How so? Yes, says he, That is plain, because the Bishop of Rome was
Patriarch of the West. This way of proving may be good against De Marca, who
had granted the Pope to be the Western Patriarch; but it is ridiculous to those
that deny it.

But he attempts something farther, viz. Id. n. 101.
That the Bishop of Rome had, before the Council of Nice, the power of deposing
Bishops in Gaul, as appears by Martianus of Arles deposed by Stephanus. This
Cypr. Ep. 68. ed. Ox.
Martianus had openly declared himself of the Novatian party; At which
Faustinus, Bishop of Lions, and other Bishops in Gaul were very much troubled,
and expressed their Resentments of it, but he slighted their Censures of him:
Both parties made Applications to St. Cyprian, and Martianus desired to
preserve Communion with him; But he was utterly rejected there for joining in
the Novatian Schism. But it seems, by St. Cyprian's Epistle, he had still hopes
not to be condemned at Rome, although the Schism began there. For, says he,
How ill would it look, after Novatian himself had been so lately and
universally rejected, to suffer our selves to be deceived by his Flatterers?
St. Cyprian and his Colleagues were in no danger, for they had already detected
and condemned him, therefore this must be understood of Stephen, which is the
Reason he presses him so hard, and with some Authority to dispatch his Letters
to the People of Arles to choose another Bishop in the place of Martianus,
Dirigantur in Provinciam and ad Plebem Arelatae consistentem a te Literae, etc.
And a little before he tells him, He ought to send his mind at large to their
Brethren the Bishops of Gaul, That they ought not suffer him to insult over
their Fraternity, etc. And the Reason he gives for this Freedom which he uses
with him is, Because they held the Balance of the Government of the Church in
common among them; And, being several Pastors, they took care of the same
Flock, who ought all to join in condemning such a Follower of Novatian, and
thereby preserve the reputation of their Predecessors, Cornelius and Lucius,
who were glorious Martyrs: and he especially who succeeded them. And so, not
doubting his compliance, in a friendly manner he desires him, to let him know
who succeeded Martianus at Arles, that he might know to whom to write. I appeal
to any Man of common Sense, whether this looks like the Application made to the
Western Patriarch, to whom St. Cyprian himself owed subjection as such. For
when the Bishops of Rome began to challenge a patriarchal Power over the
Churches of Thessaly, they expected Application to be made to them in a Style
suitable to that Dignity, as is very remarkable in the Collect. Romans p. 20.
Roman Collection; As in the Petition of Stephanus, Bishop of Larissa, the
Metropolis of Thessaly, Domino meo sancto ac beatissimo and revera venerando
Patri Patrum, and Archiepiscopo atque Patriarchae Bonifacio data supplicatio a
Stephano exiguo: And in the very same style Elpidius, p. 31.
Stephanus and Timotheus. These write like men that knew their distance, and
what Authority the Bishop of Rome then challenged; But the meek and humble St.
Cyprian seems to stand upon equal Terms with the Bishop of Rome, or rather, as
if he were upon the higher Ground, he takes upon him to tell him his duty, and
rather checks him for his neglect in it, than owns any Authority in him
superior to his. So that if any patriarchal Power be to be inferred from this
Epistle, it would be much rather, that St. Cyprian was Patriarch of the West,
than the Bishop of Rome; since he is rather superior, who directs what another
should do, than he who does what is directed; And if from hence it follows,
That the execution of the Canons was in the Bishop of Rome, it will likewise
follow, that the directing that execution was in the Bishop of Carthage.

But we are told, Schelstraet. ib. n. 102.
that, even in Africa, no Consecrations were allowed, without the consent of
the Bishop of Rome: This is great News indeed, of which the African Code gives
us no information: But Not. in Coll. Romans p. 265.
Holstenius finds it in an Epistle of Siricius or of Innocentius, (which he
pleases, for the same Rules are in both) only in the Canon Law it is taken
from Innocentius, and the true Sense is given of it, Extra conscientiam,
Metropolitani Episcopi, nullus audeat ordinare Episcopum. But what is this to
the Roman Patriarchate? And our Author does not seem to rely upon it; But he
alleges a Passage in Optatus, that Eunomius and Olympius, two Bishops, were
sent to Carthage to consecrate a Bishop in the place both of Cecilian and
Donatus: And Albaspinaeus says, they were sent by the Pope's Authority. But
this Observation of his he has not from Optat. l. 1.
Optatus, by whom it rather appears, that they were sent by the Emperor, who
stopped Cecilian at Brixia. And no one that reads the Passages about Milthiades
at that time, and how Constantine joined Marinus, Maternus and Rheticius in
Commission with him, can ever imagine, that the Bishop of Rome was then
esteemed the Patriarch of the West; and, as such, to have had Jurisdiction over
the Bishops of Africa.

The last ^^^^lstraet. (...), 101.
Attempt to prove the Pope's patriarchal Power, as to Consecrations in the
Western Churches, is from his Authority of giving Palls to the Metropolitanes.
Which he proves from Gregory's Epistles, as to the Bishops of Arles and London;
And from an Epistle of Boniface, Bishop of Mentz, wherein, he says, it was
agreed in France, That the Metropolitanes should receive Palls from the Roman
See. But how far are we now gone from the Council of Nice and the Rules of
Church-politie then established? We do not deny, that the Bishops of Rome did
assume to themselves in following Ages a more than patriarchal Power over the
Western Churches: But we say there are no footsteps of it in the time of the
Council of Nice; And that what Power they gained, was by Usurpation upon the
Rights of Metropolitanes and provincial Synods then settled by general consent
of the Bishops of the Christian Church. But this Usurpation was not made in an
Instant, but by several Steps and Degrees, by great Artifice and Subtilty,
drawing the Metropolitanes themselves, under a Pretense of advancing their
Authority, to betray their Rights. And among the Artifices of the Court of Rome
this of the Pall was none of the least; For by it the Popes pretended to
confirm and enlarge the privileges of Metropolitanes which hereby they did
effectually overthrow, as though they received them merely from the Favor of
the Bishop of Rome, which did undoubtedly belong to them by ancient Right. But
that this was a mere Device to bring the Metropolitanes into dependence on the
Court of Rome, appears by the most ancient Form of sending the Pall in the
Diurn. Romans p. 88.
Diurnus Romanus, where it is finely called, the showing their unanimity with
St. Peter. But what the Nature and Design, and Antiquity of the Pall was, is so
fully set forth by De Concord. l. 6. c. 5, 6, 7.
Petrus de Marca, and Garner. App. ad Not. c. 4. Diurn. Romans
Garnerius, that I shall say no more of it: Only that from hence the ancient
Rights of the Metropolitan Churches do more fully appear, because it was so
long before this Badge of Subjection was received in these Western Churches;
For the Synod which Boniface mentions, wherein the Metropolitanes consented to
receive Palls from Rome, was not till the middle of the 8th Century: And great
Arts and Endeavors were used in all the Western Churches, before they could be
brought to yield to this real Badge of the Pope's patriarchal Power over them.
Which is particularly true of the British Churches which preserved their
Metropolitan Rights, as long as their Churches were in any tolerable
condition; And that without suffering any diminution of them from the Pope's
patriarchal Power: As will farther appear in this Discourse.

(2.) The next Patriarchal Right to be examined, is that of calling Bishops
within their Jurisdiction to Councils. It is truly observed by De Concord. l.
1. c. 7. n. 3.
de Marca, That those who received Consecration from another, were bound by the
ancient Discipline of the Church attend to his Councils; And in the Sense of
the old Canon Law, De Constantin. Patriarch. p. 162.
those two Expressions, To belong to the Consecration, or to the Council, were
all one. And so every Metropolitan had a Right to summon the Bishops of his
Province, and the Primates or Patriarchs, as many as received Consecrations
from them. Thus the Bishop of Rome's patriarchal Council consisted of those
within his own Diocese or the Suburbicary Churches. Where there being no
Metropolitanes, the Roman Council did much exceed others in the number of
Bishops belonging to it: thence Galla Placidia relates, how she found the
Bishop of Rome compassed about with a great number of Bishops which he had
gathered out of innumerable Cities of Italy, by reason of the Dignity of his
Place. It seems then no Bishops of other Western Churches were summoned to the
Roman Councils. But the Bishops of Sicily were then under the Italian
Government, and reckoned with the Italian Bishops. It may be questioned,
whether in Ruffinus his time they were comprehended within the Suburbicary
Churches. But in Leo's time the Bishops of Rome had enlarged their Jurisdiction
so far, as to summon the Bishops of Sicily to their Councils. This is evident
from Leo's Epistle to all the Bishops of Sicily, where he charges them every
year to send three of their Number to a Council in Rome; And this he requires
in pursuance of the Nicene Canons; From whence it seems probable, That the
Bishop of Rome did by degrees gain all the Churches within the Jurisdiction of
the Vicarius Vrbis as his patriarchal Diocese. For Sicily was one of the ten
Provinces belonging thereto. But our Schelstraet. ib. n. 108.
Author says, That the Council of Nice speaks there only of provincial
Councils, and not of patriarchal. What then? Was Sicily within the Roman
Province, considering the Bishop of Rome merely as a Metropolitan? That is
very absurd, since Sicily was a Province of it self, and as such, ought to have
had a Metropolitan of its own: And so all the other neighbor Provinces to
Rome; whereas we read of none there; but as far as the Bishop of Rome's
Jurisdiction extended, it was immediate, and swallowed up all Metropolitan
Rights. I know De Concord. l. 1. c. 7. n. 4.
Petrus de Marca thinks there were Metropolitanes within the Suburbicary
Churches; But I see no Authority he brings for it besides the Nicene Canon and
the Decrees of Innocentius and Leo which relate to other Churches. But any one
that carefully reads the Epistles of Leo to the Bishops within those Provinces,
and compares them with those written to the Bishops without them, will, as Not.
in Leon. Epist. 17.
Quesnel has well observed, find so different a strain in them, that from
thence he may justly infer, that there were no Metropolitanes in the former,
but there were in the latter. When he Leo. Ep. 6. c. 2.
writes to the Bishop of Aquileia he takes notice of his provincial Synod, and
directs the Epistles of general concernment to the Metropolitan; as he does
not only to him, but to Ep. 120.
the Bishop of Ravenna too. And when Ep. 135.
Eusebius, Bishop of Milan, wrote to him, he gives an account of the provincial
Council which he held. But there is nothing like this, in the Epistles sent to
the Bishops within the ten Provinces, no mention is therein made of
Metropolitanes, or of any provincial Synods. But here we find the Bishops of
Sicily in common summoned to send three of their number to an annual Council at
Rome. From whence I conclude, That the Pope's Patriarchal Council lay within
the compass of these Suburbicary Churches. I do not deny but upon occasion
there might be more Bishops summoned to meet at a Council in Rome; As when
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 24.
Aurelian gave the Bishops of Italy leave to meet at Rome in the Case of Paulus
Samosatenus. And when they met with Julius, in the Case of Athanasius, and such
like Instances of an extraordinary Nature and very different from the fixed
canonical Councils; which were provincial elsewhere, but in the Roman Diocese
they were Patriarchal; yet they extended no farther than to the Bishops within
the Suburbicary Churches. And whosoever considers the Councils of Italy in
Saint Ambrose's time, published by Sirmond. Append. ad C. Theod. p. 97.
Sirmondus, will find that the Bishops of the Italick Diocese did not think
themselves obliged to resort to Rome for a Patriarchal Council. And, which is
more observable, the latter of them extremely differs from Damasus about the
same matter; which was the Consecration of Maximus to be Bishop of
Constantinople. For Collect. Romans p. 37.
Damasus, in his Epistle to Acholius, etc. bitterly exclaims against the
setting up Maximus, as though all Religion lay at stake, and admonished them at
the next Council at Constantinople to take care that a fitter Person be chosen
in his room: And the same he re-inforces in another Epistle to Acholius alone.
But Append. p. 104.
St. Ambrose, and the Bishops of Italy with him, in a Conciliar Address to
Theodosius, justify the Consecration of Maximus, and dislike that of Gregory
and Nectarius. Now in this Case I desire to know, whether this Council owned
the Bishop of Rome's Patriarchal Power? For Schelstraet. ib. n. 109.
Em. a Schelstraet, following Christianus Lupus, says, That in the Pope's
patriarchal Power is implied, that the Bishops are only to consult and advise,
but the determination does wholly belong to the Pope as Patriarch; And that the
Bishop of Alexandria had the same power appears by the Bishops of Egypt
declaring they could not do any thing without the Bishop of Alexandria. Let us
then grant, That the Bishop of Rome had the same Authority within his
Patriarchal Diocese, does not this unavoidably exclude the Bishops of the
Italick Diocese from being under his Patriarchate? For if they had been under
it, would they have, not barely met, and consulted, and sent to the Emperor
without him, but in flat opposition to him? And when afterward the Western
Bishops met in Council at Capua, in order to the composing the Differences in
the Church of Antioch, although it were within the Roman Patriarchate, yet it
being a Council of Bishops assembled out of the Italick Diocese as well as the
Roman, the Bishop of Rome did not preside therein, but St. Ambrose; as appears
by Ambros. Ep. l. 10. ep. 78.
St. Ambrose his Epistle to Theophilus, about the proceedings of this Council;
For he says, He hopes what Theophilus and the Bishops of Egypt should
determine in that Cause about Flavianus, would not be displeasing to their Holy
Brother, the Bishop of Rome. And there follows another Epist. 79. ed. Erasm.
Epistle in St. Ambrose which overthrows the Pope's Patriarchal Power over the
Western Churches by the confession of the Pope himself. For that which had
passed under the name of St. Ambrose is now found by Collect. Romans p. 189.
Holstenius to be written by Siricius, and is so published in the Roman
Collection, and since in the Council. Labb. T. 2. p. 1033.
Collection of Councils at Paris. This Epistle was written by Siricius to
Anysius and other Bishops of Illyricum, concerning the Case of Bonosus, which
had been referred to them by the Council of Capua, as being the neighbor
Bishops, and therefore, according to the Rules of the Church, fittest to give
Judgment in it. But they, either out of a complement or in earnest, desired to
know the Pope's opinion about it. So his Epistle begins, Accepi literas vestras
de Bonoso Episcopo, quibus, vel pro veritate, vel pro modestia, nostram
sententiam sciscitari voluistis. And are these the Expressions of one with
Patriarchal Power, giving answer to a Case of difficulty which canonically lies
before him? But he afterward declares, he had nothing to do in it, since the
Council of Capua had referred it to them, and therefore they were bound to give
Judgment in it. Sed cum hujusmodi fuerit Concilii Capuensis judicium --
advertimus quod nobis judicandi forma competere non possit. If the Bishop of
Rome had then patriarchal Power over all the Western Churches, how came he to
be excluded from judging this Cause by the Proceedings of the Council of Capua?
Would Pope Siricius have born this so patiently and submissively, and declined
meddling in it, if he had thought that it did of Right belong to him to
determine it? If the Execution of the Canons belongs to the Bishop of Rome as
the Supreme Patriarch, how comes the Council of Capua not to refer this matter
immediately to him, who was so near them; But, without so much as asking his
Judgment, to appoint the hearing and determining it to the Bishops of
Macedonia? We have no reason to question the sincerity of this Epistle which
Card. Barberine published as it lay with others in Holstenius his Papers taken
out of the Vatican, and other Roman MSS. by the express Order of Alexander VII.
And although a late Des Iugemens Canon. des Evesques, p. 562.
Advocate for the Pope's Power in France against De Marca, has offered several
Reasons to prove this Epistle counterfeit, yet they are all answered by a De
antiqui^ and majoribus Episc. causis, c. 29.
Doctor of the Sorbon. So that this Epistle of Siricius is a standing
Monument, not only against the Pope's absolute and unlimited Power, but his
patriarchal, out of his own Diocese.

But to justify the Pope's patriarchal Power in calling the Western Bishops to
his Council at Rome, we have several Schelstraet. ib. n. 113, 115.
Instances brought; As of some Gallican Bishops present at the Council under
Damasus; Wilfrid, an English Bishop under Agatho a Legate from the Council held
in Britain; with Felix of Arles and others; and some others of later times. But
what do extraordinary Councils, meeting at Rome, prove, as to the Bishop of
Rome's being Patriarch of the Western Churches? Do the Western Councils,
meeting at Milan, Arles, Ariminum, Sardica, or such Places, prove the Bishops
of them to be all Patriarchs? These things are not worth mentioning, unless
there be some circumstance to show that the Bishop of Rome called the Western
Bishops together by his patriarchal Power, for which there is no evidence
brought. But there is a very great difference between Councils assembled for
Unity of Faith or Discipline from several Dioceses, and provincial Synods, and
patriarchal Councils called at certain times to attend the patriarchal See, as
is to be seen in the Diurn. Romans p. 66.
Diurnus Romanus, where the Bishops, within the Roman Patriarchate, oblige
themselves to obey the Summons to a Council at Rome, at certain fixed times, as
Garnerius shows; which, he says, was three times in the year. But he adds,
this extended no farther than to the Bishops within the Suburbicary Churches,
who had no Primate but the Bishop of Rome, and so this was a true patriarchal
Council.

(3.) But the last Right contested for, is, that of Appeals in greater Causes.
By which we understand such Application of the Parties concerned as does imply
a Superior Jurisdiction in him they make their resort to, whereby he has full
Authority to determine the matters in difference: For otherwise Appeals may be
no more than voluntary Acts in the Parties, and then the Person appealed to
has no more Power than their Consent gives him. Now in the Christian Church,
for preservation of Peace and Unity, it was usual to advise in greater Cases
with the Bishops of other Churches, and chiefly with those of the greatest
Reputation, who were wont to give their Judgment, not by way of Authority, but
of Friendly correspondence; not to show their Dominion, but their Care of
preserving the Unity of the Church. Of this we have a remarkable Instance in
the Italick Council, of which St. Ambrose was President, who did interpose in
the Affairs of the Eastern Church; not with any pretense of Authority over
them, but merely out of Zeal to keep up and restore Unity among them. They knew
very well how suspicious the Eastern Bishops were of the Western Bishops
meddling in their matters ever since the Council of Sardica (of which
afterward) but they tell them, it was no new thing for the Western Bishops to
be concerned when things were out of order among them. App. ad Cod. Theod. p.
106.
Non Praerogativam, say they, vindicamus examinis, sed Consortium tamen debuit
esse communis arbitrii. They did not challenge a Power of calling them to
account, but they thought there ought to be a mutual Correspondence for the
general good, and therefore they received Maximus his Complaint of his hard
usage at Constantinople. Will any hence infer, that this Council or St. Ambrose
had a Superior Authority over the Patriarch of Constantinople? So that neither
Consultations, Advices, References, nor any other Act which depends upon the
Will of the Parties, and are designed only for a common good, can prove any
true Patriarchal Power. Which being premised, let us now see what Evidence is
produced from hence for the Pope's patriarchal Power over the Western Churches.
And the main thing insisted upon is, Schelstraet. ib. n. 123.
The Bishop of Rome 's appointing Legates in the Western Churches to hear and
examine Causes, and to report them. And of this, the first Instance is produced
of the several Epistles of Popes to the Bishops of Thessalonica in the Roman
Collection. Of which a large account has been already given: And the first
beginning of this was after the Council of Sardica had out of a Pique to the
Eastern Bishops and Jealousy of the Emperor allowed the Bishop of Rome the
Liberty of granting a re-hearing of Causes in the several Provinces; which was
the pretense of sending Legates into them; And this was the first considerable
step that was made toward the advancing the Pope's power over the Western
Churches. For a present De antiqui^ and majoribus Episcoporum causis, p. 71.
Doctor of the Sorbon confesses, that in the space of 347 years, i. e. to the
Sardican Council, No one Instance can be produced of any Cause, wherein Bishops
were concerned, that was ever brought to Rome by the Bishops that were the
Judges of it. But if the Pope's Patriarchal Power had been known before, it had
been a regular way of proceeding from the Bishops in Provincial Synods to the
Patriarch. And withal, he says, p. 75.
before that Council no instance can be produced of any Judges Delegates for
the review of Judgment passed in provincial Synods: And whatever Privilege or
Authority was granted by the Council of Sardica to the Bishop of Rome, was
wholly new, and had no Tradition of the Church to justify it; And was not then
received either in the Eastern or Western Churches. p. 91, etc. 132, etc.
So that all the Pleas of a Patriarchal Power, as to the Bishop of Rome, with
respect to greater Causes must fall very much short of the Council of Nice. As
to the Instance of Marcianus of Arles, that has been answered already; And as
to the Deposition of Bishops in England by the Pope's authority in later times,
it is of no importance, since we do not deny the matter of Fact, as to the
Pope's Usurpations; But we say, they can never justify the exercise of a
Patriarchal Power over these Churches by the Rules established in the Council
of Nice.

But it is said, That the Council of Arles, before that of Nice, attributes to
the Bishop of Rome, Majores Dioceses, i. e. according to De Marca, all the
Western Churches; But in answer to this, I have already showed how far the
Western Bishops at Arles were from owning the Pope's Patriarchal Power over
them, because they do not so much as desire his Confirmation of what had passed
in Council; But only send the Canons to him to publish them. But our Author
and Christianus Lupus say, that such is the Patriarch's Authority, That all
Acts of Bishops in Council are in themselves invalid without his Sentence,
which only gives Life and Vigor to them; As they prove by the Patriarch of
Alexandria. But if the Bishop of Rome were then owned to be Patriarch over
seven or eight Dioceses of the West, according to De Marca's exposition; how
came they to sit and make Canons, without the least mention of his Authority?
So that either they must deny him to be Patriarch, or they must say he was
affronted in the highest manner by the Western Bishops there assembled. But as
to the expression of Majores Dioceses, it is very questionable, whether in the
time of the Council of Arles, the distribution of the Empire by Constantine
into Dioceses were then made, and it seems probable not to have been done in
the time of the Council of Nice, Dioceses not being mentioned there, but only
Provinces; And if so, this Place must be corrupt in that expression, as it is
most certain it is in others; And it is hard to lay so great weight on a place
that makes no entire sense. But allowing the expression genuine, it implies no
more than that the Bishop of Rome had then more Extensive Dioceses than other
Western Bishops; Which is not denied, since even then he had several Provinces
under his immediate Government, which no other Western Bishop had.

Schelstraet. ib. n. 77.
St. Basil's calling the Bishop of Rome, Chief of the Western Bishops, implies
nothing but the dignity of his See, and not any Patriarchal Power over the
Western Churches.

It must be a degree of more than usual subtilty to infer Damasus his
Patriarchal Power over the West, Id. n. 78.
because St. Jerome joins Damasus and the West together, as he does Peter and
Egypt: Therefore Damasus had the same Power over the West which Peter had over
Egypt. It seems St. Jerome's language about the different Hypostases, did not
agree with what was used in the Syrian Churches, and therefore some charged him
with false Doctrine; he pleads for himself, that the Churches of Egypt, and the
West, spoke as he did, and they were known then neither to favor Arianism nor
Sabellianism; And, to make his Allegation more particular, he mentions the
names of the Patriarch of Alexandria and the Bishop of Rome. But a Cause
extremely wants Arguments which must be supported by such as these.

If Id. n. 79.
St. Augustine makes Innocent to preside in the Western Church; he only
thereby shows the Order and Dignity of the Roman See; but he does not own any
Subjection of the Western Churches to his Power, since no Church did more
vehemently withstand the Bisho^ of Rome's Encroachments than the Churches of
Africa did in St. Augustine's time; As is notorious in the business of Appeals,
which transaction is a demonstration against his Patriarchal Power over the
African Churches. And the Bishop of Rome never insisted on a Patriarchal Right,
but on the Nicene Canons wherein they were shamefully baffled.

It cannot be denied that Id. n. 80.
Pope Innocent, in his Epistle to Decentius Eugubinus, would bring the Western
Churches to follow the Roman Traditions, upon this pretense, That the Churches
of Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa, Sicily, and the Islands lying between, were
first instituted either by such as were sent by St. Peter or his Successors.
But whosoever considers that Epistle well, will not for Innocent's sake lay too
much weight upon it. For, Is it reasonable to think, that the double Unction,
the Saturday Fast, the Eulogiae sent to the several Parishes in Rome were
Apostolical Traditions which all the Western Churches were bound to observe,
because they were first planted by those who were sent from Rome? But the
matter of Fact is far from being evident, for we have great reason to believe,
there were Churches planted in the Western parts, neither by St. Peter nor by
those who were sent by his Successors. Yet let that be granted; What connection
is there between receiving the Christian Doctrine at first by those who came
from thence, and an Obligation to be subject to the Bishops of Rome in all
their Orders and Traditions? The Patriarchal Government of the Church was not
founded upon this, but upon the ancient Custom and Rules of the Church; as
fully appears by the Council of Nice. And therefore the Churches of Milan and
Aquileia though in Italy, the Churches of Africa though probably the first
Preachers came from Rome, never thought themselves bound to follow the
Traditions or observe the Orders of the Roman Church, as is very well known
both in St. Cyprian's and St. Augustine's times. But if the Pope's power be
built on this ground, what then becomes of the Churches of Illyricum? Was the
Gospel brought thither from Rome? And, as to the British Churches, this very
Plea of Innocent will be a farther evidence of their exemption from the Roman
Patriarchate; since Britain cannot be comprehended within those Islands which
lie between Italy, Gaul, Spain, Africa and Sicily, which can only be
understood of those Islands which are situate in the Mediterranean Sea.

And if no Instance can be produced of the Bishop of Rome's Patriarchal
Jurisdiction over the British Churches, why should not we claim the same
benefit of the Nicene Canons which Leo urges so vehemently in such a parallel
Case? Neither can it be said, that afterward, Subjection and Consent makes a
just Patriarchal Power; for neither does it hold as to the British Churches,
whose Bishops utterly refused to submit to Augustine the Monk; And if it does,
all the force of Leo's Arguments is taken away. For there were both
Prescription pleaded, and a Consent of the Bishops of the Dioceses concerned in
the Council of Chalcedon. But Leo says, the Nicene Canons are beyond both
these, being dictated by the Spirit of God, and passed by the common consent of
the Christian Church; And that it was a Sin in him to suffer any to break them.
Quoniam dispensatio mihi credita est, and ad meum tendit reatum, si paternarum
regulae Sanctionum, quae in Synodo Nicaena ad totius Ecclesiae Regimen, Spiritu
Dei instruente, sunt traditae me, quod absit, connivente violentur. Leo ad
Marcian. Aug. Ep. 78. c. 3.

Quoniam contra Statuta paternorum Canonum, quae ante longissimae aetatis annos
in Vrbe Nicaena spiritualibus sunt fundata Decretis, nihil cuique audere
conceditur. Leo ad Pulcher. Ep. 79. n. 2.

Superbum nimis est and immoderatum, ultra proprios terminos tendere, and
antiquitate calcata alienum jus velle praeripere, atque ut unius crescat
Authoritas, tot Metropolitanorum impugnare Primatus quietisque Provinciis, and
olim Sanctae Synodi Nicenae moderatione dispositis, bellum novae perturbationis
infer, atque ut venerabilium Patrum Decreta solvantur, quorundam Episcoporum
praeferre consensum cui tot annorum series negavit effectum. Nam 60 far annus
hujus conniventiae esse jactatur qua se praedictus Episcopus aestimat adjuvari,
frustra cupiens id sibi prodesse, quod etiam si quisquam ausus est velle,
nullus tamen potuit obtinere. Id. ib.

Nulla sibimet de multiplicatione congregationis synodalia Concilia
blandiantur, neque trecentis illis december atque octo Episcopis quantumlibet
copiosior numerus Sacerdotum vel comparare se audeat vel praeferre: cum tanto
divinitus privilegio Nicaena sit Synodus consecrata, ut sive per pauciores sive
per plures Ecclesiastica Iudicia celebrentur omni penitus auctoritate sit
vacuum quicquid ab illorum fuerit constitutione diversum. Ad Anatol. Ep. 80. n.
1.


Either this is true or false. If false, how can the Pope be excused who
alleged it for true? If true, then it holds as much against the Bishop of Rome
as the Bishop of Constantinople. And as to the Prescription of 60 years, he
says, the Canons of Nice were before, and ought to take place, if the practice
had been never so constant, which he denies. Nay, he goes so far as to say,
Though the numbers of Bishops be never so great that give their consent to any
alteration of the Nicene Canons, they signify nothing, and cannot bind.
Nothing can be more emphatical or weighty to our purpose than these Expressions
of Pope Leo, for securing the Privileges of our Churches, in case no
Patriarchal Power over them can be proved before the Council of Nice. And it is
all the reason in the World, That those who claim a Jurisdiction should prove
it, Especially when the Acts of it are so notorious that they cannot be
concealed; as the Consecration of Metropolitanes, and matters of Appeals are,
and were too evident in latter times, when all the World knew what Authority
and Jurisdiction the Pope exercised over these Churches. I conclude this with
that excellent Sentence of Pope Leo, PRIVILEGIA ECCLESIARVM SANCTORVM PATRVM
CANONIBVS INSTITVTA, ET VENERABILIS NICAENAE SYNODI FIXA DECRETIS, NVLLA
POSSVNT IMPROBITATE CONVELLI NVLLA NOVITATE VIOLARI. The privileges of Churches
which were begun by the Canons of the Holy Fathers and confirmed by the Council
of Nice can neither be destroyed by wicked Usurpation nor dissolved by the
humor of Innovation.

In the next great Council of Sardica, which was intended to be general by the
two Emperors Constans and Constantius, it is commonly said, that Athanas.
Apol. 2. p. 720.
Athanasius expressly affirms the British Bishops to have been there present.
But some think this mistake arose from looking no farther than the Latin Copy
in Athanasius, in which indeed the words are plain enough to that purpose; but
the sense in the Greek seems to be the same. For Athanasius pleads his own
Innocence from the several Judgments which had passed in his Favor. First, by
100 Bishops in Egypt; next, by above 50 Bishops at Rome; thirdly, in the great
Council at Sardica, (...), in which, as some say, above 300 Bishops out of the
several Provinces there mentioned consented to his Innocence. But here lies an
insuperable difficulty, for Ad solit. vit. agent. p. 818.
Athanasius himself elsewhere affirms, that there were but 170 Bishops in all
there present: and therefore it is impossible he should make 300 there present.
Which some have endeavored to reconcile, by saying, the latter was the true
number present; but the former of those Bishops scattered up and down who did
agree in the Sentence which passed in favor of Athanasius: But then the Greek
here cannot be understood of those present in Council; and, on the other side,
if it be not so understood, then the words do not prove what he designs, viz.
that he was acquitted in the Sardican Council; in which, although the number
were not so great, I see no reason to exclude the British Bishops.

It is true, that in the Athan. p. 756.
Synodical Epistle of that Council, only Italy, Spain and Gaul are mentioned;
And so likewise in the Athan. p. 767.
Subscriptions. But it is well observed by Bucher. Belg. Roman. l. 9. c. 4. n.
4.
Bucherius, that Athanasius reckons up the British Bishops among those of Gaul.
And Hilar. de Synodis.
Hilary, writing to the Gallican Bishops of Germania prima and Germania
secunda, Belgica prima, Belgica secunda, Lugdunensis prima, Lugdunensis
secunda, Provincia Aquitanica and Provincia novem populona; after he has
distinctly set down these, he then immediately adds, And to the Bishops of the
Provinces of Britain. Which makes me apt to think, that about that time the
Bishops of Britain were generally joined with those of Gaul, and are often
comprehended under them where they are not expressly mentioned. And, to confirm
this, Sulpic. Sev. l. 2.
Sulpicius Severus, speaking of the Summons to the Council of Ariminum,
mentions only of these Western parts Italy, Spain and Gaul; But afterward
says, That the Bishops of Britain were there present. So that Britain was then
comprehended under Gaul, and was so understood at that time; as Sicily was
under Italy, as Sirmond. Advent. c. 5.
Sirmondus shows. And Sextus Rufus does put down the description of Britain
under that of Gaul, as Berter. Diatr. 1. c. 3.
Berterius has observed. For otherwise, who could have thought that Athanasius
had meant the Bishops of Britain, when he reckons up only the Provinces of
Gaul? But he declared that they were present with the Gallican Bishops.

But it has been urged with great appearance of Reason, that since the British
Bishops were present at the Council of Sardica, The British Churches were bound
to observe the Canons of it; and Appeals to the Bishop of Rome being there
established, they were then brought under his Jurisdiction, as Patriarch of the
Western Churches. To give a clear account of this, we must examine the Design
and Proceedings of that Council. The occasion whereof was this; Athanasius,
Bishop of Alexandria, being deposed for some pretended misdemeanors by two
Synods of Eastern Bishops, and finding no redress there, by the prevalency of
the Arian Faction, makes Application to the Western Bishops, and to Julius
Bishop of Rome, as the chief of them, and earnestly desires that his Cause
might be heard over again, bringing great Evidence from the Bishops of Egypt
and other places, that he never had a fair Hearing, but was run down by the
Violence of the Eusebian party at Tire and Antioch. The Bishop of Rome
communicating this with the Western Bishops, as at large appears by Julius his
Epistle in Athanasius, he, in their name as well as his own, sends to the
Eastern Bishops, That this Cause might be heard before indifferent Judges: And
to that end, that they would come into these Parts, and bring their Evidences
with them. This they decline; Upon which, and a fuller Examination of the
matter, they receive Athanasius, Marcellus and others into Communion with them.
This gives a mighty distaste to the Eastern Bishops; at last the two Brothers,
Constantius and Constans, agree, there should be a general Council called at
Sardica, to hear and determine this matter. The Bishops meet; But the Western
Bishops would have the restored Bishops admitted to Communion, and sit in
Council; This the Eastern Bishops utterly refuse; and upon that withdrew to
Philippopolis; And declare against their Proceedings at Sardica, as repugnant
to the Nicene Canons: The Western Bishops continued sitting, and made new
Canons to justify their own Proceedings. This is the true state of the matter
of Fact; as far as I can gather it out of the authentic Writings on both
Sides. For the one side insists upon the Justice of re-hearing a Cause, wherein
there was so great suspicion of soul dealing; And the other, that the matters
which concerned their Bishops, were not to be tried over again by others at a
distance; And that this was the Way to overthrow the Discipline of the Church,
as it had been settled by the Council of Nice and the ancient Canons of the
Church. It is apparent by the Synodical Epistle of the Greek Bishops who
withdrew to Philippopolis. That this was the main Point insisted on by them;
That it was the bringing a new Law into the Church; For the Eastern Bishops to
be judged by the Western; The ancient Custom and Rule of the Church being;
That they should stand or fall by their own Bishops. The Western Bishops on the
other side pleaded, That this was a Cause of common concernment to the whole
Church; That there had been notorious partiality in the management of it; That
Athanasius was condemned, not for any pretended miscarriages so much, as for
his Zeal against Arianism; That the Cause was not heard in Egypt, where he was
charged, but at a great distance, and therefore in common Justice, it ought to
have a new hearing by the Eastern and Western Bishops together. But the Eastern
Bishops finding that the Western would not forsake the Communion of Athanasius
and the rest, they looked on the Cause as prejudged, and so went away. However
the other proceeded to the clearing the Bishops accused, which they did by a
Synodical Epistle, and then made several Canons, as against Translations from
mean Bishoprics to better, Can. 1. and using Arts to procure them, Can. 2.
Against placing Bishops in such places where a single Presbyter would serve,
and the absence of Bishops at Consecrations, Can. 6. Against their unseasonable
Applications to the Court, Can. 7, 8, 9, 20. Against being made Bishops per
Saltum, Can. 10. Against their Non-residence, Can. 11, 12. Against receiving
those who were excommunicated by others, Can. 13. About the Appeal of
Presbyters, Can. 14. Against taking Presbyters out of another Diocese, Can.
15. Against their Non-residence, Can. 16. About the Reception of banished
Bishops, Can. 17. About Eutychianus and Musaeus, and the persons ordained by
them, Can. 18, 19.

But the main Canons of this Council are the third, fourth and fifth, which
concern the re-hearing of the Causes of Bishops; And the interest the Bishop of
Rome was to have therein. For the right understanding whereof we are to
consider the several steps and methods of Proceeding therein established. (1.)
That the Causes of Bishops in the first Instance were still to be heard and
determined by the Bishops of the Province; That is plain by the first part of
Can. 3. Which forbids any Bishop in case of difference with another, to call
Bishops out of a neighbor Province to hear it. This was agreeable to the
Nicene Can. 5. Herein it is supposed that they reflect on the Council of
Antioch's Proceedings against Athanasius; But the Council of Antioch did not
proceed upon St. Athanasius in the first Instance, but upon this ground, viz.
That being deposed in the Council of Tire, he afterward returned to the
Bishopric of Alexandria, without being first restored by a greater Synod. But
this seems to have been very hard usage of so great a man; For they first made
the Canons themselves, Can. 4, 12. and out of them they framed an Article, by
virtue whereof they deprived Athanasius. And herein lay the Art of the Eusebian
party, for if they had framed the Canon so as it is extant in Pallad. vit.
Chrysostom. p. ^8.
Palladius, it would never have passed the Council; For it was not a Council of
mere Arians, as is commonly thought, but of many Hilar. de Synod. p. 227, 228.
Orthodox Bishops, together with them who in some things were overreached by
the Artifices of the Eusebian party; And they did not meet purposely against
Athanasius; But 97 Athanas. de Synod.
Bishops were summoned by the Emperor to meet at the solemn Dedication of the
great Church at Antioch called Dominicum Aureum; Phot. Bibliot. Cod. 257.
as they had done before on the like occasion at Jerusalem; And Eusebius. l. 10.
c. 3.
Eusebius says, Such Assemblies of Bishops were frequent at such times. These,
being met together, framed several Canons, for the better Ordering and
Government of the Churches, out of which, being passed by general Consent, the
Eusebians, who hated Athanasius, framed sufficient Articles against him. For,
by the fourth Canon, if a Bishop, being deposed by a Synod, does officiate, he
is never to be restored; By the twelfth, If a Bishop deposed, makes Application
to the Emperor, and not to a greater Council of Bishops, he is not to be
restored. But now Athanasius, being deposed by the Tyrian Synod, was restored
upon his Application to the Emperor, without any Synod called to that end, and
did execute his Office as Bishop of Alexandria; and for this reason, the
Council of Antioch confirmed his Deposition.

A Schelstraet. de Council. Antioch. dissert. 5. c. 3.
late Author goes about to prove, That the Canon against Athanasius did not
pass the Council of Antioch, but that it passed an Assembly of 40 Eusebians,
when the rest were gone: But this is incredible (as Baron. A. D. 341. n. 5.
Baronius his Conceit is ridiculous, who takes the 36 Mansions that Antioch was
distant from Alexandria for 36 Arian Bishops) and there is no Testimony of
Antiquity to prove it. But there is no reason to imagine any other Canon
against Athanasius besides these two, for they effectually did his business.
That which Palladius says, That in the Canon it was said, whether the Bishop
were deposed justly or unjustly is very improbable; But that which gave
occasion for him to say so was, because the ancient Canon called Apostolical
28. had in it the word (...), justly, which they left out, the better to effect
their Design; That so the merits of the Cause might not be enquired into. But
there was an Error in the first Instance committed, not by the Council of
Antioch, but by that of Tire; unless the extraordinary Summons of that Council
by the Emperor's Command, as Eusebius. vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 41, 42.
Eusebius says, be a dispensation, as to the regular Proceedings in common
Cases; But there was scarce any thing regular in the Proceeding of that
Council; For, according to the Rules of the Church, this Cause ought to have
been heard in Egypt, by the Bishops there; And they justly complain of the
Neglect of this in their Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 726, etc.
Synodical Epistle; And Council. Labb. To. 2. p. 778.
Liberius made a reasonable Proposition to Constantius; That a Council might be
summoned at Alexandria; That this Cause, which had given so much disturbance,
should be heard upon the Place, all Parties being present. Which was the best
Expedient at last; But the most natural way was to have begun there; And
therefore the Sardican Council did very well to reduce the Nicene Canon about
proceeding within the Province in the first Instance.

(2.) If the Party be grieved at the Sentence passed against him, then that
there be a re-hearing of it granted, Can. 2. This the Council of Antioch
allowed Can. 12. by a greater Synod of Bishops, but takes away all hopes of
Restitution from him that made his Appeal to the Emperor. The meaning of the
Canon is, not to exclude an Address for a greater Synod; but an Appeal, to have
the Emperor reverse the Sentence, without any farther hearing by another
Assembly of Bishops. So that the final resort was hereby settled in a greater
Council, from which no Appeal should lie. This Canon is supposed to be
particularly designed against Athanasius; But I do not find that he made
Application to the Emperor to be restored with a Non-obstante to the Sentence
of the Tyrian Council; But to have a more indifferent hearing by another
Council. So the Bishops of Egypt testify in their Synodical Epistle extant in
Athanasius; But their Proceeding against him at Antioch was, because after this
he took Possession of his See without another Sentence of a greater Synod; But
the great difficulty is, to reconcile this Canon with the fifteenth of the same
Council, which takes away all Liberty of Appeal from the unanimous Sentence of
a provincial Synod. De Con^ord. l. 7. c. 2. n. 6.
Petrus de Marca, a Man of more than ordinary Sagacity in these matters, was
sensible of this appearance of Contradiction; and he solves it thus, That no
Appeal is allowed from a provincial Synod, Can. 15. But notwithstanding, by
Can. 12. there is a Liberty of proceeding by way of Petition to the Emperor,
for a re-hearing the Cause by a greater Synod. And in this Case the Emperor
was to be Judge, whether it were fit to grant another hearing or not, and
although by this Canon, in the case of a general Consent, no neighbor Bishop
could be called in; as they might in case of Difference by Can. 14. Yet if the
Emperor thought they proceeded partially, he might either join Bishops of
another Province with them, or call a more general Council out of the Province,
as Constantine did at Tire. This was the undoubted Right of the Emperors, to
call together Assemblies of Bishops for what Causes they thought expedient. But
Socr. l. 2. ^. 40.
Socrates expressly says, That no Appeal was allowed by the Canons of the
Church; For speaking of Cyrill of Jerusalem's being deposed, he says, he
appealed to a greater Court of Judicature, which Appeal Constantius allowed;
but then he adds, That he was the first and only person who, contrary to the
Custom and Canons of the Church, made such an Appeal. H. Valesius contradicts
Socrates, because of the Appeal of the Donatists to Constantine from the
Council of Arles. But this is nothing to the purpose; for the actions of the
Donatists were not regarded; And besides, their Appeal was to Constantine, to
hear the Cause himself; But here Cyrill appealed to a greater number of
Bishops, according to the Canon of Antioch. And then appeared at the Council of
Seleucia to have his Cause heard. Baron. A.D. 359. n. 75.
Baronius is much puzzled with this Expression of Socrates, because it would
take away Appeals to the Pope; But the Eastern Bishops never understood any
such thing; And Cyrill made his Appeal to a greater Synod. The Canons of
Sardica, which Baronius quotes, were not received and scarce known in the
Eastern Church. Athanasius fled to the Western Bishops, because he was so ill
used in the East, not because of any Authority in the Bishop of Rome to receive
Appeals. But Cyrill went according to the Canons of Antioch, making application
to Constantius to be heard, by a greater Synod. Sozom. l. 4. c. 16.
Sozomen says, that Constantius recommended the Cause of Cyrill to the Council
of Ariminum; But that cannot be, since Hilar. in Fragm. l. 2. p. 44, 45.
he expressly forbad the Western Bishops in that Council to meddle with the
Causes of the Eastern Bishops; And declares, whatever they did in that matter
should have no effect. Therefore the Council to which Constantius referred this
Cause, must be that of Seleucia, which was assembled at the same time. Which
seeming to take off from the Right of Provincial Synods established in the
Council of Nice, Socrates condemns as uncanonical, and says, He was the first
that proceeded in this method of seeking to the Emperor for a greater Council.

But then, (3.) The Council of Sardica made an Innovation in this matter. For
although it allows the liberty of a re-hearing, yet it seems to take away the
Power of granting it from the Emperor, as far as in them lay, and gives it to
Julius, Bishop of Rome, for the honor of St. Peter; And, if he thought sit, he
was to appoint the Neighbor Bishops of the Province to hear it, and such
Assessours as the Emperor was wont to send. To which was added, Can. 4. That
no Bishop should enter into the vacant Bishopric upon a deposition, and
application for a new hearing; till the Bishop of Rome had given Sentence in
it: But then, Can. 5. it is said, That if the Cause be thought fit to be
re-heard, Letters are to be sent from him to the neighbor Bishops to hear and
examine it. But if this do not satisfy, he may do as he sees cause. Which I
take to be the full meaning of Can. 5. And this is the whole Power which the
Council of Sardica gives to the Bishop of Rome.

Concerning which we are to observe, (1.) That it was a new thing; for if it
had been known before, that the supreme Judgment in Ecclesiastical Causes lay
in the Bishop of Rome, These Canons had been idle and impertinent. And there is
no color in Antiquity for any such judicial Power in the Bishop of Rome, as to
re-hearing of causes of deposed Bishops before these Canons of Sardica; So that
De Concord. l. 7. c. 3. n. 6.
Petrus de Marca was in the right, when he made these the foundation of the
Pope's Power. And if the Right of Appeal be a necessary consequent from the
Pope's Supremacy; Then the non-usage of this practice before, will overthrow
the claim of Supremacy. In extraordinary Cases, the great Bishops of the Church
were wont to be advised with; as St. Cyprian, as well as the Bishop of Rome, in
the Cases of Basilides and Marcianus; But if such Instances prove a right of
Appeals, they will do it as much for the Bishop of Carthage as of Rome. But
there was no standing Authority peculiar to the Bishop of Rome given or allowed
before this Council of Sardica. And the learned Publisher of Tom. 2. dissert.
5. c. 14, etc.
Leo's Works has lately proved at large, That no one Appeal was ever made from
the Churches of Gaul, from the beginning of Christianity there to the
Controversy between Leo, and Hilary of Arles, long after the Council of
Sardica. But such an Authority being given by a particular Council upon present
Circumstances, as appears by mentioning Julius Bishop of Rome, cannot be
binding to posterity, when that limited Authority is carried so much farther,
as to be challenged for an absolute and supreme Power founded upon a Divine
Right, and not upon the Act of the Council. For herein the difference is so
great, that one can give no color or pretense for the other. (2.) That this
does not place the Right of Appeals in the Bishop of Rome, as Head of the
Church; But only transfers the Right of granting a re-hearing from the
Emperor to the Bishop of Rome. And whether they could do that or not is a
great Question; But in all probability Constantius his openly favoring the
Arian Party was the occasion of it. (3.) That this can never justify the
drawing of Causes to Rome by way of Appeal; because the Cause is still to be
heard in the Province, by the neighbor Bishops, who are to hear and examine
all Parties, and to give Judgment therein. (4.) That the Council of Sardica it
self took upon it to judge over again a Cause which had been judged by the
Bishop of Rome, viz. The Cause of Athanasius and his Brethren. Which utterly
overthrows any Opinion in them, That the supreme Right of Judicature was lodged
in the Bishop of Rome. (5.) That the Sardican Council cannot be justified by
the Rules of the Church, in receiving Marcellus into Communion. For not only
the Eastern Bishops in their Synodical Epistle say, That he was condemned for
Heresy by the Council at Constantinople in Constantine 's time, and that
Protogenes of Sardica and others of the Council had subscribed to his
Condemnation; But Suipit. Sever. l. 2.
Athanasius himself afterward condemned him; And Basil. Ep. 50.
St. Basil blames the Church of Rome for admitting him into Communion: And Bar.
A. D. 347. n. 55. n. 61.
Baronius confesses, that this brought a great disreputation upon this Council,
viz. the absolving one condemned for Heresy, both before and after that
Absolution. (6.) That the Decrees of this Council were not universally
received, as is most evident by the known Contest between the Bishops of Rome
and Africa about Appeals. If these Canons had been then received in the Church,
it is incredible that they should be so soon forgotten in the African Churches;
For there were but two Bishops of Carthage, Restitutus and Genethlius between
Gratus and Aurelius. Christian. Lup. in Can. Sardic. p. 215.
Christianus Lupus professes he can give no account of it. But the plain and
true account is this, There was a Design for a General Council; But the Eastern
and Western Bishops parting so soon, there was no regard had by the whole
Church to what was done by one side or the other. And so little notice was
taken of their Proceedings, that Aug. c Cresc. l. 3. c. 34.
St. Augustine knew of no other than the Council of the Eastern Bishops; and
even Nic. Fabric. Opusc. p. 39.
Hilary himself makes their Confession of Faith to be done by the Sardican
Council. And the calling of Councils was become so common then, upon the Arian
Controversies; And the Deposition of Bishops of one side and the other were so
frequent, that the remoter Churches very little concerned themselves in what
passed amongst them. Thence the Acts of most of those Councils are wholly lost,
as at Milan, Sirmium, Arles, Beziers, etc. only what is preserved in the
Fragments of Hilary, and the Collections of Athanasius, who gathered many
things for his own vindication. But as to these Canons, they had been utterly
forgotten, if the Sea of Rome had not been concerned to preserve them; But the
Sardican Council, having so little Reputation in the World; The Bishops of that
See endeavored to obtrude them on the World, as the Nicene Canons. Which was
so inexcusable a piece of Ignorance or Forgery, that all the Tricks and Devices
of the Advocates of that See, have never been able to defend.

CHAP. IV. Of the Faith and Service of the British Churches.
THE Faith of the British Churches enquired into.

The Charge of Arianism considered.

The true State of the Arian Controversy, from the Council of Nice to that of
Ariminum.

Some late Mistakes rectified.

Of several Arian Councils before that of Ariminum.

The British Churches cleared from Arianism after it.

The Number and Poverty of the British Bishops there present.

Of the ancient endowment of Churches before Constantine.

The Privileges granted to Churches by him.

The Charge of Pelagianism considered.

Pelagius and Celestius both born in these Islands.

When Aremorica first called Britain.

What sort of Monk Pelagius was.

No probability of his returning to Britain.

Of Agricola and others spreading the Pelagian Doctrine in the British Churches.

Germanus and Lupus sent by a Council of Gallican Bishops hither to stop it.

The Testimony of Prosper concerning their being sent by Coelestine considered.

Of Fastidius a British Bishop.

London the chief Metropolis in the Roman Government.

Of Faustus originally a Britain. But a Bishop in Gaul.

The great esteem he was in.

Of the Semipelagians and Praedestinatians.

Of the Schools of Learning set up here by the means of Germanus and Lupus.

Dubricius and Iltutus the Disciples of St. German.

The number of their Scholars, and places of their Schools.

Of the Monastery of Banchor, and the ancient Western Monasteries, and their
difference, as to Learning, from the Benedictine Institution

Of Gildas his Iren, whether an University in Britain.

Of the Schools of Learning in the Roman Cities, chiefly at Rome, Alexandria
and Constantinople, and the Professors of Arts and Sciences, and the public
Libraries there.

Of the Schools of Learning in the Provinces, and the Constitution of Gratian
to that purpose: extending to Britain.

Of the public Service of the British Churches; The Gallican Offices
introduced by St. German.

The Nature of them at large explained, and their Difference from the Roman
Offices, both as to the Morning and Communion Service.

The Conformity of the Liturgy of the Church of England to the ancient British
Offices, and not derived from the Church of Rome, as our Dissenters affirm.

THE Succession of the British Churches being thus deduced from their original
to the times of the Christian Emperors, it will be necessary to give an
account of the Faith and Service which were then received by them.

And it is so much the more necessary to enquire into the Faith of the British
Churches, because they are charged with two remarkable Heresies of those times,
viz. Arianism and Pelagianism; and by no less Authority than that of Gild.
Epist. p. 12.
Gildas and Bed. l. 1. c. 8, 10, 17.
Bid.

The Charge of Arianism is grounded upon the universal spreading of that
Heresy over the World, as Bede expresses it, and therefore to show how far the
British Churches were concerned, we must search into the History of that
Heresy, from the Council of Nice to the Council of Ariminum, where the British
Bishops were present.

It is confidently affirmed by a late R. and L. ^art. 1. p. 354.
Writer, That the Arian Faction was wholly suppressed by the Nicene Council, and
all the Troubles that were made after that were raised by the Eusebians, who
were as forward as any to anathematize the Arians, and all the Persecutions
were raised by them, under a Pretense of Prudence and Moderation; That they
never in the least appeared after the Council of Nice in behalf of the Arian
Doctrine, p. 374.
but their whole fury was bent against the word (...) and Athanasius; That in
the times of Constantius and Constans the Cause of Arius was wholly laid aside
by both Parties, p. 415.
and the only Contest was about the word (...); That the Eusebian Cause was
not to restore Arianism, but to piece up the Peace of the Church by
comprehending all in one Communion, p. 468.
or by mutual forbearance.

But if it be made appear, that the Arian Faction was still busy and active
after the Nicene Council; that the Contest about (...) was with a design to
overthrow the Nicene Faith; that the Eusebians great business was, if possible,
to restore Arianism; then it will follow, that some Men's hatred of Prudence and
Moderation is beyond their skill and judgment in the History of the Church: and
the making out of these things will clear the History of Arianism to the
Council of Ariminum.

But, before I come to the Evidence arising from the Authentic Records of the
Church, it will not be unpleasant to observe, that this very Writer is so great
an Enemy to the design of Reconcilers, that it is hardly possible, even in this
matter, to reconcile him to himself. For, he tells us, that the most
considerable Eusebians in the Western Churches, viz. Valens, Ursacius, p. 484.
and their Associates had been secret Arians all along; that the word Substance
was left out of the third Sirmian Creed, p. 508.
to please Valens and his Party; who, p. 510.
being emboldned by this Creed whereby they had at length shaken off all the
Clogs that had been hitherto fastened on them to hinder their return to
Arianism, moved, at the Council at Ariminum, that all former Creeds might be
abolished, and the Sirmian Creed be established for ever. Does this consist
with the Arian Factions being totally suppressed by the Council of Nice, and none
ever appearing in behalf of the Arian Doctrine after; and the Eusebians never
moving for restoring Arianism, but only for a sort of Comprehension and
Toleration? In another place he says, R. and L. Part. 2. p. 3.
the Eusebians endeavored to supplant the Nicene Faith, though they durst not
disown it. And was the Arian Faction then totally suppressed while the Eusebians
remained? These are the Men whom he calls the old Eusebian Knaves; p. 4.
And for the Acacians, he says, when they had got the Mastery, Part. 1. p. 528.
they put off all disguise, and declared for Arianism. Is it possible for the
same person to say, that after the Nicene Council, they never appeared in
behalf of the Arian Doctrine in the Eastern and Western Churches; and yet, When
they put off their disguise, they declared for Arianism? What is this but
appearing openly and plainly for the Arian Doctrine? And if we believe so good
an Author as himself, their Contest after the Council of Nice was so far from
being merely about the word (...), that he frequently says, that Controversy
did take in the whole Merits of the Cause, as will appear from his own words in
several places. As when he speaks of the Council of Nice, p. 358.
he says, The whole Controversy was reduced to the word Consubstantial; which
the Eusebians at first refused to admit, as being no Scripture word, but
without its admission, nothing else would satisfy the Council, and good reason
they had for it, because to part with that word after the Controversy was once
raised, would have been, to give up the Cause; for it was unavoidable, that if
the Son were not of the same substance with the Father, he must have been made
out of the same common and created substance with all other Creatures; and
therefore when the Scriptures give him a greater Dignity of Nature than to any
created Being, they thereby make him of the same uncreated Substance with the
Father; so that they plainly assert his Consubstantiality, though they use not
the word. But when the Truth itself was denied by the Arian Heretics and the
Son of God thrust down into the rank of created Beings, and defined to be a
Creature made of nothing, it was time for the Church to stop this Heresy, by
such a Test as would admit of no Prevarication; which was effectually done by
this word; and, as cunning and shuffling as the Arians were, they were never
able to swallow or chew it, and therefore it was but a weak part of the
Eusebians to show so much zeal against the word, when they professed to allow
the thing; For if our Savior were not a mere Creature, he must be of the same
uncreated substance with the Father, because there is no middle between created
and uncreated Substance; so that whoever denied the Consubstantiality could not
avoid the Heresy of Paulus Samosatenus, which yet the Arians themselves
professed to defy; for if he were a mere Creature, it is no matter how soon,
or how late he was created.

And therefore it is not be imagined that the Eusebians should really believe
the Consubstantiality of the Son, and yet so vehemently oppose the use of the
word. Would any Men of common sense, who did believe the Bread and Wine in the
Eucharist to be turned into the very Body and Blood of Christ, set themselves
with all their force and interest to overthrow the term of Transubstantiation?
So, if the Eusebians did believe the Son of the same Substance with the Father,
to what purpose should they caball so much as they did all the Reign of
Constantius, to lay aside the word (...); If it be said, It was by way of
Comprehension, to take in dissenting Parties: then it is plain they were really
dissenting Parties still, and consequently did not differ only about the Use
of a word; but about the Substance of the Doctrine. And as those who do believe
the Doctrine of Transubstantiation, are for the Use of the word; and those who
believe it not, would not have the word imposed; so it was in all the Councils
under Constantius, those who chiefly opposed the word Consubstantial, did it,
because they liked not the Doctrine; and those who contended for it, did it,
because they knew the Doctrine was aimed at under the Pretense of laying aside
an unscriptural word. And the same Author tells us from St. Hilary, p. 484.
the Consequence of shutting out the word (...) was, that it must be decreed
either that the Son was a Creature made out of nothing, or out of another
substance uncreated and distinct from the Divine Nature. And when he gives an
account of the Council of Seleucia, held at the same time with that of
Ariminum, he says, p. 520.
They brake into two Parties, of the Acacians, who defied the Council of Nice
and all its Decrees, and the old Eusebians, who pretended to stick only at the
word Consubstantial: and upon their Appeal to the Emperor, there are these two
things remarkable. 1. That those who were for laying aside all discriminating
words were Arians of the highest sort, p. 522.
viz. Aetians, who held the Blasphemy of Dissimilitude. 2. That those who were
for retaining the word Substance went on this Ground, That if God the Son exist
neither from nothing nor from any other substance, then he must be of the same
substance with the Father. p. 524.
Which was the very Argument, he says, approved by the Council of Nice for
settling the word (...). This is a sufficient Argument to me, that those who
from the Council of Nice did chiefly oppose that word, did it with a Design to
overthrow the Doctrine of the Son's being of the same substance with the
Father. Which will more fully appear by a brief deduction of the Arian History
from the Council of Nice to that of Ariminum; not from modern Collections, but
from the best Writers about that time.

The Arian Faction finding themselves so much overvoted in the Council of Nice,
that they despaired to carry any thing there by fair means; betook themselves
to fraudulent Arts, hoping thereby to hinder either the passing or the
executing any Decree against them. At first, they endeavored to blind and
deceive the Council by seeming to profess the Orthodox Faith, but they made use
of such ambiguous Forms of words as might serve their ends, by couching an
Heretical Sense under a fair appearance of joining in the same Faith with the
rest. Athanas. de Synod. Arim. and Seleuc. p. 921.
Theod. l. 1. c. 8.
This being discovered by the more sagacious Defenders of the old Christian
Faith, they at length fixed upon the term (...) as the only effectual Test to
discriminate the Arians from others; and when they had used their utmost skill
and endeavor to keep this Test from passing, and found they could not prevail,
they bethought themselves of another way to keep the Faction alive, although
the Heresy might seem at present to be totally suppressed. And that was, by
suffering Arius and his two fast Friends, Secundus and Theonas, to be condemned
by the Council, and to be banished by the Emperor; but the chief Heads of the
Faction, Eusebius of Nicomedia and Theognis of Nice, with others, resolved upon
an Expedient to clear themselves, and yet to keep up the Faction; which was, by
subscribing the Confession of Faith, and denying to anathematize Arius and his
Followers. This is plain from the Epistle of Eusebius and Theognis, extant in
Socr. l. 1. c. 14.
Socrates and Soz. l. 2: c. 16.
Sozomen, wherein they own their Subscription to the Decree of Faith, but
declare, That they utterly refused to subscribe the Anathema against Arius and
his Adherents; because they did not believe them guilty of the Heresy charged
upon them; as they found both by Writing and Conversation with them. This
Epistle was written by them during their Banishment, in order to their return
to their Bishoprics, from which they had been driven by Constantine's own
Order; and the Reason of it is given is his Epistle to the Church of Nicomedia,
viz. Theod. l. 1. c. 20.
for communicating with the Arians whom he had caused to be removed from
Alexandria for their Heresy and Disturbance of the Peace of the Church there;
and the same Account is given of it in the Synodical Epistle of the Bishops of
Egypt extant in Athanas. Apol. p. 727.
Athanasius. Which shows their Resolution to keep up the Faction in spite of
the Council of Nice: For if they had any regard to the Decree there past, they
would not have presumed to have communicated with those who were expressly
anathematized by the Council; and had very hardly escaped it themselves, as
Constantine there upbraids them in his Epistle. But, upon this notorious
Contempt, they were deposed from their Bishoprics, and sent into Banishment;
where they grew very uneasy, and resolved upon any Terms to be restored;
knowing that if they continued there, the Faction was indeed in Danger to be
wholly suppressed: and, for that end, they wrote that submissive Letter to the
leading Bishops, promising an universal Compliance upon their Restoration. And
the main ground they built their Hopes upon, was, because Arius himself upon
his submission was recalled; as they declare in the end of that Epistle.

Which Intrigue was carried on by Socr. l. 1. c. 25.
Soz. l. 2. c. 27.
a secret Arian, Chaplain to Constantia, the Emperor's Sister, recommended to
the Emperor at her Death; who, being received into Favor, whispered into his
Ear very kind things concerning Arius and his Adherents; adding, that they were
unjustly banished, and that the whole Controversy was nothing but a Pique
which the Bishop of Alexandria had taken against one of his Presbyters, for
having more Wit and Reputation than himself; and that it would become
Constantine, in point of Honor and Justice, to recall Arius, and to have the
whole matter examined over again. Upon this, Arius is sent for, and bid by the
Emperor to set down his Confession of Faith plainly and honestly; which is
extant in the Ecclesiastical Historians, under the Name of Arius and Euzoius,
and was framed in such a specious manner, as made the Emperor believe that
Arius was indeed of the same Mind with the Nicene Fathers, only leaving out
the word Consubstantial. But he would not undertake to determine himself,
whether he should be received into Communion upon this; but he referred the
whole matter to the Bishops then met a Jerusalem; who, faith Sozomen,
unanimously approved this Confession of Faith, and wrote a Circular Letter upon
it for receiving Arius and his Adherents into Communion; notwithstanding the
peremptory Decree of the Council of Nice to the contrary. Which Epistle is
extant in Athanas. Apol. p. 801. and Synod. Arim. and Seleuc. p. 899, 891.
Athanasius, who looks on it as the first Blow given to the Authority of the
Council of Nice; And he understands it of that Arius, who was Author of the
Heresy, and not of the other Arius, as some modern Writers do.

And here, Athanasius says, they began to open their Design in favor of the
Arian Heresy, which till then they had concealed. For they knew that Work was
not to be done at once; but this was a good step toward the lessning the
Authority of the Nicene Council; which being once removed, the Faction did not
question they should be able to set up Arianism speedily. They were not so
plain hearted to declare presently for what they aimed at; nor to put it to the
Vote, whether the Nicene Faith should be destroyed or not. For that, having the
great Advantage of so public a Settlement, and such a general Consent of the
Christian World, it was not to be overthrown at once, nor by open violence, but
to be taken in pieces by degrees; and the generality were to be cheated into
Arianism, under other pretenses and insinuations. And the first thing was, to
persuade the World, that the Arians had been hitherto misunderstood, and their
Doctrine misrepresented by such factious and busy Men as Athanasius, and a few
others, therefore it was absolutely necessary to weaken the Authority of the
Council, as being influenced by a small number of Men who overswayed the rest;
Neither was it safe to begin with the Matter of Faith, for that would give too
great an Alarm; but it was a much more plausible way to bring the Arians into
Communion, as being much misrepresented and not owning the Doctrines which the
Athanasian Party did charge them with, and being once joined in Communion
together, it would be fit to lay aside all Terms of Discrimination, as tending
to Faction; especially such as were lately set up, to put a distinction between
the Arians and others. And when these things were done by other Councils, the
Authority of the Council of Nice would fall to the Gound, and, as they
supposed, the Nicene Faith together with it. But such D^signs could not be
carried on so secretly and subtly, but the wiser sort suspected what was
doing, p. 891
as Athanasius says; and therefore they soon called another Council at
Antioch, where they made vehement Protestations to the contrary. We, say they,
are no followers of Arius; for, being Bishops, how can we follow a Presbyter?
As though the World could be deceived by such pitiful Reasonings. But after
they declare, That they embraced none but the ancient Faith, but withal
confess they had received Arius to Communion; and then make a Profession of
their Faith very agreeable to that of Arius and Euzoius, delivered to
Constantine; wherein they assert the Coeternity of the Son with the Father, but
leave out his being of the same Substance. But fearing this would not give
satisfaction, they added another, wherein they owned Ath. p. 892.
the Son to be God of God, Lord of Lord, the unchangeable Image of his Deity,
Substance, Will, Power and Glory: but after, they express themselves more
fully, when they say, they believe three distinct hypostases and an unity of
consent; which overthrows the Nicene Faith, it being built on the unity of
Substance and not of Will. It cannot be denied, that the crude expressions of
Arius in the first Heat of the Controversy were here rejected, viz. that there
was a time before the Son was, or that he was a Creature like other Creatures;
for they knew these expressions would not then be born; and therefore they were
forced to refine Arianism to the utmost degree, to make it pass down the
better, till the prejudice against it by the Council of Nice were wholly
removed. To which end they set forth several other Confessions of Faith to
prevent the suspicion of what they aimed at; but these were in the time of
Constantius.

I return therefore to the Reign of Constantine, which excellent Prince Soz. l.
3. c. 1.
would suffer no alteration to be made in the Nicene Faith in his time; and
therefore the Secret Arians were forced to great dissimulation and hypocrisy,
and to carry on their design under other pretenses. So Theod. l. 1. c. 5, 7.
Theodoret says, That Eusebius and his Party outwardly complied in the Council
of Nice out of fear; and he applies to them the saying of the Prophet, This
People honors me with their lips, but their heart is far from me. And
elsewhere he says, l. 1. c. 19.
The Arians in the Council subscribed to the Nicene Faith, that being in Sheeps
clothing, they might devour like ravening Wolves. Soz. l. 2. c. 21.
Sozomen says, It was reported that Eusebius and Theognis, after their return
from Banishment, corrupted the Person to whom the Subscriptions of the Council
of Nice were committed, and rased out their own Names; and then openly declared
against the Son's being of the same Substance with the Father: and that even to
Constantine himself. But that does not seem credible to me. It being much more
probable, which Socr. l. 1. c. 23.
Socrates relates, viz. That Eusebius and Theognis having recovered the
possession of their Churches upon their return from Banishment had frequent
access to the Emperor, who honored them as his Converts; and under that
Pretext of embracing the Nicene Faith, did more mischief than otherwise they
could have done: and so made a very great Disturbance in the Church: which he
imputes partly to their love of Arianism, and partly to their hatred of
Athanasius: but the latter, as Athanasius at large proves, was on the account
of the former.

For, it being their Design to introduce Arianism, without owning it, next to
their lessning the Authority of the Council of Nice, the most effectual means
they could think of was, by all possible Arts, to blacken and render odious,
those Persons who most vigorously defended the Nicene Faith. And from hence
began the great quarrel against Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, and Athanasius.
As to the former, he gives an Account in the Fragment of a Homily extant in
Theod. l. 1. c. 8.
Theodoret, what shuffling the Arians used in the Council of Nice to preserve
their Bishoprics; and, for that Reason, subscribed to the Decree of Faith; and
so, having escaped the Censures they deserved, they did sometimes secretly,
sometimes openly, propagate the Opinions there condemned. One of their great
Arts, he faith, was to decline such as well understood the Controversy, and
made it their business to oppose them. And so Eustathius himself found to his
sorrow. For, Eusebius of Nicomedia and his Party, meeting together at Antioch,
whom Theod. l. 1. c. 21.
Theodoret expressly calls the Arian Faction, they there proceeded to the
deposing Eustathius, upon the Accusation of an infamous Person suborned to that
purpose, and afterward prevailed with Constantine to banish him; which being
done, Theodoret says, c. 22.
There was a Succession of Bishops, who were secret Arians, as of Eulalius,
Euphronius and Flaccillus; and that was the Reason the Orthodox Party then
separated themselves, and were called Eustathians. Socr. l. 1. c. 23.
Socrates and Soz. l. 2.21.
Sozomen confess, that the quarrel about Arianism was renewed soon after the
Council of Nice both in Egypt and in Bithynia, Hellespont and Constantinople.
But Socrates says, It was begun about the word (...), which was indeed the
Pretext of the Quarrel, but the true Ground was Arianism. Socrates, being a Man
not thoroughly versed in these Matters, blames both sides, for contending about
they knew not what; both agreeing in the same Doctrine, and yet not agreeing
among themselves. But he did not penetrate into the depth of the Arians
Designs, as Theodoret, a Man of far greater Judgment and Learning did. And he
proves from Eustathius, an eminent Bishop of that time, and one present in the
Council of Nice, that Arianism lay at the bottom; and that they complied at
first only out of Fear, but had the same hatred to the true Faith they ever
had; but after the Council they durst not so openly show it. Soz. l. 2. c. 18.
Sozomen says, the Arian Party charged those who asserted Christ of the same
Substance with the Father (as the Council of Nice had determined) with
Sabellianism and Blasphemy; and the followers of the Nicene Faith charged the
others with Idolatry and Innovation; as asserting three distinct Gods as to
Substance, c. 19.
when the Council had declared the Son of the same Substance with the Father.
And he ingenuously confesses, that it was generally believed that Eustathius
was deposed at Antioch for adhering to the Nicene Faith; and declaring himself
against the Arian Party then prevailing in the East.

Who finding such success in their first attempt on Eustathius, they next
proceed against Athanasius, the other great Champion of the Council of Nice.
They Athan. Apol. 2. p. 725, 726.
had conceived an inveterate hatred against him for his great zeal and activity
in that Council, but their rage brake forth, after they heard that he succeeded
Alexander in the Sea of Alexandria. Eusebius of Nicomedia was his mortal Enemy,
who was removed to be near the Court, (though against the Canons;) yet he brake
through all, thereby to have opportunity to fill the Emperor's Mind with
Jealousies and Suspicions of all those that opposed them, and especially of
Athanasius. And Socr. l. 1. c. 27.
Socrates gives the true Reason of the great Spite against Athanasius, viz.
that unless he were removed, there was no hopes of the Arian Doctrine
prevailing: which he there confesses was the thing the Eusebians aimed at. And
now they thought such a Snare was laid for Athanasius, which it was hardly
possible for him to escape. For, upon Arius his Submission, they advise
Constantine to send him to Alexandria, there to be received by Athanasius, as
the only way to put an end to all the Disturbances of the Church. Away goes
Arius with the Emperor's Command to Athanasius: Who, according to their
imagination, Soz. l. 2. c. 18. c. 22.
refusing to admit him, being anathematized by the Council, as the Athanas.
Apol. p. 778.
first Broacher of a dangerous Heresy, they easily exasperated the good
Emperor against him, as a seditious and turbulent Person; and so plied him
with one Accusation upon another, that at last Constantine sent for him to
appear before him upon an Information against him of no less than Treasonable
Practices. But upon a full hearing of the Matter by the Emperor himself, Socr.
l. 1. c. 27.
he was acquitted, and sent back with Marks of his Favor and vindication of
his Innocence; in an Epistle to the People of Alexandria, part of which is
extant in Soz. l. 2. c. 22.
Sozomen and Theod. l. 1. c. 27.
Theodoret, but at large in Athanas. Apol. p. 779.
Athanasius. One would think this should have discouraged his Enemies from any
farther Prosecution of him; but these Eusebians were Men of restless,
ambitious, implacable Spirits, that scrupled no means to compass their ends,
which they thought they could never do, unless they could blast the Reputation
of Athanasius. To this end, they laid a most malicious design against him.
First, Soz. l. 2. c. 24.
they draw in the Athanas. Apol. p. 777.
Meletian Party in Egypt to join with them; who hoped to get their ends one
upon the other afterward; but at present they were willing to join together
against their common Enemy; for so Athanasius was accounted by them. And Socr.
l. 2. c. 22.
Eusebius promised the Meletians great favor at Court, if they would manage
the business against Athanasius: which they undertook; and by their means so
many Complaints were brought against Athanasius to the Emperor, that he was
forced for the general Satisfaction, to appoint a Council at Tire, which was
according to the Eusebians desire, where things were managed with so little
regard to Justice or common Honesty, that, after he had plainly cleared himself
as to the main Accusations, he yet found they were resolved to condemn him; and
therefore he privately withdrew from thence to the Imperial Court, c. 25.
to acquaint the Emperor with the horrible Partiality there used. Upon Socr.
l. 1. c. 11.
this he writes a very smart Letter to them, and requires them to come speedily
to him, Athan. Apol. ^03.
to give him an account of their violent Proceedings. They send a select Number
of their Party to Court with Eusebius of Nicomedia in the Head of them, who
there quit all the Accusations brought against Athanasius at Tire, and start a
new one which touched the Emperor in a very tender part, viz. That he had
threatened to hinder the bringing Corn from Egypt to Constantinople; which was
in effect to threaten the starving his beloved City; which nettled the Emperor
so much, that it transported him beyond his usual Temper, and immediately he
gave order for banishing Athanasius into Gaul. Not long after Constantine died,
but before his death, says Theod. l. 1. c. 32.
Theodoret, he gave order for the recalling Athanasius, to the great regret of
Eusebius of Nicomedia then present.

Let any one now judge, whether in Constantine 's time the Arian Faction were
wholly suppressed; and whether Eusebius and his Party were men that only
pretended to Prudence and Moderation; Who made use of the most malicious,
unjust, abominable means, to suppress the chiefest Opposers of the Arian
Faction? What will not such men say to serve a turn, who dare to tell the
World, That the Eusebians were no less Enemies to the Arians than to the
orthodox, and that it is a great and common Mistake, that Eusebius was the
ringleader of the Arian Faction? If it be a Mistake, others have it from
Athanasius, and it is hard to believe that man ever read Athan. Apol. 2. p. 777.
Athanasius his Writings, who dare say the contrary. All the Bishops of Egypt
in their Synodical Epistle from Alexandria charge the Athanas. Apol. 2. p. 727,
728.
Eusebians with a restlese desire to promote Arianism; and affirm, that their
malicious prosecution of Athanasius was for no other end; that their Councils
were called with a Design to overthrow that of Nice, p. 731.
that they had written against them as Arians; that the Eusebians joined with
the Meletians only for the sake of Arianism; that the Persons sent by the
Council of Tire into Egypt were Arians, and therefore declared Enemies; p. 733.
and whatever their pretenses were, nothing but the advancing Arianism lay at
the bottom. p. 736.
Were so many Bishops guilty of so gross a Mistake, who had certainly greater
opportunity of knowing, and skill in judging the Men and their Designs than the
most quick sighted Person of our Age can have? It would be endless to recite
all the passages in Athanasius his Apology, and Epistles, and Discourses of the
Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia, to prove that the Eusebians carried on the
Arian Design, since a great part of them is spent in the proof of it. But we
are told, with confidence enough, that the Synod of Alexandria, in their
Synodical Epistle, do not in the least accuse the Eusebians of Arianism, but
only of holding Communion with them, i. e. with the Arians. This cannot but
seem strange to any one that will be at the pains to peruse that excellent
Epistle. And even in that page, it is expressly said, Athan. Apol. 2. p. 738.
their violent and malicious proceedings against Athanasius were on purpose to
discourage others from daring to oppose Arianism; and this with a particular
design to introduce that Heresy. Could any Man be thought to take so much
pains to set up a Doctrine they had no kindness to? i. e. Would any but secret
Arians endeavor to set up Arianism? unless we suppose them such Tools to be
made use of by others to do their business, and then to be laid aside. But the
Eusebians were no such mean Politicians; for they were at the top of business,
having all the advantages and opportunities to carry on their own ends; and
therefore we have all the Reason in the World to conclude them secret Arians,
who were at so much trouble to lessen the Credit of the Opposers of Arianism:
Which they looked on as one of the most effectual means to introduce it. And
although they did not openly declare themselves in behalf of the Arian
Doctrine, after the Council of Nice; which had been to hinder their own Design,
in the time of Constantine; yet they made use of all the Methods which bad Men
do to carry on their ends; viz. by false Insinuations, lying pretenses, and all
manner of malicious proceedings against those who stood in their Way; as is
most notorious in the case of Athanasius.

After the Death of Constantine we are told, that all the Councils under
Constantius that are commonly accounted Arian, have as fully and clearly
condemned Arianism, as the Nicene Council it self; It is true, they could not
digest the Word (...); but otherwise, as for the whole Scheme of Arianism, they
have in all their Creeds anathematized it with all clearness and fullness of
Expression. This is somewhat strange Doctrine for one who pretends to have read
Athanasius, who has taken so much pains to lay open the juggling of the Arian
Faction in all those Councils; and, one would think, by this manner of Writing,
such a Man took a particular pleasure in contradicting him. For in his Athanas.
de Synod. Arim. and Seleuc. p. 873.
Book of the Councils of Ariminum and Seleucia, he says, none of the Councils
under Constantius could be brought to anathematize the Arian Heresy, p. 870.
as the Council of Nice did. He says, that Constantius himself was an Arian
Heretic, and that his chief Design in all those Councils was, p. 889.
to take away the force of the Council of Nice. He says indeed, they were not
such Fools to own this, p. 874.
but this was the true Reason of all the Councils they called and the
disturbance they made, p. 870.
to the great Scandal of the Christian World. Nay, p. 874.
he says, that in all their Councils they never once mentioned the Arian
Heresy as an evil thing: and if any Heresies were mentioned, the Arian was
excepted, which the Nicene Council anathematized; and they received with great
kindness such as were known to be Arians; which is an Argument that the calling
these Councils was not for establishing the Truth, but for overthrowing the
Council of Nice. And to show what Constantius his own Mind was, p. 907.
he observes, that when he came to die he would be baptized by none but
Euzoius, who had been several times deposed for Arianism; and he there affirms,
that Constantius continued an Arian to the last. As to the word (...) about
which so much stir was made, p. 909.
he takes notice, that all the offense that was taken at it, was by the Arians;
and the true Cause was, because it struck at the root of their Heresy. And, as
to the word Substance, he wondered they should so vehemently oppose it, when
themselves confessed, the Son was from the Father; for either he must be from
something without him, or something within him distinct from his Substance, or
he must be of the Substance of the Father; or they must make the Word and the
Son to be no real Substance, but mere Names; and so they did not really believe
what they expressed. And he farther shows, p. 910.
that no other way of speaking does sufficiently express the Difference between
the Son of God and his Creatures; which are only the effects of God's Will.
From whence he concludes, p. 914.
that the opposition to these Terms, whatever was pretended, was from a dislike
of the Doctrine established in the Council of Nice. For if it had been a mere
doubt about the signification of the words, they ought to have explained their
own sense, p. 915.
and withal to have condemned the Arian Heresy.

It cannot be denied that there were some who agreed in the Substance of the
Doctrine with the Council of Nice, but yet disliked the term (...); as to these
Athanasius confesses them to be Brethren; ibid.
as long as they acknowledged the Son not to be a Creature, nor to be from
another Substance distinct from the Father. And among these he reckons Basilius
of Ancyra; p. 916.
whose Doctrine he does not seem to dislike, provided that to the similitude of
Substance in the Son they add his being of the Substance of the Father. And in
this sense the (...) comes to the same with the (...). There were two great
Arguments, these used against the term (...); The first was, that it implied a
Partition or Division of the Divine Substance, as a Son among Men is said to be
of the same Substance with his Father, but so, as that there is a Division of
the same common Nature in the several individuals. To this Athanasius answers,
That the Divine Generation must not be apprehended like the humane; but our
Conceptions of God must be agreeable to the Divine Nature; and therefore we
must not imagine the Son of God to be of the Substance with the Father, after
the same manner that the Son of Man is. For, as he is the Son, so he is the
Word and Wisdom of the Father: and the internal Word or Conception in Man is
no divisible part of himself; but lest the Notion of Word should seem to
destroy his real Subsistence, therefore the Notion of Son is added in Scripture
to that of Word; that we may know him to be a living Word and substantial
Wisdom. So that when we say, the Son is consubstantial to the Father, we
understand it not by way of Division, as among Bodies, but abstracting our
Minds from all corporeal things, we attribute this to the Son of God, in a way
agreeing to the Divine Nature, and mean by it, that he is not produced by his
Will as the Creatures are, nor merely his Son by Adoption; but that he is the
true Eternal Son of God; by such an emanation as Splendor from Light, or Water
from the Fountain. And therefore when they interpreted the term Son in a way
agreeable to the Divine Nature, he wonders they should stick so much at the
word Consubstantial, which was capable of the same Interpretation. The second
Objection was, That those who condemned the Samosatenian Heresy, rejected the
word (...). In answer to this, p. 918.
Athanasius shows, that the word was so much used and allowed in the Christian
Church before the Samosatenian Heresy was heard of, that when Dionysius of
Alexandria was accused to Dionysius of Rome, for rejecting it; the Council
thereupon was so much concerned, that the Bishop of Rome wrote their sense to
the Bishop of Alexandria about it, he returns an Answer, wherein he owns all
the sense contained under it, as appears by his Epistle in Athanasius; but for
those who opposed Paulus Samosatenus, he says, they took the Word in a
corporeal sense, as if it implied a distinct Substance from the Father; But,
says he, those who condemned the Arians saw farther into this matter;
considering that it ought not to be applied to the Divine Nature as it is to
corporeal Substances; and the Son of God not being a Creature, but begotten of
the Substance of the Father; therefore with great Reason they used the word
(...), as being most proper to express the Sense of the Christian Church
against the Arian Heresy; p. 920, 921.
as he shows there at large.

From these passages of Athanasius it appears that there was a third Party then
in the Church distinct from the Nicenists and the Eusebians. The former would
by no means yield to any relaxation of the Council of Nice; because they
evidently saw that this Design was carried on by those who made it their
business under that pretense to introduce Arianism, who were the Eusebians. But
there were others extremely concerned for the Peace of the Church, and on that
account were willing to let go the term (...), hoping the Doctrine might be
secured by other expressions; and this facility of theirs gave the greatest
advantage to the Eusebian Party in all their Councils, who continually almost
overreached and outwitted them, under the pretense of Accommodation. For by
this Artifice they gained their Votes, and when they had them, made use of them
merely to serve their own Designs; as appears by the Account the Historians
give of the management of the Arian Affairs under the Reign of Constantius.

Socr. l. 2. c. ^.
Socrates says, that immediately after the death of Constantine, Eusebius and
Theognis, the Heads of the Arian Faction, apprehended it now to be a convenient
season for them to throw down the Nicene Faith, and to set up Arianism; and to
this purpose they endeavored to hinder Athanasius from returning to
Alexandria. But first they gained the Eunuchs and Court-favorites, then the
Wife of Constantius himself, to embrace Arianism: l. 2. c. 26.
and so the Controversy of a sudden spread into the Court, Camp, Cities and
all Places of the East; (for the Western Churches continued quiet during the
Reign of Constans, to whose share all the Western Provinces in a short time
fell.) After the Death of Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople, the two Parties
openly divided in the Choice of a Successor; c. 6.
the one choosing Paulus, and the Arians, Macedonius; this nettled Constantius,
who coming to Constantinople calls a Council of Arian Bishops, who depose
Paulus, and set up Eusebius of Nicomedia; who presently falls to work, going
with the Emperor to Antioch, where, under the pretense of a Dedication, as is
observed in the precedent Chapter, a Council of ninety Bishops was assembled;
but the Design was, says Socrates, c. 8.
to overthrow the Nicene Faith. Here they made some Canons to ensnare
Athanasius (of which before.) As to the matter of Faith, they durst not openly
propose the nulling the Council of Nice; but they gained this great Point, That
the Matters of Faith might be discussed after it, and so they set open the Gate
for New Councils which by degrees might establish the Arian Heresy.

Soz. l. 3. c. 1.
Sozomen says, that after the death of Constantine the secret Arians began to
show themselves more openly; among whom Eusebius and Theognis especially
bestirred themselves to advance Arianism. He agrees with Socrates as to the
spreading of it in the Court and elsewhere; and in the other particulars, to
the Council at Antioch; but he says, ^. 5.
they framed their Confession of Faith in such ambiguous terms, that neither
Party could quarrel with the Words. But they left out any mention of the
Substance of Father and Son, and the word Consubstantial; and so in effect
overthrew the Council of Nice.

This is that Confession of Faith, which the Council in Isauria called Athanas.
de Synod. p. 904.
the Authentic one made at Antioch in the Dedication. But it was not so
Authentic but they thought good to alter it; and some months after sent
another to Constans to explain themselves more fully; p. 895.
whereby they reject those who said, the Son was made of Nothing or of another
Hypostasis, and not from God. Who could imagine these to have been any other
than very sound and orthodox Men? Especially when three years after, they sent
a larger Confession of Faith into the Western Parts for their own Vindication,
wherein they anathematize those who held three Gods, or that Christ was not
God, or that he was begotten of any other Substance besides God, etc. But that
there was juggling under all this appears, because, as Athanasius observes,
they were still altering their Forms; for this again was changed several times
at Sirmium, before they resolved upon that which was to be carried to the
Council of Ariminum. And although the difference in the matters of Faith as
delivered by them seemed now very nice and subtle, yet they were
irreconcilably set against the Council of Nice and all that adhered to it.
Which was a plain Evidence that they concealed their sense under ambiguous
words, or that they saw it necessary at present to seem orthodox, that so they
might the better set aside the Council of Nice; which being once effected, it
would be an easy matter to set up Arianism, which was the thing they designed.

This Intrigue was not discovered fully till after the Council of Ariminum, but
was certainly carried on all along by the Eusebian Party, who without these
Artifices could never have deceived the Eastern Bishops, who joined with them
till they more openly declared themselves in the Council of Seleucia; and then
the difference was not between the Acacians and Eusebians, as some have weakly
conjectured, but between the old Eusebians, who now appeared to be Arians under
the Name of Acacius, and the Followers of Basilius of Ancyra, who stuck chiefly
at the word (...); of whom Athanasius speaks before. Now to draw in these Men,
and to hold them fast, who had great sway in the Eastern Churches, the
Eusebians were forced to comply in words with them, and in all probability to
suffer them to draw up these Creeds, provided only that they left out the
Nicene Decree and Anathema's, which would do their business at last. So that
the Eusebians were forced to the utmost Dissimulation and Hypocrisy, to be
able to carry on the Arian Design in the Eastern and Western Churches. But
whatever their Words and Pretenses were, their Actions sufficiently manifested
their Intentions. For they set themselves with the utmost violence against all
who constantly adhered to the Council of Nice, and openly favored and
preferred all the declared or secret Friends to Arianism. They caused
Athanasius to be banished a second time from Alexandria, and appointed Gregory
in his Place, who continued there, says Theod. l. 2. c. 4.
Theodoret, with great Cruelty for six years, and then was murdered himself by
the Alexandrians; but that seems to have been a mistake for George of
Cappadocia, who succeeded him. For Athan. ad solit. vit. again. p. 823.
Athanasius says, he died a natural death; but he at large describes the
horrible Persecution both of the Clergy and Laity then in Egypt, p. 816.
who would not comply with the Arians; p. 817.
for his business was to set up Arianism, as Athanasius says. After his Death,
Constantius finding so little success in those violent courses, sends for
Athanasius with great earnestness to come to him; p. 823.
and gives him free Liberty to return to Alexandria; and solemnly swears to
him, he would never more receive any Calumnies against him; and writes several
Letters on his behalf: p. 825.
and one very kind one to himself after the death of his Brother Constans, who
was a true Friend to Athanasius; and then his greatest Enemies courted him, and
begged his Pardon for what they had done; being forced to it by the violence of
the Torrent against him: and even Vrsacius and Valens, two warm Men of the
Eusebian Party, p. 826.
publicly recanted what they had done against him, without his seeking, and
then anathematized the Arian Heresy. But this was done while Constans was
alive, and so great a Number appeared in the Western Churches on his side; but
Constans being dead, the Eusebian Party persuade Constantius, to take heart
once more and to try what he could do to restore Arianism; then Valens and
Vrsacius recant their recantation, p. 828.
and lay it all on the Fear of Constans; and now to show the Emperor's zeal
for Arianism, p. 829.
the public allowance is taken from Athanasius and his Party, and given to the
Arians; ibid.
and the Magistrates threatened, if they did not communicate with them; and not
only the People banished that refused, but the Bishops were summoned to appear
in the Courts and were there told, they must immediately subscribe or lose
their Places. But all this while Toleration was granted to all but to the
followers of the Council of Nice. And thus all Places were filled with Tumult
and Disorder, and the People forced their Bishops to the Tribunals for fear of
being punished themselves. And the Reason of this Violence was, because the
Arian Heresy was so much hated by the People, and they hoped by this means to
bring them to own it. p. 830.
Heraclius, the Emperor's Lieutenant, declared in his Name, that Athanasius
was to be cast out, p. 846.
and the Churches given to the Arians; and required the People to receive such
a Bishop as he should send, viz. George of Cappadocia, a violent Arian. But the
tragical Account of all the Persecutions, which the orthodox Christians then
underwent in Egypt, from these Men of Prudence and Moderation is at large set
down by Athanasius himself; and in the concurrent Testimony of the People of
Alexandria; so that nothing seems to have been more violent and cruel in the
Heathen Persecutions than was acted then under Syrianus and Heraclius in Egypt.
And that it was wholly for the sake of Arianism, Athanasius evidently proves by
this Argument, That if a Man were guilty of never so great Crimes, if he
professed himself an Arian, he escaped; but if he were an Opposer of Arianism
the greatest Innocence could not protect him. p. 810, 811.


But this was not the Case of Egypt alone, but in other Places, The best
Qualification for a Bishop was to stand well inclined to Arianism; p. 812.
as Athanasius affirms. But otherwise, though the Persons were never so well
deserving; one fault or other was found with them to cast them out: So, says
he, it was with Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch; a Man famous for his Piety and
Zeal, yet because he appeared against Arianism, feigned Accusations are brought
against him, and he is ejected with his Clergy, and none but favorers of
Arianism placed in their room; and the like Examples he brings at Laodicea,
Tripolis, Germanicia, Sebustea, Hadrianople and many other places; insomuch
that a considerable Bishop scarce any where appeared against Arianism, but they
found some pretense or other to put him out, and where they could allege no
other Cause, they said, p. 813.
It was the Pleasure of Constantius. But their dealing with Paulus, the Bishop
of Constantinople, was very remarkable. He being chosen by the Anti-Arian
Party, and standing in the Way of Eusebius of Nicomedia, whose heart was set
upon that Bishopric, being so near the Imperial Court, he first procured
Paulus his Banishment to Pontus, then he was sent in Chains to Singara of
Mesopotamia, thence to Emesa, thence to Pontus, thence to Cucusus, where he was
at length strangled by the Eusebian Party, as Athanasius says, he had it from
the Persons there present. But although Macedonius who succeeded at
Constantinople were of a temper violent enough, as Soz. l. 4. c. 2.
Sozomen shows, yet Theod. l. 2. c. 6.
Theodoret observes, that even he was expelled Constantinople, because he would
not hold the Son of God to be a Creature; For, although he denied Christ to be
Consubstantial with the Father; yet he asserted him to be like the Father in
all things, and made the Holy Ghost to be a Creature; by which he seemed to
deny the Son to be so, and therefore could not keep the Favor of the Arian
Party, which then governed all in the Eastern Churches; but yet in such a
manner, as by no means, yet to declare for Arianism. And therefore Theodoret
takes notice, c. 25.
that after the death of Leontius, Eudoxius was the first who pulled off his
Vizard, and declared openly for Arianism; but Leontius his way was, to promote
only those in the Church, he was before hand sure of, and to suffer no other
to come into Orders, by which means, says he, most of the Clergy were Arians,
and the People still continued sound in the Nicene Faith, till Eudoxius his
Persecution began.

This was the miserable Condition of the Eastern Churches under the Prudence
and Moderation of the Eusebian Party; but the Western Churches continued quiet
and very little disturbed with the Arian Heresy while Constans lived; who was
ready, not only to maintain the true Faith in his own Dominions, but to give
his Assistence for the Relief of those who suffered in the Eastern Parts. Which
was the Reason of the calling of the Council of Sardica by consent of both
Emperors, although that happened only to widen and enlarge the Breach.
However the Sardican Council had such effect in the Western Parts, as to the
business of Athanasius, that as Athanas. p. 826, 839.
Athanasius tells Constantius, Valens and Vrsacius, two busy Factours in the
Arian Cause, freely own the malicious Intrigue that was carried on in the
prosecution of him. The first Council of Milan is supposed by Petav. de Photin.
Damn. c. 1.
Petavius, to be called the same year that of Sardica ended. But Sirmond.
Diatr. de anno Syrm. Synodi.
Sirmondus thinks it very improbable there should be two Councils in one year;
and therefore he believes it rather to have been the year before: which is the
more probable Opinion. This Council of Milan was assembled on the occasion of
several Bishops there meeting to wait on the Emperor Constans in order to a
General Council, to put things in order in the Christian Church, which the
Arian Faction had so much disturbed. While they were there the four Eastern
Bishops arrived, with the long Confession made at Antioch, and desire the
Western Bishops concurrence with them in it. These express their dislike of any
New Confession of Faith, especially after the Nicene; but, since they were so
free of their Anathema's at the end of their Confession, they desired them to
make short Work of it, to anathematize the Arian Heresy; which they utterly
refused to do, and so discovered the Juggle of that seeming orthodox
Confession. This appears by Liberius his Epistle in the Collection of Church
Records in Hilar. Frag. op. p. 414.
Hilary's Fragments; in which he tells Constantius, that these four Bishops
were so far from anathematizing the Arian Heresy then in order to Peace, that
upon being pressed to do it, they rose up in a Rage and left the Council. From
hence the Western Bishops smelt their Design, however covered over with fair
Pretenses of Peace and Reconciliation. Which they farther discovered by their
own Legates, whom they sent into the East, who made this Offer to the Bishops
there, that they would accept of their own Terms of Accommodation, provided,
they would but condemn the Arian Heresy, which upon consultation they refused
to do. Upon these plain Discoveries, the Western Bishops could easily see
through all their Proposals for Peace; being only made with a Design to make
them betray the Faith. So that as long as Constans lived the Arian Faction
could make little or no impression on the Western Churches; but he being soon
after taken off by the Treachery of Magnentius, Captain of his Guards; and the
whole Empire falling to Constantius upon his Victory over Magnentius, a sudden
alteration here happened about these Matters. Valens and Vrsacius who had so
solemnly retracted their former unjust Sentence of Athanasius, now lay it upon
their fear of Constans, and appear in the Head of the Arian Faction, and with
them, as Se^. Sulpic. l. 2. p. 403.
Severus Sulpicius says, the two Pannonia's declared for Arianism. And now
they having an Emperor to their mind, resolve to lose no time, but carry
things on with a mighty violence, and banish all who would not subscribe to the
condemning Athanasius. For this stale Pretense must still be made use of to
deceive the People and to make way for Arianism; and yet this prevailed so far,
that, as Hilary says, in the Preface to his Fragments, the People wondered what
made so many Bishops go into Banishment, rather than condemn one; and the
Design of those Fragments is, to show that the Matter of Faith lay at the
bottom of all this violence against Athanasius. Which proceeded so far; that in
the Council called at Arles, Paulinus, Bishop of Triers, was for opposing the
condemning Athanasius, and desiring the Matters of Faith might first be
settled, deposed by the Council and banished by the Emperor. And so great then
was the Power of Fear upon them, that some of those very Persons, who had
cleared Athanasius at the Council of Sardica; did now subscribe to his
condemnation; among whom was Vincentius of Capua the Pope's own Legate; as
(...) ad ^onstant. p. 692.
Athanasius himself confesses. Not long after, Constantius summons another
Council at Milan; where, Socr. l. 2. c. 36.
Socrates and Soz. l. 4. c. 9.
Sozomen say, above three hundred Western Bishops were assembled: Here again
the Arian Faction made a great outcry about Athanasius; but Dionysius, Bishop
of Milan, and Eusebius of Vercelles, laid open the Design so far as to make the
Council be broken up and themselves to be banished by the Emperor's Edict.
While the Emperor continued at Milan, Liberius, Bishop of Rome, was summoned
to attend upon him there, in order to his Banishment, if he did not condemn
Athanasius; Theod. l. 2. c. 16.
Theodoret has preserved the most material passages that happened between
them; One whereof is, that if Constantius really designed the Peace of the
Church, the first thing was to be a general Subscription of the Nicene Faith;
after which other things would more easily be composed. But this would not be
hearkened to; and so Liberius was banished; but afterward he unworthily
complied not only to the Condemnation of Athanasius, but he professed his
consent to the Sirmian Creed, as appears by his Epistle in Hilar. in Fragm. p.
426.
Hilary's Fragments; for which Hilary bestows his Anathema's very freely upon
him. But it is of late pleaded on behalf of Liberius, that he subscribed only
to the first Sirmian Confession in the Council against Photinus which was
express against the Arian Heresy. Whereas Hilary (who, I think, knew this
matter somewhat better) says in so many Words, Haec est perfidia Ariana, i. e.
that what he subscribed, contained in it the Arian Heresy. But where does
Hilary or any one else say, that Liberius only subscribed the first Confession
of Sirmium, and upon that was restored? Nay, Soz. l. 4. ^. 15.
Sozomen says, that Constantius at first required him in terms to renounce the
Son's being Consubstantial to the Father: but afterward they joined together
the Confession against Paulus Samosatenus and Photinus, with that of Antioch at
the Dedication, and to these Liberius subscribed. So that he struck in wholly
with the Arian Faction which undermined the Authority of the Council of Nice,
and he betrayed the Faith, if he did not renounce it. The Eudoxians at Antioch,
he says, gave out that both Osius and Liberius had renounced the Nicene Faith,
and declared the Son to be unlike the Father: but Liberius cleared himself by
rejecting the Doctrine of the Anomaeans, i. e. the open and professed Arians*
and this Vrsacius, Valens and Germinius then at Sirmium were willing to accept
of, having a farther Design to carry on in these Parts, which was like to be
spoiled by the Anomaeans appearing so openly and unseasonably in the East. And
for the same Reason, they were willing to call in that which Hilary calls the
Blasphemy of Osius and Potamius, as being too open and giving Offense to the
Followers of Basilius of Ancyra in the East. For now the Emperor having
banished so many Bishops and struck so much terror into the rest, thought it a
convenient time to settle the Church Affairs to his mind in these Western
Parts, and to that end he summoned a General Council; but justly fearing the
Eastern and Western Bishops would no more agree now than they did before at
Sardica; he appoints the former to meet at Seleucia in Isauria, and the latter
at Ariminum; whose Number, says Sever. Suipic. l. 2.
Severus Sulpicius, came to above four hundred, and to the same purpose Soz. l.
4. c. 17.
Sozomen. When they were assembled, Valens and Vrsacius acquainted them with
the Emperor's good Intentions in calling them together, and as the only
Expedient for the Peace of the Church, they proposed, that all former
Confessions of Faith should be laid aside, as tending to dissension; and this
to be universally received, which they had brought with them from Sirmium;
where it was drawn up by several Bishops, and approved by the Emperor. Upon
the reading this New Confession of Faith, wherein the Son is said to be like
the Father, according the Scriptures, and the Name of Substance agreed to be
wholly laid aside: the Bishops at Ariminum appeared very much unsatisfied; and
declared, they were for keeping to the Nicene Faith without alteration; and
required of the Arian Party there present to subscribe it, before they
proceeded any farther; which they refusing to do, they forthwith Athanas. ad
Afric. p. 934.
excommunicated and deposed them, and protested against all Innovations in
matters of Faith. And of these Proceedings of theirs, they send an account by
several Legates of their own, wherein they express their Resolution to adhere
to the Nicene Faith, as the most effectual Socr. l. 2. c. 37.
Sozom. l. 4. c. 18.
Theod. l. 2. c. 19.
Bar against Arianism and other Heresies; and they add, that the removing of it
would open the Breach for Heresy to enter into the Church. They charge
Vrsacius and Valens with having once been Partakers of the Arian Heresy, and
on that account thrown out of the Church; but were received in again upon their
Submission and recantation; but now they say, in this Council of Ariminum, they
had made a fresh Attempt on the Faith of the Church, bringing in a Doctrine
full of Blasphemies; as it is in Socrates; but in Hilary's Fragments it is
only, that their Faith contained multa perversae Doctrinae; which shows that
they looked on the Sirmian Creed as dangerous and heretical. And in the same
Hilar. Frag. p. 459.
Fragments it appears by the Acts of the Council, that they proceeded against
Valens, Vrsacius, Germinius and Caius as Heretics and Introducers of Heresy;
and then made a solemn Protestation, that they would never recede from the
Nicene Faith.

Their ten Brethren whom they sent to Constantius to acquaint him with the
Proceedings of the Council, he would not admit to speak with him: For he was
informed beforehand by the Arian Party how things went in the Council, at which
he was extremely displeased, and resolved to mortify the Bishops, so as to
bring them to his Will at last. He Soz. l. 4. c. 19.
sends word to the Council, how much his thoughts were then taken up with his
Eastern Expedition, and that these matters required greater freedom of Mind to
examine them than he had at such a time; and so commands the Legates to wait at
Hadrianople till his Return. The Council perceived by this Message that his
Design was to weary them out, hoping at last, as Theod. l. 2. c. 19.
Theodoret expresses it, to bring them to consent to the demolishing that
Bulwark which kept Heresy out of the Church, i. e. the Authority of the
Council of Nice. To this smart Message the Council returned a resolute Reply,
That they would not recede from their former Decree; but humbly beg leave to
return to their Bishoprics before Winter; being put to great hardships in that
strait Place. This was to let the Emperor know how he might deal with them,
and he sends a charge to his Lieutenant, not to let them stir till they all
consented. And in the mean time effectual means were used with their Legates in
the East to bring them to terms; an account whereof we have in Hilar. Frag. p.
452.
Hilary's Fragments, which were to null all the former Proceedings, and to
receive those who were there deposed to Communion. Which being done, they were
sent back to decoy the rest of the Council; who at first were very stiff, but
by degrees they were so softened, that they yielded at last to the Emperor's
own Terms. The very Instrument of their Consent is extant in Hilary's
Fragments, p. 453.
wherein they declare their full Agreement to the laying aside the Terms of
Substance and Consubstantial in the Creed: i. e. to the voiding the Authority
of the Council of Nice, which was the thing all along aimed at by the Arian
Party. And Athan. ad Afric. p. 934.
Athanasius says, it was there declared unlawful to use the word Substance or
Hypostasis concerning God.

It is time now to consider, how far those Churches can be charged with
Arianism, whose Bishops were there present and consented to the Decrees of this
Council. It is a noted Saying of Hier. c. Lucif.
St. Jerome on this Occasion, that the World then groaned and wondered at its
being become Arian. Which a late Author says, is a passage quite worn out by
our Innovatours. Whom does he mean by these Innovatours? The Divines of the
Church of England, who from time to time have made use of it? Not to prove an
Apostasy of the Catholic Church from the true Faith; which no Man in his Wits
ever dreamt of, but from hence to overthrow the pretended Infallibility of
General Councils, or such as have been so called. And notwithstanding the
opprobrious Name of Innovatours (which, as we find in those of the Church of
Rome, often belongs to those who give it to others) it is very easy to prove,
that this one Instance of the Council of Ariminum does overthrow not only the
Pretense to the Infallibility of General Councils, but the absolute binding
Authority of any, till after due examination of the Reasons and Motives of
their Proceedings. For it is apparent by the whole Series of the Story, as I
have faithfully deduced it, that the whole Design of the Arian Party was to
overthrow the Authority of the Council of Nice; which they were never able to
compass by a General Council till this of Ariminum, agreeing as they declared
with the Eastern Bishops. So that here was a Consent both of the Eastern and
Western Churches, the Council of Ariminum being approved by Soz. l. 4. c. 24.
Socr. l. 4. c. 41.
Hier. ad Lucif.
a Council at Constantinople the same year. What is now to be said, when the
Bishops assembled in Council both in the Eastern and Western Churches did
effectually, as far as their Decrees went, overthrow the Nicene Council? If it
be said, that the Council of Ariminum decreed nothing positively against the
Nicene Faith; we are to consider, that the reversing the Decree of the Nicene
Council was in effect overthrowing the Faith thereby stablished; And so St.
Hierome says, Tunc Usiae Nomen abolitum est, tunc Nicenae Fidei damnatio
conclamata est. And then these words follow, Ingemuit totus Orbis and Arianum
se esse miratus est: and if nothing would ever be able to stop out the Arian
Heresy but the Nicene Faith, as is confessed; and this Council took away the
Authority of that Council, then it at least made way for the introducing
Heresy, and left all Men to be Heretics that had a mind to be so. And so St.
Hierome says, Valens and Vrsacius after the Council boasted, that they never
denied the Son to be a Creature, but to be like other Creatures: from whence
Ambros. Ep. 33. ad Valent.
St. Ambrose takes it for granted, that Christ's being a Creature did pass for
good Doctrine in the Council of Ariminum. But we are told, that St. Jerome
only complains of the World's being cheated and trepan'd into Arianism by the
Bishops being so weakly overreached and outwitted by an handful of Arians.
Does not St. Jerome plainly say, the Name of Substance was there laid aside,
and the Council of Nice condemned? And could this be a mere Cheat and Trepan to
those who were so much aware of it, as to declare at first, they would never
give way to it, because they saw the Danger of it; and to renew their
Protestations against it, after the Emperor's severe Message to them about it?
So that, whatever it was, it could be no Cheat or Trepan in those who made such
Decrees at first, deposed the Arian Bishops, sent such Messages to the Emperor
as they did. Which is a plain Demonstration that they saw and knew what they
did; and understood the Consequences of it. But they were frighted into this
Consent at last. I grant they were so. But what then becomes of the
Infallibility of Councils, if mere Fear can make so many Bishops in Council act
and declare against their Consciences? If in such Meetings, the Persons were
capable of being swayed by any particular bias, from asserting the Truth, what
Security can there be as to Men's Faith from their Authority, any farther than
we can be secure they were not influenced by any Temporal Hopes or Fears? So
that we are not barely to respect the Definitions of Councils, but to examine
the Motives by which they were acted in passing those Decrees; and if it
appear, they did act freely and sincerely, and deliver the general sense of the
Christian Church, from the beginning, as it was in the Case of the Nicene
Council, then a mighty regard ought to be showed to the Decrees of it; but if
Partiality, Interest, Fear, or any other secular Motive be found to sway them
in their Debates and Resolutions, then every particular Church is at liberty to
refuse their Decrees, and to adhere to those of more free and indifferent
Councils. And this was the Case here, as to the Council of Ariminum, if the
Church had been absolutely tied up to the Decrees of Councils, however past,
there had been an utter Impossibility of restoring the true Christian Faith;
for there was no such Council assembled to reverse the Decrees of it; but in
every Church, the banished Bishops being returned, not long after, upon the
death of Constantius, they took care to settle the true Faith in the Western
Churches, by lesser Assemblies of the several Bishops. A remarkable Instance
whereof appears in Hilar. Frag. p. 431.
Hilary's Fragments, where we find the Gallican Bishops met at Paris,
renouncing the Council of Ariminum, and embracing the Nicene Faith. The like we
have Reason to believe was done in the British Churches, because in Jovian's
time, Athanas. ad Jov. p. 246.
Athanasius particularly takes notice of the Britannick Churches, as adhering
to the Nicene Faith; and Hieron. ad. Marcel. ad Euagr.
St. Jerome, and Chrysostom. Tom. 3. p. 696. Tom. 6. p. 635. Tom. 8. p. 111.
St. Chrysostom, several times mention their agreeing with other Churches in
the true Faith. Which is a sufficient Argument to clear them from the
Imputation of Arianism, which did no otherwise lie upon them, than as they had
Bishops present in the Council of Ariminum.

For Sever. Sulpic. l. 2.
Severus Sulpicius, speaking of the Care Constantius took to provide Lodging
and Entertainment for the Bishops at Ariminum, out of the public Charge, he
faith, their Bishops refused to accept it, only three out of Britain, not
being able to maintain themselves, made use of the public allowance, rather
than be chargeable to their Brethren. Which, he says, he heard Gavidius their
Bishop blame them for; but he rather thinks it a commendation for them, in the
first place to have been so poor; and next, that they chose not to be
burdensome to their Brethren, but rather to live on the Emperor's charge.
This had been better said of any Place, than at the Council of Ariminum, where
the Emperor's kindness was a Snare to their Consciences; unless it be said,
That the Emperor took greater advantage by their bearing their own Charges, to
make them sooner grow weary of staying there; and that if the rest had followed
the Example of the Britains, the Emperor might have been weary before them.
But how came the British Bishops to be so poor above the rest, who were not
only able to live at their own Charges, but to supply their Brethren? Which
shows as much the plenty of the rest, as it does the poverty of the Britains.
What became of all the Endowments of the British Churches by King Lucius? The
British History published by Galfr. Mon. l. 2. c. 2.
Geffrey of Monmouth says, That King Lucius gave not only all the Lands which
belonged to the Heathen Temples to the Churches built by him; but added very
much to them with many Privileges. The same is said from him by most of our
Monkish Historians, whose Authority is no greater than Geffrey's, from whom
they derive their Information; only enlarging it as occasion serves; As Thomas
Rudburn does very particularly for the Church of Winchester, who makes the old
Lands of the Flamins to be twelve miles compass about the Town; And King Lucius
added, he says, to the New Church, all the Suburbs of the City, with the
Privilege of Dunwallo Molmutius, i. e. of a Sanctuary. Methinks then the
British Bishops, might have been in as good a condition as the rest of their
Brethren at Ariminum; unless their Lands were taken away in the Persecution of
Dioclesian, as Rudburn seems to intimate, which is all as true, as that Monks
continued there from Lucius to the second year of Dioclesian; which was a long
time before his Persecution began; or there were any such Monks in the World.
But it seems strange, that the British Bishops should be then under such
Poverty, when Liberius, in his Conference with Constantius, told him, The
Churches were able to bear the Charges of their Bishops in going to Councils,
without the public Carriages. For even before Constantine's time, they had
endowments besides the voluntary Oblations of the People, which in great
Churches were very considerable. But that there were certain Endowments
besides, appears both by the Edicts of Maximinus and Constantine. By that of
Maximinus, not only Houses, but the Lands which belonged to the Christians,
whether seized into the Eusebius. l. 9. c. 10.
Emperor's hands, or in the Possession of any City, or given or sold, are all
commanded to be restored. And that this does not relate to their private
Possessions, but to the public Revenue of their Churches, will appear by the
following Edict of Constantine and Licinius; which in the first place commands
all their Churches to be restored; and then is added, because the Christians
are known, not only to have those Places where they assemble, but others,
which likewise of Right belong to their Body, i. e. their Churches. For so the
Words of the Edict in Lact. de Mort. Persec. c. 48.
Lactantius are. (Sed alia etiam habuisse noscuntur ad jus corporis eorum, id
est, Ecclesiarum non hominum singulorum pertinentia) These are commanded to be
restored, without any delay or dispute. Which is again enforced by another
Edict of Constantine to Anulinus extant in Eusebius. l. 10. c. 5.
Eusebius with the former, and there are mentioned Houses, Gardens, or
whatsoever Possessions they had. Those who would have nothing more meant by
these Expressions, but some Fields and Gardens, rather than Lands, may consider
that when the Church had plentiful Possessions, they were called by no other
Names. So St. Ambros. de trad. Basilic.
Ambrose, Agri Ecclesiae solvunt Tributum.) And in another Law of Eusebius. vit.
Constant. l. 2. c. 39.
Constantine directed to the Provincials of Palestine to the same purpose, and
with as full and large Expressions; And howsoever they became alienated, the
present Possessours were to be satisfied with the mean Profits; But by all
means he commands a Restitution to be made, not only to particular Persons,
but to the Churches too. But if the Endowments of Churches were not then
considerable, what need so many Edicts for the Restoration of them? But
Constantine did not only take so much care to restore what the Churches had
before, but in case there were no Heirs at Law to the Martyrs and Confessors,
he bestows their Lands and Goods on the Churches. c. 36.
And after this, about four years before the Council of Nice, he published the
famous Constitution still extant in the C. Theod. 16. tit. 2. l. 4.
Theodosian Code; wherein a full Liberty is given to all sorts of Persons, to
leave what they thought fit by Will, to the Catholic Churches of Christians.
And this, as Gothofred says, was the true Donation of Constantine, for, by
means of this Law, Riches flowed into the Church, and especially at Rome. For
although, as D. 34. de rebus dubiis, l. 20. cum Senate.
Paulus says, by an Edict of M. Aurelius, the Collegia licita, Societies
allowed by the Laws, were capable of receiving Legacies and Estates, yet by the
Baldvin. de Leg. Constable. p. 23.
Laws of the Empire, the Christians were no legal Society to that purpose
before: And by a late Constitution of Dioclesian, Societies were excluded from
receiving Inheritances without a special Privilege; yet now, by this Law, all
those Bars being removed, Riches came in so fast in some Places, that there
needed new Constitutions to set bounds to so great liberality.

And the Privileges which Constantine gave to the C. Theod. 16. tie. 2. l. 2,
3, 6.
Clergy of exemption from public Services, drew so many to take Orders,
especially in Corporations, where the Services were very burdensome; That
Constantine was forced to publish Edicts to restrain the Numbers of them; which
were not intended, to hinder Persons of Estate and Quality from entering into
Orders, as some have suggested, but only such whose Estates were liable to the
public Services, as those who were Better. Diatr. 1. c. 10.
Decuriones origin, and not merely incolatu were; who bore all the Offices,
and did the public Duties, having Lands given them on purpose in the first
Settlement of Colonies which were called Praedia Reipublicae, as Pancirol. de
Magistr. Mancip. c. 1.
Pancirol observes; And therefore Constantine had reason to forbid such entering
into Orders to the Prejudice of the Government. And so the Title of the
Constitution is, De ordinatione Clericorum in Curiarum and Civitatum
praejudicium non facienda. Which was at that time a very just and reasonable
Constitution. But afterward Men of great Honor and Dignities came into the
Council, as not only St. Ambrose, at Milan, who was the Consular Governor
over Liguria, and Aemilia, and St. Paulinus, a Roman Senator, behind none in
Birth, says Ambros. Ep. 36.
St. Ambrose, having a great Estate in Aquitania, was made Priest at Barcelona,
and Bishop of Nola, but many Examples of this kind were in one Age in the
Gallican Church, as Vincent. Barralis, vit. Abbat. Lerim.
Honoratus, Bishop of Arles, of a Senatorian and Consular Family; St. Hilary,
of Arles, of a very Noble Family, and born to great Riches; Sidonius
Apollinaris, whose Father and Grandfather were Praefecti Praetorio Galliarum,
and himself married to the Daughter of the Emperor Avitus, made Praefectus
Vrbi, and Patricius, one of the greaest Persons and Wits in Gaul, was made Vit.
Sidomi Apoll.
Bishop of Auvergn; St. Constant. vit. German.
German, Bishop of Auxerre, was of Noble Parents, and Governor of a Province;
Saint Venant. Ford l. 4. c. 5.
Ruricius, Bishop of Limoges, descended from the Annician Family, as Venantius
Fortunatus says, which was of that Fame at Rome, that St. Hier. Ep. 8.
Hierome says, Very few of it missed the Consulship, and two Brothers of it
were Consuls together, as Claudian says, a thing never seen before or since.
Lign. Vitae in Praefat.
From this Family Arnoldus Wion proves that the Emperors of Germany are
descended. And of this same Family another Ruricius succeeded his Grandfather
in the same Bishopric.

But, besides that general Law which gave Permission to others to give
liberally to Churches, Constantine of his own Revenue allowed a proportion of
Corn to be given to the Clergy of the greater Cities; Of which Athanas. ad
solit. p. 829.
Athanasius speaks, when he says, Constantius took it away from him, and his
Clergy, and gave it to the Arians; But the Gift it self was continued all the
time of Constantius; Then it was taken away by Theod. l. 4. c. 4.
Julian, and in part restored by Jovian.

It is then no wonder that the Bishops at Ariminum refused the public
allowance, being maintained by the Revenues of their Churches; But it seems the
British Churches were not then in so Rich a condition to maintain their Bishops
so long abroad; For Constantine, drawing all the Wealth and Trade of the Empire
Eastward, for the greater Advancement of his New City; And this Country having
been so long harassed with Wars, and scarce recovered from the Effects of them;
(For the Scots and Picts had been very troublesome to them, both in the times
of Constans and Constantius; the Am. Marcel. l. 20. c. 1.
former came himself over into Britain to suppress them; and the latter sent
Lupicinus his General, who arrived at London about the time the Council of
Ariminum was dissolved) and therefore in a time of such Confusion in the
British Province, it is not strange that these Churches should not be in so
plentiful a condition as those which were the Seat of Trade and Government.
And Id. l. 27. c. 3.
Ammianus Marcellinus observes, that the Provincial Bishops lived in a much
meaner condition than those of the greater Cities, especially of Rome; And,
although a Heathen, he very much commends them for their Temperance, Humility
and Modesty.

But Arianism was not the only Heresy the British Churches were charged with;
For Gild. Ep. 1. 5.
Gildas from hence makes every following Heresy to find a passage hither;
among which the chief was Pelagianism. And Bed. l. 1. c. 10.
Bid does insinuate, That Pelagius, being a Britain, and, spreading his
Doctrine far and near, did corrupt these Churches with it; which some Bal. de
Scrip. l. 1. c. 38. Pits, de Script. p. 84. Jansen. de haer. Pelag. l. 1. p. 27.
late Writers, having taken up, have affirmed, that both Pelagius and
Coelestius, after their Repulse at Rome, came over into Britain, and dispersed
their Doctrine here. Leland. de Script. in Pelagio.
Leland sadly laments the Condition of the Church of God, that had no sooner
recovered it self from Arianism, but a new Heresy sprung up to disturb the
Peace, and infect the minds of Christians; But as Egypt brought forth the
Author of the former Heresy, so did Britain the Author of this, which took
his name from hence; And is supposed to have been Morgan in British, which by
his conversation at Rome he turned into Pelagius; And Aug. ep. 106. ad Paulin.
St. Augustine says, He was commonly called Pelagius Brito, to distinguish
him, as he supposed, from another Pelagius of Tarentum. Leland observes, that
some made him a Britain, as being born in that Bretagn which was called
Aremorica, on the Continent. But I do not find that it had then lost its name
of Aremorica. The first time we find the name of Britannia given to that
Country, is in the Council. Gal. Tom. 1. p. 126. A. D. 461.
Subscription of Mansuetus to the Council of Tours, where he is named Episcopus
Britannorum, after which time it was frequently called Britannia Cismarina,
Minor, Celtica, etc. Dempster. Hist. Eccles. l. 15. n. 1012.
Dempster (not a Jesuit, but a Lawyer) takes it very ill of Browerus, the
Jesuit, that he makes Pelagius a Scot: But not as Dempster understands him, For
Brower. in Venant. Fortun. l. 3. p. 69.
he explains himself, That he meant one that came out of Ireland, and therefore
was Scoticae Originis. For which he quotes Saint Jerome. But Archbishop De
Primord. p. 209.
Usher has observed, That he speaks there, not of Pelagius, but of Coelestius,
whom he makes the Cerberus to the Pluto, (according to his usual way of
complementing his Adversaries.) But both, he thinks, came out of the British
Islands. The late Garner. Dissert. 1. in Mar. Market. c. 5.
Publisher of Marius Mercator, endeavors to show, That our learned Primate was
herein mistaken; And that Saint Jerome does not speak of Coelestius, but of
Pelagius himself; And that by Pluto he means Ruffinus dead in Sicily three
years before St. Jerome 's writing these Words; But notwithstanding he did
still bark through Pelagius his Mouth, whom he compares to a great Scotch
Mastiff, from which Country he is derived in the Neighborhood of Britain. If
these Words relate only to Ruffinus and Pelagius, it is certain that St.
Jerome would have it believed, That Pelagius came out of Ireland. That which
makes it most probable, that he means them is, That in the Preface to his Hier.
in Ezekiel. l. 6. Praefat.
Commentaries on Ezekiel, he mentions the death of Ruffinus, and then says, he
hoped now he should be quiet to go on with his Commentaries on the Scriptures;
But not long after he complains, That there were others, which in his Room
opened their Mouths against him. In the beginning of his Commentaries on
Jeremiah, which he undertook after he had finished those on Ezekiel, he
mentions one who carped at his Commentaries on the Ephesians, and calls
Grunnius, ( i. e. Ruffinus) his Forerunner; And says, he was, Scotorum
pultibus praegravatus, made fat with Scotch Flummery. All this agrees very well
with Pelagius whom Oros. Apol. c. 27.
Grosius describes as a very corpulent Man; But there is one thing which makes
the former Opinion not improbable, which is, That St. Jerome himself takes so
much notice, that Pelagius at that time wrote little or nothing about these
matters, but Coelestius was the Man who appeared, especially in the two main
Points about Original Sin, and the Possibility of Perfection: Hier. ad Ctesiph.
p. 256. To. 2.
In his Epistle to Ctesiphon, he says, That the Author of the Sect still held
his Peace, and his Disciples wrote for him; Magistrorum silentia profert rabies
Discipulorum. Methinks Rabies agrees well enough with Cerberus, and here it is
meant of the Disciple Coelestius, and not of Pelagius; Which Expression answers
very well to the other, Mutus Magister latrat per Albinum Canem. And he speaks
as if he designed to draw him from his closeness and retirement; Which does far
better agree to the mute Person, than to the barking Cerberus. There is then no
Improbability, that Coelestius and Pelagius, may be both meant; But if any
other Country has a mind to challenge Coelestius to themselves, I think, they
may be allowed to put in their Claim notwithstanding these Expressions. But it
is very unworthy in the same Garner. ib. c. 4. p. 134.
Author, to prove Pelagius to have been an Irish Scot, and at the same time to
charge his Vices on the British Nation. He cannot deny, That Pelagius had a
great natural sharpness of Wit, since St. Augustine and his other Adversaries
allow it; But then he says, it was fierce and contentious, after the fashion
of his Country; and which he could not shake off by his long Conversation at
Rome. He grants that his Exhortations to Piety were vehement and earnest, but
written in an uncouth and imperious Style, more Gentis, according to the humor
of his Nation. But why must the British Nation be reproached for the particular
faults of Pelagius? It is a very ill way of confuting Pelagius, to attribute
Men's Vices and Virtues to their Countries; And is contrary both to the
discretion of a Philosopher, and to the Grace of a Christian; Pelagius might
have had the same temper if he had been so happy as to have been born in a
Neighbor Country; And I do not see how his Way of writing does affect the
British Churches; Where the Christians might be very wise and humble,
notwithstanding this severe and unjust Character of the British Nation; Which
(as all National Reproaches) is not so great a Reproach to any as to him that
gives it. But the greatest Adversaries to Pelagius, did not give him so ill a
Character; Saint Aug. de Peccat. Meritis and rem. l. 3. c. 1, and 3. de Gestis
Palaest. c. 22. Epist. 106.
Augustine says, he had the esteem of a very Pious man, and of being a
Christian of no mean rank. Was this Pro more Gentis too? And of his Learning
and Eloquence St. Augustine gives sufficient Testimony, in his Epistle to
Juliana, the Mother of Demetrias, to whom Pelagius wrote an Epistle highly
magnified for the Wit and Elegance of it. But Garnerius will not allow that
Pelagius was able to write it himself, without the assistance of his Disciples
Coelestius and Annianus. But why should this be so hard a thing for a Man whom
he confesses to have had a great deal of Natural Wit, and Aug. de Peccat. Orig.
c. 8.21.
St. Augustine says, He lived long, yea, very long in Rome, and kept the best
Company there? Could a Britain never attain to so much Purity of the Roman
Language as to write an Epistle to the Envy of those meliore solo prognatorum,
as he speaks, who were born in more happy soils? What mean such unbecoming
reflections, on the Country of Pelagius; when himself confesses he had so much
Mother Wit? And one would think of the two, that is the better soil which
produces more Wit than Words.

Our Monkish Historians make Pelagius not only a Monk at Bangor, but the Abbat
there; So the Author of the Polychronicon, and John of Tinmouth; Leland takes
it from them; To whom Bale adds, That he was made Bishop in the East; But
without any Authority. Leland de Scrip.
Leland says, That he went over into Aremorica, to visit his Countrymen who
were newly settled there, being carried over by Maximus. Gildas seems to imply,
That Maximus was originally a Britain, when he calls him Germen plantationis
suae; But Bid takes no notice at all of his Country. The Saxon Annals, Fabius
Ethelwerd, Huntingdon, and others say, he was born in Britain; But Zosim. l. 4.
Zosimus affirms, That he was a Spaniard, and took it ill that he was no more
preferred, when his Countreyman Theodosius was made Emperor; However this were,
it is certain that he was declared Emperor in Britain, and that he went out of
Britain with the Forces here; And that Gratian's Legions revolted to him; upon
which he fled, and was killed; And that Maximus, being unsatisfied with
Gratian's share of the Empire, went into Italy against Valentinian, and was
after four years destroyed at Aquileia; But in all the Proceedings of Maximus,
I see no ground for the settling the Colonies of Britains in Aremorica. For he
landed at the Mouth of the Rhine, says Zosimus, and was well received by the
Roman Legions there abouts. What occasion then was there for his coming against
the Aremorici: Or, if he had driven them out, had he nothing to do with his
Soldiers, but to people Countries with them? But we find the Aremorici in
quiet possession of their Country after this time. So that we see no reason at
all for Pelagius to go to his Countrymen in Aremorica: From thence Leland
carries him to all the Places of Learning in Gaul; As there were many at that
time; And while he was thus passing up and down, he met with Julianus of
Campania, whose Wit and Learning recommended him to Pelagius. But this cannot
hold, For Pelagius lived a long time in Rome before his Heresy was discovered;
After the Discovery of it, many years passed before Julian appeared in it; And
in the last Work of Julian. l. 3. n. 171.
St. Augustine, just before his death, He calls Julian a young man; Although he
had been a Bishop in Campania, at a Place called Aeculanum, thence his Title
was Episcopus Eclanensis. The Town stood, faith Holsten. in Cluver. Ital. p.
1203.
Holstenius, near Mirabella; But since its Destruction, the Sea was removed to
Frigento, and the Bishop called Episcopus Frequentinus. If Pelagius, passing
through Gaul, made so long a Stay in Rome, as St. Augustine says, before he
was suspected of Heresy, there is no probability at all in the Monkish
Tradition of his being Abbat of Bangor. And there is not much more of Bangor's
being so famous a Monastery at that time, or of Pelagius his being a Monk
therein: For the British Monasteries were no elder than St. Patrick's time, as
I may have occasion to show afterward. And even at Rome it self the Monastic
state had not been long known there, being brought out of the East by
Athanasius and Eusebius of Vercelles. And in Pelagius his time, those were
called Monks at Rome, who had no Office in the Church, but yet retired from the
common Emploiments of the World for Sacred Studies and Devotion; and where any
Number of these lived together, that was called a Monastery; Such was the
Monasterium Pinneti, mentioned by Ruffin. Op. p. 9.
Ruffinus, not far from Rome; Probably a House of Melania; whither they were
wont to retire in times of greater Devotion. Garnerius confesses that Pelagius
was no otherwise a Monk, than as those were then called so who led stricter
Lives than others within their own Houses; of which Number he reckons
Pammachius, Paulinus, Melania, Demetrias and others at that time, to whom
Pelagius was well known, and much esteemed by them, before his Heresy was
discovered. The chief Emploiment of these Persons, next to their Devotions, was
the Study of the Scriptures, as appears by St. Jerome's Epistles; And some
grave Person made it his business to instruct his Disciples therein: So St.
Jerome did at Bethlehem; So Ruffinus did Pammachius, Melania and her Family;
And so Pelagius did at Rome, where he had Scholars whom he brought up, as
appears both by Coelestius, and Julianus whom he instructed very young, and by
Timasius and Jacobus. From this Emploiment it was that he wrote his short
Commentaries on St. Paul's Epistles, and his Epistles to Melania and Demetrias;
But after he was accused of Heresy, his time was spent in Vindication of
himself, in Africa, Asia and Rome; and after many Bandyings to and fro from
want of understanding the meaning of Pelagius, he was, besides the Councils in
Africa, at last condemned in a Council at Antioch, under Theodotus, as Marius
Merc. in Comment. c. 3.
Marius Mercator shows; And from thence forward, he spent the Remainder of his
Life in Obscurity, dying somewhere in the East.

From whence it appears, that there is no probability, that Pelagius and
Coelestius should come back to Britain, to spread their Heresy here. For he
complained of his Age, when he set forth his Commentaries at Rome, about Anno
Domini 404. And he was certainly in the East at the Council of Diospolis, Anno
Domini 415. from whence he sent Coelestius to Rome, but abode there himself
with Albina, Pinianus and Melania; And wrote Letters to clear himself first to
Innocentius, and then to Zosimus, who was so well satisfied therewith, that he
wrote a sharp Letter to the African Bishops (who had condemned him) in his
Vindication; severely taxing his Accusers; Although there were Heresy in that
Confession which Coelestius tendered to Zosimus, and which he esteemed Orthodox.
And Aug. de Peccat. Origin. c. 6. ad Bonifac. l. 2. c. 3.
St. Augustine, is fain to make use of all his Wit to bring the Pope off from
approving of Heresy. Noris Histor. Pelag. l. 1. c. 12.
Henr. de Noris confesses that he was circumvented by the Pelagians. But it
was in a matter of Fact, says Jansen. Hist. Pelag. p. 28.
Jansenius; What, when he denied Original Sin in that very Paper he delivered
in to Zosimus! Cappell. de Appellat. c. 2. 28.
Cappellus thinks it better to deny Zosimus his Letter; but therein he is
condemned by Petav. Dogm. Theol. Tom. 3. de Haer. Pelag. c. 1. 15. Garner.
Diss. 2. de Synodis in Causa Pelag. Natal. Alex. Saec. 5. p. 169.
Petavius and others who have lately written about this matter, and say, that
Cappellus his Opinion is singular and false, being contradicted by the
Testimonies of Marius Mercator, Facundus Hermianensis and St. Augustine: And
one of them blames the Pope for too great easiness; and the other for too great
hastiness, and does think, that the business of Appeals, then contested by the
African Bishops stuck in the Pope's stomach, which made him willing to take
this Occasion to rebuke them. But the African Fathers proceeding smartly
against the Pelagians, notwithstanding Zosimus his Letter, made him to comply
too, in condemning both Coelestius and Pelagius, notwithstanding his former
Epistle. So that upon the whole matter Pelagius and Coelestius, by their own
natural Wit, had, in all probability been too hard for a whole Succession of
Popes, Innocentius, Zosimus and Xystus, had not the African Fathers interposed,
and freely told them what the true Doctrine of the Church was. For Aug. ad
Bonif. l. 2. c. 3, 4.
they offered to subscribe Innocentius his Epistles; Zosimus was very well
satisfied, and thought them peevish and unreasonable that were not; Aug. Ep.
104.
Xystus was their Patron at Rome, before the African Bishops appeared so
resolute in the Cause. And had it not been for them; for all that I can see,
Pelagianism had spread with the Approbation of the Roman See.

But notwithstanding it was at last condemned at Rome, and Imperial
Constitutions published against it; Yet it found a Way over into the British
Churches, by the means of one Agricola, the Son of Severianus, a Pelagian
Bishop, as Prosper. in Chron. Florent. and Diony. Cons.
Prosper informs us. It appears by the Rescript of Council. Gall. Tom. 1. p. 54.
Valentinian III. Anno Dom. 425. There were several Pelagian Bishops in Gaul.
And the severe Execution of the Edict there was probably the occasion of this
Agricola's coming over hither and spreading that Doctrine here. Bal. de Scrip.
Brit. Cent. 1. n. 4
Bale and Pits de Scr. Aet. 5. n. 34*
Pits run into many Mistakes about this Agricola. (1.) They call him Leporius
Agricola, and then confound the two Stories of Leporius and Agricola together:
For after his Preaching Pelagianism, they mention his Conversion and
Recantation by St. Augustine's means. Now there was one Leporius of whom
Cassian. de incarn. l. 1. c. 4.
Cassian and Gennad. de Script. c. 59.
Gennadius speak, that was a Disciple of Pelagius, who was driven out of Gaul
by Proculus, Bishop of Marseilles, and Cylinnius of Forum Julii, and so went
into Africa, where being convinced by St. Augustine, he published his
Recantation extant in Council. Gall. To. 1. p. 51.
Sirmondus his Gallican Councils, and elsewhere; And Aurelius, Augustinus and
Florentius, gave an account of it to the Bishops of Provence; But there is no
Pelagian error there mentioned, but something of Nestorianism: And by Leontius
succeeding Cylinnius in his See, before Anno Dom. 420. It follows, that
Leporius recanted before the Pelagian Heresy was spread into these Parts; And
therefore this Leporius could have nothing to do in it: Besides, it seems
probable that this Leporius, after his Recantation, continued in Africa; For
one Leporius, a Presbyter, is Aug. Ep. 110.
mentioned in the Election of Eradius in the Sea of Hippo, Anno Dom. 426. and
Aug. Sermon. 50. de diversis*
St. Augustine says, he was a Stranger. (2.) Bale makes him the Son of Severus
Sulpicius, a Pelagian Priest in Britain: But Prosper and Bid say, he was the
Son of Severianus, a Bishop. It is true Gennad. de Script. c. 19.
Gennadius charges Severus Sulpicius with Pelagianism in his old Age; But if he
died, as the Gall. Christia. To. 1. p. 147.
Sammarthani say, Anno Dom. 410. Pelagianism was not known to the World then;
And Apud Bolland. Acta Sanct. Ian. 29.
Guibertus Abbas frees him from the imputation of it: But this Severus never
was a Bishop, and therefore could not be the Father of Agricola. (3.) They both
make him a Monk of Banghor; which had need to have been a large Place to
receive all that they send thither. (4.) They say he did write against one
Timotheus, a British Heretic; two Books, says Bale; but one, says Pits;
Which arises from a Mistake of Sigebert's Copy, where Britannia is put for
Bithynia, as our Learned Archbishop Usher has observed: And Pits seemed to
have some mistrust of this, for he does not affirm his spreading his Doctrine
in Britain as the other does.

But Pelagianism was not spread here by Agricola alone; for Prosper. c. Coll.
Prosper, speaking of Celestine's care to root it out of Britain, he says, It
had taken possession here by the Enemies of God's Grace, Solum suae originis
occupantes, returning to the Soil from whence they sprang: So that there were
more than one, and those Britains who, being infected with that Heresy
themselves, did return hither to infect others. From hence Jansen. Hist. Pelag.
l. 1.
some have thought that Coelestius at least, if not Pelagius, did come hither,
being driven out of Italy by Celestine; as Prosper relates: which Jansenius
thought not improbable: But it now appears by the Commonitorium of Marius
Mercator delivered to Theodosius in the Consulship of Dionysius and Florentius,
i. e. Anno Domini 429. That Coelestius did return into the East, and was
banished from Constantinople by the Emperor's Edict; From whence it follows,
That Coelestius came not into these Parts; nor do we read what became of him
after the Council of Ephesus, wherein he was condemned by 275 Bishops, as the
same Marius Mercator shows. Whose account of these things, being a Person of
that time, and active in this Cause, has cleared several things, which were
much in the dark before.

But whosoever they were who brought Pelagianism hither, it appears by Prosper
that they were Britains, and had too great Success here by the spreading of
Pelagianism. But care was taken by the sounder part to get it out; and
therefore, distrusting their own sufficiency to deal with such subtle
Adversaries, they send for help, says Bed. l. 1. c. 17.
Bid, to the Bishops of Gaul; Who called a great Council, and unanimously
chose Germanus and Lupus, two Bishops of great Reputation, to come over on
purpose. They readily undertook the Employment, and performed it with great
Success, as it is at large related by Constant. vit. Germani.
Constantius and Bid. It is affirmed by a late Garner. diss. 2. c. 21.
Author, That the Acts of the Council which sent Germanus and Lupus are still
in being, with the Instructions given them at their coming hither; If ever they
come to light, they will very much clear this intricate part of the History of
the British Churches. For there is now fifteen years difference among Writers
about the time of their coming. Prosper says it was, Anno Dom. 429. But
Sigebert, as Sirmond. Not. in Council. Gall. Tom. 1. p. 86.
Sirmondus observes, places it, Anno Dom. 446. To which he thinks Bede's
Relation does best agree; And Sirmondus himself puts it that year Aetius III.
and Symmachus were Consuls, in the 21 of Valentinian III. and 5 of Leo I. If
this Computation of the time be true, then it is impossible that St. German
should be sent hither by Celestine, as Prosper affirms; For Xystus was Pope
after Celestine, Anno Dom. 432. And it is incredible, That if he had been sent
hither by Commission from him, Neither Constantius in his Life of St. German,
who lived so near that time; Nor the Author of the Life of St. Lupus
Trecensis; Nor Bid should take any notice of it. But they all mention the
particular Application made by the Britains to the Gallican Bishops for their
Assistance; and their meeting in Council on purpose, and choosing, and
dispatching St. German and Lupus, without any intimation of Celestine. Baron.
A. D. 429. n. 9.
Baronius and Jansen. Hist. Pelag. l. 1.
Jansenius go about to reconcile these things, by saying, Either that the Pope
approved him whom the Council chose; Or that the Pope left it to the Council to
choose; But neither of these will hold. For Prosper says, That Celestine sent
him, Vice sua, in his own Name and stead; Which is very different from
appointing a Council to choose one to be sent: And Constantius says, That
immediately they went; Which shows they did not stay for the Pope's
Approbation. And withal, the kindness was not so great at that time between
Celestine and the Gallican Bishops, That either he should send to them to
appoint; or they should wait for his direction in this matter. For Prosper and
Hilary had made great Complaints of them at Rome, as favoring Pelagianism too
much. And, among these, Hilary, Bishop of Arles, was the chief. For Prosper.
Ep. ad Aug. inter Aug. Epist. 225.
Prosper complains of him particularly in his Epistle to St. Augustine, which
was sent to him, Anno Dom. 428, or 429. as the late Editors of St. Augustine's
Epistles conclude; So that Hilary was Bishop of Arles at that time before St.
Augustine's death, Anno Dom. 430. After his death, the same Prosper and another
Hilary join in a Complaint to Celestine, and went to Rome on purpose; as
appears by his Council. Gall. Tom. 1. p. 59.
Answer, who therein reproves the Bishops of Gaul, for giving too much
countenance to some Presbyters who vented new Doctrines, viz. Cassian and his
Followers; and who reflected on the memory of St. Augustine. It is not
therefore any ways probable that the Gallican Bishops, having been complained
of so long before St. Augustine's death, that he wrote a Book in answer to them
before he died, should be entrusted by Celestine to choose Persons to go over
into Britain to confute Pelagianism, when he suspected them, from Prosper's
information, to be too much inclined to it. It seems therefore most likely that
St. German and Lupus were sent by a Council of Gallican Bishops, without the
Pope's concurrence, since Constantius, who certainly knew all the circumstances
of this matter, says nothing at all of it. And this St. German was so great
with Hilary, Bishop of Arles, that he joined with him in the deposing
Chelidonius (for which Pope Leo was so incensed against him) as Honoratus
affirms in his Life: which was no new acquaintance, but of so long standing,
that if Hilary of Arles were at that time suspected at Rome, St. German would
harldly have been pitched upon by Celestine for his Legate into Britain.

I wonder how Baron. A. D. 426. n. 20.
Baronius and Voss. Hist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 19.
Vossius came to mistake the Hilary who joined with Prosper, for Hilary Bishop
of Arles; Since this Hilary never was a Disciple of St. Augustine's, as the
other was; And he was certainly Bishop of Arles, after St. Augustine's death,
when Celestine mentions the other Hilary as present with Prosper at Rome, when
they informed against the Bishops of Gaul. For Honoratus succeeded Patroclus in
the Sea of Arles; Prosper says, that Patroclus was killed, Anno Dom. 426.
Honoratus continued but two years in the Sea: And so Hilary might well be newly
Bishop of Arles, when Prosper and the other Hilary sent to St. Augustine, as
plainly appears by their Epistle; So that Semipelagianism did not, as
Archbishop Usser. de Prim. p. 344.
Usher supposes, then begin in Gaul, when St. Germanus and Lupus were here
employed against Pelagianism, but was begun before, and embraced by those very
Bishops who sent them hither; Who for their own Vindication appeared zealous
against Pelagianism, and were therefore willing to embrace this opportunity to
send two of their Number into Britain. And it is the more strange, that so
Learned a Person should fall into this mistake, when he had so fully proved, as
Holsten. Not. in Martyrol. Romans 345.
Holstenius confesses, That Hilary, Bishop of Arles, did favor the
Semipelagians; and it is certain that Prosper did complain of him to St.
Augustine (if the Copies be not corrupt, as he shows they are not) before St.
German's voyage into Britain. For St. Augustine received the Complaint time
enough to write his two Books of Predestination and Perseverance, in answer to
it, after his Book of Retractations, and before his elaborate Work against
Julian, and therefore they are probably supposed to be written, Anno Dom. 428.
If we then yield that St. German's coming hither was when Prosper says, Anno
Dom. 429. yet we find that Semipelagianism had prevailed among the Gallican
Bishops before that time, or else there was no cause at all for Prosper's
Complaint.

And to make it appear yet more improbable, that Celestine should send St.
Germanus and St. Lupus; We are to consider, that Lupus was Brother to
Vincentius Lirinensis, and were both of the same Society. Which Vincentius was
a great Stickler in the Semipelagian Cause, as all the Members of that Society
that were considerable were engaged in it; And when the Pope wrote so smartly
against the Accusers of St. Augustine's Doctrine, it is very unlikely he should
pitch upon one of that Society most suspected for it, and whose Brother
appeared so early and so warmly in it; Not only by the Objections under his
Name in Prosper; But by the whole Design of his Commonitorium; Which, if I
mistake not, was levelled against those who went about to broach a new Doctrine
about Predestination, as they said, under St. Augustine's name. And they who
carefully read over that Discourse, and consider the drift of it, will find I
am not mistaken: But Baron. Not. ad Martyrol. 24. Maii.
Baronius is, when he would clear the Author of the Commonitorium from
favoring those who impugned St. Augustine's Doctrine about Predestination;
Which was quite another thing from favoring Pelagianism, which Cassianus,
Faustus, and this Vincentius all professed to abhor.

But what shall be said to Prosper, who affirms that Celestine sent St. German?
(1.) Prosper. c. Cass. ad fin.
Prosper, in his undoubted Work against Cassian, does not affirm it. For there
he only says, That Celestine took care to free Britain from Pelagianism. Why
is not the Mission of St. German here mentioned, when it had been most
seasonable against the chief of the Semipelagians? No doubt Prosper would not
have lost this Opportunity of magnifying Celestine's care, by sending Bishops
of so great Reputation. Especially, if these Bishops were not Semipelagians;
But if so, why does he not mention them in that Work as such, when he complains
how much Semipelagianism did prevail, and even among their Bishops? (2.) The
Prosper published by Pithaeus never mentions it, which he thought to be the
genuine Chronicon of Prosper. Rer. Franc. l. 3. p. 102.
Hadrianus Valescus concludes one or the other not to be genuine; since they
differ in point of time, and it is not probable the same Man would write two
several Books about the same matter with such Diversity. Doctr. Tem. c. 12. p.
212.
Bucherins thinks it impossible the same Person should write both; yet both
pass under the Name of Tyro Prosper; and so he says the ancient MS. of it,
which he had (which was like that Pontac. App. ad Chron. p. 28.
Pontacus calls Lodunense) had that Name in the Title of it; But Pontacus his
had the Title of Prosper Aquitanus, where he is said to be Episcopus Regini,
and great debate has been, whether he was Bishop of Regium Lepidum in Italy;
or of Regium (Riez) in Gaul; But Sirmond. Not. ad Sidon. Apoll. l. 8. ep. 15.
Sirmondus proves, he was neither one, nor the other; By the Testimonies of
Gennadius, Victorius, Marcellinus, and others; And by Faustus immediately
succeeding Maximus in that See: And so leaving no room for Prosper between
them. But there was a Prosper, Bishop of Orleans at that time; and another
Prosper, Bishop of Regium Lepidum in Italy, as Ughell. Ital. Sacr. Tom. 2. p.
259.
Vghellus shows, which might occasion the Mistake; But, besides these, Sirmond.
Hist. Praedest. c. 5.
Sirmondus tells us, there was another Prosper in Gaul who wrote a Chronicon
too, and ended at the same time with Tyro Prosper; with this difference, that
the one was only an Appendix to St. Jerome, the other an entire Chronicon, as
Gennadius expresses it. Which is supposed to be that published by Labbe out of
several MSS. But Annal. Eccles. Franc. A.D. 455. n. 7.433. n. 18.
those who have carefully examined it have found such a difference in the
Computation used in the several parts of it, That they cannot think them
written by the same Author; And therefore conclude that published by Pithaeus
to be the genuine Chronicon of Prosper, as far as it reaches; And that the
first Part, which should make it entire, is not yet discovered. So that it
remains uncertain whether this Passage be in the true Prosper or not. Our
Usser. de Prim. p. 429.
Learned Primate of Armagh was of opinion, That the Chronicon published by
Pithaeus was not written by Prosper, but by Gennadius; because Boston of Bury
says, That Gennadius added a Chronicon to St. Jerome. And, I confess, the
Passage in it about the Heresy of the Praedestinati does better agree with
Gennadius than Prosper; And for that Reason Sirmondus has found out another
Prosper. But the President Maug. Hist. and Chronica Dissert. p. 519.
Mauguin says, it was counterfeited by the Semipelagians in Prosper 's name;
And that there is no mention in any Authors of another Prosper who published a
Chronicon, which ended at the time the true Prosper did, viz. Anno Domini 444.
Sirmondus says, All the ancient Copies had the Name of Prosper upon it. And it
is so quoted by Sigebert; But if he had a mind to pass for the other Prosper,
he would never have differed so materially as he does from him. So that this
whole matter is very dark and obscure yet. (3.) Suppose it be granted that
Prosper wrote so, yet there is greater Reason to believe Constantius than
Prosper in this matter. For Constantius was not only living in that Age; but a
Person of great Reputation, as appears by Sidonius Apollinaris his Epistles to
him; and one that wrote with great fidelity, says Baron. A.D. 429. n. 9.
Baronius; And therefore it cannot be supposed that he should not expressly set
down by whom St. German was sent into Britain. Besides, Constantius is not
alone; but the Author of the Life of St. Lupus gives the same account; and so
does Bid, (with whom Paulus Diaconus, Frecalphus, Erricus and Ado Viennensis
agree) And he places their coming after the Reign of Theodosius; And therefore
it was impossible that Celestine should send them.

St. Germanus and Lupus being thus employed by the Bishops of Gaul, in a solemn
Conference at Matt. West. A. D. 446.
Verulam they disputed with the Pelagians; and had so great Success therein;
and by their Preaching up and down in many places; That they left the Britains
well settled, as they supposed, in the ancient Faith. But no sooner were they
returned, but some of the Pelagians got ground again; which occasioned another
Message to St. German, who then took with him Bed. l. 1. c. 21.
Severus, Bishop of Triers; And then they prevailed so far as to procure the
banishment of these Heretical Teachers, according to the Edict of Valentinian;
And from thence forward Bid observes that the British Churches continued sound
and orthodox.

But here it will be proper to consider how justly two British Bishops have
been charged with Pelagianism; the one is Fastidius, and the other Faustus.

As to Fastidius, Leland. de Script.
Leland confesses, that his memory had been lost, but for the mention which
Gennadius makes of him; Genesis Catalog.
who says of him, that he was Britannorum Episcopus; And wrote a Book to one
Fatalis, De vita beata, wherein the Doctrine was very sound and good. Trith. de
Script.
Trithemius highly commends him, as a man of great Wit and Eloquence, an
excellent Preacher, and very pious Man. Bal. Cent. 1. n. 41.
Bale says, that, being made Bishop, he preached over all Britain, and was, as
is reported, Metropolitan of London: What Bale speaks upon report; Pit. de
Scrip. At. 5. n. 30.
Pits affirms with confidence, that he was Archbishop of London. Usser. de
Prim. p. 317.
Archbishop Usher thinks, they had no other ground for this, but a different
reading in Gennadius, Britanniarum Episcopus. From whence they concluded, He
must be Archbishop of London, that being, as they supposed, the Metropolis of
Britain; But he rather inclines to the opinion of Berterius; p. 97.
That York was then the Metropolis of Britain; Not only because it was a Roman
Colony, but because the Praetorium and Emperor's Palace was there. But these
Arguments are not sufficient to overthrow London's being the chief Metropolis
of the Roman times. For every Province had its Metropolis; And the superiority
of one Metropolis above another depended on the Residence of the Roman
Governor, the Vicarius Britanniarum. I grant that, in the time of the Wars
with the Northern Britains, York was the chief Seat of the Emperor when he was
here, as in the times of Severus and Constantius; but that was for the
convenience of attending the Wars, and being near to give Directions and send
Supplies. But the Pre-eminence of Places in the Roman Account did depend more
upon the Civil than the Military Officers; These being more uncertain than the
other, and where the Supreme Court of Judicature was, that was the chief
Metropolis, and that was where the Supreme Governor of those Provinces had his
residence. Thus every Province had a President in the Metropolis; but where
there was a Superior Officer over these Presidents, as the Vicarius
Britanniarum was over the five Provinces, the Place of his residence was the
highest Metropolis, because the Presidents Courts were in Subordination to his,
whether they were consular or presidial; and therefore the solemn Conventus out
of the Provinces were appointed there. Of these things we have a clear instance
in the Case of Arles, where by the Constitution of Vit. Sirmond. Not. ad Sidon.
Apollin. p. 245.
Honorius, the seven Provinces, over which that was the Metropolis, were to
have an annual Assembly there, where the chief Magistrate resided; and the
Reasons there given are, the great convenience of that City being upon the
River Rhosn, both for other business and trading into all parts. The same
Reasons will hold to make London the chief Metropolis in the Roman times,
because of its admirable situation for Trade and Commerce, and the opportunity
of sending into, or receiving Dispatches from the foreign Provinces and the
Emperor's Court where ever it was. So that I see no reason to question
London's being the chief Metropolis among the Romans. The Argument from York's
being a Colony signifies nothing after Antoninus gave the Jus Civitatis to the
whole Empire; and London was a Colony before York, (as I may show elsewhere)
and of a higher nature, when it was called Am. Marcel. l. 27.8.28.3.
Augusta, which shows that it was then the Imperial City of Britain, that name
being given to no other City in Britain besides. And it is observed by the
learned Velser. Rer. Vindel. l. 5.
Marc. Velserus, That those Cities which had the Title of Augusta conferred
upon them, were the Capita Gentium, the chief Metropoles of the Provinces; And
since by the general Rule of the Church, the Ecclesiastical Government did
follow the Civil, There is no reason to question, but if Fastidius were then
Bishop of London, he was the chief Metropolitan over the Churches of Britain.

But whether Fastidius were Metropolitan, or only a British Bishop, his
Doctrine is of late charged to be inclinable to Pelagianism. For Holstenius
found in ancient MS. the Book Fastidius wrote De Vita Christiana with his name
to it, and so published it; but it is not directed ad Fatalem, but to a certain
Widow. In this Book a late Hen. de Noris, Hist. Pelag. l. 1. c. 19.
Augustinian has discovered, as he thinks, some Tincture of Pelagianism; but
to any candid Reader his Exceptions will appear very frivolous, and there is so
much of true Primitive Christianity in the rest of it, as makes good the
Character which Gennadius and Trithemius give of him. Out of which Book, and no
great one, Bale has made four, one De Vita Christiana, a second De Doctrina
Spiritus, a third De Viduitate servanda, a fourth, Admonitiones Piae. Pits
keeps the same number, but lest he should seem to take all out of Bale, he
alters the Title of one of them; And because Gennadius says his Doctrine was
Deo digna, therefore Pits, very artificially, makes the Title of his second
Book to be De Doctrina Deo digna vel spirituali. Boston of Bury makes him the
Author of two Books, by mistaking Gennadius; but as far as we can find, there
is but one exstant. Dempster. Hist. Eccles. l. 6. n. 530.
Dempster has found Fastidius to have been born upon the Mountains of the
Western parts of Scotland, and he makes him Author of a fifth Book called
Chronicon Scotorum, which is a Strain beyond Pits. He possitively affirms that
he lived An. Dom. 440. Trithemius says, about An. Dom. 420.

As to Faustus, his Case is much harder. That he was originally a Britain I
find not denied by any; For although Facund. c. Mocian. p. 561.
Facundus calls him a Gaul, yet that was because of his being a Bishop so long
there, as Sirmondus observes; he being Ortu Britannus, habitaculo Regiensis, as
Alc. Avit. Ep. 4. p. 35.
Alcimus Avitus says, in his Epistle to Gundobadus, King of the Burgundians,
to whom, he says, Faustus was known. In his Canis. Antiquae Lect. To. 5. p.
435.
Epistles to Ruricius, Faustus speaks of his living in a State of Banishment,
and the Comforts he found in it; This our Learned De Primord. p. 439.
Primate understood of his living out of his own Country; But Noris Hist.
Pelag. l. 2. c. 16.
Hen. de Noris, of a Banishment by Euaricus an Arian King then in Gaul, which
he supposes he underwent for writing against the Arians. If he had produced any
Testimony of such Banishment, there might have been Reason to have understood
his Expression so; But since there is none, and his Words are general as to his
Country; I see no cause to take them in any other sense. For Men do not use to
call that their Country where they live as Strangers, and he speaks of the
kindness of Ruricius so to him, that he did Patriam in peregrinatione facere,
which cannot well bear any other sense, than that he made up the want of his
own Country to him. Sirmond. Not. ad Facund. p. 562.
Sirmondus grants he was a Britain, but he adds, he was one of those Britains
who dwelt upon the Loir, i. e. in the parts of Aremorica. There is no question,
but in the time of Faustus, there were great numbers of Britains there; for
Jornand. c. 45.
Jornandes says, That Riothamus, their King or General, went with 12000
Britains against Euricus, King of the Visigoths. Which Riothamus Sidon. Apoll.
l. 3. ep. 9.
Sidonius Apollinaris writes to, and mentions the Britains with him; But it may
be justly a question, whether there were any Colonies of Britains on the
Continent, before Faustus his birth; For Faustus was made Abbat of Lerins,
before the Saxons came first into Britain; For he was Abbat when St. Caprasius
died, as the Author of his Life affirms, which was about Anno Domini 430. But
their coming was not till Anno Domini 449. and it will be hard to make out any
Settlement of the Britains on the Loir before. It is then most probable that
Faustus went at first out of Britain into Gaul, where he attained to a
wonderful Reputation both for Piety and Learning. He was worshipped as a
Saint, says Hist. Pelag. l. 2. p. 297.
Noris, in the Church of Riez, and his Name was preserved in the Calendar of
the Gallican Church. Molanus was the first who durst adventure to strike out
his name; Baronius followed him, but upon admonition restored it, as Acta
Sanct. ad 16 Jan.
Bollandus observes, who likewise takes notice, that he was called a Saint by
Cl. Robertus, by Ferrarius, and by Pet. Galesinius, in his Martyrology, who
adds, that his Books are piously and learnedly written, and that Miracles are
said to be wrought by him. It is certain, he was a Person in mighty esteem in
his own time, as appears by the Passages of Sidon. Apoll. Ep. 3, 9. l. 9. and
in Euchar.
Sidonius Apollinaris, of Ruric. Epist. l. 1. ep. 2.
Ruricius, and others, concerning both his Eloquence, Learning and Piety. Of
whom Sidonius Apollinaris gives that excellent Character, that he had learnt to
speak better than he was taught, and to live better than he spoke: He was
Bishop of Riez, Anno Domini 462. for at that time he was joined with Auxanius
in determining the Controversy between Leontius of Arles and Mamertus of
Vienna. But nothing can more manifest the esteem he was then in among the
Gallican Bishops, than that in the Council of Arles he was pitched upon as the
fittest Person to draw up their sense in the great Points then so much agitated
about Predestination and Grace, as appears by his Preface to Leontius. At this
Council thirty Bishops were present, and there Lucidus presented his
Recantation of the Errors he held about Predestination, and after this Faustus
wrote his Books of Grace and Free Will, to which, he says, another Council at
Lions caused some things to be added. In these Books it is thought that, under
a Pretense of confuting those Errors, he sets himself against St. Augustine's
Doctrine, as seems clear by one Expression in his first Book; That if it be
true, that some are predestined to Life, and others to Destruction, ut quidam
Sanctorum dixit, non judicandi nascimur; sed judicati: But these words may
refer to what follows, as well as to what went before, As a certain holy Man
has said, We are not born to be judged, but we are judged before we are born.
According to which Doctrine, says Faustus, There can be no Equity in the day
of Judgment.

It has been a great Question among some Learned Men, whether there were any
Persons who drew ill Consequences from Saint Augustine's Doctrine, and were
therefore opposed by Faustus and others, or whether it were the mere Doctrine
of St. Augustine that was so opposed by them, and urged with those Consequences
as following from it. I see no Reason to deny, that the Semipelagians did
charge the Followers of St. Augustine with the same things which are made the
Opinions of those who are called the Predestinatian Heretics by Sigebert,
Gennadius, Hincmarus, and others. But yet that there were certain Persons who
did own such bad Consequences as the overthrowing the Liberty of Man's Will and
the Necessity of our Endeavors, will appear from these two Reasons. (1.) St.
Augustine's Doctrine was so misunderstood by some in his Life time, as appears
by the Controversy amongst the Adrumetine Monks. The Case was this, Florus,
one of that Society, going to Vzala, a City near Vtica, between Hippo and
Carthage, where Euodius was then Bishop, a Friend of St. Augustine's, there met
with Valent. ad Aug. Ep. 216.
St. Augustine's large Epistle to Sixtus against the Pelagians, which being
sent home, and Florus himself going to Carthage, before his return they were
fallen into great Heats upon the Occasion of that Epistle. Some of them, as
Aug. ad Valent. Epist. 214.
St. Augustine himself says, did so preach up the Grace of God, as to deny
Free Will, and consequently to say, That God in the day of Judgment would not
render to men according to their Works; Others said, That our Free Will was
assisted by the Grace of God, that we may know and do the things that are
right; That the Lord, when he comes to render to every Man according to their
Works; may find our Works good, which he has prepared that we may walk in
them. And they, says he, who judge thus do judge rightly. Therefore those who
thought otherwise did mistake his Doctrine; For, as he says, If there be no
Grace, there can be no Salvation; If there be no Free Will, there can be no day
of Judgment. To what purpose is all this, if some of these did not so
misunderstand his Doctrine as to overthrow all Liberty of Will in Mankind? And
so Apud Sirmond. Hist. Praedest. c. 1.
Euodius, in his Answer to those Adrumetine Monks shows, That there is still
Free Will in us, but wounded by the Fall, and only recoverable by the Grace of
Christ. Jansen. Hist. Pelag. l. 1. p. 27.
Jansenius grants that they did misunderstand St. Augustine 's Doctrine,
thinking that Free Will was wholly destroyed by it; And that no Man ought to be
reproved when he does amiss, but that others ought to pray that he may have
Grace to do better. l. 7. c. 1.
But the President Praedest. Fab. confut. c. 1.
Mauguin will not allow this; For he says, That St. Augustine was at first
falsely informed of the state of the Controversy among them by Cresconius and
Felix; But after Florus his coming he found they were Semipelagians who
misunderstood his Doctrine. But to what purpose then does De Corrept. and Great.
c. 1.
St. Augustine take such pains to prove even in the Book he wrote after the
coming of Florus, That there is Free Will still left in Mankind? Liberum itaque
arbitrium confitendum nos est habere, and ad malum, and ad bonum faciendum. Not
so as to exclude the necessity of Divine Grace, as he proves at large, but yet
in such a manner as to show its consistency with Divine Commands, c. 4.14, 15,
16.
and the just Reproof and Punishment of those who do amiss. Which shows
plainly, That he thought there were some still who misinterpreted his Doctrine,
not barely to object against it, but to make ill use of it. Therefore Hist.
Pelag. l. 2. p. 281.
Noris had no Reason to conclude that the Error of the Adrumetine Monks was
Semipelagianism. (2.) It appears evidently from the Case of Lucidus, and the
Councils of Arles and Lions. I grant that the Objections mentioned by Prosper
and Hilary were made by the Semipelagians, and not by any Predestinatian
Heretics at that time in Gaul; and therein Hist. Praedest. c. 2, 3.
Sirmondus was certainly mistaken, as he was likewise, when he says, that the
Epistle of Celestine was against the latter, and not against the former. But it
appears by Faustus his Epistle to Lucidus that there were some who did so
assert Predestination as to make all Men's Endeavors vain and useless; And this
dangerous Error he renounced in his Recantation delivered to the Council of
Arles. Praedest. Fab. confut. c. 7.
Mauguin is very hard put to it, when he says, That all these things were the
mere invention of Faustus; whom he makes to be Countreyman with Pelagius and
Coelestius, and to have sucked in the Poison of Pelagianism with his Milk. He
grants that he was famous for his Wit, Eloquence and Philosophy; But especially
for a profound cunning, which Isid. de viru illustr. c. 14.
Isidore mentions in him; From whence he endeavors to prove by many Arguments,
That these Councils and Epistles were all forged by Faustus. But he is so far
from persuading Learned Men to be of his Mind, That Hist. Pelag. l. 2. c. 15.
Noris himself confesses he can never assent to it; And although it be looked
on as part of the cunning of Faustus, That he designed to convey his Books so
privately to his Countrymen the Britains, as appears by the Epistle of
Sidonius Apollinaris to him, yet it is utterly incredible that he should forge
two Councils, and set down the Names of several Bishops as present in them,
with whom Sidonius Apollinaris was particularly acquainted, and yet he not
discover the Cheat and Imposture. But the Jansenists yield, that both those
Councils were held about Anno Domini 475. But they say, that the Bishops were
partly Semipelagians, partly deceived by Faustus who was so; And Noris does not
deny, that there were other Persons who were then charged with those Opinions
which Lucidus held. But, he says, they were not many nor considerable enough
to make a Sect; And that they did not willingly yield those Consequences. But
not knowing how to answer the Semipelagians, they were forced to assert them;
Which their Adversaries therefore charged them with as their own Opinions.
Which seems no improbable Account of those called Predestinatians. It cannot be
denied, that Faustus his Books were severely censured after his death, not
only by the Scythian Monks at Constantinople, among whom Joh. Maxentius was
the chief; but by the African Bishops who were then Exiles in Sardinia, by whom
Fulgentius was employed to write against them. But Possessor, one of the
African exiled Bishops, being then at Constantinople, and finding great Heats
about Faustus his Books, sends to Pope Hormisdas, to know his Judgment about
them; Which he did at the request of Vitalianus and Justinianus two of the
greatest Men in the Emperor's Court. He returns a cautious Answer as to
Faustus; Which, by the way, shows how little Credit is to be given to the
Decree of Gelasius about Apocryphal Books, for therein Faustus his Books are
condemned. But if this had been done by Gelasius, is it probable that
Hormisdas, his Successor, would have stuck so much at it as Maxentius says
that he did? But he refers them for the sense of the Church to St. Augustine,
and Prosper, and Hilary; And the Definitions of his Predecessors. Maxentius
rails against this Answer, as unsatisfactory and next to heretical, and sets
St. Augustine's Sayings against those of Faustus. Afterward, Caesarius, Bishop
of Arles, not only wrote against Faustus his Doctrine, but by his means
chiefly it was condemned in the Second Council of Orange: Which asserted the
Necessity of Preventing Grace; The denying whereof was the main Error charged
on Faustus, not so much as to good Works (for Jansen. Hist. Pelag. l. 8.
Jansenius has at large proved, That the Semipelagians did yield the Necessity
of Internal Grace as to them;) but Faustus and Cassian and Gennadius denied it
as to Faith or Good Inclinations.

But to return to St. Germanus and his Companions into Britain; If we give
Credit to our Antiquaries, they did other Kindnesses to the British Churches
besides the confuting Pelagianism, whereof two are most considerable. (1.) The
Institution of Schools of Learning among the Britains. (2.) The Introduction of
the Gallican Liturgy into the use of these Churches.

(1.) As to Schools of Learning; none were more famous among the Britains than
those of Dubricius and Iltutus, who are both said to have been the Disciples of
St. German. The Anonymous Author of the Chronicle in Collect. vol. 2. p. 42.
Leland says, that St. Germanus and Lupus, having rooted out Pelagianism,
consecrated Bishops in several parts of Britain, and among the rest they placed
a Cathedral at Landaff, and made Dubricius Archbishop, who disposed of his
Disciples to several Churches; He made Daniel Bishop of Bangor, and sent
Iltutus to a Place from him called Lan Iltut, or the Church of Iltutus. Brit.
p. 498.
Camden says, to this day it is called Lantuit, where the Foundations of many
Houses are still to be seen; Near the Place called Bovium in the Itinerary now
Boverton. But there is another Place near Nidum or Neath, whose name comes very
near it Llanylted. The v. Monast. Anglic. vol. 3. p. 188.
old Register of Landaff, after it has mentioned the frequent Messages the
Britains sent to the neighbor Bishops of Gaul for assistence against the
Pelagians, and the coming of Germanus and Lupus sent by them, it adds, that
they consecrated Bishops in many Places, and made Dubricius Archbishop over all
the Britains, Dextralis partis Britanniae, Of the right hand part of Britain.
With which John of Tinmouth and Capgrave agree. What this Right hand part of
Britain was at the time of the Consecration of Dubricius is not so easy to
understand; Archbishop De Primord. p. 80.
Usher takes it for South Wales; it being the custom of the Britains to call
the South the Right hand side; so Asserius Menevensis calls Sussex the Region
of the Right hand Saxons. But it is observable that De Gestis Alfred. ad A. D.
884.
Asserius there makes Demetia, or South Wales, to be but a part of what he
calls Dextralis pars Britanniae. For when he says in general, That all the
Country of the Right hand of Britain submitted to King Alfred, he then
instanceth particularly in Hemeid King of Demetia, and Houil, and other Kings
of Guent, by which North Wales is as much understood as South Wales is by the
other. And therefore I rather think Dubricius was made Archbishop over all the
Britains in those parts; For Polychron. l. 1. c. 52.
Ranulphus Cestrensis says, The Bishop of Caerleon had seven suffragan Bishops
under him: And Matt. Westminster. A. D. 490, and 507.
Matt. Westminster says, That Dubricius was made Archbishop of Caerleon,
(although he might have a Seat at Landaff, as the Register of that Church
affirms, by the Gift of Mouricus.) But it appears that he had then
Archiepiscopal Power; And possibly, upon the Disturbance of those times, the Sea might for a time be removed to Landaff; From whence it was again removed by
St. David to the Town bearing his Name. But the Bishops of Landaff who
succeeded were so unsatisfied with it; That the Register of that Church says,
That from Oudoceus the second, from Dubricius, (for he succeeded Teliaus in
that See) They chose rather to be consecrated by the Archbishops of Canterbury,
than by their own Metropolitan of St. David 's, as appears by the Protestation
made by the Bishop of Landaff to Calixtus II. in the Council of Rhemes, Anno
Dom. 1119. But, I confess, it does not seem very probable that a British Bishop
should go for Consecration to Augustine the Monk or his Successors; For the
British Bishops did all look on them as Intruders; And if any should have done
it, how would they have been received by the British Churches at that time? It
is therefore far more probable, either that they went over to the British
Archbishop, at Dol in Britannie, or that there was a Succession preserved for
some time of the Archbishops of London among the Britains, after the retirement
of Theonus and Thadiocus, the two other Metropolitans of London and York, who,
as Matt. Westminster. A. D. 586.
Matt. Westminster says, did withdraw when their Churches were destroyed by
the Saxons, with many of their Clergy into Wales; where as long as that
Succession continued they might exercise some parts of their Function, leaving
the main to the Archbisbop of Caerleon, to whom of right it belonged; And
Ranulphus says; That Province extended as far as the Severn, and so took in
Chester, Hereford and Worcester; But before Dubricius was so much advanced, the
Authors of his Life speak of the great number of Scholars which flocked to him
from all parts of Britain; Not the Rude and Vulgar only, but Persons of
greatest Reputation, among whom they name St. Theliaus, Samson, Aidanus, and
many others. Two Places they mention, where he received and instructed his
Disciples, one at Hentlan, on the River Wye, where they say he had a Thousand
Students with him, whom he brought up in humane and divine Literature. And the
other was at Moch-rhos, where he had a Place for Study and Devotion.

Iltutus by Vincent. Spec. Hist. l. 21. c. 105.
Vincentius, and the Biblioth. Floriac. p. 468.
Author of the Life of Samson is said positively to have been a Disciple of
St. Germanus; And the Vit. Gild. Ib. c. 3.
Author of the Life of Gildas says, That in the School of Iltutus many
Noblemens Sons were brought up, among whom he reckons as the chief Samson,
afterward Archbishop of the Britains, viz. at Dol in Britannie; Paulus, Bishop
of the Oxismii, the most Northern of the Aremorici (which Bishopric is since
divided into three, Treguier, St. Pol de Leon and St. Brieu) and Gildas, called
Sapiens, of whom afterward: Leland to these adds David and Paulinus: And
says, his School flourished like an University among the Britains. Act. Sanct.
Feb. 9. Vit. S. Teliaj. Com. praev. 1. n. 3.
Bollandus and Henschenius make a very probable Conjecture, That when St.
German came into Britain, and found the decay of Learning to have been the
great occasion of the spreading of Pelagianism, he appointed Dubricius and
Iltutus to undertake the Education of the British Clergy; And that by these
means, as Bede says, these Churches continued afterward pure and free from
this Heresy. Which was a wise and seasonable Institution; And hereby we see
the British Churches were not defective in Learning in their lowest Condition,
when the Britains were forced to leave their Habitations, and to fly into
Corners.

Of which, besides these Nurseries of Dubricius and Iltutus, we have a famous
Instance in the Monastery of Banchor, which even Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
Bid says, was furnished with learned Men at the coming of Augustine into
England. This Banchor was distant but ten or twelve miles from Chester, as
Polychr. l. 4. c. 31.
Ranulphus Cestrensis and Bradshaw, in his Life of St. Werburg, say. Collect.
vol. 2. p. 63.
Leland in his Itinerary describes the Place as standing in a Valley, Itiner.
p. 308.
and having the compass of a walled Town, and two Gates remaining half a mile
distant from each other. Camd. Brit. p. 457.
Camden supposes it to be the Bomium in Antoninus, being ten miles distant from
Deva, i. e. Chester. That which was most observable in this British Monastery
was, that Men there were bred up to Learning and Devotion together, and so more
resembling our Colleges than the Egyptian Monasteries, where men were brought
up to Ignorance and Labor as much as to Devotion. Wherein the Benedictines
followed them according to their first Institution: For St. Benedict himself
not only despised Learning, as the Writers of his Life say; But he takes no
care about it in the Rule of his Order; And when Bonifac. Epist. 141.
Boniface gave an account to Zachary of his setting up a Benedictine Monastery
at Fulda, he sets the Monks out by their Abstinence and hard Labor with their
own Hands, without Servants. It is true that Chron. Hirs. A. D. 890.
Trithemius speaks much of the Schools of Learning in the Benedictine
Monasteries, but not before Anno Dom. 890. which was after the Capit. Anseg. l.
1. c. 71. l. 5. t. 95.
Constitutions of Charles the great, who appointed Schools for instructing
Youth both in Monasteries and Cathedrals; Which gave the first Countenance and
Encouragement to Learning at that time; And Lup. Epist. 1.
Lupus Ferrariensis says, That the reviving of Learning was then owing to him:
But although these Constitutions extended no farther than to Grammar Schools;
yet from hence, those who were inclined to Learning in the Monasteries applied
themselves more to it; and by degrees gained a great Reputation by it, as
Rabanus Maurus at Fulda, whose esteem drew Lupus thither, and many others;
Which example prevailing, and the Monks finding such resort to increase their
Wealth as well as Reputation, as Orig. Monast. l. 2. c. 1.
Aub. Miraeus observes; from that time the Monasteries were desirous to have
some of their Number to be eminent for Learning, which had been before so much
neglected by them, as wholly besides the Rule of their Order. But the
Monasteries of the Western Churches before St. Benedict's time, such as that of
St. Ambrose, St. Eusebius of Vercelles, St. Augustine in Africa, St. Martin in
Gaul, were chiefly intended as Nurseries to the Church, and the Persons
educated therein, were brought up with a design to do the Church service
afterward. This method of Education taking so much in other Churches (as in
Gaul, where so many eminent Bishops were taken out of the Monastery of Lerins,
according to the Rule of Caprasius,) St. German who was so well acquainted with
St. Honoratus, St. Hilary of Arles, and others of that Education, might
probably be the first Instrument of setting up this way in the British
Churches. And to confirm this, St. Patrick, who carried over this Monastic
Education into Ireland, spent many years under the Discipline of St. German, as
Prob. vit. Patr. apud Bed. To. 3.
Probus and Jocel. vit. Patr. c. 22.
Jocelin the Writers of his Life do agree. And those who have written of St.
German have mentioned him as one of his Disciples, as Biblioth. MSS. Labb. Tom.
1. p. 537.
Erricus of Auxerre. And De Gestis Pont. l. 2. p. 145.
William of Malmsbury says, he was not only a Disciple of Saint German, but
being made Bishop by Celestine, he was sent by St. German into Ireland. And in
the Irish Monasteries there were Schools like those of Dubricius and Iltutus
for the breeding of Youth in Learning. For therein, as Rouse an Antiquary in
Edward IV. time says, The Masters did teach, secundum formam Studiorum
antiquorum, according to the ancient method of Learning; Which our learned De
Primora. p. 910.
Primate understands of joining the Studies of humane Learning with divine; of
which he produces an Instance in a MS. of the Library of Worcester; Being a
Commentary of an Irish Bishop upon Martianus Capella's Astrology which he read
to his Disciples in the Monastery of St. Remigius in Down. And the Author of
the Opus Tripartitum of the Life of St. Patrick says, That he set up at Armagh
Summum studium literale. Which in the Language of that time is the same with an
University, only this is a Law-term, and implies a Legal Society incorporated
for the Profession of Learning, which the Choppin. de Dom^n. Franc. l. 3. tit.
27. Limn. Jus publ. l. 8.
Civilians tell us, None but the Supreme Authority of a Nation can do. In this
School at Armagh, Caradoc of Lancarvan in his Life of Gildas says, That he was
a Professor, Studium regens and praedicans in Civitate Ardmaca. But the
Anonymous Author of his Life published out of an ancient MS. by Joh. a Bosco
Biblioth. Flor. vit. Gild. c. 10.
says, That Gildas, going over into Ireland in the time of Ammeric, i. e.
about Anno Dom. 566. found both Religion and Learning much decayed there, and
that he built many Churches and Monasteries, and brought up many Noble Men's
Sons therein. In his younger days, he says, Id. c. 6.
Gildas went to Iren, and visited the Schools of many Learned Men, and enquired
their Opinions in Philosophical and Divine matters.

Some question has been made by Learned Men, what this Author means by Iren;
The most easy and obvious sense is to take it for Ireland, where there were so
many Schools of Learning in the Monasteries of St. Patrick's foundation; And
Iris is used by Diod. Sic. l. 5.
Diodorus Siculus for Ireland: And De Mund. p. 64. ed. Vulcanil.
Ierne in the Book de Mundo, and Apuleius; and the Inhabitants are called
Irenses by Ord. Vital. l. 10. ad A. D. 109^.
Ordericus Vitalis; and the Country is called Erin by the Inhabitants, as
Archbishop Hist. Gottesch. c. 9.
Usher observes; But the marginal Note of Joh. a; Bosco has led some quite out
of their way in seeking for this Place; Which is, That Iren was an University
then in Great Britain; And from hence they have proceeded to prove our famous
University of Oxford to be meant by it; Antiq. Acad. Oxon. Apol. l. 2. n. 84.

Hist. Acad. Oxon. l. 1. p. 9, 10, 11.


First, Iren, say they, was mistaken for Icen, and that for Ychen, and Ychen
for Rydychen, and Rydychen in the British Tongue signifies the same with Vadum
Boum, and that is the same with Oxford. I cannot think Learned Men write these
things any otherwise, than as Sports of Wit, which are intended for the
diversion, and not for the conviction of the Reader. As likewise, when the same
Authors produce out of Constantius his Life of St. German, Regionis illius
Vniversitas, to prove the Antiquity of their University. But that Passage in
the Copy of Asserius, printed by Camden is more material, viz. That St. German
staid half a year in Oxford, and approved the Orders made by Gildas, Melkin,
Nennius and Kentigern. I know what Heats have been about this Passage among
very Learned Men. For my part, I see no cause to mistrust the sincerity of
Archbishop Parker in the Edition of his very ancient Copy, where this Passage
was not to be found; And I do not question Camden's Fidelity in publishing
Asserius out of some other Copy; But it had been fair to have given an Account
whence he had it, and for what Reasons he inserted it in another Edition of
Asserius; and why he preferred the Savilian Copy before the other. But I cannot
but wonder that these Learned Men have taken no more notice of the
Inconsistency of this Passage with the History of those times. For these
Persons all lived a considerable time after St. German, as it were easy to
prove, if it were worth the pains. For Gildas was not born till at least forty
four years were past after St. German's death: which thus appears; He says he
was born the year of the Victory of Aurelius Ambrosius over the Saxons at the
Mons Badonicus, which was forty four years after they came hither, Anno Dom.
449. And by comparing St. German's Embassy to Valentinian at Ravenna, where he
died, we shall find that St. German was dead the year before the Saxons
arrival, Anno Dom. 448. As the Gall. Christian. To. 2. p. 267.
Samarthani show. But against this there is a considerable Objection from what
Bed. l. 1. c. 20.
Bid says, That the Saxons and Picts joined together after St. Germans
coming, which occasioned the Victory by singing Alleluiah according to St.
German 's direction; and it is so much stronger, in that the very same
Expressions are in Constantius. But this may be easily solved by those that
consider the frequent Incursions the Saxons made on the Britains before they
were sent for over, as appears by the Comes Litoris Saxonici per Britanniam,
appointed to secure the Coasts from the Saxons; And that Gildas therefore
wonders the Britains should send for the Saxons, of whom they were so much
afraid before; And when the Roman Forces were withdrawn, no doubt they did more
boldly and frequently disturb them.

Besides, Constant. vit. German. l. 2. c. ult.
Constantius says in St. German's Life, that he succeeded St. Amator in his
See, and continued therein thirty years and twenty five days. But St. Amator
died Anno Dom. 418. as our Learned Usser. de Prim. p. 382.
Primate has proved, because the Calends of May on which he died were that
year, as Constantius says, the fourth day of the Week, which agrees to 418. If
it be said, That this Passage of Asserius is meant of an Elder Gildas, called
Gildas Albanius whose Life the same excellent Antiquary supposes to be written
by Caradoc of Lancarvan; I answer, that when he comes to fix the times in his
Chronological Index, he does overthrow his own Supposition: For Caradoc, by his
own confession, makes Gildas contemporary with King Arthur, and he is said by
him to be born Anno Dom. 493. And therefore Caradoc's Gildas can be no elder
than the Gildas Badonicus. Although therefore the want of skill may make
Caradoc set his Gildas elder than he ought to have done; yet whosoever will
compare that Life published by Joh. a Bosco with the other by Caradoc, will
find that they were designed for the same Person. And therefore Leland, with
far more judgment, mentions but one Gildas; but Bale and Pits make more; but it
is their Vanity to multiply Authors as well as Books. St. Kentigern was
baptized as soon as he was born, by Seruanus, one of the Disciples of Palladius,
whose Mission had the same date with the first coming of St. Germanus and
Lupus; And therefore it is not very probable that St. German should see the
Orders of Gildas and Kentigern, much less those of Melkin and Nennius, whose
Ages fall so far short of the others.

But although St. German's being at Oxford cannot be proved by such obscure and
incoherent Passages as this; yet I doubt not but by the Evidence already
produced, he did take care to advance Learning and Piety in the British
Churches wheresoever he came: Both which were falling very much to decay upon
the irruption of the barbarous Nations. While the Roman Empire flourished there
was care taken for the encouragement of Learning, especially in greater Cities.
At Rome by the Constitution of Valentinian we may see the Orders then made for
Regulation of Students there; as for entering their Names who came thither out
of the several Provinces by the Magister Census, with the Testimonials from the
Governors of Provinces, of the Place of their Birth and Quality, who then were
to declare what Studies they designed to follow, and an account was to be given
of their Lodgings: And particular Officers were appointed called Censuales to
make an Inspection into their Lives, that they did avoid all Clubs called there
Consociations, or frequent appearing at the Sports, or affecting unseasonable
and public Entertainments. If any were found faulty, they were to be
chastised, and sent away home, but none were permitted to stay after twenty at
Rome, and an account of these things was to be taken monthly, and given in to
the Praefectus Vrbis, and returned to the Emperor every year; as appears by
the C. Theod. l. 14. tit. 9. L. 1. A. D. 370.
Constitution it self in the Theodosian Code. By which we find, That Rome it
self was then the chief University of the Empire, to which Students resorted
from all the Provinces, and the Emperor thought it not below his Cognizance to
have notice sent him of the Numbers, Qualities and Behaviors of the Students;
But lest the Splendor and Vanities of Rome should tempt them to forsake the
Service of their Country, they were not permitted to stay there after twenty
years of Age; For then, not having the Difficulties of the Language to conquer
which they were used to while Children, at fifteen they were thought fit to be
instructed in other Studies, and five or six years was all the time this Law
allowed them to prosecute them under the Masters at Rome. Where, besides an
infinite number of private Teachers in that vast City, there were public
Professors appointed, who had their Schools within the Area of the Capitol,
which were called Auditoria publica, as we may reasonably infer from the C.
Theod. l. 15. tit. 1. l. 53.
Constitution of Theodosius; where the Exedrae of the Portico's of the Capitol
at Constantinople are appointed to make Auditoria for the public Professors
there: And Constantinople followed the Pattern at Rome. These Exedrae were, as
Vitruv. Antiq. l. 5. c. 2.
Vitruvius describes them, Places of Capacity within the Portico's, with Seats
round, in which the Rhetoricians, and others, were wont to discourse; Or,
according to De Orator. l. 3.
Cicero, they were Cellae ad colloquendum aut meridiandum, such as Crassus had
at Tusculum, and Cotta at Rome, where those great Men were wont to sit for
their diversion and discourse with each other: And the Greek Glossary renders
Exedra, a School; such a one Geogr. l. 17.
Strabo describes in the Musaeum at Alexandria, which consisted of a Walk, an
Exedra, and a great House where the Learned Men did all live and eat together
upon a public Allowance, under the Government of a Person appointed by their
Kings, and after by the Caesar's. This Musaeum was adjoining to the Palace, and
near it was the famous Library of Ptolemy Philadelphus: For that was in
Bruchio, as Epiph. de Ponder.
Epiphanius says, and was distinct from the other Library afterward in
Serapeo mentioned by Am. Marcell. l. 22. c. 15.
Ammianus Marcellinus. This Bruchion was a Region of the City, as Epiphanius
says; And some will have its Name from the (...), the Granary of Alexandria
being there, and by contraction it was called (...). So the MS. of Eusebius. l. 7.
c. 32.
Eusebius mentioned by Valesius has it. But Salmas. in Spartian. p. 52.
Salmasius would have the name taken from the Stores laid in there for the
College of Learned Men in the Musaeum, which Ammianus Marcellinus calls
Praestantium hominum domicilium; And this (...), he says, is the same with
(...), and Eustathius says, The one signified the same at Alexandria, which
the other did at Athens; And, he observes, that it was accounted a great favor
in the Emperors to grant any Learned Man (...), i. e. a Fellowship in the
College. So Athen. l. 15.
Athenaeus mentions it as the kindness of Hadrian to Pancrates the Poet, for
flattering Antinous; That he gave him a Right of Commons in the Musaeum: As he
did likewise to Dionysius the Sophist, and Polemon, and Nicetas Smyrnaeus, as
Philostratus in their Lives relates. Aristonicus wrote the History of the
Musaeum at Alexandria, and of the Philosophers and Learned Men who flourished
in it, and the manner of their living there; Out of whom Cod. 161.
Photius says that Sopater borrowed part of the twelfth Book of his
Miscellanies. But this Book being lost, as likewise those of Callimachus and
Alcidamas, no particular account can be given of the History of it. Only in
general we know, that the most Learned Persons in their several Professions
were invited thither, and had there all the Encouragements which Freedom from
Care, good Air, (for the Musaeum was celebrated for that by Strabo) suitable
Society and an excellent Library could give them; the Keepers whereof were men
of the greatest Reputation, as Demetrius Phalereus, Zenodotus Ephesius,
Eratosthenes, Apollonius, Aristonymus, Chaeremon, Dionysius, etc. In this
Musaeum it was that Spartian. in Hadrian.
Hadrian proposed Questions to the Professors; and in it were (...)
instituted, or Sports by Philadelphus to Apollo and the Muses, after the
finishing his Library and Rewards given to those that overcame in the Opinions
of the five Judges appointed for that purpose. From hence came the Commissiones
and Agones Sacri among the Romans, at which Judges were appointed; Among whom
Horat. de Art Poet. and in Satyr.
Horace mentions Metius Tarpa for one. These were sometimes performed in the
Capitol, as De Capitol. c. 35.
Rycquius observes, i. e. in the Portico's where the Exedrae were like those at
Constantinople. What the Number of public Professors was at Alexandria and
Rome is not certainly known, but at Constantinople their Number is determined
by a C. Theod. l. 14. tit. 9. l. 3. l. 2.
Constitution of Theodosius. In the Public Schools called there Auditorium
Capitolii and Auditorium nostrum, there were to be for the Latin Tongue three
Orators, and ten Grammarians; For the Greek five Sophists and ten Grammarians;
One Professor of Philosophy and two of Law. These had their distinct Schools
allotted them called Publicae Magistrationes and Cellae in the Law; And all
others were forbidden to teach in public, either within the Capitol, or
elsewhere, upon pain of Infamy for the Fact, and Banishment out of the City.
The Emperor Valens, l. 2.
by another Constitution, appointed for the Public Library at Constantinople
seven Antiquaries to look after the Books, four Greek and three Latin, who
were to have a public allowance; So that there was a Bibliotheca Palatina
there as well as at Rome, and both in probability were near the Capitol, where
the Professors taught; For that at Rome was called Bibliotheca Capitolina,
concerning which Joh. Polycrat. l. 8. c. 19.
Sarisburiensis says, It was reported that Gregory the great caused it to be
destroyed, out of a fear, that Heathen Learning should abate Men's Love to the
Scriptures; which was a very foolish and superstitious fear. For Men know
better how to value the Scriptures by it. And he did ill then to fetch the Soul
of Trajan out of Purgatory (but I hope one Story is no truer than the other)
for he founded the Bibliotheca Vlpia, which was next to the Palatina; and
Victor says, There were twenty seven more public Libraries in Rome. If this
Story be true, Gregory rather followed the Steps of Julian than of Constantine;
for the one envied Learning to the Christians as much as the other promoted it,
Victor's Epitome says of Constantine, that he did, Nutrire arts bonas,
praecipue studia Literarum; And his C. Theod. 13. tit. 3. L.L. 1, 2, 3.
Constitutions still extant do show the great kindness he had for Learning and
Learned Men; granting great Privileges and public Salaries to the Professors
of Learning in the several Cities of the Empire. But Julian, Ib. L. ^.
finding that Christianity did spread by the Learning of the Christians, he
first drew the choice of public Professors to himself, by making his
Approbation necessary after the Judicium Ordinis and Decretum Curialium, and so
excluded the Christians. Afterward Julian. Ep. 42.
he expressly declared, He would endure none to interpret Heathen Authors, who
argued against their Religion: But no Constitution appears in the Code besides
the former tending that Way. Upon this Proaeresius, says Hier. Chron.
St. Jerome, left the Chair at Athens, although he had a particular Indulgence
by Julian. And Oros. l. 7. c. 30.
Orosius adds, That the Christian Professors of Learning almost universally
forsook their Places: But both mention an express Edict of Julian's to that
purpose. Some Writers speak of another Edict forbidding Christian Children to
learn; But I can find no Edict to that purpose; And it seems to me to have been
only a consequence of the former; Since Christian Parents would not send their
Children to be taught by Heathens, having seen the sad effect of it in the
Apostasy of Julian, under his Heathen Tutours, Mardonius, Maximus and
Iamblichus.

But by this Edict we find how universally Learning was then diffused through
the Provinces of the Roman Empire, which was in great measure due to Antoninus
Pius, of whom Vit. Anton. Pi^.
Jul. Capitolinus says, That he appointed Honors and Pensions to Rhetoricians
and Philosophers through all the Provinces; which were confirmed and enlarged
by the several Edicts of Constantine to that purpose, already mentioned. And De
Laegibus Constant. l. 2. p. 142.
Fr. Baldwin takes particular notice of his Zeal to promote Learning. In Gaul
Ad Rustic.
St. Jerome mentions the Florentissima Studia Galliarum; And Constantius, in
the Life of St. German, the Auditoria Galliarum; after which, he says, he went
to Rome as the chief University especially for Law; thence Sidon. Ep. 6. l. 1.
Sidonius Apollinaris calls it Domicilium Legum, and Saint Confess. l. 6. c. 8.
Augustine says, he went thither to study the Laws. But other Professions
flourished elsewhere; as at Carthage, De Gubern. Dei, l. 7.
Salvian says, There were Professors of all Arts and Sciences: And at Sicca
Veneria in Africa, Arnobius was Professor of Rhetoric. Near Lions in Gaul the
60 Cities had dedicated an Altar to Augustus, where the Rhosn and the Arar
meet, there Caius Caligula appointed Prizes to be played both in Greek and
Latin Eloquence; And not that only, but Philosophy was there taught; Thence
Vit. Maioli, Vit. Adell.
Odilo, Abbat of Clugney, about Anno Dom. 1020. calls Lions of old the Mother
and Nurse of Philosophy. In the time of Dioclesian and Maximianus, the Nobility
of Gaul were brought up to Learning at Augustodunum (Autun) and there Eumenius
was both Rectour and Professor, as appears by his Speech to Constantius, where
Orat. pro restaur. Schol. n. 3.
he celebrates so much the Scholae Moenianae, Quondam pulcherimo opere and
studiorum frequentia celebres; which having suffered very much in the Rebellion
of the Bagaudae under the latter Claudius; he was extremely concerned to have
them rebuilt, which is the design of his excellent Oration. But long before, in
Tiberius his time, Annal. 3. c. 43.
Tacitus says, The Sons of the Nobility did there, Liberalibus studiis
operari, improve themselves in Learning. In Chronic.
Eusebius mentions, in the time of Nero, Statius Vrsulus of Toulouse, a famous
Professor of Rhetoric. And In Profess.
Ausonius reckons up many of those who had been famous there and at Bourdeaux,
and other Places. But to spare our pains in particular Places, there is extant
in the Theodosian Code an C. Theod. 13. tit. 3. L. 11.
Edict of Gratian, requiring all the chief Cities of these Parts of the Roman
Empire to settle and maintain in them Professors of Learning, both of the
Greek and Roman Languages. This Edict was directed to the Praefectus Praetorio
Galliarum, and was commanded to be observed through all his Diocese, which
Gothofred restrains to the Provinces of Gaul, excluding Britain, for which I
see no reason; Since In Mosell. v. 407.
Ausonius who was himself in that Office in Gratian's time comprehends the
Britains under his Jurisdiction. And the Notitia Imperii places the Provinces
of Britain under him after Gratian's time. Which Notitia he thinks was made
about Anno Dom. 426. By virtue of which Edict we are to search for the ancient
Schools of Learning among the Britains, in the chief Cities of the Provinces at
that time; especially at London, which was the Caput Gentis, being Augusta or
the Imperial City, and so at York and Caerleon. So that the British Churches,
as long as the Roman Power continued here, had the same advantages for Learning
which they had in other Provinces; But when the Roman Forces were withdrawn,
and nothing but Miseries and Desolation followed; then St. German's Care proved
a most seasonable Relief to them in providing such Schools as those of
Dubricius and Iltutus for the breeding up of Persons qualified for the Service
of the Church; as far as the Miseries of those times would permit.

The last thing to be considered is, The Public Service of the British
Churches. And in an ancient MS. in the Cotton Library, about the Original of
Divine Offices, Germanus and Lupus are said to have brought into the use of the
British Churches, Ordinem Cursus Gallorum. By which De Primord. p. 343.
Archbishop Usher understands the Gallican Liturgy. For Cursus in the
Ecclesiastical use of the Word is the same with Officium Divinum, as Dominicus
Macer, in his late Hierolexicon shows; thence Cursum celebrare, is, to perform
Divine Offices; And so the word Cursus is often used in Apud Suri. 28. Maii.
Fortunatus his Life of St. German, Bishop of Paris, and in our Bed. l. 4. c.
18. Council. Call. c. 7. Asser. vit. Alfr.
Saxon Writers: But this Cursus Gallorum is there distinguished from the Cursus
Orientalis, and the Cursus Ambrosii, and the Cursus Benedicti (which little
differs, he says, from the Cursus Romanus) And this was that which Germanus
and Lupus had learnt in the Monastery of Lerins, where it was used by Cassianus
and Honoratus, as the Author of that Book affirms, which I find to have been
the same which Council. Brit. To. 1. p. 167.
Sir H. Spelman commends for its great Antiquity. And that Author derives the
Gallican Liturgy from St. John by Polycarp and Irenaeus; Which MS. Mabillon was
inclined to think to have been the Book which Gregorius Turonensis wrote de
Cursibus Ecclesiasticis, but for the quoting the Mabillon. Anal. 1. p. 9.
Life of Columbanus and Attala, which was not written till after his Death.

This will oblige us to enquire, what the Gallican Liturgy at this time was,
and how far different from the Roman. It is agreed on all hands, that there was
a material difference between them, but wherein it lay is not so easily
understood. When Gregory sent Augustine the Monk into England, to settle the
Saxon Churches, and he was consecrated by the Archbishop of Arles, one of the
Questions, Bed. l. 1. c. 27.
Augustine proposed, was, since there was such difference between the Offices
of the Roman and Gallican Churches, Which he should follow? Gregory answered,
That he should choose what he thought most proper for the English Church. Which
implies, That there was a diversity still between them; And that the Pope did
not oblige him to follow the Example of the Roman Church; chiefly, I suppose,
Because the Queen, being a Christian before, and using the Gallican Liturgy in
the Public Service, and her Bishop being of the Gallican Church, it would have
given great Offense to them to have had it taken away; as likewise to all the
British Churches which had been accustomed to it. If the Books of Musaeus
mentioned by Gennad. de Scriptor. c. 79.
Gennadius were extant, we should easily understand wherein the difference lay.
For, he being a Presbyter of the Church of Marseilles, and a Man Learned in the
Scriptures, was desired by Venerius, the Bishop there, to draw up a Form of
Public Service, consisting of two Parts, viz. The Morning Service, and the
Communion Service. The first he finished in the time of Venerius, and is highly
commended by Gennadius for its Order, Usefulness and Decency. The second, in
the time of Eustathius his Successor, which he likewise commends for its great
weight and exactness. And there was great Reason at that time, to bring the
Church Service into Order, because Cassian and others endeavored to introduce
the Monastic Customs which he had observed in Egypt and elsewhere, as appears
by the design of his Monastic Institutions, especially the second and third
Books, which he dedicated to Castor, Bishop of Apta Iulia, at the same time
that Venerius was Bishop of Marseilles, where Cassian lived. This Musaeus was
therefore employed to draw up the most convenient Order for the Public
Service, from whence we may be able to judge of the difference in both parts
between the Gallican and Roman Offices.

I begin with the first, viz. the Morning Service, which consisted of Lessons,
Hymns and Psalms agreeable to the Lessons, and short Collects after them.

In the Church of Rome, for a long time, viz. for above 400 years, they had
nothing before the Sacrifice, as the old Ritualists agree, besides the Epistle
and Gospel; then Celestine appointed the Psalms to be used; or as Walafr. c.
22. Microl. c. 1.
Walafr. Strabo and Micrologus say, caused Antiphonae to be made out of them
and sung. The Epistle was constantly taken out of St. Paul, as Walafr. Strabo
proves out of the Pontifical Book; But in process of time, he says, other
Lessons were taken out of the Old and New Testament, agreeably to the time;
Which might be borrowed from the Gallican Church; as other Inlargements of
their Offices by the Ritualists Confession were, and in probability the
Distribution of the Lessons was first begun by Musaeus, which we have digested
according to the Roman Custom in the Lectionarius, published by Pamelius, by
some attributed to St. Jerome. After the Lessons followed the Responsoria, or
Proper Hymns, for so De Eccl. Officiis, l. 1. c. 8.
Isidore says, they were called, because, one singing, the whole Choire did
answer; and De Instit. Cleric. l. 1. c. 33.
Rhabanus Maurus calls such an Anthem, Responsorius Cantus; and these differed
from the Antiphonae, because in them the whole Choire sung each Verse
alternatim: But De Officiis, l. 1. c. 15.
Rupertus thinks, they had their Name because they answered to the Lessons,
being sung immediately after them; for the refreshment of the Hearers mind,
says Amal. l. 4. c. 3.
Amalarius. But, besides the Lessons and Hymns, he methodiz'd the Psalms so as
to be read agreeably to the times and the Lessons; and not in the Order wherein
they stand: which seems to have been peculiar to the Gallican Church. The most
ancient Custom of the Church, as In Sacram. Gregor. p. 4.
Menardus proves from Justin Martyr, and others, was to begin the public
Service with the Lessons. And Ambr. Ep. 35. l. 5.
St. Ambrose, in one Place, seems to mention no more in his Church at Milan
besides the Lessons and the Sermon, before his expounding the Creed to the
Competentes; But in the same Epistle he speaks of the Psalms that were read in
the Morning Service: And In Hexaem. l. 3. c. 5.
elsewhere of the People's answering to the Psalms; and it is generally said by
the ancient Ritualists, that St. Ambrose brought into the use of the Western
Church the custom of Singing the Psalms Verse by Verse in turns by both sides
of the Choire; so De Offic. l. 1. c. 7.
Isidore, Rab. l 2. c. 50.
Rabanus, Wall. c. 25.
Walafridus Strabo, and Rad. c. 12.
Radulphus Tungrensis: And so Paulinus in his Life says, he brought up the use
of Antiphonae, in the Western Church. And Sigeb. Chr. A. D. 387.
Sigebert adds, that he took it from the Greeks. And Confess. l. 9. c. 6, 7.
St. Augustine sets down the occasion of it, viz. when the People at Milan were
persecuted by the Arians, and resolved to abide in the Church. And therefore to
keep them well employed he thought upon this Custom of the Eastern Churches;
Which not only continued there, but from thence spread into other Churches,
not without opposition in some Places; as Retract. l. 2. c. 11.
St. Augustine confesses, it met with some at Carthage; But withal he says,
he wrote in Vindication of it. In the Eastern Church it was of ancient use, if
Socr. l. 4. c. 8.
Socrates say true; for he says, it begun upon a Divine Vision to Ignatius, at
the Church of Antioch. But Theod. l. 2. c. 8.
Theodoret says, Flavianus and Diodorus brought it up there; But the words of
Theodorus Mopseustenus in Nicet. These. l. 5. c. 30.
Nicetas seem to intimate, that they took this Custom from the Syriack
Churches; However Theodoret attributes the beginning of Singing the Psalms of
David in that manner in the Greek Churches to them; From whence he says it
spread into other Parts. But we find by Basil. Ep. 63.
St. Basil, it was very hardly received in the Church of Neocaesarea, because
it was not introduced by Gregory, who first settled the Church there. Neither,
says he, were the Litanies which they then used, brought in by him: And for
that Custom of Singing, he says, it was practiced in the Churches of Egypt,
Palaestine and Syria, as far as Euphrates. But it came later into the Western
Church. Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 4.
Card. Bona says, That Damasus first commanded it to be used in all Churches
by his Apostolical Authority; But A. D. 384. n. 20.
Card. Baronius says, It is a plain falsehood which the Pontifical Book affirms
of Damasus his appointing the Psalms to be sung in all Churches, and he adds,
that the Epistles of St. Hierome and Damasus about it are counterfeit. Yet
those are the Authorities which, as appears by Pamel. Lit. To. 1. p. 258.
Pamelius, the ancient Ritualists rely upon. All that Baronius will allow to be
done in the time of Damasus, was, that St. Jerome 's Psalter was then
introduced at Rome. And yet we are told, Gavant. in Brev. Sect. 5. c. 8. n. 3.
that to this day, the old Translation of the Psalter is used in St. Peter 's,
and is called, Psalterium Romanum in the Rule of St. Francis, which he forbids
to be used in Divine Service; But the same is only used in the Ambrosian
Office. And Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 3. 4.
Card. Bona observes, that St. Gregory composed the Antiphonae at the
Introitus, and at the Responsoria, etc. out of the old Version, before St.
Jerome's time; Of which he gives this reason, That the People at Rome were so
accustomed to it, that they would not learn the New Testament of St. Jerome;
And the same Author l. 1. c. 12.
observes likewise, That the old Italick Version was not only used in Rome,
but in all the Suburbicary Churches, and other Churches, Gaul only excepted.
And from thence St. Jerome's Translation was called Versio Gallicana, because
it was immediately received into the use of the Gallican Churches. So that I
see not how Baronius can make good his own Assertion, That St. Jerome 's
Translation of the Psalter was introduced by Damasus. But the use of Alleluja
by St. Jerome's means, as Regist. l. 7. Ep. 63.
St. Gregory says, was brought from the Church of Jerusalem. Which Baronius
thinks is rather to be understood of some particular manner of using it. But
how he can justify the ancient use of the Singing Psalms at Rome, either
before or after Damasus his time till Celestine was Pope, I cannot imagine, if
the Pontifical Book say true, for that expressly affirms, that Celestine
appointed David 's Psalms to be sung Antiphonatim before the Sacrifice, and
that it was not done before, but only the Epistles of St. Paul and the holy
Gospel were read. Which words are repeated by Alcuinus, Amalarius, Rabanus
Maurus, Walafridus Strabo, Berno Augiensis, and several other Ritualists and
Historians, as may be seen in Liturg. To. 1. p. 554.
Pamelius his Collection, and Liturg. c. 18, 21.
Cassander's, besides the Authors themselves; But Bar. A.D. 60. n. 33.
Baronius says, the use of Singing the Psalms was from the beginning in the
Roman Church; which we are to take upon his Word, for he brings no proof of it.
It is true, that Aug. Epist. 119. c. 18.
St. Augustine says, That we have the Precept and Example of Christ and his
Apostles, for singing in our Assemblies. But he speaks not of David's Psalms,
nor of the Church of Rome. And he says, The Customs of Churches were very
different about this matter. In the Churches of Africa, he says, They confined
themselves to the Prophetical Hymns, for which they were upbraided by the
Donatists, as too grave and formal; But he allows Singing to be one of the
Solemn Parts of Divine Service, with which he joins Reading the Lessons,
Preaching and Prayer; either aloud by the Bishop, or in common, by the Deacon's
giving notice. Apolog. p. 60.
Justin Martyr mentions the Hymns of the Church, without declaring whether they
were composed or inspired; And so do Epist. l. 10. ep. 97.
Pliny and Tertull. de Virg. Velat. c. 17. ad Vxor. l. 2. c. 8.
Tertullian in some Places. But in his Apolog. c. 39.
Apology he says, both were used. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 28.
Eusebius mentions the Hymns composed by Christians which proved the Divinity
of Christ; And l. 7.24.
the great esteem the Hymns of Nepos were in; and l. 7. c. 30.
the complaint against Paulus Samosatenus for laying aside the Hymns made to
the Honor of Christ. The Council of Laod. C^r. c. 59.
Laodicea first restrained the use of Private Hymns in the Churches Service,
the Greek Canonists understand this Canon of Apocryphal Psalms, such as
Salomon's Psalter published by La Cerda out of the Auspurg MS. which he highly
magnifies, and almost believes to be genuine; But if this Canon be extended to
all humane Compositions; it was never received in the Western Church, wherein
the Hymns of St. Hilary, St. Ambrose, Prudentius, and others have been
generally used. And the Ambrosian Hymns were received into the Service of the
Gallican Church, as appears by the second Council at Council. Turon. 2. c. 23.
Tours; And Cass. Praef. ad Hymn. Eccl.
Cassander observes, that not only those made by St. Ambrose, but others in
imitation of him, were called by his name; Which Walafr. c. 25.
Walafridus Strabo confirms; But among those the Te Deum is not reckoned by
Cassander, neither is it of the Ambrosian Composition, for those Hymns ended
their Sentence every fourth Verse, as he observes. Te Deum is commonly said to
have been made by St. Ambrose, and St. Augustine, at his Baptism, and to prove
it, the Ritualists quote the Chronicle of Datius, Bishop of Milan. But Gav. in
Bre. 8. c. 19.
Gavantus observes, that the Learned Men of Milan deny that there is any such
thing as a Chronicle of Datius among them. Analect. Vol. 1. p. 5.
Mabillon sent to them to enquire particularly about it, and they returned
Answer, That they had no such thing, But that there was such a Title put upon a
Book written by other Authors. In an old Collection of Hymns, and an old
Latin and French Psalter mentioned by Usser. de Sym. p. 3.
Archbishop Usher, this Hymn is attributed to St. Nicetius. And there were two
of that name in the Gallican Church; The former of which, might probably be the
Author of it. The one was Bishop of Triers, and subscribed to the Council of
Auvergn, Anno Dom. 535. highly commended for his Eloquence and Sanctity by
Greg. l. 10. c. 29.
Gregorius Turonensis, Fort. l. 3. car. 9.
Fortunatus and others; And the other of great fame too and Bishop of Lions,
who subscribed to the Council there Anno Dom. 567. But against this latter
there is a strong Objection from the mention of this Hymn in the Rule of St.
Benedict, c. 11. who died, according to Baronius, Anno Dom. 543. It is likewise
mentioned in the Rule of Cod. Regul. Part. 2. p. 93.
Caesarius, drawn up by Tetradius, c. 21. who died about the same time; And in
the Rule of Ib. p. 112.
Aurelianus, who was present in the Council of Lions, Anno Dom. 549. in the
time of Sacerdos, Predecessor to Nicetius. But I see no reason against the
former Nicetius, since Not. in Sacr. Greg. p. 351.
Menardus confidently affirms there is no mention of this Hymn in any Writers
before. And therefore we may look on this Hymn, as owing its Original to the
Gallican Church.

Besides, Cass. Justif. Monach. l. 2. c. 8.
Cassian takes notice that in the Gallican Churches, Gloria Patri, etc. was
said by the People at the end of every Psalm. But Walafridus Strabo observes,
That at Rome they used it rarely at the end of the Psalms; but more frequently
after the Responsoria. From hence the three Cardinals, Bellar. de Miss. l. 2.
c. 16.
Bellarmine, Bar. A. D. 325. n. 175.
Baronius and Bon. de Psalmod. c. 16. n. 6.
Bona all conclude those Ritualists mistaken who make Damasus the Author of
adding the Gloria Patri, etc. to the end of every Psalm: And that the Epistle
under the name of St. Jerome to him about it is notoriously false, and withal
they say, that the other Ritualists are mistaken who attribute it to the
Council of Nice; Because then there would not have been such difference in the
use of it in several Churches. In the Aethiopick Eucharistical Office of the
318 Fathers at the Council of Nice, bestowed on me by my worthy Friend, Doctor
Castle, this Hymn it self is not used; But the Office consists chiefly of a
Lofty and Divine Paraphrase upon it. In the Liturgy of Dioscorus it is used in
the middle of the Prayers. It is evident from Ad Amphil. c. 7. c. 27.
St. Basil's Discourse concerning it, that the Hymn it self was of ancient use
in the Eastern Church; but he does not say in what part of the Churches Service
it was used; But Cassian. l. 2. c. 28.
Cassian says, over all the East, it was used only to conclude the Antiphona.
By which he understands a Hymn between the Psalms; Walafridus Strabo observes
great diversity in the use of it in the Western Churches; Some put it, he
says, into all Offices; Some at the end of every Psalm; Some at every breaking
off the longer Psalms; Some after the Responsals; But the use in general was
universally approved, only the Greeks found fault with the Latins for putting
in the middle, Sicut erat in principio, but the use thereof was required in all
the Gallican Churches in the time of Council. Vas. 2. c. 5.
Caesarius, Archbishop of Arles (as Council. Agath. c. 30.

Venet. c. 15. Epaon. c. 17. Gerand. c. 1. Brac. 2. c. 12. Tolet. 4. c. 2.


Uniformity was required by other Councils.) Cardinal Bona, following Baronius,
makes that Council much elder which required the use of this Hymn, and soon
after the Council of Nice; But that cannot be, if the Subscriptions in
Sirmondus be true; and he observes that mistake in Baronius to have risen from
misunderstanding a Passage of Ado Viennensis. So that the Morning Service of
the Gallican Churches consisted chiefly in Lessons, Hymns and Psalms of St.
Jerome 's translation, with Gloria Patri at the end of every Psalm. The Latin
Tongue being yet the common Language of the Roman Provinces.

But are we to suppose, that they met together for the Worship of God without
any Prayers? I answer, that they had then two sorts of Prayers in their
Assemblies.

(1.) Private Prayers of each particular Person by himself.

(2.) A concluding Collect, which was the Common Prayer, wherein they all
joined.

(1.) That they had such private Prayers in their Assemblies I prove from De
Instit. Mon. l. 2. c. 7.
Cassian, who reproves the Custom of some in the Gallican Churches, who fell
to their private Devotions on their Knees, before the Psalm was well ended.
But, he says, the Egyptian Monks used to spend some time in Prayer to
themselves standing, and then fall down for a short space in a way of
Adoration, and presently rise up again, continuing their Devotions standing.
All which is capable of no other sense; but that between the Psalms a time was
allowed in the Gallican Churches as well as Egyptian Monasteries, for private
Devotions in the public Assemblies. Greg. l. 7. c. 8.
Gregor Turonensis says, That in the Gallican Churches the Deacon did
Silentium indicere; and the Priest did it by the Eug. Robles. de Officio
Mozarab. c. 28.
Mozarabick Liturgy, which Eugenius Roblesius understands only of making the
People attentive; Which I grant was part of the Deacon's Office and Design in
commanding Silence, as appears by several passages in the ancient Liturgies
both Greek and Latin. But there was a farther meaning in it, and that the
People were for a time there to attend to their own private Prayers, appears
not improbable to me on these Considerations. (1.) Gregory Turonensis says, in
the Place before mentioned, That the King took that time to speak to the
People, who immediately break forth into a Prayer for the King; Not that any
Collect was then read for him, for that was not the proper time for it; but it
being a time of secret Prayers, they were so moved with what the King said,
that they all prayed for him. (2.) Among the Heathens, when they were bidden
favere Linguis, yet then De Formulis, p. 9, 10.
Brissonius says, They made their private Prayers; And as the Deacons
commanding Silence seems to be much of the same Nature, it is not probable that
the Christians should fall short of their Devotions. (3.) The great Argument to
me, is the small number of Collects in the Ancient Churches; For the Christians
spent a great deal of time in the public Service, on the Lord's-days, and the
Stationary days; But all the other Offices could not take up that time, there
being no long Extemporary Prayers, nor such a multitude of tedious Ceremonies
in all Parts, as the Roman Breviary and Missal introduced, and the Collects of
greatest Antiquity, being very few and short, it seems most probable, that a
competent part of the time was spent in private Devotions. A remainder whereof
is still preserved in the Office of Ordination of Priests in our Church,
whereby silence is commanded to be kept for a time, for the Peoples secret
Prayers. And the same Custom was observed at the Bidding of Prayers, which was
a direction for the People what to pray for in their Vid. Matt. Parker.
Concion. in obit. Buceri.
private Devotions; After which followed the Lord's-prayer as the concluding
Collect. But either that or another was still used after these silent Prayers,
and that is the true ancient Reason of the Name: For Mircr. l. 3.
Micrologus says, The name Collecta was, because the Priest therein did,
Omnium Precescolligere, or, as Walafr. c. 22.
Walafridus Strabo says, Necessarias omnium Petitiones compendiosa brevitate
colligere. This was distinct from the Prayer made ad Collectam, before the
People went to the Stationary Churches; Of which Onuphrius Panvinius and Fronto
in his Calendarium Romanum have said enough. But as to the Gallican Churches,
the Con. Agath. c. 30.
Council of Agde shows that after the other Offices were performed in the
Morning and Evening Service, the People were to be dismissed by the Bishop
Collecta Oratione, i. e. With a concluding Collect.

(2.) As to the Communion Service Gennad. in Musaeo.
Gennadius says, That Musaeus composed a large Volume of the Sacraments, with
several Offices according to the Seasons, with a diversity of Lessons, and
Psalms, and Anthems, and Prayers and Thanksgivings. This Book is called, Liber
Sacramentorum, and so is Gregory's, says Not. in Sacr. Greg. p. 1, 2.
Menardus in several MSS. and the old Missal published by Illyricus is called
Ordo Sacramentorum; Which was the Name given to the Books of Liturgick Offices,
which were called Sacramenta, both by St. Ambrose and St. Augustine, as
Menardus shows. Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 12.
Cardinal Bona confesses, That there is undoubted Evidence, that the old
Gallican Liturgy, differed from the Roman; And Car. de Imag. l. 1. c. 6.
Charles the Great, not only says, That there was such a difference in the
Celebration of the Divine Offices; But that the Gallican Churches were very
unwilling to change theirs for the Roman, Matthias Flacius Illyricus (not
Flavius, as Le Cointe pretends to correct his Name) having found an ancient MS.
Missal, and discerning several different Prayers in it from the Roman Missal,
thought this to have been the ancient Gallican Missal, wherein he is followed
by Annal. Eccl. Franc. To. 2. A. D. 601.
Le Cointe, who has printed it at large in his Annals; with an Epitome of it
published by Menardus out of an ancient Copy. But Menard. App. ad lib. Sacr. p.
266.
he shows that Illyricus his Copy could not be of that Antiquity he pretends,
viz. Before the time of Gregory the Great: There being several things in it not
of that Age; Which were not in the old Missal of 986. and were in another of
later date; To which Le Cointe returns no Answer; But because this differs from
the Roman Missal, he concludes it must be the Gallican; Whereas, upon perusing
it, it will appear rather to be a Supplement to the Roman Missal for the
Devotion of those that celebrate it, consisting chiefly of private Prayers to
be used by them before Celebration, and during the Singing of the Several
Hymns: For the common parts of the Office, as the Introitus, Epistola,
Graduale, Evangelium, Offertorium, Secreta, Praefatio, Communio, and
Post-communio, are only referred to, and not set down; Whereas if this had
been the Gallican Missal, all those parts would have been set down rather more
distinctly than others. Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 12.
Card. Bona thinks it not to have been before the end of the tenth Century,
about which time several such private Missals were made. But he concludes, that
certainly this was not the old Gallican Missal: What it was, he thinks hard to
determine, and I think so too; If such Authors as Hilduinus must be relied on.
It is true, he mentions the old Missals which contained the Gallican Liturgy
from the first reception of the Christian Faith, till the Roman Missal was
received; But he is an Author of no Authority, and quotes these Missals for a
thing notoriously false, viz. the Martyrdom of Dionysius Areopagita in Gaul.
And he pretends, that Innocentius, Gelasius and Gregory, all endeavored to
alter the Gallican Liturgy, which continued in use till Pepin's time: So that
from Hilduinus no certain Note can be taken. It is much more material which De
Rebus ad Missam spect. c. 2.
Berno Augiensis says, That in the Archives of their Monastery, he found an
old Missal wherein the Offices were very differently ordered from what they
were in the Roman. And he mentions one remarkable particular of the Roman
Missal, which is the

(1.) Difference I shall observe in the Communion Service, viz. That the Creed
was not said nor sung at Rome after the Gospel, of which he says, They gave
this Reason, because the Roman Church was never infected with Heresy; which,
he says, the Emperor Henry I. was so little satisfied with, that he never
ceased, till they had introduced it at Rome; which, says Bar. A. D. 1014. n. 5.
Baronius, was done Anno Dom. 1014. but he seems not pleased that the former
Custom was broken. Before that time, none that speak of the Customs of the
Roman Missal ever mention the Creed, as may be seen in Alcuinus, Amalarius,
Rabanus, and others. And this cannot be understood barely of the
Constantinopolitane or Nicene Creed, as Not. in Greg. Sacr. p. 370.
Menardus well proves, because then Berno would have spoken more distinctly.
And the Athanasian Creed, as far as we can trace it, was first used in the
Gallican Churches, and that use first mentioned by Abbo Floriacensis in some
Fragments sent by Nicolaus Faber to Bar. A. D. 1001. n. 3.
Baronius. But whosoever considers the universal Silence about that Creed
before, and compares it with the Profession of Faith in the first Canon of the
Fourth Council of Toledo, which then took so many of the Gallican Offices into
the Service of the Spanish Churches will see Reason to believe that this Creed
was originally of a Gallican Composition, and thence was carried into Spain
upon the Conversion of the Goths from Arianism, wherein several Expressions are
taken out of St. Augustine's Works. Ruffinus shows, That those that were to be
baptized did at Rome repeat the Creed; but that is another thing from its use
in the Liturgy, which both Baronius and Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 8.
Bona confess was so lately introduced at Rome. So that here we have one
considerable difference of the Roman Offices from those of other Churches; For
De Eccl Offic. c. 16.
Isidore says, That the Nicene Creed was then used in the Gothic Churches in
the time of Sacrifice; As the Church Service was then called; For that it had
no Relation to that which is called the Sacrifice of the Mass, appears by
Council. Aurel. 3. can. 29. Where we find the name of Sacrifice applied to the
Evening Service, Sacrificia Matutina Missarum, sive Vespertina; And so Cassian.
de Inst. Monach. l. 3. c. 3.
Cassian uses Sacrificia Vespertina in allusion to the Custom of Sacrificing
among the Jews. And Vit. Hilarii Aril. c. 21.
Honoratus, in the Life of St. Hilarious of Arles, calls it Sacrificium
Vespertinae Laudis. And Missa was then used for the public Service, as Liturg.
c. 17.
Cassander and others show. In the Rule of St. Benedict, Missae are to be taken
for the concluding Collects at the Canonical Hours. Cassian. de Inst. l. 2. c.
13. l. 3. c. 5.
Cassian uses Missa for any public meeting at Prayers, thence he speaks of
Missa Nocturna and Missa Orationum, and Missa Canonica, for the Nocturnal
Office among the Monks; And in the Council. Agath. c. 30. We read of Missae
Vespertinae. But afterward the name was appropriated to the most solemn part
of public Worship, viz. the Communion Service. In which the Creed was
appointed by the third Council of Toledo, c. 2. in all the Churches of Spain
and Gallaecia; or, as some Copies have it, of Gallia; Which is confirmed by an
Edict of Reccaredus to that purpose; which extended to that Part of Gallia
Narbonensis, then under the Gothic Power; Where a Council. Narbon. 1. c. 2.
Council met under Reccaredus, about the same time. In which Gloria Patri was
decreed to be used at the end of every Psalm; Which was observed by the other
Gallican Churches in Cassian's time. It seems very probable, that the Spanish
Churches did follow the Customs of the Gallican in other parts of the Divine
Offices as well as this; Which appears by the Passage in the Epistle of Carolus
Calvus produced by Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 12.
Card. Bona, where speaking of the ancient Gallican Offices before the
Introduction of the Roman; he says, He had seen and heard how different they
were by the Priests of the Church of Toledo, who had celebrated the Offices of
their Church before him. Which had signified nothing to this matter, unless the
Gothic and Gallican Offices had then agreed. I do not say that the old
Gallican Service can be gathered from all the Parts of the Mozarabick Liturgy,
as it was settled by Gomes. de vit. Ximen. l. 2.
Card. Ximenes, in a Chapel of the Church of Toledo; or as it is performed on
certain days at Salamanca, because many Alterations might be in those Offices
as well as others in so long time; And such no doubt there were, as Marian. de
Rebus Hisp. l. 6. c. 5.
Mariana confesses, by the length of time; although it did bear the Name of
Leander and Isidore. For Ildephons. de Script. Eccles. and in Append.
Julianus Toletanus is said to have reviewed the whole Office, and to have
altered and added many things, and Johannes Caesaraugustanus and Conantius, and
after them Petrus Ilerdensis, and Salvus Abbaildensis, besides such whose Names
are not preserved; But so far as we can trace the ancient Customs of the
Gothic Missal we may probably infer what the Customs of the Gallican Churches
at that time were, and thereby show the difference between them and the Roman
Offices. As besides this of the Creed.

(2.) The Prophetical Lessons were always to be read by the Rules of the
Mozarabick Liturgy: and accordingly three Books were laid upon the Altar in the
Gallican Churches, as Greg. Turonen. l. 4. c. 16.8. c. 7.
Gregorius Turonensis observes, That of the Prophets, and of the Epistles, and
of the Gospels. But nothing but the Epistle and Gospel were read at Rome, as is
showed already; Which manifests that the Book under St. Jerome's Name, called
the Lectionarius or Comes must be counterfeit; Because therein Lessons out of
the Prophets are set down: And the Authorities of Berno Augiensis, Micrologus
and Radulphus Tungrensis, which are the best To. 2. Liturg. in Praefat.
Pamelius could find, are not great enough against so plain Evidence to the
contrary, to prove this Lectionarius to have been made by St. Jerome. And he
confesses that Amalarius several times only mentions the Auctor Lectionarii
without St. Jerome's name, who lived a good while before them. But in this the
Roman Church had its peculiar Rites; for, in the Church of Milan, first a
Lesson out of the Prophets was read before the Epistle, as appears by Sever.
Sulpic. vit. Martini. l. 3.
Sulpicius Severus. And in the Greek Church, St. Basil. Hom. 13. and 21.
Basil says, That Lessons out of the Old, as well as the New Testament were
read. By the Council. Laod. c. 59.
Council of Laodicea, all the Canonical Books were appointed to be read.
Zonaras observes, on the 16. Canon of that Council, That before this Council
there were nothing but Prayers before the Consecration: But therein he was
certainly mistaken; For Apolog. 2.
Justin Martyr shows, That the Lessons were read long before, and that out of
the Prophets as well as Apostles. But Balsamon and Aristenus restrain this
Canon only to Saturdays; And it enjoins the reading of the Gospels then, which
was not accustomed before, There being no Religious Assemblies in those Parts
on that day: But by the same Canon we find, That where the Gospels were read,
other Scriptures were appointed to be read too. It is observed by Hiero-lexi
cog. v. Lectio.
Dominicus Macer, that at the Lessons of the Old Testament the Greeks do sit;
But stand at those out of the New. Soz. l. ^. c. 19.
Sozomen reckons it as a peculiar Custom of Alexandria. That the Bishop did
not rise up at the Gospels: And Nicephorus Niceph. l. 11. c. 34.
Callisthus says, It was contrary to the Practice of all other Churches.

(3.) After the Gospel, the Sermon followed in other Churches; But in the old
Roman Offices, there is no mention at all of any Sermon to the People. Re^.
(...). l. 8. n. 7. ^. 4.
Card. Bona says, That it has been the uninterrupted practice of the Church
from the Apostles times to our own, for the Sermon to follow after the Gospel:
And he does sufficiently prove the Antiquity of it from the Testimonies of
Justin Martyr and Tertullian, and the general practice of it in other Churches,
especially the Gallican; But he offers no proof, that it was observed in the
Church of Rome. But Soz. l. 7. c. 9.
Sozomen observes it as the peculiar Custom of that Church, That there was no
Preaching in it; neither by the Bishop, nor by any one else. Valesius seems to
wonder at it; But he says, If it had not been true, Cassiodore, who certainly
knew the Customs of that Church, would never have repeated it. In the
Sacramentary of Gregory, The Offertory immediately follows after the Gospel;
And Micrologus says, Finito Evangelio, statim est offerendum, c. 10. And to
the same purpose in the Ordo Romanus: But in the Ordo of the Western Churches,
published by Liturg. p. 52.103.
Cassander with the other, There the Bishop is to be attended on after the
Gospel, in order to his Preaching; But if he will not, Then the Creed is to be
sung: And according to this Custom the Gem. Animae, l. 1. c. 25.
Gemma Animae is to be understood when it says, That after the Gospel, the
Bishop preaches to the People. It is true, That in the Church of Rome, Leo did
make some Sermons on solemn Occasions; But he was the first that did it, says
De ^it. and gestis Leonis, p. 257.
Quesnel, if Sozomen may be believed. It is possible, That upon some
extraordinary Occasions, the Bishops of Rome might speak to the People before
his time, as Liberius is said, by St. Ambros. de virg. veland. l. 3.
Ambrose, to have done at St. Peter's; But this signifies nothing to the
constant Office of Preaching which was not used in the Church of Rome by any
Bishop before Leo, nor by many after, as it was in other Churches. In the
Gallican Churches, as In Can. Truff.
Christianus Lupus observes, The Bishops called their Office Praedicationis
Officium; as appears by the Profession both of Bishops and Archbishops, among
To. 2. Council. Gall. Form. 12, 13.
Sirmondus his Formulae published out of ancient Copies. And in the Royal
Confirmation they were charged to be diligent in Preaching. The same Author
tells us, That Charles the Great was so strict in requiring it, That he made
the Penalty of the neglect of it to be no less than Deposition. Which is
warranted by the Apostolical Canon 58. The Council in Trullo, c. 19. charges
the Bishops to preach constantly. But especially on the Lord's-days; The want
whereof was extremely lamented afterward in the Greek Church by Barlaam,
Epist. 1.
Barlaam, and Greg. Apol. ad Marc. Ephesians.
Gregorius Protosyncellus. And the neglect of it in the Armenian Churches has
brought the Episcopal Order into so great Contempt, as Council. Eccl. Armena.
etc. c. 28. p. 455.
Clemens Galanus reports, (who was a long time among them) that he says, They
use their Bishops for little else but to give Orders; But the only Men in
esteem are their Vartabret (whom he renders Magistri, their Preachers;) Whom
the People regard far beyond their Bishops, because, they say, they represent
Christ himself, as he was Rabbi, or the Teacher of his Church. But to return to
the Western Churches. In the Church of Milan, Confess. l. 6. c. 3.
St. Augustine says, He heard St. Ambrose every Lord's Day; And, he says, De
Officiis, l. 1. c. 1.
He accounted it the proper Office of a Bishop to preach; Which he performed,
as in other Churches Ep. 33.
after the Gospel, before the Dismission of the Catechumeni; But by the
Mozarabick Liturgy, the Sermon was after their dismission.

(4.) The Gallican Churches had peculiar Offices after the Sermon; So Walafr.
22.
Walafridus Strabo says, That some of those Prayers were still in use among
many. And Microl. c. 11.
Micrologus, That the Prayer, Veni Sanctificator, etc. was taken out of the
Gallican Ordo. But, to make this more clear, we are to consider, that there
were some parts of the Communion Service wherein all the Ancient Offices
agreed; as in the Sursum Corda, and Habemus ad Dominum used in the Eastern, as
well as Western Churches; and there are as plain Testimonies of their use in
the African and Gallican Churches as the Roman; before the Roman Offices came
to be imposed on other Churches. The Gratias agamus Domino Deo nostro, and Vere
dignum and justum est aequum and salutare, nos tibi semper and ubique gratias
agere, are mentioned by St. Cyril, St. Chrysostom, St. Augustine, and other
ancient Writers: This latter part in the Mozarabick Liturgy is called Inlatio.
The Trisagion was generally used; I do not mean that which was said to have
come by Revelation in the time of Proclus at Constantinople; But that which the
Greeks call (...), and is called Trisagium in the Ambrosian Missal, and was
used with a more ample Paraphrase in the Eastern Churches. All these parts are
retained in the excellent Office of our Church* not from the Church of Rome (as
our Dissenters weakly imagine) but from the consent of all the ancient Churches
in the use of them; Which it has followed likewise in the putting them into a
Language understood by the People (as Liturg. c. 28, 36.
Cassander fully shows.) And in the use of the Hymn, Gloria in excelsis, which,
with the Addition to the Scripture words, was used in the Eastern Churches, as
appears by the Constit. Apost. l. 7. c. 47.
Apostolical Constitutions, and a Passage in Athanas. p. 1057.
Athanasius his Works, and several Greek MSS. of it; this was called Hymnus
Angelicus from the beginning of it, and Hymnus Matutinus from the ancient time
of using it, as appears not only from other MSS. but from the famous
Alexandrian Copy of the LXX. where it is set down in large Letters, and called
by the name of the Morning Hymn. Its use in the Gallican Church is attested by
the ancient MS. in the beginning of this Discourse; And Alcuin. c. 42.
Alcuinus makes St. Hilary of Poictou to have been the Inlarger of it. The
Prayer for the Church Militant; For Kings and Princes; And all Ranks and Orders
of Men; The Commemoration of Saints departed; The Reading the Words of
Institution; And using the Lord's-prayer; Were in all the ancient Liturgies as
parts of the Communion Service: And therefore are not to be looked on as
appropriated to the Canon of the Mass in the Church of Rome.

Wherein then did the Difference consist between the Roman and Gallican
Churches at that time, as to this Service?

In Answer to this Question, I shall go through the other parts of it, and show
the difference.

(1.) The Gallican Office began with a peculiar Confession of Sins made by the
Priest; Which was called Apologia. A form whereof Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 1.
Cardinal Bona has published out of a very ancient MS. in the Queen of Sweden
's Library; And which he proves to have been the old Gallican Office. It is
true, that several Forms of such Confessions, are in the Sacr. Greg. p. 242.
Sacramentary of Gregory; But all different from the Gallican Form. In the old
Missal of Rataldus, Abbat of Corbey, published by Sacr. Greg. p. 262.
Menardus, instead of the Apology, we read that Form, Suscipe Confessionem
meam, unica Spes Salutis meae, Domine Deus meus, etc. And then follows a
particular enumeration of Sins, and a general Confession of them. And a
different Form is produced by Greg. Sacr. p. 269.
Menardus, out of another ancient Missal, which he calls the Codex Tilianus,
and seems most agreeable to the old Gallican mentioned by Bona; And, There is a
great variety of Forms of Confession and Supplication in the old Missal
published by Illyricus. But, I observe; That the Form prescribed in the Roman
Missal is in none of them: viz. Confiteor Deo Omnipotenti, B. Mariae semper
Virgini, B. Michaeli Archangelo, etc. and omnibus Sanctis, etc. Ideo precor B.
Mariam, etc. Omnes Sanctos, etc. -- Orare pro me ad Dominum nostrum: For all
the ancient Forms of Confession were only to God himself; And so they
continued for 1000 years after Christ; About which time Menardus says, The
several ancient Missals before mentioned do bear Date. The Common Ritualists
attribute the present Form to Pontianus, or Damasus, but without any Authority,
says Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 2.
Card. Bona. The first mention I can find of Confession to Saints, is that
which he sets down out of the Codex Chisii; Which being in the Id. l. 1. c. 12.
Lombard Character, he ghesses to have been before the end of the tenth
Century, and with this Microl. c. 23.
Micrologus agrees; The Author whereof lived toward the end of the eleventh
Century. So that this part of the Roman Missal was neither in the Gregorian nor
Gallican Offices, being of a much later Original.

(2.) The Gallican Office had peculiar Prefaces, and Collects different from
the Roman. By the Prefaces are understood that part of the Service which
immediately goes before the Consecration, and is called in the Gallican Office,
Contestatio, in the Gothic, Illatio, showing not only the general Fitness for
us at all times, to give thanks to God; But the particular Reason of it, with
respect to the Day. Of which kind of Prefaces, the Roman Church allowed but
nine, which were attributed to Pope Gelasius; But Rer. Lit. l. 2. c. 10. n. 3.
Card. Bona says, That number is to be found only in the Missals, after Anno
Dom. 1200. For before, there were many more, as appears by Gregory's
Sacramentary; But how they came to be left out afterward in the Roman Missal
is a Mystery, of which none of the Ritualists give any tolerable account.
However this is enough to show their Ignorance, when they so confidently
attributed the proper Prefaces to Gelasius; As though Gregory would have
slighted so much the Decree of his Predecessors, as to have appointed so many
more, if Gelasius had limited the number to Nine. But however it was in the
Roman Church, the Gallican Church had peculiar Prefaces for all solemn
Occasions. Of which Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 12. n. 6.
Card. Bona has produced three remarkable Instances, two out of the former
ancient MS. of Nine hundred Years old, which formerly belonged to Petavius, a
Senator of Paris; And the third out of a Copy of the Palatine Library,
translated to the Vatican, of the same Age. From these excellent Monuments of
Antiquity compared together we may in great measure understand the true Order
and Method of the Communion Service of that time, both in the Gallican and
British Churches, especially on Saint's-days; For no other Offices are
preserved, or at least made known to the World. And on those Occasions the
Service began with particular Collects for the Day; Then followed the
Commemoration out of the Diptychs; Then another Collect, Post nomina; After
which the Collect, ad Pacem; Then the particular Prefaces relating to the Saint
whose memory was celebrated; with a larger account of his good Actions than is
used in any of the Gregorian Prefaces, expressed in a devout and pathetical
manner; Which ended in the Trisagion; And was continued by another Collect to
the Consecration; After which followed a devout Prayer for benefit by the Holy
Sacrament; And after another Collect for the occasion followed the
Lord's-prayer, with a Conclusion for the Day: And the whole Service was
concluded with a Benediction of the People, a Collect after the Eucharist, and
a short Thanksgiving. This is a just and true Account from these authentic
Offices of the Public Service then used in the British Churches following the
Gallican from the time of St. German, whose particular Office is one of those
preserved by Card. Bona; And in the peculiar Preface his great Zeal is
mentioned in Preaching and going up and down doing good in Gaul, Italy and
Britain, for thirty years together.

(3.) As to the Canon of the Mass, as it is called in the Church of Rome, or
the Prayer of Consecration used in the Church of Rome, and magnified as
Apostolical, St. Greg. Epist. l. 7. ep. 63.
Gregory affirms, as plainly as he well could, That it was first composed by a
private Person, and was not of Apostolical Tradition. Who that Scholar was, it
is now impossible to know, and not at all material, since it is apparent that
it was received into the public Use of the Church. Some small additions, they
say, were made to it by several Popes, till Gregory's time, who, according to
the Ritualists, shut up this Canon. But I see no reason to believe that
Consecration of the Eucharist, was at that time performed in other Churches by
the words of this Canon. For, setting aside the Eastern Churches, which had
Forms of their own; The African Churches did not follow the Roman Form. For
although Opt. l. 2.
Optatus mentions illud legitimum in Sacramentorum mysterio; which implies,
that there was a certain Form to be observed; yet this does not at all prove,
that it was the Roman Canon: And it evidently appears that it was not, by the
Testimonies of Victor. advers. Ar^^m, l. 1.
Marius Victorinus, and Fulgent. in Ep. 1. ad 1 Cor. c. 14.
Fulgentius, two African Writers, who both mention some Prayers used in the
Eucharist, which are not in the Roman Canon, and those not Prefatory; but such
as do relate to the main parts of the Canon. It is true, the Writer about the
Sacraments, under St. Ambrose's name (for Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 7. n. 4.
Card. Bona will not allow him to be St. Ambrose) does produce several
Expressions in the Form of Consecration which agree with the Roman Canon; But
then he adds a very considerable Passage, which I hardly believe, those who are
most zealous for the Roman Canon will say, was ever part of it. De Sacram. l.
4. c. 5.
Fac nobis hanc oblationem ascriptam, rationabilem, acceptabilem, quod est
figura corporis and sanguinis Domini nostri Jesu Christi. And in the Gallican
Church, the Form of Consecration, as appears by the Office of Saint German, was
nothing else but repeating the Words of Institution, after the Conclusion of
the Irisagion, and Gloria in Excelsis. After which followed a Prayer, for God's
Holy Word and Spirit to descend upon the Oblation they made, That it might be a
spiritual Sacrifice well pleasing to God; And that God, by the Blood of Christ,
would with his own Right Hand defend those his Sacraments; And then followed
the Lord's Prayer and other Collects. This Prayer after Consecration, Card.
Bona knows not what to make of, as seeming wholly inconsistent with
Transubstantiation, for if that Doctrine had been then believed, and by
Consecration the Elements turned into the Body of Christ; To what purpose does
the Church then pray for the Word and Spirit to descend upon the Elements, when
they are actually united already? But Rer. Liturg. l. 2. c. 13. l. 1. c. 12.
he makes a very hard shift to interpret these Words, not of a descent on the
Elements, but on the Hearts of the Communicants: But the Words are, Descendat
super haec quae tibi offerimus Verbum tuum Sanctum, Which are so plain and
evident concerning the Elements, that nothing but mere force, can make any Man
to understand them of the Receivers. Besides, that Office concludes with a
particular Prayer for the Benefit of those that had partaked of the Body of
Christ, wherein this Expression is remarkable, Christ, Domine, qui and tuo
vesci corpore, and tuum corpus effici vis fideles, fac nobis in remissionem
Peccatorum esse quod sumpsimus, i. e. O Christ, our Lord, who would have thy
People eat thy Body, and become thy Body, grant that we may be that which we
have taken for the Remission of our Sins. And it is certain, the meaning of
this Prayer was not that Christians might become the Natural Body of Christ;
And therefore it was not then believed, That the Faithful did in the Eucharist
take the Natural Body of Christ; But that which was the Body of Christ in such
a mystical sense as the Church is. But Transubstantiation was no part of the
Faith of the Church at that time, and therefore it is no wonder to meet with
Expressions so disagreeing to it in their solemn Devotions. And it is well
observed by Rer. Liturg. l. 1. c. 13. n. 2.
Card. Bona, that the Custom of Elevation of the Host, in Order to Adoration,
is found in none of the ancient Sacramentaries, nor in the Ordo Romanus, not in
the Old Ritualists, such as Alcuinus Amalarius, Walafridus, Micrologus and
others. The same had been ingenuously confessed before by Not. in Sacr. Greg.
p. 374.
Menardus, in the same Words: And although there may be Elevation, where there
is no belief of Transubstantiation, yet, since the Custom of Elevation was
lately introduced into the Western Churches, and in order to Adoration of the
Body of Christ then present by Transubstantiation; it seems very probable, that
Doctrine was not then received by the Church, the Consequences whereof were not
certainly in use: For there was as much Reason for the Elevation and Adoration
at that time as ever could be afterward. But my Business is now only to show
wherein the Gallican and British Churches differed from the Roman, and not
wherein they agreed.

(4.) The last difference was as to the Church Music, wherein the Romans were
thought so far to excel other Western Churches, That the goodness of their
Music proved the great occasion of introducing their Offices: For De Imag. l.
1.
Charles the Great says, That his Father Pepin brought the Roman way of
Singing into the Gallican Churches, and their Offices along with it. And
although he says, many Churches stood out then, yet by his means they were
brought to it. And he caused some of the best Masters of Music in Rome to be
brought into France, and there settled for the Instruction of the Pithaei Glos.
v. Cantur Gallicanus.
French Churches: By which means the old Gallican Service was so soon
forgotten, That in Carol. Calv. Epist. ad Cler. Raven.
Carolus Calvus his time, he was forced to send as far as Toledo, to have some
to perform the Old Offices before him; So great a Power had the Roman Music,
and the Prince's Authority in changing the ancient Service of the Gallican
Churches. But thus much may suffice to have cleared the ancient Service of
these Western Churches, and to have showed their difference from the Roman
Offices.

From which Discourse it will appear, that our Church of England has omitted
none of those Offices wherein all the Ancient Churches agreed; And that where
the British or Gallican and Roman differed, our Church has not followed the
Roman, but the other; And therefore our Dissenters do unreasonably charge us
with taking our Offices from the Church of Rome.

CHAP. V. Of the Declension of the British Churches.
BRitain never totally subdued by the Romans.

That, the Occasion of the Miseries of the Britains in the Province, by the
Incursions from beyond the Wall.

Of the Picts, and Scots their mortal Enemies.

The true Original of the Picts from Scandinavia.

That Name not given to the Old Britains, but to the New Colonies.

The Scottish Antiquities enquired into.

An Account of them from John Fordon compared with that given by Hector
Boethius and Buchanan.

Of Hector's Authors, Veremundus, Cornelius Hibernicus and their ancient
Annals.

An Account of the Antiquities of Ireland, and of the Authority of their
Traditions and Annals, compared with the British Antiquities published by
Geffrey of Monmouth in point of Credibility.

A true Account of the Fabulous Antiquities of the Northern Nations. Of the
first coming of the Scots into Britain.

The first Cause of the Declension and Ruin of the British Churches was, the
laying them open to the fury of the Scots and Picts.

Of Maximus his withdrawing the Roman Forces; And the Emperor's sending
numbers of Picts to draw them back.

The miserable Condition of the Britains thus forsaken; And supplies sent them
for a time, and then taken away.

Of the Walls then built for their Security, and the Roman Legions then placed.

Of the great degeneracy of manners among the Britains.

Of Intestine Divisions, and calling in of Foreign Assistence.

The Saxons first coming hither.

Who they were, and whence they came.

Bede's Account examined, and reconciled with the Circumstances of those times.

His fixing the time of their coming justified.

Of the Reasons of Vortigern's calling in the Saxons.

And the Dissatisfaction of the Britains upon their coming, and Vortigern's
League with them.

Of the Valor of Vortimer and Aurelius Ambrosius against the Saxons.

The different Account of the Battles between the Britains and Saxons among our
Historians.

The sad condition of the British Churches at that time.

The imperfect Account given by the British History.

Of King Arthur's Story and Success.

Of Persons of greatest Reputation then in the British Churches, and
particularly of St. David.

Of the Britains passing over to Aremorica.

The beginning of that Colony stated.

Gildas there writes his Epistle; The Scope and Design of it.

The Independency of the British Churches proved from their carriage toward
Augustine the Monk.

The Particulars of that Story cleared; And the whole concluded.

BEing now to give an Account of the fatal Declension of the British Churches,
it will be necessary to look back on the time when their Miseries first began.
For which we are to consider, That the Romans having never made an entire
Conquest of the whole Island; but contenting themselves with the better part,
and excluding the rest by a Wall; They still left a backdoor open for the poor
Provincial Britains to be disturbed, as often as the Roman Garrisons neglected
their Duty or were overpowred by their Enemies. Who were now very much
increased in those remoter parts of Britain; Which being abandoned by the
Romans, they became an easy Prey to the Scots and Picts; Who, from different
parts, took Possession of those Coasts which lay nearest to the Place from
whence they came. Thus, the Scots coming from Ireland, entered upon the Southern
and Western Parts, as the Picts from Scandinavia had before done on the
Northern. Our Learned Camd. Brit. p. 82.
Antiquary was of Opinion, That the Picts were no other than the ancient
Britains, partly settled in those Parts, before the Roman Invasion, and partly
retiring thither out of Impatience of the Roman Yoke, who by degrees grew up
into a considerable number of People. It is not to be questioned, that there
was a Stock of Old Britains in those Northern Parts, as appears by the Army
under Galgacus, and the Actions against Vrbicus, Agricola, Marcellus and
Severus; But their continual Wars with the Roman Legions, who were placed about
the Wall, on purpose to take all Advantages against them, must needs exhaust
them by degrees, and lessen them so much as to leave room enough for new
Recruits to come in and take up part of their Country. And although for their
own Security, the Parts near the Wall might be well supplied on that side, yet
when so much Blood retired to the Heart as was necessary to support Life, a
great deal must be called off from the extreme parts for a fresh supply of it,
and those parts must needs be left destitute of natural heat, and Strength
enough to maintain themselves. For during the War, which continued for several
Ages, the very Life of the British Nation, beyond the Wall, was in perpetual
danger; And not only the Duty and Service, but the many Diseases and Accidents
of War, could not, in so long a tract of time, but very much impair the British
Strength, and leave the remoter Parts, if not wholly void of Inhabitants, yet
not in a Condition to withstand a foreign Invasion. I grant that Tacitus, Dio,
Herodian, Vopiscus, etc. take no notice of any other Enemies the Romans hand at
that time in those Parts besides the Britains; But then, I think, the Argument
may be thus turned upon Camden, What makes the latter Writers so expressly and
distinctly mention the Picts, if they were no other than the Old Britains, so
often spoken of by Roman Historians? I do not understand, why their continuing
an old Custom should now give them a new Name? The Britains, however rude,
were no more Picts then, than they were at Caesar's coming. What makes the
Roman Writers so of a sudden alter their Style, and leave off a Name so famous
among the Romans, for the name of Picts, which was not heard of before? The
first mention we find of them is in Paneg. Constable. n. 11.
Eumenius his Panegyric to Constantius, where he takes notice of the different
State of the Britains, when Caesar subdued them, from what they were in
Constantius his time: Then, says he, they were a rude, half naked People, and
so easily vanquished; But now the Britains were exercised by the Arms of the
Picts and the Irish. Nothing can be plainer, than that Eumenius here
distinguishes the Picts from the Britains, and supposes them to be Enemies to
each other. Neither can we reasonably think this a Name then taken up to
distinguish the barbarous Britains from the Provincial: For that distinction
had now been of a very long standing, and if it had been applied to that
purpose, we should have met with it in Tacitus, or Dio, or Herodian, or
Zosimus, who speak of the Extra-provincial Britains, under no other Name but of
Britains. Xiphil. in Sever.
Dio is so exact as to set down the Names of distinction then used for those
Britains, and he says, they were of two sorts, the Maeatae, and the Caledonii;
If the name of Picts had then comprehended them all, no doubt he would have
mentioned it on that occasion. Zonar. in Sever.
Zonaras likewise calls them all then by the name of Britains. But it is said,
That the Eumen. n. 7.
Panegyrist himself calls the Caledonians, Picts, who were certainly Britains.
His words are, Non dico Caledonum, aliorumque Pictorum, Silvas and Paludes:
where H. Valesius observes, it ought to be read, Non Dicaledonum aliorumque
Pictorum; For Am. Marcel. l. 27. c. 8.
Ammianus Marcellinus says, the Picts were divided into the Dicaledones and
the Vecturiones. It is ingeniously conjectured by Mr. Camden, that these Names
were taken from the Situation of the People, the first from Dehe^ and
Caledones, or the Caledonians on the Right Hand, and the other from Chwithic,
which signifies the Left Hand in the British Language; But Archbishop De
Primord. p. 1021.
Usher observes, that he is mistaken, in supposing the Right Hand among the
Britains to be the West, and the Left Hand the East; for he plainly proves,
that by the one is understood the South, and the other the North. And Bed.
Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 4.
Bid shows, that the Northern and Southern Picts were divided from each other
by a Ridge of Mountains; which Scotichron. l. 2. c. 7.
John Fordon says, was Mount Grampius, which parted the Scots and the Picts.
For the Scots came into that part of the Picts Country which lay next to
Ireland; from whence they came thither under the conduct of Reuda, as Hist. l.
1. c. 1.
Bid says. Who, as some think, was the Chief of the Six Sons of the King of
Ulster, who, as Giraldus Cambrensis says, with no small Fleet, came into the
Northern Parts of Britain, and there settled themselves; from whom that
Country was called Scotia. Which, if it happened in the time of Constantius,
as Archbishop De Primord. p. 547.
Usher proves from the Anonymous Life of St. Patrick, it agrees very well with
what Am. Marcel. l. 20.
Ammianus Marcellinus says, That in the latter end of his Reign, the Scots and
the Picts were both joined against the Britains. The Scots, as Gild. Epist.
Gildas and Bed. l. 1. c. 12.
Bid say, coming from the West, and the Picts from the North; And so Fabius
Ethelwerd says, the Picts came from the North, and the Scots from the West;
who took possession of the Southwest parts of Caledonia beyond Glota, and
Bodotria, or Dumbritton, and Edenborough Frith. And so, the Mons Grampius, or
the Dorsum Britannicum, as some call it, parted the Picts and the Scots; the
Old Britains still living between the Wall and the two Friths; Forbid
expressly says, That both the Scots and the Picts lived beyond them; and he
likewise adds, That upon the remove of the Roman Legion they took in all the
Country as far as Severus his Wall; where the Britains dwelt before. I
confess, the Roman Province had different Bounds at several times, it sometimes
extending as far as Antoninus his Wall, or Graham's Dike between the two
Friths; Sometimes again it was brought within the Compass of Hadrian and
Severus his Wall, id est, between the Tine and the Esk; And Bid thinks that
the last Wall made by the Romans was where Severus his Wall stood. If so, that
whole Country between the two Walls must be then abandoned for 100 Miles;
Which Usser. de Prim. p. 1027.
some object against as an improbable thing, The Wall being so much longer, and
consequently more indefensible by the Britains. But, in probability, the
Britains were then willing to let their Enemies have the more room to prevent
being disturbed by them; And this was the main Security they always had, the
Linea Valli relating to this Wall from Hadrian's time; And although sometimes
in a bravery the Roman Soldiers would march to Antoninus his Wall, and drive
the Britains before them, yet generally the Roman Province was bounded by
Severus his Wall, and therefore Gallio Ravennas might at last choose rather to
make up and fortify this for the Britains, when the Roman Soldiers left them
to defend themselves.

But, as to the several Inhabitants beyond the Wall, it will be necessary, in
order to the following History, to set down a more particular Account in this
Place of the different Original of them, which has been so perplexed by the
partial Conjectures of the Scottish and Irish Antiquaries, that it is no easy
matter to find out the plain Truth amongst them. But I shall endeavor to trace
the Footsteps of it by the best Light which ancient or modern Authors afford.
And I am so far from any pique or partiality in this matter that I shall be
glad to receive any better information from learned and ingenuous Men. For it
will appear by this enquiry that the Antiquities of both Nations do yet stand
much in need of being cleared to the satisfaction of inquisitive Men. But to
the business.

It is certain that in the time of Tacitus, the Northern Parts of this Island
were well inhabited, as appears by the following Account from him. The
Brigantes, who extended as far as the Tine, were, as Tacit. Agric. c. 17, 18.
he says, subdued by Petilius Cerealis; The Silures, by Julius Frontinus; The
Ordovices, the other People of Wales; by Julius Agricola in his first entry
upon this Province. But in his third year he went as far as the Frith of Taus:
By which Sir H. Savil says, Some understand the Tweed; For that it cannot be
understood of the Taus, which parts the Northern and the Southern parts of
Scotland, seems evident from Tacitus, who says, That the Romans had leisure to
build Castles there: But this Taus is a great way beyond the two Friths; And
Tacitus, in the fourth year of Agricola, makes the Roman Power to reach no
further than to Glota and Bodotria, where he thought the Romans might have
conveniently fixed the Bounds of their Empire that way. But, I confess, Tacitus
his words may bear another meaning, viz. That although the Romans had made
Excursions as far as the Taus, and set up some Forts there; Yet when Agricola
went about to settle the Province, he reduced it within the compass of the two
Friths; There being the most convenient Place for the Garrison to be fixed;
There being so small a Neck of Land between the Arms of the two Seas, which
was then very well fortified. But the boundless Ambition of the Romans, in the
fifth year of Agricola, carried them beyond these Limits; And then he subdued
Nations before that time unknown; And furnished with Forces that part of
Britain which lies against Ireland: Not out of fear of any Invasion from
thence; But rather in hopes of subduing that Country by their means. Which
shows that Ireland was then well peopled; and thought by Agricola very fit for
the Roman Army to conquer; Because it lay so convenient for uniting the parts
of the Empire together; And it would help much toward the total subduing of
Britain, if there were no appearance of Liberty left within their view. And
Tacitus insinuates that Agricola had it in his Design, if he had been suffered
to continue longer after his Victory over Galgacus: Which Domitian's incurable
Jealousy of Great Men would not permit. However, in order to it, Agricola had
taken an account of the Ports, and condition of the People, whom he found not
unlike the Britains; And he kept with him till Occasion served, one of the
Princes of that Country, who was driven from thence by a domestic Sedition.
But in the mean time, in his sixth year, he applied himself to the Conquest of
the several Nations beyond Bodotria, among whom a general Insurrection was
apprehended, and all Passages by Land were supposed to be beset; And therefore
Agricola set out a Fleet for discovery of the Country; the sight whereof
struck great Terror into the Britains. And then he says, the Caledonians
armed themselves and set upon the Romans with all the Force they could make;
and falling upon the ninth Legion unexpectedly, had like to have totally
defeated them, if the rest of the Army had not come in to their timely rescue.
By which good success, the Roman Army, being much encouraged, cried out to
march into Caledonia; That they might at last come to the utmost Bounds of
Britain. But the Britains attributed this not to the Valor of the Romans, but
to the ill Conduct of their General; And therefore resolved to fight it out,
and to that end they disposed of their Wives and Children in Places of Safety,
and by frequent Meetings and solemn Sacrifices they entered into a strict
Confederacy, to stand it out to the utmost against the Romans. And in this Case
of common danger, all the Cities were united together, and raised an Army of
30000 Men, under the Command of Galgacus, who, in his brave Oration, so much
commended by Lipsius, tells his Soldiers, they were the last of the Britains,
there being no Nation beyond them; And he calls them, the most noble of the
Britains, who had never beheld the Slavery of others; Upon this the fatal
Battle was fought at the Foot of Mons Grampius, where 10000 Britains were
killed, and the rest dispersed; After which Agricola was recalled. This is the
Substance of Tacitus his Relation, wherein we may observe; (1.) That these
Britains were not merely such as were driven thither by the stress of War, but
such as had long inhabited there, and had so little Communication with the
other Britains, that they had never seen the Condition of Slavery which the
Romans had brought them to. (2.) That they were not inconsiderable for their
Numbers or Valor, who were able to oppose the whole Roman Army, and make their
Victory so doubtful. (3.) That these had a distinct Name from the rest, being
in general called the Caledonian Britains: And Tacitus thinks they had a
different Original from the Silures, and other Britains. Those who adjoined to
Gaul, he concludes came at first from thence, and had several Colonies followed
them afterward, as appears by their Names, Customs and Language; the Silures
he deduced from Spain, which he proves from their Complexion and Situation; And
so probably enough, he thinks them a Colony of the old Iberi; some whereof went
into Ireland, and peopled some part of it: But, besides these two, he makes a
third Race of Men in Britain, whom he fetches out of Germany, and these were
the Caledonian Britains; But Tacit. de Mor. Germ. c. 1.
he takes Germany in a very large Sense, so as to extend as far as the
Sarmatae; And to comprehend under it, c. 43, 44.
the Northern Nations of the Cimbri, and the Gothones, and the Sucones; From
whom it seems very probable, that the Caledonian Britains descended; As the
Southern Britains came from the Celtae; Whose Language and Religion were kept
up among them. But the Caledonians came from the European Scythians, to whose
Coasts they lay much nearer than to those of the Celtae, and their larger
Proportions, which Tacitus observes agree very well with this Supposition.

And these, if I mistake not, were the Original Picts, but not called by that
Name, till new Colonies came over to people the Country, after the terrible
Devastation of it by the Continuance of the Roman Wars. For Claud de quarto
Consul. Honorii.
Claudian makes Thule the Country of the Picts; And after all the Disputes
which have been about it, Ola. Rudbeck, Atlantic. c. 19.
Olaus Rudbeck has made it very probable, that Scandinavia is meant by it;
Which he proves, not only from the Testimony of Procopius, who affirms it; but
from the exact Agreement of the Relations of Pytheas, Isidorus, and others with
that, and neither with Iseland, nor any other Place. Besides, Bed. l. 1. c. 1.
Bid says, The common Tradition was, that the Picts came out of Scythia;
Which is affirmed by Matt. Westminster, and many others: But they do not mean
the Asian, but the European Scythia; Which comprehended under it all the most
Northern Nations, Ab extremo Aquilone, says Plin. l. 6. c. 13.
Pliny; And elsewhere he says, l. 4. c. 12.
That the Getae, the Daci and Sarmatae, and even the Germans were called
Scythians: Herod. l. 4.
Herodotus mentions the Northern Scythians to whom there was no access by those
who dwelt near the Palus Maeotis without the help of seven Languages; And when
Darius fought with them, they retired Northwards toward their own Country.
Prol. Tab. 8. Europa.
Ptolemy places the Royal Scythians near the Hyperborean Mountains; Which could
never be found in the vast Plains of Poland and Muscovy; There being no
Mountains there answering to their Description as Re^. Muscov. p. 61.
Hebersteinius and Sarm. Europ. l. 2. c. 3, 4.
Matthias a Micou confess; And therefore Atlantic. c. 9.
Olaus Rudbeck has undertaken to prove, not without great show of Reason, That
these Mountains were no other than the Ridge of Mountains in Sweden, where the
seat of the ancient Scythians was; And that Ptolemy was extremely mistaken in
the Situation of the Northern Nations, removing them several Degrees more
Eastward than they ought to have been, and so very much straitning Scandinavia.
Which De Rebus Get. l. 1. c. 4.
Jornandes calls the Workhouse of Nations; and the same Jornandes affirms from
Josephus, That the Sueones were the true Scythians, whom Mem. l. 2. p. 581. ed.
M. St.
Xenophon takes to be the Governing People of Europe in his time; As the
Persians were in Asia and the Carthaginians in Africa. And the old Greek v.
Strabo, l. 1. and 11.
Geographers (as is said before) knew of but two Nations in Europe besides
themselves, viz. the Scythae toward the North, and the Celtae toward the
West. These European Scythians did make frequent Expeditions by Sea, as appears
by the old Gothic Histories; And Atlantic. c. 7.
Olaus Rudbeck observes from them, That it was a Custom for them to go abroad
by Sea, under the Conduct of one of their Princes, to see for Booty; And Germ.
c. 44.
Tacitus says particularly of the Sueones, that they were well provided of
Shipping; And therefore there can be no improbability that these Northern
Nations should people that part of Britain which lay nearest to them. And
Suenon. Opusc. c. 1.
Sueno, the first Historian of Denmark, says, That Helghi, the Son of Haldan,
the Son of Skiold, the first Monarch there, was so powerful at Sea, that he
was called Rex Maris, the King of the Sea. And Hist. Dan. l. 2.
Saxo Grammaticus says, That, having subdued the King of the Sclavi, he sailed
into diverse Passages of the Sea. v. Not. Steph. in Sax. Gram.
Andreas Velleius gives this Reason why the Northern Nations were so soon and
so much given to Expeditions by Sea, because their Kings having many Children,
they thought them best employed abroad, in seeking other Countries and getting
Spoils at Sea. And upon the old boast of the Scythians concerning their
Antiquity and Nobility might be grounded that Saying of Galgacus, That the
Caledonian Britains were the most noble of any of them.

Among these Scythians L. 4. c. 12.
Pliny reckons the Agathyrsi; Who had their Name, says Atlantic. c. 30.
Olaus Rudbeck, from Aggathyr, one of the Gothic Names for Neptune: From Agga,
signifying Power at Sea; and Tyr, Power at Land; These Agathyrsi, says he,
were a sort of People who lived near the Sea, in the Sinus Codanus, and were
wont to prey upon the Spoils of the Sea. Iornandes places them in Scandia, and
calls them Agantzyrios. They were remarkable in Antiquity for Painting their
Bodies, as not only appears from Virgil's Pictique Agathyrsi,
But from what Solin. c. 15.
Solinus says of them, That their Bodies were painted Color caeruleo, just as
the old Picts were. De Moribus Germ.
Tacitus observes of the Arii, a fierce Northern People, That they had Tincta
Corpora, i. e. were Picts. And the same Georg. 2.
Virgil says of the Geloni, who were next Neighbors to the Agathyrsi: So that
Hist. Scot. s. 4.
Hector Boethius his Conjecture is not at all improbable, who deduces the Picti
from the Agathyrsi, i. e. from the Maritime Inhabitants of the Baltic Sea; or,
as he expresses it, from those who came first out of Sarmatia into the Cimbrick
Chersonese, and from thence into Scotland.

This being to me the most probable Account of the Original of the Picts, I now
come to that of the Scots. And, to do right to all Pretenders, I shall
impartially set down the several Claims of the Scottish and Irish Antiquaries,
and in passing make some Remarks upon them.

I begin with the Scottish Pretenses, Apparat. ad Hist. Scotic. l. 1. c. 2.
Dempster has given a large Catalogue of the Scottish Antiquaries (whom he
never saw) such as Marcerius, the first Writer of their History, whom he places
Anno Dom. 53. From him, Hist. Eccles. l. 12. n. 881.
he says, Veremundus took his Materials, (whom Hector Boethius professes to
follow) and Cornelius Hibernicus, another of Hector's great Authors, who is
said by him to have lived Anno Dom. 1160. about 80 years after Veremundus,
according to Dempster's computation. Lesly (or Robert Turner, as some think)
mentions some ancient Annals, which Hector takes no notice of in particular,
but Dempster does, as those of Paslet and Scone, and other Monasteries. It
would tend very much to the clearing of the Scottish Antiquities if some of
these ancient Annals or Lieger Books were printed by some of their Learned Men,
who have never been wanting in that Nation since Hector's time. And it has
rendered their Credit the more suspicious, because they have been so long kept
up, when all the old Annals which have been found among us have either been
carefully published, or our Writers have on all Occasions appealed to their
Authority, and made use of their own Words to justify their Assertions.
Whether this has been done by Hector, Buchanan or Lesly, as to these Annals, I
leave the Reader to determine.

I omit Dempster's other ancient Authors, who were never heard of by any
besides himself; But it is somewhat strange, that even such as Veremundus and
Cornelius should never fall into any hands (that I can find) but those of
Hector Boethius; And that he should never so much as mention John Fordon's
Scoti-chronicon. Pits confounds this Author with John de Fordam, Confessor to
our King John, and so places him Anno Dom. 1210. Wherein he is followed by the
Learned De Hist. Lat. l. 2. c. 56.
Ger. Vossius. He was Abbat of Ford in Devonshire, says Leland, and he
mentions no Historical Writings of his. But it is certain that John Fordon, who
wrote the Scoti-chronicon, lived after this time, by the Authors he quotes
(such as the Scoti-chron. l. 3. c. 8. l. 1. c. 38.
Poly-chronicon of Ranalphus Higden, the Polycraticon of Roger of Chester, who
both lived in the fourteenth Century.) And Hist. Eccles. l. 12. n. 911.
Maculloch, who transcribed and enlarged it, lived, says Dempster, Anno Dom.
1482. For it appears by the Preface, Debtor sum fateor, etc. That John Fordon
(who is there called a Presbyter, and no Monk) finished no more than five Books
of the Scoti-chronicon; But left the Materials to make up the rest; And that
Fordon's own Work was but lately done, before Maculloch undertook to finish and
enlarge it, who professes himself a Disciple of Fordon 's; And distinguishes
his own Additions from Fordon's Copy, by putting in the Margin Scriptor and
Author. But Appar. ad Hist. Scot. l. 1. c. 2.
Dempster makes Maculloch, Scoti-chronicon, and Fordon, three several Authors,
which is a Sign he never saw them. Mr. Brit. p. 71^.
Camden takes notice how much the later Scottish Historians are beholding to
Fordon 's diligence. And therefore out of him I shall give a short Account of
the Scottish Antiquities; And then show how far Major, Hector Boethius and
Buchanan differ from him: For Lesly does very faithfully contract Hector where
Buchanan was ashamed to follow him; as will appear by what follows.

There was, says Scoti-chron. l. 1. c. 9.
Fordon, One Gaithelos, Son of Neolus, one of the Kings of Greece, who, having
displeased his Father, was banished his Country, and went into Egypt, where he
was married to Scota, the King's Daughter. But he quotes another Chronicle,
which says, that he was sent to the assistence of the King of Egypt, against
the Ethiopians; Who gave him his only Daughter Scota to Wife; And the Legend
of St. Brendan to the same purpose; And another Chronicle, which makes him to
be Grandchild to Nimrod, who was driven into Egypt, and there married this
Scota. However they differ in lesser Circumstances, they agree in the main
Point; For Scota he must have, or else the Name of Scotia would be quite lost.
c. 12.
After the destruction of Pharaoh in the Red Sea, Gaithelos is chosen King;
But, Discontents arising, he and his Wife Scota, with their Company, put to
Sea, and made Westward; But, after many Difficulties, they landed in Spain,
where, after the Conquest of the Inhabitants, he built the City Brigantia; c.
14.
But, being wearied out with continual Wars, he sent some of his Company to Sea
to find out an Island without Inhabitants; upon discovery whereof they returned
to Gaithelos; Who soon after died, c. 16.
and charged his Children and Friends to go thither; c. 17.
And accordingly his Sons, Iber and Imec, c. 18.
went to take Possession of this Island, which from him was called Ibernia, and
from his Mother Scotia; Which Name was after given to part of Britain; Because
the Inhabitants of the other Island settled, there (says Maculloch, in his
Additions to Fordon) as appears by the affinity of their Language and Customs,
which, c. 21.
says he, continues to this day. In Spain some of that Race abode, says
Fordon, out of an old Chronicle, 240 years; Then arose a King, whom he calls
Micelius, c. 22.
who had three Sons, Hermonius, Partholomus and Hibertus, whom he sent into
Ireland with a great Army; The eldest returned to Spain; But the other two
continued there. Afterward Simon Brek with his Company made a third descent
into Ireland, who sprang from Hermonius, c. 27.
and carried along with him the Marble Chair in which their Kings were wont to
sit, and which Gathelus brought out of Egypt, as some think; c. 29.
but others say, Simon drew it up from the bottom of the Sea with an Anchor in
a great Tempest, and therefore was preserved as a precious Relict; And he took
it as a Presage of his Kingdom, which was to continue wherever that Stone was;
as the Southsayers said. From Ireland, Ethachius Rothay, a Descendent from
Simon Brek, took possession of the Island Rothsay; c. 30.
And many Scots associated with the Picts in the Northern parts of Britain; But
being hardly used, c. 33.
and having no Head, Fergus, the Son of Fercard, or Ferard, being descended of
the Royal Family, went over, and took upon him the Government of them. c. 37.
Which, he says, was before Christ 330 years, in the time of Alexander the
Great; who carried the Fatal Chair into Scotland, and was crowned in it. l. 2:
c. 12.
Some time after him succeeded Rether, whom Bid calls Reuda, who endeavored
to enlarge the Borders of the Scots in those Parts, and fixed himself in that
which from him was called Retherdale, but since Rydisdale; c. 13.
And this he makes the Second coming of the Scots out of Ireland. After this,
he tells how the Kings of the Britains, of the Scots, and the Picts lived very
lovingly together till Julius Caesar disturbed them all, who, he says, c. 14.
went to the very Borders of Scotland; And there sent Letters to the Kings,
both of the Scots and Picts, who both returned Answers in Latin, although but
the Chapter before he says, The very Britains had never heard of the Name of
the Romans. But it happened, That Caesar, hearing of the Revolt of the Gauls,
made a speedy return out of those Parts. c. 28.
Then he relates the bloody Wars of the Scots and Picts against the Britains;
and how Fulgentius, 29.
Head of the Britains, joined with the Picts and Scots against Severus, and
killed him at York: c. 36.
And so proceeds in the Story of Carausius and Maximus, 37.
and their Wars with the Scots and Picts, 38.
till he comes to Fergus II. With whom he begins his Third Book; And between
the two Fergusses he reckons Forty five Kings; But he confesses he cannot
distinguish the times of their Reign; l. 3. c. 2.
as he can do those from Fergus II. And he gives this considerable Reason for
it, Nam ad plenum Scripta non reperimus, i. e. He could not find any full
Account of them in any ancient Annals or Records. And therefore it ought to be
considered from whence Hector, Buchanan and Lesly should be able to give such a
particular Account of the Reigns of those Kings which were wholly unknown to
Fordon. This is the short Account of what Fordon delivers about these Remoter
Antiquities of the Scots.

De Gestis Scot. l. 1. c. ^.
Joh. Major confesses, That the Scots were derived from the Irish, which, he
says, is plain by the Language; For in his time, half the Nation spoke Irish,
and before that time, more. And so he tells the Story of their coming from
Spain, of the City Braganza, of Iberus and his Mother Scota, and then repeats
the Tradition of Gathelus, as Fordon relates it; But very honestly says, That
he looks on that part of it, about coming out of Greece and Egypt as a Fiction;
And very probably conjectures it was done, because the Britains derived
themselves from the Trojans. Which was subtily done of the Scots to claim
Kindred rather with the Conquering Greeks, than the subdued and banished
Trojans. All that Major asserts is, That the Irish came out of Spain, and the
Scots out of Ireland: And the Story of Simon Brek he rejects as a Fable: And he
makes the first settling of the Scots in Britain, to be that under Reuda; c. 11.
But he mentions their Annals for Fergus, the Son of Ferchard, before Reuda;
and Rether and Ryddesdale, as it is in Fordon. But he makes the Kingdoms of the
Picts, Scots and Britains to be distinct in Caesar's time; And that they all
joined against him: And so relates Fordon's Story to the time of Fergus II. But
between the two Fergusses he makes but 15 Kings, and 700 Years.

Hist. Scot. l. 1.
Hector Boethius, before he begins the Tradition of Gathelus, very ingenuously
confesses, that their Nation followed the Custom of other Nations, therein
making themselves the Offspring of the Greeks and Egyptians; And so he tells
all the Story from Gathelus, as Fordon has done, only here and there making
Additions and Embellishments of his own; As when he derives the Brigantes from
Brigantia in Spain; When he sets down the Deliberation about the Form of
Government upon Fergus his coming to Scotland; And the Speeches of Fergus and
the King of the Picts; The Death of Coilus King of the Britains; The entering
the fundamental Contract of the Scots, with the Posterity of Fergus in Marble
Tables in the way of Hieroglyphics; The Agrarian Law, and Partition made by
Seven, and the Division of the Tribes; The bringing the Silures, Ordovices,
Camelodunum, as well as the Brigantes, within the Compass of Scotland; These
are the proper Inventions of Hector, unless he had them from his Spaniard
Veremundus, which no one could tell but himself; Thence Leland and Monae
Descrip. ad fin.
Lluyd charge him with innumerable Falsehoods. Hist. Eccles. l. 2. n. 175.
Dempster confesses, that Buchanan frequently chastises him; But he would have
it rather on the Account of Religion than Learning: But it is plain, that he
owns his Mistakes and Buch. Hist. l. 2. ad fin.
Vanity, only he charges Lluyd with as great on behalf of the Britains.

In the Second Book Hector inlarges more. For Scotiahr. l. 2. c. 12.
Fordon passes on from Fergus to Rether, or Bede's Reuda, having nothing to
say; But Hector acquaints us with the Contest about the Regency upon Fergus his
Death, and the Law then made concerning it, the attempt of Resignation of
Feritharis, to Ferlegus, the Son of Fergus, and his Imprisonment upon it; The
Death of Feritharis after fifteen years Reign; The Flight of Ferlegus into
Britain, with the Choice of Main, his younger Brother, to be King; His good
Government and Annual Progress for Justice through all Places of his Dominions;
His appointing Circles of great Stones for Temples, and one in the middle for
the Altar; And the Monthly Worship of the New Moon; And several Egyptian
Sacrifices (which one would have thought had been more proper for Gathelus
himself) with the Succession of his Son Dornadil, his making the Laws of
Hunting, which were still observed there; And of his Brother Nothatus, his Son
Reuther being an Infant: Who came in by the Law of Regency, says Hector; By
the Power of the People says Buchanan; but in truth by neither. For all this
Succession seems to have been the product of Hector's fruitful Invention,
which Buchanan follows without Authority; as he does in all the rest of the
Succession of that Race of Kings from Reuther to Fergus II.

To make way for Bede's Account of Reuda's coming into those Parts of Britain,
This Reuther is forced back into Ireland; from whence he is said to return with
new Supplies after twelve years; From whom the Scots were then called
Dalreudini: But this return of Reuther, Hector places in the year before Christ
204. And after him Reutha, his Kinsman; In whose time, Hector relates an
Embassy from Ptolemy Philadelphus to him; And the Account of Scotland which he
began in a large Volume for his satisfaction, which was after finished by
Ptolemy the Cosmographer. This Buchanan had the Wit to leave out (and even
Hist. Eccles. l. 16. n. 1065.
Dempster himself; though he mentions him for a Writer of their History) and so
he does the Voyage of the two Spanish Philosophers in the time of Josina, and
their Preaching against the Egyptian Worship in Scotland; (but Lesly has it.)
And if Buchanan had believed it, he would have set it down, as well as Josina's
bringing Physic and Surgery into so much request. That there was not a
Noble Man that could not practice the latter. And yet Hector declares
immediately after the Story of the Philosophers, that hitherto he had followed
Veremundus, John Campbell and Cornelius Hibernitus, the most approved Authors
of their History. It would have been some satisfaction to the World, if any
other Person had seen these Authors besides; Fordon never mentions them; And
yet he used great diligence to search their Antiquities; And, if Appar. ad
Hist. Scot. l. 1. c. 6.
Dempster may be believed, had the Sight of their most ancient MSS. Buchanan
passes them over; Dempster names them, on the authority of Hector: What became
of these great Authors afte^ Hector's time? Did he destroy them, as some say
Polydore Virgil did some of ours after he had used them? But this were Madness,
to quote their Authority and destroy the Authors; For these were his Vouchers;
which ought most carefully to have been preserved. And in truth Hector himself
gives no very consistent Account of his Authors: For in his Epistle to James
5. he mentions Veremundus, Archdeacon of St. Andrew's, who deduced the Scottish
History from the Original to Malcolm III. And Turgott, Bishop of St. Andrew's,
and John Campbell, which were brought from the Island Iona; To whom he adds an
Anonymous Author, and the imperfect History of William Elphinston, Bishop of
Aberdeen. But, says he, if any ask such a material Question, How came these
Authors to be seen no where else? He answers, That Edw. I. destroyed all their
Monuments of Antiquity; So that had not those been preserved in the Island Iona
with the Chest of Books which Fergus II. brought from the sacking of Rome, in
the time of Alaric, They had been able to give no account of their Antiquities.
From whence it is evident that Hector never saw or heard of any ancient
Authors of their History, but such as were conveyed to him from the Island
Iona. But in his L. 7. p. 118.
Seventh Book, where he gives a more particular account of those Books which
were brought to him from thence, he only mentions some broken Fragments of
Latin Authors; But whose they were, where Written, whence they came, he knew
not; And, as to their own Histories, he names indeed Veremundus and Elphinston,
and no more. The latter he said before was imperfect, and lately done; So that
the whole Credit of Hector's Antiquities rests entirely upon Veremundus; For
here he never takes notice of Campbell or Cornelius Hibernicus; But he says,
Edw. I. had destroyed all their Antiquities, but such as were preserved in the
Island Iona or Hy. And is this now a good Foundation to build a History upon?
For is it not very strange, that no one Copy of Veremundus should be heard of
since that time; When there were several of Fordon, not only there, but in our
Libraries, some with the Inlargements and some without? But if our King Edw. I.
destroyed all their ancient Histories, how came Turgott's to be preserved? He
was Bishop of St. Andrew's in the time of Malcolm III. and Queen Margaret,
whose Lives he wrote; And whose History, Hector says, he had. So that not
only Turgott's History of the Church of Durham is preserved in the Cotton
Library, with his own Name written in an ancient Character (the same that is
printed under the Name of Simeon Dunelmensis, with some Alterations, as
Praefat. ad 10 Script.
Mr. Seldom has showed; But if Hoveden be so much to blame, as Leland. de
Script. in Simeon.
Leland says, for concealing what he borrowed from Simeon Dunelmensis, Simeon
himself is at least as much to blame for assuming to himself the proper work of
Turgott.) But it seems Hector had seen what he wrote in relation to the Scottish
History: And Bale and Pits say, he wrote of the Kings of Scotland. But Dempster
says, he wrote only the Annals of his own time, i. e. I suppose, the Lives of
Malcolm and Margaret: If so, Hector mentions him to little purpose, with
respect to the Scottish Antiquities. But however, from the forementioned
Authors, Hector pretends to give an Account of the Institution of the Great
Council by Finannus, of the Order of the Druids, and their Chief Seat in the
Island Mona, (which he would have to be the Isle of Man, to the great regret of
Humphrey Lluyd, who has written a Book on purpose to disprove him and Polydore
Virgil about it.) Of the Tyranny and violent Death of King Durstus; Of the
choice of Euenus his Kinsman to succeed him, and his first requiring an Oath of
Allegiance; Of the Disturbances by Gillus his natural Son, and his flying into
Ireland: And his Death by Cadallus; And Euenus his setting up Edecus, the
Grandchild of Durstus; with which he ends his Second Book.

In his Third Book he gives an Account of the Troubles from Ireland by Bredius,
a Kinsman of Gillus; Of Cassibellan's Message to Ederus for Assistence against
Julius Caesar: And the Speech of Androgeus before the Council: and Ederus his
Answer, and sending 10000 Men under the Command of Cadallanus, Son to Cadallus;
Who, with the British Forces, quite overthrew Caesar, by the help of Tenantius,
Duke of the Cambri and Corinei; for which, as we may easily conceive, there was
wonderful rejoicing in Scotland: And great Friendship upon it, between the
Britains, the Picts and the Scots. But next Summer they hear the sad News of
Caesar's coming again; And then the Britains refused the Scots assistence (and
it is easy to imagine what must follow) the poor Britains were miserably
beaten; And Cassibellan yields himself to Caesar, and Caesar marches toward
Scotland; but before he enters it, he sends a more Eloquent Letter to them than
that in Fordon; And the Scots and Picts returned a resolute Answer. But it
seems Caesar had so much good Nature in him as to send a Second Message to the
Scots, which was delivered with great Eloquence, but it did not work upon them;
For, says Hector, had it not been for the Law of Nations, they had torn the
Messengers to pieces. But it happened luckily, that while Caesar was making
Preparations to enter Scotland, he received Letters from Labienus of the Revolt
of the Gauls; upon which Caesar returns, having scarce so much as frighted the
Picts and the Scots. And here again Hector vouches the Authority of Veremundus
and Campbell; But notwithstanding, Buchanan very wisely leaves all this out,
which Lesly, believing Veremundus, or rather Hector before Caesar, keeps in.
But here Hector becomes very nice and critical, rejecting the vulgar Annals
(which it seems were not destroyed by Edw. I.) which say, that Caesar went as
far as the Caledonian Wood, and besieged Camelodunum, and left there his
Pretorian House which he used to travel with, called Julis Hoff. But for his
part, he would write nothing that might be found fault with, and therefore he
follows Veremundus again, That this was the Temple of Victory, built by
Vespasian, not far from Camelodunum; Only the Inscription was defaced by Edw.
I. Buchanan in the Life of King Donald says, This was the Temple of the God
Terminus: being near the Roman Wall. It was a round Building, made of square
Stones, and open only at the top 24 Cubits in height, 13 in breadth, as Brit.
p. 700.
Camden describes it. Nenn. c. 19.
Nennius says, It was built by Carausius, in token of his Triumph. But this
looks no more like a Triumphal Arch, than Caesar's traveling Palace: And
therefore Buchanan's opinion seems most probable, since Hector says, That
there was within it a Stone of great magnitude, which was the Representation of
the God Terminus, especially, if the hole in the top were over the Stone, as it
was in the Capitol at Rome. Then follow the wicked Life and tragical End of
Euenus III. the good Reign of Metellanus, and his Friendship with Augustus,
which he goes about to prove from Strabo: But he had better kept to Veremundus.
After him succeeded Caratacus, born at Caractonium, a City of the Silures,
says Hector, and that he might be sure to confound all, he says, his Sister
Voada was married to Arviragus, King of the Britains; But he divorced her, and
married Geuissa, a Noble Roman; upon which Caratacus joined the Britains
against the Romans, and was at last beaten by them, and betrayed by
Cartumandua, his Mother-in-law, who, after his Father's death, was married to
Venusius, and was by Ostorius carried in Triumph to Rome, from whence, he
says, he returned to Scotland, and remained to his death a Friend to the
Romans; After Caractacus, Corbred his Brother was chosen King; who joined with
Voada against the Romans; And partaking of her misfortune returned into
Scotland, and there died. His Sons being under Age, Dardannus succeeded; Who
designing to destroy the right Heirs of the Crown, was himself taken off: And
thereby Way was made for Galdus the true Heir to succeed; Who was the same,
says Hector, with Tacitus his Galgacus; and, he confesses, was beaten by
Petilius Cerealis. This King, Buchanan thinks, was the first of their Kings who
fought with the Romans. What becomes then of the Credit of Hector and
Veremundus, from whom we have such ample Narrations of their engaging with the
Romans so long before? From hence it is plain that Veremundus his Authority
signified nothing with him; And yet he follows Hector where he professes to
rely upon his Authority. For Buchanan evidently abridges Hector as to the
Scottish Affairs, leaving out what he found inconsistent with the Roman History.

Hector begins his Fifth Book with the short Reign and doleful End of
Luctacus, Galdus his Son; who was succeeded by Mogallus, his Sisters Son; who
continued for some time a brave Prince, but at last degenerating, was killed by
his Subjects. After him Conarus his Son, who was confined for ill management,
and the Government committed to Argadus; Upon his death the Kingdom fell to
Ethodius, Nephew to Mogallus, who was strangled in his Bed by an Irish Harper:
And so was Satrael that succeeded him, by those of his Bedchamber. These are
sad Stories, if they were true, but the comfort is, there appears yet no better
Authority than that of Hector for them. For Fordon has nothing of all this;
And Buchanan and Lesly take them upon Hector's Credit. They served Buchanan's
purpose well enough, as appears by his Book De jure Regni apud Scotos; And
therefore he was willing to let them stand in History, being none of his
Invention, and knowing what use was to be made of them. Donaldus, Brother to
Ethodius, was chosen in his room, and here Hector falls in with Fordon about
Fulgentius, one of the Royal British Race, who revolted from the Romans, which
Fordon had from Geffrey of Monmouth, who calls him Fulgenius, and says, he was
driven with the Britains into Albany: But after, in a Fight with Severus at
York, they were both killed. But in this Hector was ashamed to follow them;
allowing Severus to die a natural death, and Fulgentius to survive him. As to
Donald's embracing Christianity, he follows Fordon, but never quotes him; And
here he never mentions Veremundus; As though so considerable a Point of History
needed no Authority but his own. He concludes this Book with a brief Account of
Ethodius, Son to the former, who for his ill Government was confined by his
Nobles and killed by his Guards.

In the Sixth Book he begins with a Convention of the Estates for the choice of
a new King. And they set up his Son Athirco, who gave great hopes at first, but
falling into Debauchery, his Nobles combined against him, and finding no way to
escape, he killed himself. Nathalacus, Head of the Conspiracy, succeeds, who
was for a time Popular, afterward Cruel, to that degree, as raised a general
hatred of him, which ended in a Design to destroy him; Wherein they were
prevented by one of his greatest Confidents, who stabbed him. Then Findocus,
eldest Son to Athirco, recovered the Crown, who proved an excellent Prince, but
was at last murdered by two Villains, his Brother Carantius being privy to it:
The Murderers were executed, but Carantius fled, and was afterward a great
Soldier under Probus, Carus and Dioclesian. This Carantius is the same whom
the Roman Writers call Carausius, as Hector afterward confesses, who set up
for himself in Britain; But, says he, he purposely disguised himself abroad.
Geffrey of Monmouth makes him a Britain, and calls him Carassius. Scoti-chron.
l. 2. c. 44.
Fordon tells the main of the Story of Carausius well enough; only enlarging
on the Leagues he made with the Scots and Picts; And Gothorius, Nephew to
Fulgentius, who ruled over the Northern Britains. But whence had Hector this
Information, That he was Carantius, Son to Athirco, and Brother to Findocus?
Buchanan is not ashamed to relate the Story of Carantius as far as to his
passing into the Roman Army, and there stops. But afterward he speaks of
Carausius his Actions in Britain, without any farther mention of Carantius;
Which shows that Buchanan took, and left what he pleased out of Hector's
History without being obliged by any Authority he produced to carry it on as he
found it there.

After the Death of Findocus, his Brother Donald succeeded, who was soon killed
by Donald of the Isles, who usurped the Kingdom, and was at last killed by a
Conspiracy whereof Crathlintus, Son to Findocus was the chief; Who immediately
took possession of the Crown: After him succeeded Fincormachus; both these died
peaceably. Then arose a mighty Contest about the Regency between the three
Nephews of Crathlintus; At first Romachus prevailed, but Governing cruelly, he
was taken off: Then followed Angusianus, who was killed in Battle by the Picts;
After him Fethelmachus, killed in his Bed by his Harper; And last of all
Eugenius, killed in Battle by the Romans: And soon after, by the Instigation of
the Picts their mortal Enemies, the Scots were universally banished out of
Britain by order of Maximus the Roman General; whither they returned not till
about forty years after, under Fergus II. And in this, as to the main part of
this last Tragedy, Fordon agrees with Hector, viz. That it was occasioned by
the Romans joining with the Picts against the Scots, in the time of Eugenius,
who were not only beaten by them, but driven out of Britain into Ireland, and
Norway, and other Countries.

This is the Substance of what these Scottish Antiquaries deliver concerning
their remotest Antiquities to the time of Fergus II.

But several Arguments are of late produced to justify the History of
Scotland, as it is delivered by Hector Boethius out of Veremundus and his other
Authors; which must be briefly considered, before I proceed to the Irish
Antiquities. And it is alleged, that the Scottish Antiquities, as delivered by
him (for it is concerning Hector's Authority which I dispute) have been
received with great Applause for many hundreds of years, by all Historians,
Antiquaries and Critics of other Nations, who had any occasion to mention
their Affairs. It will go a great way with me, if it be made appear, that there
was any such account received among Learned Antiquaries in any part of the
World before Hector's time. But I cannot find any one Antiquary, no not in
Scotland, before his time, who gives the same Account that Hector does. The
Tradition of the Scots peopling that part of the Island long before Fergus II.
I grant was a much elder Tradition, and is embraced by Fordon, and probably by
others before him. But Fordon does not own the Succession of the same number of
Kings, and in such a manner as Hector delivers them. From whence then came
Hector to know so much more than Fordon in these matters? I yield that there
were some ancient Chronica before Fordon, which he often quotes. But still the
Argument is the stronger against Hector. For if Fordon had all those Helps, and
yet knew nothing of those particulars, it is a vehement Presumption against
Hector, that he took too much Liberty in those many particulars, which Fordon
passed over, as having nothing to say about them. The more Copies they have of
Fordon in their Monasteries, the more easily they may be convinced, how little
Hector and he agree about the first Succession between the two Fergusses. And
if Fordon did agree with all their Annals, as is now pleaded, Hector Boethius
could not, because they differ so much from each other; as will appear to any
one that compares them. Why do we not read in Fordon the Authorities of
Veremundus and Cornelius Hibernicus, who were certainly before his time, if
ever? For we are told, that he was Archdeacon of St. Andrew 's. A. D. 1076. and
dedicated his Book to Malcolm Canmore; which was long enough before Fordon's
time. But it is said, that he is cited in a particular part of Fordon 's Book;
which could not be copied from Boethius. It had been a much clearer Evidence,
if that Place had been produced; for then we might have considered whether it
was a Passage of Fordon, or of one of those several Writers who it seems wrote
Additions and Continuations to him; such, as besides Maculloch, Arelat and
Walter Bowmaker are said to have been, who continued the Histories to the Reign
of James II. And yet I would be glad to see any Testimony of Veremundus of that
Antiquity. As to the Testimony of Chambers, who says, he had these principal
Authors, Veremund, a Spaniard, Turgott, Swinton, Campbell, etc. till some
farther Proof be produced, I have reason to suppose, it was the same Case as to
him with that of Sir R. Baker, which immediately follows; For we are told, that
he likewise quotes this Veremund among the Authors out of whom he compiled his
History, and likewise Campbell and Turgott. And if we have no more ground to
believe that Chambers had them, than Sir R. Baker, the matter must remain in as
much obscurity as before. For no one imagines that Sir R. Baker had all those
Authors by him which he there mentions; but he sets down the Names of those
whose Authorities he relied upon, although he found them quoted by others. And
he is not the only person in the World who has cited the Authority of Books
which he never saw* The same is to be said of Hollinshed. But if such kind of
Proofs must pass for evident Demonstrations, that the Scots had such Historians
as Veremundus and the others before mentioned; I wonder the same Learned
Author should shrink so much the Faith of History as to allow that despicable
thing, called Moral Certainty, to be a sufficient Probation for it; For scarce
any History can be mentioned, but may have such kind of evident Demonstrations
to prove it. Well, but Balaeus, a Learned Englishman, and Gesner, and other
famous Strangers, quote Veremundus. But so do not Boston of Bury, nor Leland,
who had written of the British and other Writers before the time of Hector
Boethius. And those were Men who searched all our Libraries for the ancient
Books in them, and have digested them with great Care; and if Veremundus with
other MSS. were brought into England by Edw. I. as is now suggested, it could
hardly have escaped the diligence of those Men. But those who lived after
Hector Boethius published his History, took his word for Veremundus, and entered
him into their Catalogues; as Vossius has done many whom he never saw. But
Erasmus says that Hector was a Person who could not lie. That was more than
Erasmus could know, unless he had been by when he wrote his History and
compared it with the Authors he pretended to follow. As to Paulus Iovius, he
was a fit Second to Boethius; but I am sure Erasmus would not have said of him,
that he could not lie. For Hector's pretending to have his Books from the
Island Iona, I have given an Account of it already, and showed how inconsistent
his own relation thereof is. But all this while, Where is the great Applause of
these Scottish Antiquities for many hundreds of years by all Historians,
Antiquaries and Critics of foreign Nations? When not so much as one is
produced, who lived before Hector Boethius, and, I think, that was not many
hundred years since.

But whatever becomes of Veremundus, we are told, That the Black-book of Scoon,
containing the Scottish Histories from the beginning, was among President
Spotswood 's Books, and given to Lambert, and by him to Colonel Fairfax. All
this, I am afraid, is a great mistake for a Black-book of Fordon's, which was
brought out of Scotland and presented to the late King by a Gentleman of that
Name, as some yet living can attest. But no such thing as the Black-book of
Scoon was ever heard of here; and if any such could be found, we should be so
far from suppressing any thing that tended to the Glory of the Scottish Nation,
that some here would be very glad to publish it, with all other ancient Annals
which themselves would think fit to be printed; whether it be the Black-book of
Paslay, Pluscardin, or any others. We do not deny that they had any ancient
Annals or Registers in their Monasteries; but we desire to be better acquainted
with them; and it is no good Argument, they can tell us where to find them,
that they are so careful to let us know how they came to lose them.

But, after all this Fencing, it is positively said, that the surest foundation
of all History is the common belief and consent of the Natives. But what if the
Natives of several Countries differ from each other? It may be reasonable to
believe neither, but it is not possible to believe both. What if they had for a
long time no certain way of conveying their Histories from one Age to another?
It is possible Oral Tradition may preserve some general strokes of the ancient
History of a Country; but it is hardly credible, that so many particulars as
Boethius has in the first Race of Kings could be kept so distinctly by the
force of Tradition. The case of the old World is vastly different from any
other People since the shortning of Men's Lives; and whatever Nation wanted
Records, could never make out the Credibility of their History to other People.
We do not deny the Annals of the Jewish or Roman Priests; but we think Annals
and Oral Tradition are two things; when Annals are produced, we must weigh and
consider them, and compare the Annals of several Nations together, that we may
better judge which are to be relied upon.

And yet we are told again, that when Histories are already formed out of
ancient Records, there is no farther need to produce them; for Papers may be
lost by accident, but the Histories taken out of them are to be believed,
although the Records cannot be found; as it is in respect of the Histories of
Rome and Greece, whose Authority remains, although the Testimonies on which
they relied are not extant.

So that at last Geffrey of Monmouth must be believed as to the British
Antiquities, as well as Hector Boethius as to the Scottish. For Geffrey does no
more pretend to invent his History than Hector: and Hunibaldus is as good an
Author as either of them; and Keting as good as Hunibaldus. For they all
equally pretend to derive their Histories from ancient Records and the
Tradition of the Natives; and all these having formed their Histories out of
these substantial Grounds, we are to search no farther; but to believe them all
however improbable in themselves and contradictions to one another.

The case is very different as to the Learned Greek and Roman Histories, from
those of the modern barbarous Nations; which were plainly made in imitation of
them, as will appear afterward. And as to the Greeks and Romans, there is a
considerable difference to be made between the Histories that related to the
times before they had written Annals and after. Can any Man imagine that there
is as great reason to believe the first Accounts of Greece as those that were
written after the Peloponnesian War? Or, that the first beginnings of the Roman
Monarchy by Romulus are delivered with as much certainty as the Carthaginian
War? The most judicious Writers among the Greeks and Romans did make allowance
for the Obscurity of Ancient times, when many things were utterly lost, and
others very imperfectly delivered: What Reproach then is it to any modern
Nations to suppose their Histories to have had the same Fate the Greeks and
Romans had? Only in this respect they are liable to greater Dispute, because
they pretend to give an exact Account of those times before they had any Annals
or written Records; and in this Case, the more exact and particular, the more
suspicious. And we have more certain Rules of trying their ancient Histories,
than the Greeks and Romans had; because we have the Accounts of several Nations
to compare together; and undoubted Testimonies of other Writers to examine them
by. And if they be not found faulty by some of these ways, we are contented to
let them pass.

But as to the Scottish Antiquities, we not only object the Want of sufficient
Antiquity in their written Records, but their Inconsistency with approved
Writers, in the most ancient Account they give of the first settling of the
Scots so early in Britain. And which yet adds more to the suspicion, the Irish,
from whom they descend, give a far more different Account of their first coming
than themselves do; as will appear by what follows.

For, The Irish Antiquaries will by no means allow the Account given by Hector
Boethius; And say, He had not regard to Truth in the Writing of it;
Particularly, as to Simon Brek's coming out of Spain, and bringing the fatal
Chair with him, which they say are both false, and the main ground they insist
upon is, That they are contrary to the Relation of the Cambrensis eversus per
Great. Lucian. c. 8. p. 61.
Old Irish Antiquaries who deserve far more Credit.

I shall therefore set down the Account they give, and consider the Credit they
deserve.

The best Account we have from Prospect of Ireland by P.W. p. 6.
them is this;

(1.) That Ireland was first planted after the Flood, by one Ciocal, with a
Fleet, wherein every Vessel had fifty Men and fifty Women; And this, Keting
says, happened about 100 years after the Deluge. But since such remote
Antiquities are very tender things, I shall not with a Besom sweep them all
away at once, but gently take them in Pieces, and lay them open as I pass
along. Now I desire to know what Foundation there is for our believing a thing
so unlikely, as the Peopling of Ireland in this manner, with such a Fleet, so
soon after the Flood? It was a long time after this before the Phoenicians had
any skill in Shipping; to whom the Romans attributed the Invention of it. And
certainly the Expedition of the Argonautae had not made such a noise among the
Greeks so long after the Flood (but twenty years before the Destruction of
Troy, as Animad. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 46.
Scaliger says, which happened in the time of the Judges) if the Skill in
Shipping had been so great within 100 years after it? Yet, if that Expedition
were such as Atlant. c. 26.
Olaus Rudbeck describes it, it was far more considerable than is commonly
thought. For he says, They not only entered the Euxine Sea, but he proves from
Orpheus and Diodorus Siculus, that they sailed up the Tanais, from whence
Hornius in his Map says, They went into the Mare Cronium, and so came round
Egypt, passing between Britain and Ireland, and returning home by the Straits.
But Rudbeck finds a Passage for them from the Tanais to the Volga, and so to
the Lake of Fronoe, the Head of the Volga, and then by Rivers into the Baltic
Sea, and so about the Scythian Promontory to Ierne (Ireland) and Peucessa
(Britain) and to Ausonia (Italy) and Trinacria (Sicily) and so home to Iolcos.
If this were a mere Poetical Fancy, yet it was extraordinary, since it agrees
with the exact Description of the Northern Countries, says Rudbeck far more
than Ptolemy does. I will suppose this Orpheus, who wrote the Argonauticks, to
be neither the Old Orpheus, nor Onomacritus, but Orpheus of Crotona, to whom
Suidas attributes the Argonauticks, who lived in the time of Pisistratus; yet
it is very much for him then to describe these Parts of the World, as he does;
and to mention Ireland as a Country then known to the Greeks. And Festus
Avienus, describing the Voyage of Himilco the Carthaginian (spoken of by L. 2.
c. 67.
Pliny) speaks of Ireland as then esteemed Sacred in these remarkable Verses:
Ast hinc, duobus, in sacram, sic Insulam
Dixere prisci solibus cursus rati est
Haec inter Vndas multum cespitem jacit
Eamque late Gens Hibernorum colit
Propinqua rursus Insula Albionum patet.
Nothing can be plainer, than that he here speaks of Ireland and Britain, as
then known by Himilco; For Festus Avienus says, He took this Description from
the Phoenician Annals, in which this Voyage was inserted. And it is very
strange to me that Atlantic. p. 475.
Olaus Rudbeck should here change the Hiberni into Hyperborei, especially when
he allows Albion to stand for Britain. But these are undoubted Testimonies of
the ancient Peopling of Ireland: and of far greater Authority than those
domestic Annals now so much extolled. But must we follow Keting, because he
follows the old Annals in this Tradition of the first Peopling of Ireland? And
why not then in the Story of Seth and three Daughters of Cain viewing Ireland?
And of the three Fishermen of Spain being Wind driven thither the year before
the Flood? And of Keasar the Daughter of Bajoth, Son of Noah, coming thither
with three Men and fifty Women, to save themselves from the Flood? Are not all
these fine Stories in the same Irish Annals? But Keting rejects them; And what
then? Does this make for or against the Authority of these Annals, that even
Keting looks on these as Poetical Fictions? But he says, The best Irish
Antiquaries did of Old look on these as fabulous. Possibly the two former they
might; But do they indeed reject the Story of Keasar and her Companions?
Topogr. Hib. Did. 3. n. 1.
Giraldus Cambrensis quotes the most ancient Histories of Ireland for this
Tradition; and they confirm it by the Names of the Place where she landed, and
where she was buried. And Cambrensis evers. p. 40.
Gratianus Lucius confesses, that he had the sight of their ancient Annals; and
he suspects that he made away many of them. If so, Keting had fewer advantages
than Giraldus for the Old Irish Antiquities. But if these Old Annals be of so
little Authority in this Story, What Credit do they deserve in this early
Plantation after the Flood? But to proceed in the Irish Account, It is said,

(2.) That Bartholanus and his three Sons, about three hundred years after the
Flood, landing in Ireland with a thousand fighting Men, had many doughty
Battles with the Posterity of Ciocal; And at the end of three hundred years
they were all consumed by a Pestilence.

This Story, I confess, is in Nenn. c. 6.
Nennius, and Did. 3. c. 2.
Giraldus Cambrensis; But it is a very obvious Question, if they all died, How
their memory came to be preserved, and even the memory of that Pestilence which
destroyed them all? But to this Giraldus gives a very substantial Answer out of
the ancient Annals, viz. That only one Ruanus escaped, who lived to St.
Patrick 's days, and was baptized by him: (in a good old Age certainly, for he
must be born within six hundred years after the Flood; And it was above four
hundred and thirty years after Christ before St. Patrick was designed for
Ireland.) This Ruanus, say the Irish in Giraldus, was the true Relatour of the
ancient History of Ireland to St. Patrick, and who can question the Testimony
of such an authentic and truly ancient Witness? A late Ogyg. Insula, p. 4.
Irish Antiquary says, he continued so long by a Pythagorean Transmigration;
but it was much he could retain these things in his Memory under all his
Transmutations.

But as to this Bartholanus (who is called by Nennius Bartholomeus, but by
Geffrey, Partholomeus, by Fordon, Partholomus) we read in the De Orig. and
Gestis Briton. l. 1. c. 20.
British History, That when Gurguintus returned from Dacia, he found 30 Ships
near the Orcades full of Men and Women, and, sending to enquire who they were,
their Commander, De Orig. and Gestes Briton. l. ^. c. 20.
Bartholomeus, said, They were driven out of Spain to seek a Country to live
in, and begged some part of Britain, for they had been a year and a half at Sea;
But he sent them into Ireland, then void of Inhabitants, which they planted,
and there continued to this day. It seems there was a Tradition in Nennius his
time, Anno Domini 830. That Ireland was peopled from Spain; And that one
Bartholonus, or Bartholomeus, was the Leader of them; But Geffrey would not let
them go thither without leave from the Britains; But Nennius has nothing of
it, and that part concerning being a year and a half at Sea, Nennius applies to
Nimech, as he calls him, but the Irish, Nimead; and he says, after his abode
in Ireland, he returned to Spain. Then, Nennius says, Three Sons of a Spaniard
came with thirty Vessels, and thirty Women in each of them, who saw a Tower of
Glass in the middle of the Sea, and Men upon it, who would give no Answer,
wherefore they resolved to assault it with all their Vessels, except one, which
was shipwrecked, having thirty Men, and as many Women, in it, all the rest were
sunk in the Attempt of the Castle, and from those thirty Men and thirty Women,
says Nennius, all Ireland was peopled. Here we see how far Geffrey differs
from Nennius; and alters the old Traditions as he thought fit. But Nennius goes
on, and says, That more still came from Spain, and the last was one whom he
calls Clamhochor, and his Company. But the Interpolatour of Nennius (whether
Samuel Beulanus or another) there observes, That there is no certain Account of
the Original of the Scots; So the Irish were then called. But yet Nennius
relates, from the Irish Antiquaries, the Story of the Noble Scythian, who was
Son-in-law to Pharaoh, and his Expulsion out of Egypt, and coming at last to
Spain, and thence to Ireland above a thousand years after the Egyptians were
drowned in the Red Sea; And first settled in Dalrieta, which he understands of
that Region in Ireland; But the Scottish Antiquaries apply it to the Country
which had the same Name in Scotland. So that here we have very different
Accounts, that were given so long since as the time of Nennius; and no way
found then, to distinguish the true from the false, or the certain from the
uncertain. But of that more afterward. Now to go on to a farther Account from
the Irish Authors who say,

(3.) That thirty years after, Nemedus, another Scythian, with his four Sons,
arrived in Ireland with a good Fleet, and fought with the remainder of the
Giants, but by another Pestilence were driven off, under the Conduct of three
Captains, Simeon Breac, Ibaath, and Briotan, and the two former sailing to
Greece; Briotan, with his Adherents, landed in the North of Britain, now called
Scotland; And by these, and their Posterity remaining there, gave the
Denomination of Britain to the whole Island. And this we are told is affirmed
by the Holy Cormach, King of Munster and Bishop of Cashel, in the Psalter of
Cashel. And all the Chronologers of Ireland agree with him. This Psalter of
Cashel is one of the most authentic Histories among them, and so called
because done in Verse; And Prospect of Ireland, p. 350.
it is said, That the more remote Antiquities in it were taken from another
Book made 1200 years since, collected out of all the former Chronicles of that
Nation and allowed in a solemn Convention of the Estates at Tarach, under
Laogerius, p. 46.
in the time of St. Patrick, who was one of the Committee appointed for the
supervising of it. And this Book was called the Psalter of Tarach.

This I confess goes much beyond what can be said for Geffrey of Monmouth, or
Hector Boethius. But yet methinks there seem to be some Reasons, why these
Annals should not have such a mighty authority with us. For we cannot be
certain that there ever were such Annals, or that these Annals, if they were so
exactly drawn up, are still preserved. For not only Cambrensis evers. p. 40.
Gratianus Lucius complains for the loss of their old Annals; But Vita
Patricii, c. 196.
Jocelin, in the Life of St. Patrick, concludes with saying, that many of their
Writings relating to him were burnt by the fury of the Pagans while they
governed in Ireland. By these Pagans the Danes are meant, and the Slavery under
them is Prospect of Ireland, p. 139.
said to be worse than Egyptian, Circassian, or any other mentioned in History.
And particularly it is said, That the Clergy were banished into Bogs, Woods and
Caves, where they were fain to lurk several years like wild Beasts; p. 141.
And that none were suffered to keep School, or to be taught any kind of
Learning, not even in their own Houses: And which is yet more to the purpose,
None were suffered to have any kind of Book; But all Books the Danes could
light upon, were either burnt, or taken away from them. It is possible their
Annals might escape such a Storm as this, but it does not seem altogether
probable; Especially considering that this first Slavery under the Danes
continued Forty years, in which, they say, all their famous Monasteries, Cells,
p. 14^.
Universities, Colleges were destroyed, not one being left in the Land. And it
is withal said, That although other Losses might be recovered, yet their
Libraries were never recovered. p. 15*
Only some few Religious Men preserved some of their Books. But we have no
assurance that the old Annals were among them. Or if they were then, That they
could escape the Second Danish Invasion, which continued for a hundred and
fifty years. In which Acta. Sanct. Hibern. Praef. ad Lector.
Colganus says, The Irish Antiquities had an irrecoverable Loss, at least, he
says, not yet recovered. And yet he had Cormach's Psalter, or the Psalter of
Cashel, Tigernacus his Annals, or the Annals Cluanenses, the Annals
Insulenses, composed by one Magraidin, in the Island of All Saints, in the
County of Longford, which he deduces to Anno Domini 1405. The Annals of Vlster,
by one Maguir, Canon of Armach, deduced to his own time, who died An. Dom.
1498. And the Annals of Dungall composed by four modern Authors out of all
their former Annals; But among all these, there is nothing pretending to
Antiquity, but the Psalter of Cashel and Tigernacus; yet the Psalter of Cashel
falls short of the time of Nennius, for Cormach, King of Munster, the supposed
Author of it, lived after the beginning of the tenth Century, being killed by
Flanmhac Siona (called Flannus Siuna by Great. Lucius Cambr. evers. p. 78.
Gratianus Lucius) who died An. Dom. 914. or as Sir James Antiq. Mibern. p. 26.
Ware thinks, An. Dom. 916. And for Tigernacus his Annals, the four Magistri,
as Colgunus calls them, or the Annals of Dungall are positive, that Tigernacus
o Braion, the Author of them, died Acta Sanct. Hibern. p. 108.
in the eleventh Century, An. Dom. 1088. There remains only the Psaltuir
Na-Ran, written by Aonghais Ceile de, or by Aengusius, one of the Culdees, who
lived in the latter end of the eighth Century, as the same Irish Antiquary
confesses, p. 8
who withal says, That all the Works contained therein relate only to
Matters of Piety and Devotion, p. 579.582.
which therefore can signify nothing to our purpose. So that nothing appears
of the Irish Antiquities which can pretend to be written before the Danish
Invasion; And although we are told, that these Annals were taken out of others
more ancient; yet we have barely their Word for it; for those ancient Annals,
whatever they were, are irrecoverably lost; So that there can be no comparison
of one with the other. And how can they be so certain of the exactness used in
the Parliament of Tarach to preserve their Annals, if there be no ancient
Annals to preserve the Memory of the Proceedings at that time? It was a very
extraordinary Care for the Estates of the whole Nation to preserve their
Annals; if we could be assured of it: Which does much exceed the Library of
Antiquities which De Orig. Fr^si. l. 3. c. 4.
Suffridus Petrus speaks of, set up, as he says, by Friso, the Founder of the
Frisians, at Stavera, near the Temple of Stavo, in which not only the ancient
Records were preserved from time to time; But the Pictures of the several
Princes, with the times of their Reigns, from An. 313. before Christ 's coming,
to Charlemagns time; The like whereof, he says, no German Nation can boast of;
But yet methinks the Posterity of Gathelus exceeds that of Friso's in the Care
of Preserving their Antiquities; For the Wisdom of the whole Nation was
concerned in it. But I never read of any who ever saw this Library of
Antiquities at Stavera, but we must believe Cappidus Staverensis and Occa
Scarlensis, as to these things; And that they saw the Records, as Hector did
Veremundus, although none else ever did. But as to this Parliament of Tarach,
which was careful to preserve the Irish Antiquities; Whence have we this
Information? Are the Acts of that Assembly preserved? Are any Copies of those
Annals still in being? Yes, we Prospect of Ireland, p. 47.
are told, that the keeping of the Original Book was entrusted by the Estates
to the Prelates, and those Prelates, for its perpetual Preservation, caused
several authentic Copies of it to be fairly engrossed, whereof some are extant
to this day, and several more faithfully transcribed out of them; their Names
being the Book of Ardmach, the Psalter of Cashel, etc. It seems then, these are
the Transcripts of the Original Authentic Book, allowed by all the Estates of
the Kingdom. But the Book of Ardmach is a late thing, being the same with the
Annals of Vlster composed by a Canon of Armach: So that the whole rests upon
the Psalter of Cashel, which must be composed 500 years after the meeting of
that famous Assembly. For St. Patrick was one of the number, and it was done in
the time of Laogirius, or Leogarius, King of Ireland, who died, says Cambr. c.
verse. p. 73.
Gratianus Lucius, An. Dom. 458. But King Cormach lived in the tenth Century;
And therefore an account must be given, how this Original Book or Authentic
Copies were preserved for that 500 years and more, in the miserable Condition
that Nation was in, a great part of that time.

So that the Difference is not so great between the Authority of Geffrey of
Monmouth and these Annals, as is pretended. For I see no Reason why the Story
of Brutus should be thought more incredible than that of Ciocal, Bartholanus
and Nemedus, with his Son Briotan that gave the name to Britain; And especially
the Story of Gathelus himself, his Marriage in Egypt to Scota, coming to Spain,
and thence his Posterity to Ireland; which seems to me to be made in imitation
of Geffrey's Brutus. For Brutus married Pandrasus his Daughter, the King of
Greece, and then was forced to seek his Fortune at Sea, and passing by
Mauritania, just as Gathelus did, the one landed in Gaul, and came for Albion;
And the other in Spain, and sent his Son for Ireland. And I wonder to find
Prospect of Ireland, p. 338. p. 7.
Brutus his Giants in Albion of so much larger Proportions than the Giants in
Ireland, who are said not to exceed the tallest growth of Men; For I had
thought Giants had been Giants in all Parts of the World. p. 347.
Suppose some Learned Men have questioned, Whether there were such a person as
Brute; I should think it no more Heresy, than to call in question, Whether
there were such Persons as Ciocal, Bartholanus, Briotan or Gathelus; If the
silence of good Authors, the distance of time, and want of Ancient Annals
complained of, makes the History of Brutus so hard to be believed, I only
desire that these Irish Traditions may be examined by the same Rules, and then,
I believe, the Irish Antiquities will be reduced to the same Form with the
British; Only Geffrey had not so lucky an Invention, as to have his History
confirmed by Parliament. For, if he had but thought of it, he could have made
as general an Assembly of the Estates at Lud's Town, and as select a Committee
of Nine, as ever was at Tarach. But all men's Inventions do not lie the same
way; And in this, I confess, Keting or his Authors have very much exceeded
Geffrey and his British MS. And upon the whole matter I cannot see that the
Irish Chronologers and Historians have so much more probability in their Story
of Briotan than the British Writers had in the Tradition of Brute. For it is
certain, it was not originally the Invention of Geffrey, only he might use
some art in setting it off, as he thought, with greater advantage than the
Britains had done before him.

But still we are referred to the Authority of the Irish Monuments in the
Psalter of Cashel written 800 years since by the holy Cormach, both King and
Bishop of Munster. Let us then, for once, examine one part of the History taken
from thence, and then leave the Reader to judge, whether it deserves so much
more Credit than the British Antiquities; And that shall be concerning the
Kingdom of the Picts, because we are told, Prospect of Ireland, p. 490.
This is the way to end the vexatious Questions about them, being taken out of
the most authentic Records of Ireland, which are of such irrefragable
Authority, That some are persuaded, had they been known to Camden, he would
never have disputed the matter. And so I think too. But this irrefragable
Authority is that of the Psalter of Cashel; From whence we are instructed in
these Particulars: (1.) That the Picts served in Thracia, under one Policornus,
p. 491.
a King of that Country; where their General Good took away the King's Life, to
prevent an Attempt on his Daughter. And did not Brutus serve King Pandrasus
with his Army not far off in Greece? And methinks Pandrasus is as good a Name
for a King of Greece as Polycornus for the King of Thrace. But where are either
of them to be met with elsewhere? (2.) That upon this the General and his Army
fled the Country, roamed up and down at Sea till they came to Gaul, and there
they founded the City of Pictavia. This is just Geffrey. For Brutus came to
Gaul too, and there fought with Groffarius, King of the Picts, and founded the
City of Tours, which had its Name from Turonus, Brutus his Nephew. (3.) That
upon the same Occasion they were forced to leave Gaul, and to go for Ireland,
(as Brutus did for Albion) where they were entertained, to fight with the
Britains; Who it seems made very early Invasions upon Ireland, which still
agrees with Geffrey's History. (4.) The Story of the Advice of Trosdan, the
Pictish Magician, for the Irish Army to bath in the Milk of 150 White,
Crumple-horned Cows, as an effectual Antidote against the envenomed Arrows of
the Britains, and the strange Success upon it, is hardly to be matched in
Geffrey. (5.) That the Picts, growing insolent, were forced by Herimon to
retire to the Northern Parts of Britain, Only with three Irish Women, whatever
Bid says of more; or, how differently soever he relates the whole Story of
the Picts; For what is Bede's, a poor Monk's Authority, to King Cormach's? (6.)
That from Cathluan, Son to Good, there was a constant Succession of Kings of the
Picts in that Country. But not more exact than the Succession of British Kings
from King Brutus. And now I leave the Reader to judge whether Geffrey be not
hardly dealt with, when such Authors are preferred so much before him. We now
return to the farther Account which the Irish Antiquaries give of their own
Antiquities.

(4.) We are then to understand, that, besides the Race descended from Nemedus,
p. 11.
there was another called Clanna Gaoidhel, or, Posterity of Gathelus;
concerning whom these things are affirmed. p. 324.
(1.) That he was descended from Niul, a younger Son to Feanusa Farsa, King of
Scythia, who, traveling into Egypt, had a Country there given him by Pharaoh
Cingeris called Capacyront (I suppose in the old Egyptian Language) who was
married to Pharaoh 's daughter called Scota. Whereas the Scottish Antiquaries do
peremptorily affirm, it was Gathelus himself was married to her. But we ought
not to forget, p. 332.
that this Scythian King had a celebrated School on the Plain of Sennaar, and
one Gaodel, being there employed to compose or refine the Irish Language,
called from him Gaodhelc or Gaodhlec. This is a Strain beyond Geffrey, who
never thought of bringing the British Language from the Plain of Sennaar. (2.)
That Gaodhel 's Posterity continued in Egypt till the time of his Grandchild
Sruth, and then being forced thence, they landed in Creet, where he died. And
his Eldest Son Eibhir Scot went into Scythia; where one of his Descendents
killed Restoir, the King of that Country, and was forced with his Company to
the Caspian Sea, and landed in an Island there (just like Geffrey's Large^ia,
where Brutus landed.) But they went from thence to Caronia, another Island in
the Pontick, and from thence to the North end of the Riphean Mountains; (a
pretty kind of Compass!) And here, instead of Diana's Oracle to Brutus, an old
Druyd told them, they should never fix till they came to the Western Island,
and so they removed to Gothia, and in the eighth Generation, they went to
Spain. And does not this exceed the Story of Brute, in the great Probability of
it, which their latest Ogygia Insul. p. 8, 9.
Antiquary knows not what to make of? It is certain whoever invented it,
designed to go beyond the Author of the former. But this is not all; For we
are told farther from the same Authentic Irish Annals. p. 331.
(3.) That Calamb (called Milead Espain, or Milesius the Spaniard) great
Grandchild to Bratha, who brought them into Spain, went back into Scythia; and
there served as General under Refloir, p. 12.
King of the Scythians; From whence, upon Suspicions, he fled into Egypt, and
there married Pharaoh 's Daughter called Scota; And at last returned to Spain,
and there founded Braganza: And here the Scottish Antiquities fall in. But is it
not a little improbable to have the same Scene acted twice over? Two Gaodel's,
two Refloir's, two Scota's, twice passing to and fro after much the same
manner? We may well say, p. 333.
as our Author does, enough of these profound remote Antiquities. For I shall
not need now to add any thing about the eight Sons of this Milesius coming to
Ireland; And how the rest being killed, the Country was divided between Eibhir
and Erimthon; and the former being killed, the latter became the first Monarch
of Ireland, from whom descended 181 Monarchs of this Milesian Race: which must
depend on the Credit of their Annals, of which I have already spoken.

But, in short, to give the true Account of these Fabulous Antiquities. We are
then to consider, That when the Northern Nations began to have some smattering
of the Greek and Roman Learning, they were never satisfied; till by one means
or other, they could deduce their Original from some of the Nations most
celebrated in ancient Books; Such were the Trojans, the Greeks and the
Egyptians. As to the Trojans, the Romans themselves had showed the Way to other
Nations. For there are considerable Arguments to prove that neither Aeneas, nor
Ascanius, ever came into Italy; as may be seen in Dionys. l. 1. p. 39.
Dionysius Halycarnasseus, Geogr. l. 13.
Strabo and Festus, in the Word Roma. Hellanicus, in Dionysius, says, That
Ascanius (from whom Brutus is derived) never left Phrygia; But only withdrew
for a time to Dascylites, near the Lake (from him called the Ascanian) and
afterward returned to Troy. Strabo says, That Ascanius reigned at Scepsis,
near the Ruins of Troy, and that his Posterity continued there a long time
after, with a Royal Title. Festus shows, that the old Authors were not agreed
where Aeneas was buried; Many were of Opinion, that he lay buried in the City
Berecinthia. And some in Dionysius say, he died in Thrace, others in Arcadia.
But the Romans making it so great a part of their Glory to be descended from
the Trojans; Other Nations of Europe, upon the Dissolution of the Roman Empire,
would not seem to come behind them in this. So Trithem. Comp. Hist. l. 1.
Hunibaldus gives as formal an Account of the descent of the Franks from
Antenor, and as good a Succession of their Kings down from him; with the
particular Names of Persons, and the time of their Reigns, as either Geffrey
does of the British Kings from Brutus; or Hector of the Scots from Fergus; or
the Irish Annals from Gathelus or Heremon. And that this is no late Invention
appears from hence; That Aimoinus, Ado Viennensis, Abbas Vrspergensis, Rorico,
Gaguinus, Aeneas Silvius, and others, agree with Hunibaldus in the Substance of
his Story. And De Origin Francor.
Vignier mentions several Diplomata of the ancient Kings of the Franks, to
prove the Authentickness of this Tradition. And it is less to be wondered at,
that the Britains should pretend to be derived from the Trojans because of the
mixture of the Romans and them together, while Britain continued so long a
Roman Province. From whence I suppose the first Occasion was taken, which
continued as a Tradition among the Britains for a long time before it was
brought into such a History as we find in Geffrey. That the Tradition it self
was elder than his time is certain; For even those who despised Geffrey
embraced it, as appears by Cambr. Descript. l. 2. c. 7.
Giraldus Cambrensis; And in the Saxon times this Tradition was known, as is
evident by the Saxon Poet, mentioned by Not. in Bed. c. 1. p. 25.
Abr. Whelock; But Nennius his MS. puts it out of dispute, That there was then
a Tradition about the Britains coming from Brute; but he could not tell what to
make of this Brute; sometimes he was Brito the Son of Ysicion, the Son of Alan,
of the Posterity of Japhet: And for this he quotes the Nenn. c. 13.
Tradition of his Ancestors; But this being incapable of much Improvement or
Evidence, he then runs to Brutus the Roman; and sometimes it is Brutus the
Consul; But that, not suiting so well, he then produces the Story of Aeneas,
and Ascanius, and Silvius, and the Prediction of the Magician, c. 2, 3.
that his Son should kill his Father and Mother; she died in Labor, and his
Father was killed by him by chance; However he was banished from Italy into
Greece; And from thence again banished, and so came into Gaul, and there built
Tours, having its Name from one of his Companions; And from thence he came for
Britain, which took its Name from him, and he filled it with his Progeny, which
continue to this day. So that here we have the Foundation of Geffrey's History
laid long before his time; And Nennius his Account is mentioned by De Gestis
Reg. l. 1. c. 1.
William of Malmsbury, under the Name of Gesta Britonum; And followed by Henry
of Huntingdon, and Turgott, or Simeon Dunelmensis; But when Geffrey's Book came
abroad, it was so improved and adorned with Particulars, not elsewhere to be
found, that the generality of the Monkish Historians, not only followed, but
admired it, and pitied those that had not seen it, (as they supposed) as
Polychr. l. 1. c. 47, 48.
Ranulphus Cestrensis does William of Malmsbury; But there were some
Cross-grained Writers who called it an Imposture, as Gul. Newburgensis; or a
Poetical Figment, as John Whethamsted. But these were but few in Comparison
with those who were better pleased, with the Particulars of a Legend than the
dryness of a true History.

But this humor was not peculiar to the Franks and Britains; For the Saxons
derived Witikind. l. 1.
themselves from the Macedonian Army of Alexander, which had three Captains
says. De Orig. F^^. l. 2. c. 5.
Suffridus Petrus, Saxo, Friso and Bruno; From whom are descended the Saxons,
Frisians and those of Brunswick. And A. D. 51^.
Abbas Stadensis adds, That not only the Saxons, but those of Prussia, Rugia
and Holstein came from them. Cosm^drom. ^t. 5. c. 11.
Gobelinus Persona relates the Particulars as exactly as Geffrey, or Hector, or
the Irish Annals do; how they were left on the Caspian Mountains, and wandered
up and down just as Brutus and Gathelus did, till they settled in Prussia,
Rugen and Saxony. The Danes, says Saxo Gram. l. 1.
Dudo S. Quintin derived themselves from the Danai; The Matthew. a Mich. l. 2. c.
8. Orig. Pruss. n. 7.
Prussians from Prusias, King of Bithynia, who brought the Greeks along with
him. Only the Scots and Irish had the Wit to derive themselves from the Greeks
and Egyptians together.

We are now to sit down and consider, what is to be said to all these glorious
Pretenses? Must they be all allowed for good and true History? If not, what
marks of distinction can we set between them? They all pretend to such Founders
as came afar off, wandered from place to place, consulted Oracles, built Cities,
founded Kingdoms, and drew their Succession from many Ages; So that it seems
unreasonable to allow none but our own. And yet these Antiquities will hardly
pass any where, but with their own Nation; And hardly with those of any
Judgment in any of them. But when all this is said, every one will believe as
he pleases; But it is one thing to believe with the Will, and another with the
Understanding.

To return now to the Irish Antiquities. And it only remains that we enquire,
How the Irish Antiquaries give an Account of their Nations coming into the
Northern Parts of Britain: And here is something which deserves Consideration,
viz. That they Prospect of Ireland, p. 22.
charge the Scottish Antiquaries with placing the time of Fergus I. 819 years
before he landed in Britain. For, say they, the Irish Monuments fix on Anno
Dom. 498. as the time wherein p. 367.
Fergus Mor the Son of Erch (whom the Scottish Writers call the Son of Ferchard)
with his five Brothers invaded the North of Britain. To this purpose they
produce the Testimony of Tigernacus, who in his Annals says, Fergus Mor mhac
Ercha cum gente Dalraida partem Britanniae tenuit, and ibi mortuus est. This he
writes about the beginning of Pope Symmachus, which was about six years after
the death of St. Patrick, and very near the end of the fifth Century. Besides
another Irish Author who writes of the Kings of Albany who were contemporary
with the Monarchs of Ireland, reckons twenty years between the Battle of Ocha,
and the going of the six Sons of Erc into Albany: And the Annals of Vlster
place the Battle of Ocha A. D. 483. so that Fergus his coming into Scotland
could not be before the beginning of the sixth Century. Cambr. c. verse. p. 73.
Gratianus Lucius says, that the Battle of Ocha, wherein Oilliol Molt, the
Irish Monarch, who succeeded Leogarius, was killed, was Anno Dom. 478. Which
makes but five years difference. Farther, say they, The Scottish Antiquaries
make Reuda the sixth King after Fergus, Whereas it appears by their Annals,
Cambr. c. verse. p. 69.
That their Monarch Conair had three Sons, called the three Cairbres, and the
third Prospect of Ireland, p. 370.
was Cairbre Riada; from whom that part of Britain was called Dal Riada, or Dal
Reuda; But Conair was killed An. Dom. 165. and therefore this p. 90.
Reuda must be 300 years before Fergus. The Old MS. cited by Brit. p. 707.
Camden, makes Fergus to be descended from Conair, with which as Usser. Prim.
p. 611.
Archbishop Usher observes the old Irish Genealogies agree: But he says,
Conair reigned Anno Dom. 215. however, long enough before the time of Fergus.
According to this supposition, that part of Scotland called Dalrieta, p. 612.
or Dalreuda, (the bounds whereof are described by the Learned Primate) was
inhabited long before the coming of Fergus; and so agrees with what Bid, l. 1.
c. 1.
Bid says, That the Scots came first out of Ireland under the conduct of
Reuda, and either by Force or Friendship found habitations for themselves
there, which they still enjoyed, and from their Leader to this time they were
called Dalreudim; Daal signifying a share in their Language. This Reuda seems
to be the same with Cairbre Riada, the third Son of Conair; And if Fergus were
descended from the same Conair, it gives a probable Account of Fergus his
coming afterward into those Parts; and taking the Government upon him. For
Prospect of Ireland, p. 93.
Keting says, That Eochac Mumreamhar of the Progeny of Cairbre Redhfadac or
Riada had two Sons Earcha and Elchon; And from the former the Families of Dal
Riada in Scotland are descended, from the latter those of Dal Riada in Ulster.
Which must be understood of that part of the Vlster Dal riadans, which Fergus
carried with him: For there were the Descendents from Riada in Scotland before,
according to the former account. But the whole matter about the Reign of Fergus
remains still very obscure. For (1.) It seems strange that Bid takes no notice
at all of him, which in all probability he would have done, as well as of
Reuda, who was less considerable. (2.) V^^. ^. Pu^^^cii, c. 137.
Jocelin in the Life of St. Patrick says, That Fergus was one of the twelve
Sons of the King of Dalredia, and was excluded from his share by his Brethren,
of whom St. Patrick prophesied, That from him Kings should rise, who should not
only reign at home, but in a foreign Country; After which, says he, Fergus
in no long time came to be King in his own Country; And from him sprang Eanus,
who subdued Albany, and other Islands, and whose Posterity still reigns there;
So that if Jocelin's authority be good, Fergus himself never came into
Scotland; But the mistake arose, because he was King in Dalrieda; Which the
Scots understood of their own, and thought they had Reason, because the
Posterity of Fergus reigned there. (3.) Topogr. Hib. Did. 3. c. 16.
Giraldus Cambrensis, who had a Sight of the Irish Annals, never mentions
Fergus, but only says, That in the time of Nellus the Monarch of Ireland, six
Sons of Mured King of Ulster sailed into the Northern Parts of Britain, and
there planted themselves, from whom the Scottish Nation is derived. This Nellus,
whom the Irish call Niall the Great, was killed, says Gratianus Lucius, Anno
Dom. 403. And if the Sons of the King of Vlster came then over to plant and
settle in Scotland, this must be 100 years before the time of Fergus, and
consequently he could be none of that Number: And yet the Cambr. ^vers. p. 73.
Prospect of Irland, p. 93.
Irish Annalists make the two Fergusses, the two Aengusses, and the two Loarns,
to be the six Sons of Muriedhach, King of Ulster, who came over to settle in
Scotland. But if Giraldus his Authority be allowed, the Scots came not to
settle in Britain, till the beginning of the fifth Century; And the Monarchy in
the Posterity of Fergus, according to Jocelin, could not be till toward the
middle of the sixth Century. And if Edan, King of the Scots in Bede's History,
be the same with that Edan in Jocelin who descended from Fergus, Then the
Scottish Kingdom did not begin till the seventh Century, as appears by Bid, l
1. c. 34.
Bid. But in matters of so much Obscurity I determine nothing.

But it is but Justice to consider on the other side, what the Scottish
Antiquaries do now plead for themselves, to prove that they inhabited Scotland
long before this time.

First, They say, Bid, l. 1. c. 1.
Bid mentions them as ancient Inhabitants of this Island before the coming of
the Romans; and describes the War's between the Picts, Scots and Britains
before that of the Romans. It is very true, that Bid, in the beginning of his
History, does set down the several Nations which inhabited Britain, and he
names five. English, Britains, Scots, Picts and Romans. And among these he
reckons the Britains first, then the Picts, after them the Scots from Ireland
under Reuda; and then adds* That Ireland was the true Country of the Scots,
who coming hither made a third Nation in Britain, besides the Britains and
Picts, and landed on the North part of the Frith, toward Ireland, and there
settled themselves. But Bid says nothing at all of the time when the Scots
came first from Ireland, and it is of no force, that he reckons them here
before the War with the Romans; for, so he does the English as well as the
Scots: his business being to give an Account of the present Inhabitants, and
not merely of the Ancient, Haec in praesenti 5 Gentium linguis, etc. But where
does Bid say, that the Scots were in Britain before the Romans coming hither?
I cannot find so much as an Intimation that way: unless it be in the Title of
the Chapter, Of the Situation of Britain and Ireland, and their ancient
Inhabitants. And does not Bid speak of the Britains as the ancient Inhabitants
of this Island and the Scots of Ireland? But if all mentioned must be ancient
Inhabitants, then so must the English and Romans be, as well as the Picts and
Scots.

Well! But does not L. 1. c. 5.
Bid afterward say, That Severus his Wall was built against the unconquered
Nations beyond it? I grant it, if he had said, the Scots and Picts beyond it,
the Controversy had been ended. But does not Dio explain Bid, who expressly
tells us, these Nations were the Maeatae and the Caledonii? Why not the Picts
and the Scots if then in Britain? The latter Roman Writers never forbear
calling them by their own Names, when they knew them to be here; as appears by
Eumenius, Claudian and Ammianus Marcellinus: but to say the Scots were called
Maeatae, because they came from the Palus Maeotis, will hardly go down in this
Age. However it is confidently affirmed, the Caledonii were the Scots. Let this
one thing be well proved, and I will yield the Scots were in Britain long
before Severus his time; for Tacitus mentions the Caledonians. But it is to no
more purpose to quote modern Writers, who call the Caledonians Scots, than
Lipsius his calling Galgacus a Scottish King: for we are not bound to follow any
modern Writers in their Improprieties. There is no Question the Caledonians
were known to Flaccus and Martial (who certainly lived not in Augustus his
time, unless that Name be very improperly given by it self to Domitian or
Trajan.) But do any of these Roman Authors ever tell us the Caledonians were
Scots* If not, to what end are the Caledonians so much spoken of? As far as we
can find by Tacitus, or Dio, or any others, they were the Northern Britains.
And if Tacitus had known that they came out of Ireland, and were a distinct
Nation, he was so diligent and judicious a Writer, he would never have omitted
the setting it down, when he gives so punctual an account of the Original of
the several sorts of Britains, according to his best Judgment and Information;
and none could have better; relating some things concerning Ireland, from
Agricola's own Mouth, who was then the Roman General against the Caledonians.
And he says, Agricola had one of the Kings of Ireland with him. Suppose we
then the Caledonians to have been Scots come out of Ireland; Is it possible,
that an Irish King should not be able to inform Agricola who these Caledonians
were? Or, if Tacitus had known any such thing, would he have said, the
Caledonians, by the habit of their bodies seemed to be of German Extraction,
when he derives the Silures from Spain? Had it not been as easy for him to
have derived the Caledonians from Spain through Ireland, if any such thing had
been heard by him, as that the Caledonians were of Ireland, and came first out
of Spain thither? But nothing can be more plain than that Tacitus took the
Caledonians for Britains, and so does Galgacus, in his excellent Speech,
wherein he calls them, the Noblest of the Britains, and excites them to recover
the Liberty of the Britains; and tells them, they fought the same Cause with
the other Britains; and now they were to show what sort of Men Caledonia had
reserved for their common defense. Was Tacitus so inconsiderate a Writer to put
such words into Galgacus his mouth, if he knew or suspected the Caledonians to
be no Britains, but a different Nation come out of Ireland in the time that
Alexander took Babylon? Had Tacitus known any thing of this, he would never
have concealed it, when he values himself upon his Integrity, in relating what
he could find about the Affairs of Britain. And therefore Tacitus his Judgment
in this matter is to be much preferred before Scaliger's Criticism about the
Scoto-brigantes, or the Scoticae pruinae in Spartian's Poet; or any such
uncertain Conjectures. And yet the Scoto-brigantes might be Irish; where both
Scoti and Brigantes were, and so it proves nothing, as to Britain; for Claudius
conquered Ireland as much as Scotland.

But it is more plausibly urged, That L. 1. c. 12.
Bid speaking of the Scots being a transmarine Nation, he explains himself by
saying, that he means not that they were out of Britain, but beyond the two
Friths; therefore the Scots then inhabited Britain. This was but a necessary
Explication, forbid, who used these words, after he had confessed before,
that the Scots under Reuda did settle in Britain. Therefore when he used Gildas
his words, he thought it necessary to reconcile them with his own; and so
declares that he used transmarine now in another sense. Just as if a Scottish
Writer in Bede's time had spoken of the transmarine Saxons, using the words of
an Author who lived before their coming into Britain; and then should explain
himself, That he did not mean the German Saxons, but those who lived in
Britain, beyond the two Friths; would this prove, that the Saxons lived here
before Caesar's time? And if this be an Argument clear to a Demonstration, some
men's Demonstrations will hardly amount to the strength of a probable Argument.
And I am apt to fear no Men's way of reasoning more than those who talk most of
Demonstrations.

What if St. Jerome mentions the Scoti from Porphyrie, and the Attacotti as a
British Nation, what does this prove as to the Scots inhabiting Britain so long
agon? Could there be no Scots but in Britain, when it is confessed they came
originally out of Ireland? Sidonius Apollinaris does mention the Scots and
Picts, in his Panegyric to Sidon. Carmi 7. v. 90.
Authemius; but what then? who denies that the Scots and Picts did then fight
and were beaten in Britain? but could not they be beaten here then unless they
came into Britain before Julius Caesar? Is this clear to a Demonstration? But
it is observable, that in the Verse before he calls the Caledonians Britains
even then. Victricia Caesar
Signa Caledonios transvexit ad usque Britannos.
Fuderit and quanquam Scotum, and cum Saxone Pictum.
Where it is evident he distinguishes the Caledonian Britains from the Scots
and Picts.

But Claudian mentions the Scots as settled in Britain before his time. If it
be granted; that falls very much short of Alexander or Julius Caesar's time;
yet there appears no Demonstration for it. His words are, Claud. in 4. Consul.
Honorii, v. 33.
Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Ierne. But there is a certain Place in
Scotland called by that Name. I will not dispute it; but are we sure that
Claudian knew it by that Name? Was that so considerable to be taken such notice
of by the Roman Writers? Was not Ireland then called Ierne by him? And does he
not mention the Scots moving all Ierne? 1o Consulat. Stilicon. l. 2. v. 251.
Totam cum Scotus Iernen
Movit, and infesto spumavit remige Tethys?
And is not this very Poetical, to say, He moved all a certain little part of
Scotland? From whence they might pass beyond the Wall, without so much as
touching the Ocean? Must these things pass for Demonstrations too?

I mention these Evidences, which the Weight of the Cause is laid upon, to show
how far these Antiquities are still from being cleared, to the satisfaction of
impartial Men. For I had no Luddus my Kinsman, nor Buchanan my Enemy; I search
for nothing but Truth in such Enquiries, it being as much to my satisfaction,
that the Scots came into Britain in Alexander's time, as any time after, if it
can be as well proved. But it does not become the ingenuity of Learned Men,
when all judicious Persons in the Nations about us have rejected their fabulous
Antiquities, to adhere to them without producing better Proofs of them; and
that with so much violence as if the Interest of the Nation, and the Succession
of the Royal Family were concerned in them: Which has far stronger grounds to
stand upon than the Authority of Hector Boethius, or the Race of Kings between
the two Fergusses, or the certain time when the Scots came first into Britain.

Having thus far given an Account of the Antiquities relating to the Picts and
Scots, the mortal Enemies of the Britains; I now come to pursue my main Design,
which relates to the Antiquities of the British Churches, whose declining State
and Condition I am now arrived at.

And the first Occasion thereof was, the laying them open to the fury of their
greatest Enemies, the Picts and the Scots. It is impossible for us to set down
the punctual time when the Scots and the Picts first joined their Forces
together to give disturbance to the Britains, but it is clear that they did so
toward the middle of the fourth Century. For Am. Marcell. l. 20. c. 1.
Ammianus Marcellinus, speaking of the Incursions they made in the time of
Constantius, when Julian was Caesar, An. Dom. 360. he says, That Julian, being
then at Paris, durst not go over to the assistence of the Britains against the
Scots and the Picts, as Constans had done before. Which Expedition of his
happened Anno Dom. 343. after his success over the Franks, and he passed an
Edict, still exstant in the C. Theod. de extraord. XI. Tit. 16. L. 5.
Theodosian Code, when he was at Bologn, in his Passage, which bears date that
year; And a Coin of his is mentioned by Hist. Byzant. p. 33.
Du Cange and In Caes. Jul. p. 134.
Spanheim, wherein the Effigies of Constans is on one Side, and on the Reverse,
an armed Man on Shipboard, with the Image of Victory, and the Inscription of
Bononia Oceanen; being Coined on purpose to preserve the memory of this
Passage. And upon his coming over, things were quieted here, but not long
after, they began to make new Incursions, within the Bounds of the Province, as
is evident from the foregoing Passage of Ammianus Marcellinus, when Lupicinus
was sent over, who arrived at London, says he, in the middle of Winter, to
take Counsel how to proceed. In the time of Valentinian, the same Historian L.
26. c. 4.
says, That there seemed to be a general disturbance through the whole Empire,
by the barbarous Nations who lay near them; And, among the rest, he mentions
the Picts (whom some render Redshanks) the Saxons, the Scots, and the Attacots,
who were continually vexing and doing mischief to the Britains, so that in a
little time, the L. 27. c. 8.
Britains were reduced to a miserable condition by a new Conspiracy of the
Barbarians, wherein Nectaridus the Comes Maritimi Tractus, or Roman Admiral,
and Fallofaudes, the General, were both killed. And then Valentinian sent over
Theodosius; a famous Captain (Father to the first Emperor of that Name) with
considerable Forces. For at that time, the Picts of both kinds, the
Deucalidones and Vecturiones; the Attacotti, a fierce Nation, and the Scots,
dispersing themselves up and down, did abundance of mischief; But Theodosius,
leaving London, dispersed his Forces likewise into several parts, who surprised
the Enemies, and recovered their Booty, which they restored to the Owners,
only reserving a small share for the Soldiers; And so in a short time, he put
the City out of its fears and difficulties, and entered it as it were in
Triumph: And then took care to have good Officers placed here; Civilis for
Administration of Justice; and Dulcitius for Military Affairs.

Who these Attacotti were, who joined with the Picts and Scots; our Antiquaries
are not agreed; But because of their joining with the other, and yet being
distinguished from them, it seems most probable, that they were the Wild
Britains; For c. Jovin. l. 2.
St. Hierome does say, they were a British People. But what the Reason of the
Name was, is not yet understood, and I doubt will not be, unless some happen to
derive it from the Phoenician Language. What great mischief had been done to
the Britains, by this Combination of their Enemies, appears by the care taken
by Theodosius, after his beating them out of the Country, to restore the
Cities and Garrisons, and to settle the Guards upon the Frontiers; which being
done, That part of the Country which he recovered from them, he obtained leave
to have it named a New Province. And it was called Valentia, from the
Emperor's Name. This was done Anno Domini 368. And the next year Theodosius
returned to the Emperor's Court. From that time we read no more of their
Incursions till Maximus, in the time of Gratian, Son to Valentinian, was set up
by the Soldiery in Britain, to be Emperor. Then Chronic. init.
Prosper, set out by Pithaeus, says, Maximus overcame the Picts and Scots,
making new Incursions. Which he thought he had done so effectually as to fear
no disturbance on that Sides, And therefore took away from hence all the Flower
both of the Roman and British Soldiery, to make good his Title against Gratian
and Valentinian, and after, against Theodosius; So that there was no
possibility of their return, to secure the Frontiers from their Enemies. And
this proved the fatal Blow to the Britains. For the Empire being so divided,
and Maximus forced to keep his Army together, those parts were left open to the
Rage and Fury of their Merciless Enemies. And if the v. Usser. Prim. p. 590.
Author of the Eulogium and Giraldus Cambrensis may be believed, Gratian and
Valentinian entered into a League with the Gothic Picts, and helped them with
Shipping to convey them into the Northern parts of Britain, on purpose to
withdraw Maximus his Army out of Gaul: Who coming thither in great Numbers, and
finding the Country naked and without defense, settled themselves in those
Parts. Not as though the Picts had not come hither before, but they never came
over in so great Numbers and with so much Encouragement as they did now. And it
seems not improbable, that Gratian and Valentinian should at that time deal
with the Gothic Nation to give a diversion to Maximus. For Zosim. l. ^ p. 760.
Zosimus assigns that as one of the great Causes of Gratian's Ruin, that he
seemed more fond of the barbarous Nations than of the Romans: And Maximus
charged Valentinian, with making use of the Hunns and the Alani against him;
Which is not denied by St. Ambros. Ep. 27.
St. Ambrose, who was sent by Valentinian on an Embassy to him. These Hunni and
Alani were, as is commonly said, Inhabitants of Sarmatia Europaea near to the
Palus Maeotis. The Alani did live upon the Tanais, says Rer. Franc. l. 3. p.
98. l. 4. p. 153.
Hadrianus Valesius; And the Hunni, says he, were a Scythian People, between
the Pontus and the Caspian Sea, upon the Northern Parts of the Caucasus, from
whom the Abares, Turks and Hungarians are descended. But whosoever observes Am.
Marcel l. 31. c. 2.
Ammianus Marcellinus his Description of them, will find that the Hunni were
the Asiatick Tartars; and the Alani the European. The Hunni in the time of
Valens passed over the Palus Maeotis in vast Numbers, and after, having killed
many of the Alani, took the rest into Confederacy with them, and having
conquered the Goths in those Parts, enlarged their Power as far as the Danube:
Where they lay ready to come into the Roman Empire on any Occasion. And it is
not to be wondered if Gratian should employ Persons into Scandinavia to draw
out greater Forces from thence, thereby to make a Revulsion, as to Maximus his
Designs in the Northern Parts of Britain. However this were, Gildas from this
time dates the miserable Condition of the Britains, as being in no Posture to
defend themselves at Home. Nenn. c. 23.
Nennius says, That Maximianus (as he calls him) carried all the Forces out of
Britain, and killed Gratian the Emperor; And would not let the British
Soldiers return to their Wives, Children or Possessions, but gave them another
Country instead of it; In the Western parts of Gaul, says the Interpolatour
of Nennius. And these, says Nennius, are the Aremorican Britains, who never
after returned to their own Country. And from hence, he says, Britain was
seized upon by foreign Nations, and its own Natives were driven out; and would
so continue till God helped them. But the British History, set forth by Hist.
Brit. l. 2. c. 4.
Geffrey, has improved the Story in many Particulars. First, It makes this
Maximianus to marry the Daughter of Octavius, and so to come to the Kingdom of
Britain; Then, it adds, That Conanus retired into Albany, and raised an Army,
which was overthrown by Maximianus, who after five years passed into Gaul, and
fought first against the Armoricans, whose Country he gave to Conanus and his
Britains; Who, resolving not to marry any others than British Women, he sent
over Messengers to Dionotus, King of Cornwall, to whom Maximianus, had
committed the Government of Britain, to provide Wives for them; And he sent
with Ursula his own Daughter Eleven thousand of the better sort, and of the
common sixty Thousand. But these were unhappily, by Storms either sunk or
driven into those Places, where Guanius, King of the Hunns, and Melga, King of
the Picts, who were Consederates with Gratian, were joined with their Armies,
who cruelly destroyed them. After which they came into Albany, where they made
havoc of all Places they came near. Then Maximianus sent Gratianus Municeps
with two Legions who subdued the Hunns and Picts, and drove them into Ireland.
Here we have many fabulous Particulars put together, but none comparable to the
71000 Virgins sunk or destroyed by the Hunns. And yet Geffrey's Relation of
this Legend is magnified by Bar. ad Martyrol. Romans Octobr. 21.
Baronius, and approved by Not. ad Tab. Pentinger.
M. Velserus, Disquis. de SS. Virg. Col.
Aub. Miraeus, and Belg. Romans l. 12. c. 5.
Aegid. Bucherius, as most agreeable to the Circumstances of the time. Which is
a thing to be wondered at; considering how little Foundation there is for any
one Particular of Geffrey's whole Relation, either as to Octavius, then King of
Britain, or the marrying his Daughter to Maximus, or as to Conanus going first
into Albany, and thence into Aremorica, or the settling of the British
Soldiers there, at so busy a time, when Maximus wanted all the Assistence he
could get; or the sending to Dionotus, or the sending away such a Number of
Virgins at once, without any Fleet to conduct or secure their Passage. But Not.
in Ven. Fortun. l. 3. p. 59.
Browerus has overthrown this Legend at once, by proving that Aremorica was
not in the Britains Possession till a good time after this; For, as he well
observes, Maximus was kindly received in Gaul, and met with no considerable
Opposition there, Gratian's own Soldiers revolting to him, and he passed on
and settled himself at Triers, (then the Seat of this part of the Empire) as
Gildas says; And besides, in the time of Actius, the Aremorici enjoyed their
own Country (as he proves from Constantius his Life of St. German) about Anno
Dom. 434. After which time they stood up in their own defense, till they were
reduced by Littorius, which he shows from Sidonius Apollinaris. And Rutil.
Iriner. l. 1. v. 250.
Rutilius Claudius, in the beginning of the fifth Century, after Maximus his
time, mentions the Aremorici, as still enjoying their Country, where
Exuperantius was then Governor. Saying, that after the Troubles by the Goths
they had Postliminium Pacis; which evidently proves, they were not then kept
out of Possession.

Cujus Aremoricas Pater Exuperantius oras
Nunc Postliminium pacis amare docet
Leges restituit libertatemque reducit
Et Servos Famulis non sinit esse suis.
And this was written after the Sacking of Rome by the Goths; So that there is
no foundation for this Legend in the time of Maximus. Aegid. Bucherius,
although he approves of Geffrey, as to the time, and some other Circumstances,
yet he differs from him in others. For he goes upon these Grounds, that Maximus
landed at the Mouth of the Rhine, as Zosimus says, That there they left the
Multitude of Women and Virgins which followed the Army out of Britain; where
the Hunns which Bauto sent against Maximus fell upon them and destroyed them.
This is no ill-contrived Story; but very different from the Legend in Geffrey,
in all the considerable parts of it: And yet after all, Bucherius thinks fit to
yield up his Faith to the old Legend, as it is defended by Bebius and
Crombachius; and so it is taken off from the time of Maximus.

Scoti-chron. l. 2. c. 63.
Joh. Fordon, agrees with Geffrey about Maximus his giving the Country of
Aremorica to Conanus and his Britains, Anno Dom. 386. but he is so far from
mentioning the 11000 Virgins, That he supposes the Britains of both sexes to
have settled there together. But he makes a more credible Relation of Conanus
his going over to Aremorica, which is, That Maximus mistrusted he might set up
for himself in his Absence, having the legal Title to Britain, and therefore he
removed him and the Chief of the Britains, and settled them in those Parts of
Gaul. This is no improbable Story; but yet the Aremoricans enjoying their
Country after this time, is an effectual Confutation of it.

After the death of Maximus, more Troubles following in the Roman Empire, the
Picts and the Scots, says Scoti. thron. l. 3. c. 1.
Fordon, negotiate a mutual Peace and stricter Alliance, in order, says he, to
the recovering their Country again. For Maximus had made use of the Picts to
drive out the Scots, and then put Garrisons among the Picts to keep them under.
And upon this Agreement, An. D. 403. in the sixth of Arcadius and Honorius,
Fergus the Son of Erk the Son of Ethadius the Brother of Eugenius, who was
driven out by Maximus, came with his two Brothers (called there Loarii and
Tenegus, in all probability Loarn and Aengus, which were the Names, the Irish
Annals give to the Brothers of Fergus, as is observed before) and great
Supplies of Scots from the Islands of Ireland and Norwey, whither they were
driven: And the Picts, to prevent all Suspicion of Treachery surrendered up
their Forts to Fergus. c. 2.
Who now became King of all Scotland, i. e. of that Part which is beyond Drum
Albain, as well as on this other, which, he says, it does not appear how he
came to, whether by the Sword or by any other Right, none of his Predecessors
having any Power there. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 11.
Bid says, The Romans had the Right of Dominion to the remotest part of the
Island: Which is not easy to make out, unless the Possession and Conquest were
better proved than appears by Bede's History. For although he mentions Claudius
his Conquering the Orcades; yet it is hard to prove it by any Roman Authors;
And if the Possession were after lost, for so long a time, it will be as hard
to prove the Romans still enjoyed the Right of Dominion upon so slender a
Title. But the Picts and Scots being thus united, their first Work, says
Fordon, was to drive out the ^omans and Britains from their Country, and then
to invade Britain, which was then left destitute of any defense: And so by
their Incursions they either killed the Common People, or made them Slaves.

Here Fordon transcribes Bede's twelfth Chapter of his first Book; c. 3.
the Foundation whereof he took out of Gildas, concerning the departure of the
British Forces without returning; the Invasion of the Scots and Picts; the
Britains sending an Address to Rome for Assistence; a Roman Legion coming and
driving out their Enemies; and persuading the Britains to build a Wall for
their own Security. But it is observable, that Bid varies from Gildas without
Reason; For what Gildas speaks of their departure with Maximus, he applies to
the going of the Remainders of the British Forces under Constantinus and
Constans, after Gratianus Municeps was killed in Britain having usurped the
Empire here. But that Bid was herein mistaken will best appear by digesting
the times wherein these things happened as well as we can.

Zos. l. 6.
Zosimus says, That Honorius VII. and Theodosius II. being Consuls, viz. A.D.
407. (nineteen years after the death of Maximus, as Primord. p. 591.
Archbishop Usher observes, Phot. Cod. 80.
Olympiodorus in Photius says, the year before, Orosius and Sozomen the year
after, viz. the year when Arcadius died;) the British Soldiers in a Mutiny set
up one Marcus to be Emperor, as a Man of great Power in these Parts; But he,
not answering their expectation, they soon took him off, and then set up
Gratianus, ( who was a Native of Britain, for so much Hist. l. 7. c. 40.
Orosius his Words imply, when he says, he was Municeps ejusdem Insulae) and
made him put on the Royal Purple and Crown, etc. but he not pleasing them,
after four months they take away his life. Nenn. c. 24.
Of him Nennius says nothing; But he mentions one Severus between Maximus and
Constantius, whom others omit; But Galfr. l. 2. c. 4.
Geffrey makes Gratianus to assume the Royal Authority as soon as he heard of
the Death of Maximus; But he was so tyrannical, he says, That the common
People rose up and killed him; and after his death the Britains, according to
him, sent to Rome, to beg help against the Picts and Scots. But Zosimus and
Orosius both say; That, upon the Death of Gratianus, they set up here
Constantine, a mean person (for the good Omen of his Name says Orosius) who
immediately left Britain, and passed over into Gaul, where he gained the Army
to him, and made his Son Constans Caesar, and sent him into Spain. Olympiodorus
says, That he sent a Message and Excuse to Honorius, for assuming the Imperial
Dignity, that he was forced to it by the Army; And that Honorius allowed the
Excuse, and for a time admitted him into Partnership with him. But Gerontius a
Britain, one of the Generals, finding himself slighted by Constans, made a
Revolt among his Soldiers and stirred up the barbarous Nations in Gaul against
Constantine; Upon which occasion, says Zosimus, The British Islands, and some
of the Celtick Nations renounced the Roman Empire; And took up Arms to defend
themselves from the Incursions of their Enemies: And Honorius by his Letters
gave them leave to take care of themselves. Not long after Constans is killed
by Gerontius, and Constantine, after the Siege of Arles, had his Head cut off
by Soz. l. 9. c. 15. Phor. Cod. 80.
Honorius his Order. But Nenn. c. 25.
Nennius, against the consent of all the Greek and Latin Historians, both
Heathen and Christian, says, That this Constantine reigned 16 years in
Britain, and in the seventeenth died at York. However he falls much short of
Galfr. l. 2. c. 5, 6.
Geffrey; for, he says, That Constantine was Brother to Aldroenus, King of the
Aremorican Britains, to whom Guithelin, Metropolitan of London was sent on an
Embassy to accept the Government, which he put off to Constantine, who was
chosen King at Silcester, and had a Roman Wife of Guithelin 's education, by
whom he had three Sons, Constans a Monk at Winchester, Aurelius Ambrosius, and
Uther Pendragon, who were committed to Guithelin 's care. After Constantine 's
Death, who was killed by a Pict, there happened a great Contest about the
Succession; but by Vortigern 's means Constans is taken from the Monastery, and
set on the Throne at London; But Guithelin was now dead, and Vortigern put the
Diadem on his Head, who governed all things, and soon got himself rid of him by
a Guard of Picts he had placed about him, and so took the Government upon
himself.

But I shall set aside these Fictions or Traditions of Geffrey and Nennius, and
consider now what Bid says, He makes Gratianus Municeps to be set up two
years before the sacking of Rome by Alaric, King of the Goths, which happened
Anno Dom. 410. And he follows Orosius, about Constantine and his Son Constans,
without ever imagining their continuing to govern, and losing their Lives in
Britain: But then he applies the Passage in Gildas, concerning the lamentable
Condition of the Britains, and their help from the Romans, to the times after
the Death of Constantine; Whereas Gildas mentions both upon the Usurpation of
Maximus, and his withdrawing the Forces from hence; And therefore this first
cruel Invasion of the Picts and Scots must be between the Death of Maximus, and
the setting up of Gratianus Municeps: And then the Britains so earnestly
begging for Assistence, had Roman Governors and Forces sent to their Relief.
Some think that Iriner. l. 1. v. 500.
Claudius Rutilius mentions Victorinus as a Roman Governouor here in that time,
but this is uncertain, when he there speaks of the taking Toulouse by the
Goths, which was done by Ataulphus some time after the death of Alaric; And
therefore could not be before the time of Gratian and Constantine; For Idatius
says, that this latter was killed before Ataulphus entered Narbon, which was
before the taking of Toulouse.

It is evident from many Passages in De laud. Scilich. l. 2. v. 25. De Bello
Ger. v. 415.

In Eutrop. l. 2.


Claudian, that Stilicho, took particular care of the Supplies of the Britains
against the Scots and Picts: But Stilicho was killed by the Army when Bassus
and Philippus were Consuls, Anno Dom. 408. before the first Siege of Rome by
the Goths; And therefore the Roman Forces sent by him were before the
Usurpation of Gratianus and Constantine: Stilicho being killed the same year
that these were set up in Britain, it is not possible he should do it after
their death; And it seems not probable that any Supplies should be sent through
Gaul while Constantine remained there, the Army through which they were to pass
in Gaul taking part with Constantine against Honorius. And withal Gildas
says, That the Roman Legion, having driven out the Picts and Scots, returned
in Triumph to Rome: And so much is confessed by Bid. But at what time should
we suppose, after the Usurpation of Constantine, that a Roman Legion should
return in so much Triumph? For after Constantine's Usurpation the Roman Empire
began to decline extremely in those parts through which they were to pass: Gaul
being upon Composition Jornand. c. 30. Paul. Diac. l. 14. Sigeb. Chron. A. D.
412.
delivered up to the Goths by Honorius, and the Franks and Burgundians making
continual impressions there. I conclude it therefore most probable, that the
first Supplies given to the Britains were not after Constantine's Usurpation,
but between the death of Maximus, and the setting up of Gratianus Municeps.

The second time the distressed Britains were forced to solicit the Romans for
Supplies, is placed by Primord. p. 603.
Archbishop Usher, An. Dom. 426. when Gallio Ravennas was sent hither, as he
supposes, because the next year Prosper, says Gallio, was sent against
Bonifacius in Africa. But then he makes the first Supplies to have been in the
latter end of Honorius; for which I can see no reason. For he grants, p. 594.
That after the Death of Maximus, the Scots and the Picts did waste Britain;
and that then Stilicho did send assistence to them. Why then should the first
wasting of the Country, spoken of by Gildas, and the Legion sent upon it, be
that in the latter end of Honorius, and not rather that in the beginning? For
the latter end of Honorius his Reign was very perplexed and troublesome. The
Alani, Suevi and Vandali were in Spain; The Franks, Burgundians and Goths in
Gaul; Iovinus and Sebastian there, after Constantine's death, usurped the
Empire; And although the Goths* going into Spain, did great Service against the
other Barbarians, yet such were the Straits of the Roman Empire in Gaul, That
Constantius, who then managed the Affairs of the Empires was forced to recall
them, as both Prosper and Idatius say, Monaxius and Plinta being Consuls (which
was the twenty fourth of Honorius,) and to give them all that part in Gaul from
the Garonne to the Ocean. The year before Honorius his death, he was forced to
send his Forces under Castinus into Spain, against the Vandals, as Prosper
affirms; and that proved the Occasion of new Troubles in Africa, by the
difference between Castinus and Bonifucius, who, for his own Security, conveyed
over the Vandals thither. It is not therefore very probable, that the first
Supplies of the Britains should be in the latter end of Honorius, especially
since the Learned Primate confesses that Honorius did not in his time recover
the Province of Britain, and he proves it against Sabellicus from Procopius, p.
600.
Bid, the Saxon Annals and Ethelwerd. And the single Testimony of Sigebert,
That Honorius, at the same time, sent assistence to the Britains, that he did
to the Spaniards (when Prosper, Idatius and Cassiodore, who all mention the
latter, say not a word of the former) cannot weigh down the Reasons on the
other side.

But as to the second Supplies which were sent upon the mighty importunity of
the Britains; They were in probability in the beginning of the Reign of
Valentinian III. after that Aetius had somewhat recovered the Credit of the
Roman Empire in Gaul: For after his Success there, both against the Goths and
Franks he had liberty enough to send over a Legion to the Assistence of the
Britains, who were again miserably harassed by the Scots and Picts. And at this
time it was that Gildas says, The Romans, upon the sad Representations the
British Ambassadors made of their pitiful condition, sent them speedy
Supplies, who coming upon their Enemies on a sudden, like a violent Torrent,
drove them all before them, and made them repass the Seas: Which is an
Argument, they did not then inhabit in Britain. But the Romans then plainly
told the Britains, they were not at leisure to bring over Legions as often as
their Enemies invaded them: But they must train up their own People to Arms to
defend themselves and their Wives and Children against a sort of Men no ways
stronger than themselves. And, to encourage them the more, they built a Wall of
Stone from Sea to Sea, and Forts on the Shore, and exercised them in Arms,
taking their leave of them, and telling them, they must expect their return no
more. This is the Substance of Gildas his Relation, with whom Bid agrees;
only enlarging the Description of the Wall, which, he says, was eight Foot in
breadth and twelve in height, and that it stood where the Wall of Severus
stood, being all made of Stone, and not of Turf, as that unserviceable Wall
was, which the Britains had before without skill and direction built for
themselves.

It has been much disputed among our Learned Antiquaries where this last Wall
stood, whether in the place where the former of Turf was raised by the Britains
between the two Friths, or where Hadrian's Wall was first built, between the
Tine and the Esk Bid puts a great distance between these two Walls, and makes
the former to have been between the two Friths, beginning at a Place called
Peneltun, two miles from Abercorney, and ending to the West, near Alcluyd:
which, says he, signifies a Rock in the River Cluyd. But the latter Wall was
from Sea to Sea, in a direct Line, between the Cities there built for Security
against Incursions, and it stood in the Place of Severus his Wall. Scoti-chron.
l. 3. c. 5.
Joh. Fordon distinguishes between the old Wall called Grimesdike, from Grime,
a Britain (whose Daughter Fergus married, and after his death, ruled over the
Scots during his Grand-child's Minority: and which Wall, he says, this Grime
overthrew, and so recovered the ancient Possessions due to him as descended
from Fulgenius) and the other Wall built where Severus his stood: And he gives
very different descriptions of them. The former Wall, he says, begins from the
East, upon the South Side of the Scottish Shore, near a Village called Karedin,
and then for twenty two miles crosses the Land, c. 4.
leaving Glasgow on the South; and ends on the Bank of the River Clyd, near
Kirk-patrick. The other, he says, begins on the East in the Southern Bank of
the Tyne to Gaitsheved, or Goatshead, c. 7.
where Severus, says he, a long time before had made a Wall and a Trench over
against New Castle; and so it is continued to the River Esk, called
Scotishwath, for sixty miles, and ends near Carlisle, on the West. But Hist. l.
4. Rege 27. l. 5. R. 41.
Buchanan contends, that Severus his Wall was where Graham's Dike, or
Grimes-dike was, and at least eighty miles distant from Hadrian 's Wall; which
he proves from the Antiquities there found, and the square Stones taken up;
which do sufficiently prove an ancient Stone Wall to have been there, but not
that of Severus: And the Roman Inscriptions in Brit. p. 699.
Camden mention Antoninus, and not Severus. Joh. l. 1. c. 14.
Major places Severus his Wall as Fordon does between the Tyne and the Esk. But
Archbishop Primord. p. 605, 1024, etc.
Usher has endeavored to clear this matter, by yielding to Buchanan, that the
Scottish Wall was made of Stone, viz. by the Romans under Gallio Ravennas, and
by proving that Bid was mistaken as to Severus his Wall being made of Turf
before, which was the Reason he thought it turned into Stone at this time; it
being not likely, that the Romans would bring the Britains at least eighty
miles back, and put them to defend a Wall so very much longer than the other;
But I rather think Severus his Wall was now repaired, and a larger Scope
allowed for the Picts and Scots; As, besides what has been said before, may
appear by this one Argument from Scoti-chrom. l. 3. c. 10.
Fordon. He says, That when the Scots made a new Incursion, they opened
Passages in the Wall, from whence it was called Thirle-wall, i. e. says he,
Murus perforatus. Now the Learned Primord. p. 1028.
Primate grants, that a Place called Thirle-wall stood on the Borders of
Cumberland and Northumberland: And that Fordon says, Thirle-wall was built by
Severus on the Tyne. And therefore Bid seems to have been in the right as to
Severus his Wall, but only mistaken in thinking it was made of Turf before,
which was built of Stone by Severus, and accounted one of the great Works of
the Roman Empire, which was impossible to be built of Stone anew by one Legion
and the help of the Country; But might very well be repaired, and made
desensible against the Scots and Picts.

We might now think that the Britains were left by the Romans in a tolerable
Condition to defend themselves; But as soon as their old Enemies understood that
their old Friends had forsaken them, they came upon them with a greater Force
and Violence than ever. And the Spirits of the poor Britains were so broken by
their former Miseries, that they were not able to withstand the Assaults of
their Enemies: But they forsook their Wall and Forts, and fled as far as they
could, and dispersed themselves, which made them an easy Prey to their
barbarous Enemies, who now destroyed them in a more cruel manner than they had
done before; And those who escaped were driven from their Habitations, and
hardly left in a condition to subsist, having no Provision left, but what they
did get by Hunting. This is the short account of what Gildas more Tragically
inlarges upon. And being thus reduced to the utmost Extremities, they resolve
once more to send to Aetius their last Groans; and to let him understand how
unable they were to stand out against their Enemies, Seeing between them and
the Sea they were either drowned or butchered. But all farther assistence was
now denied them; Aetius being then, as Bede, l. 1. c. 13.
Bid says, deeply engaged in the War with Bleda and Attila, Kings of the
Hunns. This Message was sent, says Bid in the 23d. of Theodosius, Aetius
being then third time Consul with Symmachus. But Bleda, according to Prosper
and Cassiodore, was killed by Attila two years before Aetius and Symmachus were
Consuls (but one year before according to Marcellinus) but the year following
he makes the terrible Invasion of Europe by Attila to be; And so Aetius having
then a Prospect of that War, had just reason to deny Supplies to the Britains.
And when Valentinian was VI. Consul, the year before Aetius and Symmachus, it
appears by Valentinian's Letters to him, that he was then in Gaul, for then he
directed the famous Constitution De Episcoporum Ordinatione to him there;
wherein he interposes his Authority to ratify Leo's Sentence against Hilary of
Arles. But this is sufficient to show that the Britains Complaints were then
sent to Aetius, and not to any Agitius or Aequitius, as some imagine.
Scoti-chron. l. 3. c. 11.
Fordon says, The Britains sent to Agitius and Litorius; But Litorius some
years before was beaten, and taken Prisoner by the Goths, as appears by the
Fasti Consulares both of Prosper and Cassiodore, and Hist. Misch. l. 14.
Paulus Diaconus out of them.

But the Miseries of the Britains were still increased by a Famine which then
raged; which was not peculiar to Britain. L. 1. c. 13.
Bid says, That there was then a Famine at Constantinople, and a great Plague
which followed it, which consumed abundance both of Men and Beasts. Which he
borrows from Marcellinus who makes both Famine and Plague to break out the very
year Aetius and Symmachus were Consuls. Both these are mentioned by Euagr. l.
2. c. 6.
Euagrius in the Eastern Parts, and therefore are not to be looked on as a
peculiar Judgment on the Britains.

After this, as Gild. 18. Bed. l. 1. c. 14.
Gildas and Bid tell us, finding their Case almost desperate, the Britains
were resolved to sell their Lives and Liberties as dear as they could, and by
making a fierce Assault upon their Enemies, they began to get the better of
them; Which they impute to their trusting rather to Divine Assistence than to
the help of Men, which they too much relied upon before. The Britains, as
appears afterward, did not want Courage, but Exercise in Arms; being kept under
so long by the Romans, they durst not so much as pretend to fighting, for fear
of being destroyed; And now the Romans, when they had a mind, could not infuse
new Spirits into them; But their own Miseries at last roused and awakened them
to that degree, that they made their Enemies quiet for some time; And the Irish
Robbers, says Gildas, returned home, intending to return shortly: And the
Picts in the farthest part of the Island lay still, only sometimes making
Excursions. This is a considerable passage in Gildas, which shows, that even
then the Scots, whom he calls Irish Robbers, were not Inhabitants of any part
of Britain. For he calls Ireland their home, as before he said upon the second
Devastation (as the Margin of Joselin's Gildas has it) that they came in their
Curroghs over the Scythian Vale, so he calls the Irish Sea; as Nennius calls
the Scots, Scytae. But if they had then inhabited in Britain, there had been no
use of Curroghs to convey them over, and this had been their proper Home.
Scoti-chron. l. 3. c. 10.
Fordon seems to have been aware of this Objection, and therefore says, The
Scots and Picts took the Irish in to their Assistence; But Gildas takes notice
of no other Scots than those that came out of Ireland, and returned back again.
Hist. l. 5. R. 41.
Buchanan says, That upon the Success of Grime against the Britains, many
Strangers came in to the Scots Assistence, and had their shares allowed them in
the conquered Lands. But he takes no notice of Gildas or Bede's saying, That
those very People who fought with the Britains returned home to Ireland; And
the Picts were quiet in the utmost parts of the Island; where there is no
mention of any third sort of People called the Scots in Britain. But Apparat.
ad Hist. Scot. l. 1. c. 3.
Dempster undertakes from this place of Gildas to prove, That the Scots and
Irish were then distinguished, because Gildas, after he had mentioned the Scots
and Picts, here names the Irish Robbers. It is true, that Gildas before does
mention the Scots and Picts; but in this Place he only speaks of the Irish and
the Picts, which is an Argument on the other side. For either the Scots had no
share in these last Incursions, or they must be comprehended under the Name of
Irish, having then no settled Habitations elsewhere but in Ireland. But there
is one Passage in Gild. 20.
Gildas which seems to imply that it was their Custom to inhabit this
Country, but Solito more being there used, and they being then supposed out of
Britain, the word Inhabit can only imply making a longer stay here, as they
were wont to do when they had Success. For their coming is described, like
that of the Bucaniers in the Westindies, and their Stay was as they liked their
Entertainment.

From this time Gildas only mentions the Vices and the Fears, and another
great Plague among the Britains, before he comes to that pernicious Counsel, as
he calls it, for sending for the Saxons by Vortigern.

But before I speak of that, while we are upon this Head of the Britains being
thus exposed to their Enemies, it will be needful to enquire what that
Legionary Assistence was which is mentioned in the Notitia Imperii, and at what
time that was made; For if the Common Opinion be true, that it was made after
the time of Honorius, then Britain could not have been left so destitute of
Roman Assistence as Gildas and Bid say. For by that Notitia, here in Britain,
under the Dux Britanniarum (who seems to have swallowed up the Power of the
Comes Britanniae, whose bare Title is still left in the Notitia) there was the
Prefect of the sixth Legion at York, of the Dalmatian Horse at Praesidium, i.
e. Warwick, probably first built in the time of Didius Gallus against the
Silures, and so continued its Name after, as being a convenient Station to keep
under the Provincial Britains; Of the Caspian Horse at Danum, (Doncaster;) Of
the Cataphractaerii at Morbium, (Moresby in Cumberland;) and so of others, at
Albeia (Ierby in the same Country,) at Dictam (Diganwey in Carnarvanshire,) at
Concangii Kendal in Westmoreland,) at Lavatrae (Bows in Richmondshire,) at
Verterae (Burgh in Westmoreland,) at Brovoniacum (Brongham in the same County,)
at Maglona (Macleneth in Montgomery-shire,) at Magi (old Radnor,) at Longovicum
(Lanchester in the Bishopric of Durham,) at Derventio (Aldby in Yorkshire;)
And besides these, there were many Cohorts disposed per lineam Valli, along the
Wall, as at Segedunum (Seton or Seghill in Northumberland,) Pons Aelii
(Ponteland in the same County,) Condercum (Chester in the Street,) Vindohila
(Walls-end,) Hunnum (Severshale,) Cilurnum (Silchester in Muro,) Procolitia
(Prudlow,) Borcovicus (Borwick,) Vindolana (Winchester,) Aesica (Netherby on
the Esk in Cumberland,) Magna (Chester in the Wall,) Amboglana (Ambleside in
Westmoreland,) Petrianae (old Perith in Cumberland,) Aballaba (Appleby in
Westmoreland,) Congavata (near Caudebec in Cumberland,) Axellodunum (Hexam in
Northumberland,) Gabrosentum (Gateshead by Newcastle,) Tunnocelum (Tinmouth,)
Glanoventa (a Place upon the Wensbeck, says our Learned Camd. Brit. p. 669.
Antiquary, (whose Judgment in the other I have followed) some miles within the
Wall;) Alione (upon the River Alne in Cumberland,) Brementuracum (Brampton in
the same County,) Olenacum (Elenborough in the same,) Virosidum (Warwick on the
Eden.) Now if all the Military Forces lay here so near to the Wall, after the
time of Honorius, how came the Britains to have been in such distress? But we
have no certainty when this Notitia was made. If it were, as Pancirol
conjectures, in the latter end of Theodosius the younger, about Anno Dom. 445.
Then all these Roman Forces were certainly withdrawn; and any new Supplies
denied by Aetius in the 23 th. of Theodosius; Therefore this Notitia must
relate to the Roman Settlement here, before the time that Maximus carried over
the Roman Legions, which never returned to that Station which they had before.
And although the Title seems to imply that it extended beyond the times of
Arcadius and Honorius; yet it cannot be understood of what then was, but of
what had been in former times. For that the Britains had then no such Forces
among them is apparent by what has been said already.

I now come to that fatal Counsel of sending for the Saxons to come to their
Assistence. It appears by Gild. 19, 20, 21, 23.
Gildas, That the Britains could come to no Settlement among themselves. For,
says he, They anointed Kings, not according to the Will of God, but such as
were more fierce and cruel than others, and not long after they without
Examination took them off, and set up worse than they. If any one was more
gentle and a Lover of Truth, he was the most hated and maligned, as a Betrayer
of his Country, they minded not what was pleasing or displeasing to God; or
rather the latter was more pleasing to them. They acted still contrary to their
own Interest, and there was an universal Degeneracy of Manners in all sorts of
men; And those who should have given the best Examples, their Priests and
Teachers, were as bad as others; Excessive Drinking, Heats and Animosities,
Contentions and Divisions, Envy and Oppression, were then so prevailing that
they seemed to have lost all Judgment of Good and Evil; so that then, he says,
The Saying of the Psalmist was fulfilled, He pours Contempt upon Princes, and
causes them to wander in the Wilderness, where there is no Way. And when
neither Fear of their Enemies nor the Judgments of God in a raging Pestilence
would do them good, then their Iniquities, says he, growing full, like the
Amorites, they fell into consultation, what was best for them to do against
their Enemies Incursions, and they all agreed to invite the Saxons over to
assist them. Upon which he breaks out into a strange Admiration of that
Stupidity and Infatuation which the Britains were then under, to call in a
Nation to help them whom they dreaded worse than death.

For the Saxons had been terrible for some time before to the British Nation;
which was the Occasion of calling the Shore on both sides the Saxon Shore, and
setting up such an Admiral here by the Romans, who was called Comes Litoris
Saxon per Britanniam. Which shows that the Saxons were then very well known for
their great Piracies, and had been so from the time of Carausius: For then,
Eutrop. l. 9. c. 19.
Eutropius says, he was employed to scour the Seas from the Franks and Saxons
who were very troublesome. It appears by Tacit. An. 11.
Tacitus, that Gannascus, with the Chauci, did, in Claudius his time, infest
the Gallican shore with Piracy. Zosim. l. 3.
Zosimus says, That the Saxons, who were the stoutest of all the barbarous
Nations, sent out the Quadi, a part of their own People, into the Roman
Territories. By these Quadi Germ. Antiq. l. 3.
Cluverius and Belg. Romans l. 7. c. 5.
Bucherius understand the Cauchi. But Primord. p. 309.
Archbishop Usher shows, That these were neither the Quadi nor the Cauchi, but
the Chamavi, from Eunapius, whom Zosimus transcribes, and from Julian himself:
But from hence it appears, That the Chamavi were then accounted a part of the
Saxons, who, according to Germ. l. 3. c. 14.
Cluverius, there lived near the River Amisia, a great way on this side the Elb
or the Weser; And Eunapius places them not far from the Rhine. However, this
proves, that the Name of Saxons then comprehended Nations of other
denominations. But, to make this out, we are to consider, that Zosimus says,
That in the time of Constantius, three German Nations brake forth as it were at
once on the Roman Empire; The Franks, the Alemanni and the Saxons; and had
taken and destroyed forty Cities on the Rhine. And Saint Hier. vit. Hill.
Hierome mentions the Franks, as lying between the Alemanni and the Saxons.
These three, as Rer. Germ. l. 1. p. 55.
Beatus Rhenanus observes, comprehended the several Nations of Germany; And, as
the late Learned Bishop of Mon. Pader^. p. 91.
Munster says, The Saxons was a Name belonging to different, but neighbor
Nations, which joined together upon a common Interest. And, not improbably, had
their Name at first from the short Swords they did commonly wear called Sachs;
as the Quirites had their Name from Quiris, a sort of Spear; And the Scythians,
from Scytten, to shoot with a Bow. Witikind. de Sax. l. 1.
Witikindus first mentions this Etymology, which is followed by others; but
Reiner. de Sax. Origin, p. 10.
Reinerus Reneccius and De Weichbild. Saxon. c. 70. n. 5.
Gryphiander do much more incline to another derivation, viz. from Sassen,
which in the German Tongue is the same with Natives or Inhabitants; And which
in the modern Saxon is Saten; as Gross is Grote; and so Holsati are the same
with Holt-saten, Men that lived in Woods. But why this, which was common to
other Germans, should give a particular denomination to one sort, is not so
easy to apprehend: But Tacitus, speaking of some of the Northern Germans,
says, That the common Badges of them are round Shields and short Swords: And
the Arms of Saxony to this day, as Origin. Franc. l. 2. c. 2.
Pontanus observes, are two short Swords across. As to those who derive the
Saxons from the Sacae of Asia, as though they were Sacasones; although there be
Persons of great Name who embrace that Opinion (among whom our Brit. p. 92.
Mr. Camden is one) yet I think it no more probable, than that the Germans are
derived from the Plowmen of Persia, some whereof, Herodotus says, were called
Germanii. For a bare similitude of Names is no sufficient ground to judge of
the Affinity of People; nor the agreement of some Words, as in the German and
Persian Languages (which Mr. Camden insists on) to conclude the People of the
same Original: Unless there be a probable account withal given, how they came
to be propagated from each other, i. e. how the Persian Germans came into these
Parts; And how the Sacae left their own Country to people Saxony. But under
this Name of Saxons, not only those who originally had that Name, but all
those who joined with them, were comprehended. And it is observable, that not
one of the three Names of the German Nations then in use was known in Tacitus
his time. The Alemanni are first spoken of by Vit. Caracal.
Spartianus, in the Life of Caracalla; and, as Hist. l. 1.
Agathias says from Asinius Quadratus, They were an Association of many People
together under that Name, as the Word imports. The Name of Franks was first
known in the time of Vopisc. in Aurel.
Aurelian, and took in several of the old German Names, the Scicambri, Chatti,
Tencteri, and many others; Thence Hier. in vit. Hilar.
St. Jerome says, That France was that which Historians called Germany; And so
the Saxons was a general Name for the Northern Germans, who chiefly lived upon
the Seashore, from the Amasis to the Weser and Elb, as far as the Eydor, unto
the Cimbrick Chersonese, that had peculiar Appellations. For although the
Testimony of Geogr. l. ^.
Ptolemy be commonly produced for the Saxons living on the back of the Cimbrick
Chersonese, yet Mr. Selden's MS. in both places, leaves out the S, and Capnio,
as Praefat. ad Crantz. Sa^^.
Cisnerus observes, contends, it ought to be read (...). But I lay no weight
upon this. But it is certain, that the People in Tacitus his time were called
Fosi, who lived in the Place where the Saxons are supposed to have been. Germ.
Antiq. l. 3. c. 21.
Cluverius makes a very unhappy Conjecture, that FOSI, in Tacitus, was
corrupted, for SASONI; because they lived in Holstein, and about Sleswick; But
it is far more probable, That the Name of Saxons was then generally assumed by
the Northern Germans when they joined their Forces together, and resolved to
make some Expeditions abroad, as the Franks and Alemanni had done. Which they
did with so great Success, that Zosim. l. 5.
Zosimus says, in the time of Julian they went down the Rhine, and drove out
the Salii, a Nation of the Franks, out of the Island of the Batavi. But it
seems very probable, That the Saxons had placed themselves near the Seashore,
from the time of Dioclesian, when Carausius was employed against them. Hist. l.
7. c. 31.
Orosius describes them as a People living on the Seashore; and so do Isidore
and Paulus Diaconus after him. Ammianus Marcel. l. 27.
Marcellinus mentions them, as bordering, in Valentinian 's time, on the parts
of Gaul as well as the Franks.

But about this Point our two Learned Antiquaries differ, Brit. p. 93.
Camden says, That the Saxons originally came from the Cimbrick Chersonese, in
the time of Dioclesian; And after, passing the Elb, they partly went into those
parts of the Suevi, which are since called Saxony, and partly into Frisia and
Batavia; From whence, he says, all the Inhabitants of the German shore, who
used Piracy at Sea, were called Saxons; by which he understands the People from
Jutland to Holland. For which he produces the Testimony of Fabius Ethelwerd, of
the Royal Blood of the Saxons; Who says, That the Saxons lived upon the Sea
Coasts, from the Rhine as far as Denmark. But Archbishop Primord. p. 309.
Usher will not allow, that the Saxons had seated themselves upon those Coasts
then, But only that they did exercise their Piracies along them. He grants,
that before Bid 's time, the Saxons took Possession of the Places quitted by
the Franks, when they went into Gaul, and not only inhabited on the Coast
between the Elb and the Rhine, but in the inner parts of the Country; But he
denies, that this was before the Saxons coming into Britain. But then Fabius
Ethelwerd did not understand where his Countrymen lived before they came into
Britain; And if the Saxons in Valentinian's time, were still only in the
Cimbrick Chersonese, how comes Ammianus Marcellinus to make them to border upon
the Parts of Gaul? Are either Jutland or Holstein, or Sleswick, or any of those
Countries contiguous to Gaul? Yet his words are, Gallicanos Tractus Franci and
Saxones iisdem confines, etc. Which, that it is not to be understood, that the
Saxons were Neighbors to the Franks; but that the Franks and Saxons then
bordered upon the Gauls, will appear from hence, The Franks were then in
Taxandria, as is plain by L. 17.
Ammianus his words, in the time of Julian, and in Batavia; and withal,
Zosimus speaks of the Salii, who were undoubtedly Franks, being driven out of
the Island of the Batavi by some of the Saxons. And this was no Incursion of
the Franks, For Ammianus Marcellinus says, They did there fix their
Habitations: And the Chamavi, whom he makes a part of the Saxons, had that
Command of the Rhine, that Julian made Peace with them, because without their
leave, Corn could not be brought out of Britain, as Excerpt. Legate. p. 15.
Eunapius Sardianus says: And so Orat. Fun.
Libanius and Zos. l. 3.
Zosimus say, that Julian took greater care for the transporting Corn out of
Britain, as had been accustomed, by building more Ships on the Rhine for that
Purpose; And L. 18.
Ammianus Marcellinus says, he built Granaries instead of those which were
burnt. Such a one the Arx Britannica, in the mouth of the Rhine, was made from
a Magazine, and thence probably, says Brit. p. 852.
Camden, had its Name, because the Corn was conveyed thither out of Britain.
From thence it follows, that the Saxons so early as Julian's time, had the
Command of the Rhine. For, whether these were the Chauci, the Quadi, or the
Chamavi; yet Zosimus says, That they were a People of the Saxons. But it may
be said, That this was only a sudden Incursion, and that they were driven out
again by the Roman Forces. So indeed Zosimus and Julian relate it, but how then
come the Saxons in Valentinian's time to border still upon Gaul? So that, if
they were driven out by Julian, they quickly returned, and fixed their
Habitations by the Sea, as the Salii, who were Franks, did in Taxandria; which
was more within Land: and where, as Natale Solum Legum Salic. c. 8.
Godfrey Wendelin has endeavored to prove, the Salick Law was first made.
Which Taxandria; according to him, was bounded by the Maes on the East and
North; by the Tamera on the South, and by the Scheld on the West; And here,
upon Submission, the Franks were permitted to live; And this was thence forward
called Francia Minor, c. 11.
and he mentions a place there still called Vranrijck, the Kingdom of France
(but a very small one) and others called Seilberg, the Mountain of the Salii,
Seelbendens, the Salian Meadows, Seleheim, the House of the Salii: c. 13.
But the other Franks being by Stilicho's means driven out of their Possessions
beyond the Rhine, they came into the parts about Tongres near to Taxandria, and
there joined in one Body; and set up Kings among themselves, as he shows from
Gregorious Turonensis, and then they made that Body of Laws, called the Salick
Laws. But to return to the Saxons.

Rer. Frisic. l. 1.
Vbbo Emmius, a learned and judicious Historian, gives this Account of the
Saxons and their Neighbor Nations, who inhabited on the Northern Parts of
Germany. The Frisii dwelt from the middle Stream of the Rhine, about Vtrecht,
to the River Amasus, (Eems;) From thence to the Elb lived the Chauci, divided
into the greater and lesser by the Weser; A great part of these, leaving their
Native Soil, joined with the Sicambri on the Rhine, who, from their affecting
liberty, were called Franks; beyond the Elb were the Saxons and the Cimbri;
These Saxons, being pressed by the more Northern People, or for their own
convenience, came Southwards, and took Possession first of those Places where
the Chauci dwelt; And by degrees prevailing, all the other People, who joined
with or submitted to the Saxons, were called by their Name: l. 3.
and among the rest the Frisii; From whose Coasts he supposes the two Brothers,
Hengist and Horsa, to have gone into Britain; and, returning thither, carried
over a far greater Number with them, not so much to fight, as to inhabit there.
He thinks it most probable, that Hengist and Horsa, by their Descent, were
originally Saxons; But that the greatest part of the People who went over with
them were rather Frisians than Saxons. Which he proves, not only from the
greater facility of Passage from the Coasts of Friseland, and the Testimony of
their own Annals; but from the greater agreement of the English Language with
theirs than with the Saxon or any other German Dialect. And because l. 5. c. 10.
Bid reckons the Frisians among those from whom the English are derived; and
Wilfrid, Wickbert, Willibrord preached to the Frisians in their own Tongue, as
he proves from Marcellinus his Life of Suidbert: And Procopius reckons the
Frisians among the Inhabitants of Britain. But he says farther, That the
Affinity of the Languages continues still so very great, that from thence he
concludes many more to have gone out of Friseland into Britain, than either of
the Saxons, Iutes or Angles.

But to all this our Learned Primord. p. 399, 400.
Primate answers, That Hengist and Horsa might be true Frisians, there being a
Frisia in the Southern parts of Jutland, which Saxo Grammaticus calls the
lesser Frisia, and is parted by the Eidore from the Country of the Angli on
the East, and of the Saxons on the South. But whatever Suffridus Petrus, or
such Authors contend for, as to Hengist and Horsa being originally Frisians,
Vbbo Emmius quits that Point upon L. 1. c. 15.
Bede's Genealogy, and grants they were Saxons: being the Sons of Victgilsus,
whose Father was Vitta, the Son of Vecta, whose Father was Voden, of whose Race
the Kings of many Provinces are descended. It does not seem at all probable,
That these lived in the lesser Frisia, which is hardly taken notice of by any
but by L. 14.
Saxo Grammaticus; and Descript. Daniae.
Pontanus tells us, is not above four German miles in length upon the
Seashore; But suppose that Saxo comprehended Dithmars under it; yet we have no
certainty that the Colony of Frisians was removed thither before Hengist and
Horsa came for Britain; and Helmoldus seems to imply that it was brought
thither by Adolphus II. Count of Holstein, about Anno Dom. 1137. But the
Question is not concerning Hengist and Horsa, but the greater Number of the
People, which might be still of the greater Frisia; For which the affinity of
the Language is a considerable Argument, which does not depend merely upon the
Credit of Marcellinus his Life of Suidbert, but upon the probability of the
thing. For since several English went thither to Preach, and the Affinity of
the Language continues so great still, it is a good Argument to prove, either
that the Frisians came over hither, or that the Frisian and Saxon Languages
were then the same. And De bello Goth. l. 4. c. 20.
Procopius his Testimony is not to be slighted, who places the Frisians in
Britain; for, although he calls it Brettia, it is certain he means great
Britain, because he places the Angles together with the Frisians in it; So that
he might as well question the Angles as the Frisians coming hither; if
Procopius his Authority signify any thing.

I know that our most Learned Primord. p. 419.
Primate takes this Brettia for the Island of the Batavi, because Joh.
Leidensis says, That, upon the Saxons Invasion, some of the Britains fled into
Holland, and there, in the Mouth of the Rhine, built that famous Castle called
Britton, and subdued the People thereabout. But this seems to be very
improbable, for any one that looks into the Description of it, in Antiq. Bat.
p. 171, etc.
Scriverius his Antiquitates Batavicae, will conclude it to have been a Roman
Work; which a Person of his Judgment could not but discern; But he says, it
was possessed then by the Britains: Which depends wholly on the Credit of this
Joh. Gerbrandus of Leyden, who was a late Writer, and of no great Esteem with
him, as appears by many Passages in his Book: But how came the Angles to live
here with the Frisians and Britains? For that the same Gerbrandus is cited, who
says, That when part of Hengist 's Army was driven out of Britain, they built
the Castle of Leyden. And so we have the Britains dwelling there, being driven
out by the Saxons; and the Saxons driven out by the Britains; only to make
this to be the Island Brettia, in Procopius, distinct from Great Britain. But
to proceed.

Hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 3.
Adamus Bremensis, who lived near to Jutland, says, That the Saxons, who went
over into Britain, lived near the Rhine. Chron. p. 111.
Engelhusius, lately published out of MSS. by Maderus, and who lived in the
lower Saxony, says, That Hengist and Horsa went out of Westphalia, from a
Place called Enghere, and instead of Engerschen, called themselves Engelschen.
De Orig. Fris. l. 2. c. 15.
Suffridus Petrus says, Those People were called Angrivarii, and the Country
Angria, which was subdued by Udolphus, Father to Hengist and Horsa, and Prince
of Frisia; But their Mother's Name was Suana, Daughter to Vectgistus, a great
Man about Hamburgh. If he suppose Hamburgh then built, he was extremely
mistaken; for it was only a Castle erected on the Elb, in the time of Charles
the Great, for preventing the Incursion of the Sclavi, as appears by the
Testimonies of Annal. A D. 810, 811.
Eginhardus, and Stad. A. D. 810.
Albertus Stadensis: After which he built a City, and founded a Church there,
as Adamus Bremensis and Helmoldus agree; Which City had its Name from a
Neighbor Wood, called in the Saxon, Hamme; as Orig. Hambag. p. 13.
Lambecius says, in Ditmarse there are two Woods still called Suderhamme and
Norderhamme. But to return to Suffrifridus; When, according to Custom, says
he, a Colony of Frisians was to be drawn out, Hengist and Horsa were their
Captains, and so went for old England, or Anglen in Jutland, where they were
kindly received, by means of Vetgistus; and from thence took the opportunity of
coming into Britain. From hence he finds fault with Crantzius, for making
Angria in Westphalia to be Old Anglen; and says, That Bid only reckons the
Mother's Line, and not the Father's. But his Occa Scarlensis, on whom he
chiefly relies, is much such another Author as Hunibaldus, or Geffrey, or
Hector's Veremundus; and therefore I shall say no more of him. For, I perceive,
scarce any of the Northern Nations wanted such Authors who endeavored to
supply the defect of their Histories by their own Inventions. So that it is
necessary to lay open the pretended Antiquities in order to the setting forth
the true.

The late Bishop of Monum. Paderbourn. p. 88.
Munster, a Person of far greater Judgment and Learning than Suffridus Petrus,
calls his Originals of the Saxons by no better a Title than of Canorae Nugae,
Sounding Trifles, having no foundation in good Authority. The Account he gives
of the Saxons is this, That they at first lived beyond the Elb, where they had
the same Situation with Tacitus his Angli, p. 90, etc.
whom he makes the farthest of the Suevi, and therefore might well be the same
People; That in Bede's time they were come on this side the Weser, and were
settled in Westphalia; and so they made a threefold Saxony of the Ostphali,
Angrivarii and Westphali, who were called Olt-saxons by Bid and others: Not
that these were all originally Saxons; But they bore the same Name, being
united in one common League; So that, as all the Germans which went into Gaul
were called Franks, so those who prevailed in Germany and went into Britain,
were called Saxons.

But Atlantic. c. 21. 16.
Olaus Rudbeck, after all, has found the Seat of the Saxons more North than
Jutland, where, says he, The Name of the Saxons could never yet be found; and
where are no Mountains to be met with upon which Ptolemy places them on the
back of the Cimbrick Chersonese, but in that part of Sweden which lies between
Vermelandia and Angermannia he has found Norsaxen, and Sodersaxen, and
Saxehundari, and Saxewall, and Saxen, etc. c. 24. 16.
And in Smaland he has discovered many Places taken from the Angles, as
Anglested Hundred, Angloridia, Anglodorpia, Engelbeck, etc.

But for our better understanding the Condition of that People who were called
in by the Britains, it will be most material to consider what is said of them
by those who descended from them, and lived here not long after their coming.

L. 1. c. 15.
Bid, who was himself a Saxon, and lived nearest the time of the Saxons coming
hither, must be presumed to have understood best who they were, and whence they
came. And although at the beginning he makes the Angles and Saxons all one,
saying, the Angles or Saxons, being invited by King Vortigern, came hither in
three Keels or long Boats at first; yet when he adds, that Numbers came
afterward, he then distinguishes them into three distinct sorts of People,
viz. the Saxons, Angles and Jutes. The Saxons, he says, came from that Place
which was then called Saxony; The Angles, from the Country called Angulus,
which remained desert to this day, and lay between the Provinces of the Jutes
and Saxons. And much to the same purpose Ethelw. l. 1.
Fabius Ethelwerd; only he says, that they came de Saxonia, Anglia atque
Giota. Saxony, he says, was then called Ealdsexe; and for Anglia, he says, it
lay between the Saxons and the Gioti, whose chief Town in the Saxon Tongue was
called Sleswic, and by the Danes, Haithaby. But, by this Account, all these
People who came hither to assist the Britains, and after conquered them, and
possessed their Land, must come out of that Chersonese called Jutland, taking
it in the largest extent, not only to the Eidore, but from the Eidore to the
Elb. For if the Angli came from about Sleswic, and lay between the Jutes and
the Old Saxons; then the Jutes possessed all that part of the Chersonese which
is now called the Northern Iutland: and the Southern Iutland takes within it
all that was possessed by the Angli, which reached no farther than between
Sleswic and Flensburgh, which in the modern Maps is still called Angelen; And
so the Country lying between the Elb and the Eidore, comprehending Hostein,
Dithmars and Stormar, must be the Seat of the Old Saxons; which, by L. 2. c. 8.
Adamus Bremensis and L. 1. c. 5.
Helmoldus, is called Nortalbingia; and, by A. D. 785.
Eginhartus, Saxonia Transalbiana; by Stad. A. 785.
Albertus Stadensis, Transalbia; where the Saxons remained in so great Numbers
that Charles the Great could not totally subdue them, till after a War of above
thirty years, as the forementioned Authors assure us. And Vit. Caroli.
Eginhartus, whose Authority is unquestionable, says, That Charles had no War
more tedious or more fierce than that which he had with the Saxons; And in the
conclusion of it, he was forced to remove 10000 Saxons on both sides the River
Elb, and to disperse them in several Parts of the Empire. And as to that part
of Jutland which Bid says was left desolate to his time upon the remove of
the Angli; De Situ Daniae.
Adamus Bremensis gives another Reason for it, saying, That Jutland was the
most uncultivated part of all Germany, and the least fit for humane habitation,
being so barren and unfruitful, and so obnoxious to Pirates from both Seas.
But since the Saxons, Angles and Jutes, coming into Britain, took Possession of
so great a part of it, as our Historians tell us, viz. The Jutes, Kent, the
Isle of Wight and part of Hampshire; The Saxons, Sussex, Essex, Middlesex, the
South part of Hartfordshire, Surrey, the other part of Hampshire, Berkshire,
Wiltshire, Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Devonshire and part of Cornwall; The
Angles, Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridge, the Midland and Northern Counties; It
deserves to be considered whether, since there were so few Inhabitants then in
Jutland and so many Saxons left behind, there be not far greater probability
that these should come from all the Maritime Coasts from the Rhine to Jutland,
than merely out of such an unpeopled Country as that was. I do not deny the
distinction of People that Bid mentions, nor their coming originally out of
Jutland, or rather through Jutland: But, I think, all Circumstances considered,
it is more probable that the Saxons, before that time, were come nearer to the
Rhine, and so had greater Convenience of removing themselves over in such great
Numbers into Britain, as they did upon Vortigern's Invitation, and the
Discontents which soon happened between the Saxons and the Britains.

And it is observable, That those who enlarge the Bounds of the Saxons do take
notice of a difference in their Situation agreeable to what Bid says; For De
Orig. Sam. p. 11.
Reinerus Reineccius, a Learned German Antiquary, says, The Saxons were
divided into three sorts, the Ostvali, or the Eastern Saxons, whom the Old
Saxon Poet calls Osterlingi, whose Limits extended, he says, as far as the
Slavi, i. e. beyond the River Elb; the Westvali, whose Bounds, he says, came
very near the Rhine; And between these, he says, were the Angarii, just as Bede puts his Angli, between the Jutes and the Saxons.

Inter praedictos media Regione morantur
Angarii, Populus Saxonum tertius --
If this Division of the Saxons be allowed, we have here scope enough for all
those People to live in who came over into Britain, and number enough to come
hither, and yet not to leave the Places desolate whence they came. And it is
not improbable that the Northern Nations thrusting one another forwards, for a
greater Convenience of living, those Saxons who lived about Holstein might come
into Westphaliae, and so be nearest to the Rhine; The Angli came into the Place
where the Angrivarii are seated; And the most remote Inhabitants of the
Chersonese, would then be the Osterlings or the Eastern Saxons. This, upon the
whole matter, seems to me the most probable way of reconciling what Bid says
with the Circumstances of those times, and with the Frisians coming in together
with the Saxons, which he elsewhere expressly affirms, as is already showed.

As to the time of the Saxons coming into Britain, in the common printed Copies
of Bid, it is said to have been Anno Dom. 409. and so it is in the late
Edition by Chiffletius, out of the old MS. of S. Maximin at Triers; But that
cannot be true, because Martianus is said to be Emperor at the same time. But
in the Chronology, at the end of that Edition, it is said to have been Anno
Dom. 449. to which Mr. Wheelock's MS. agrees; and Asserius Menevensis, in his
Annals; which is followed by Fabius Ethelwerd, the Old Saxon Annals, William of
Malmsbury, Henry Huntingdon, Matthew. Westminster, and others. Florentius
Wigorniensis, who generally follows Marianus Scotus, places it in the following
year; Valentinianus and Avienus, Consuls; but, according to Marianus Scotus, in
the Basil Edition, they were Consuls the year before Martianus was Emperor,
and he makes their coming in to have been when Herculanus and Asporatius were
Consuls, Anno Dom. 453. But Archbishop Primord. p. 405.
Usher says, That appears by the Fasti to have been Anno Dom. 452. or the
second of Martianus, by Cassiodore. Two Characters of the time are certain;
viz. that it was after the third Consulship of Aetius, and the Death of
Theodosius; And therefore it is to be wondered Mr. Brit. p. 95.
Camden should so confidently affirm that it was before Anno Dom. 449. But
there are three things he goes upon which must be considered. First, That
Vortigern 's Death was before St. German 's return; But St. German died Anno
Dom. 435. And therefore the coming in of the Saxons must be some time before.
As to Vortigern's Death, before St. German's return, he produces only the
Testimony of Nennius, who, in the Affairs of Vortigern, does Romance so much,
That even Geffrey of Monmouth was ashamed to follow him. But as to the time of
St. German's Death, there are very convincing Arguments to prove Camden
mistaken. Vincent. Bar. SS. Lerinens. Vit. p. 112.
Honoratus, in the Life of Hilary, Bishop of Arles, mentions St. German as
present when Chelidonius was deposed by Hilary in his Visitation; which Council.
Gall. To. 1. p. 79.
Sirmondus places not without Reason, Anno Dom. 444. as appears by the Epistle
of Leo and the Rescript of Valentinian upon Chelidonius his Appeal, which bears
date, Anno Dom. 445. But which is yet more considerable, L. 1. c. 21.
Bid says, That after his second return he went on an Embassy to Ravenna, and
was there kindly received by Valentinian and Placidia, and there died; And, not
long after, Valentinian was killed in the sixth of Martianus: And therefore St.
German's Death could not be so soon as Mr. Camden supposes. Add to this, that
Constantius, in his Life of St. German says, That he sat thirty years after
St. Amator in his See, who died Anno Dom. 418. But the Sammarthani say, Anno
Dom. 420.

As to the Testimony of Prosper Tiro, who says, That Britain was brought under
the Power of the Saxons, the 18th. of Theodosius, it plainly contradicts
Gildas; For this was before the third Consulship of Aetius, which was five
years after; And in matters of the British History, Gildas certainly deserves
the greater Credit, supposing it were the true Prosper.

His last Argument is from the Calculation, at the end of Nennius, on which he
lays the greatest Weight; which makes their coming in to be when Felix and
Taurus were Consuls, which agrees with Anno Dom. 428. But this was near twenty
years before the third Consulship of Aetius, when the Britains were not yet in
despair of Assistence from the Romans; Before which they never sought for the
Saxons. And I confess the Authority of Gildas and Bid, with the Series of the
British and Roman Affairs at that time sway much more with me than such an
Anonymous Calculation.

It is a strange mistake of Rer. Francis. l. 3. p. 143.
Hadrianus Valesius, to make Vortigern, King of the Angles, who were hired to
assist the Britains; But the Ambiguity of the words in Hist. l. 14.
Paulus Diaconus seem to have been the occasion of it: which had been easily
prevented by looking into Bid: And so had another Mistake in the same place,
viz. That only the Angles, and not the Saxons, were invited over: Forbid
says expressly, That the Britains, with their King Vortigern, agreed to send
for the Saxons; But it is a third mistake, when he says, That the Saxons
before this time had a part of the Island near to the Picts; Which he proves
from the Words of Constantius as to their joining with the Picts in one of
their Battles. But the Saxons did frequently make Incursions before, and in one
of them might join with the other Enemies of the Britains, which is a very
different thing from Inhabiting in any Part of the Island, which we have no
Evidence that they did, till they were called in by the Britains.

The Saxons having received such an Invitation from the Britains were unwilling
to let slip so fair an Opportunity of coming into that Land, by the consent of
Prince and People whose Shores they had so long infested. L. 1. c. 14.
Bid says, There was a particular Providence of God in it, to make them the
Scourges of the Peoples wickedness. Gild. 23.
Gildas imputes it to mere Sottishness and Infatuation. Nenn. c. 28.
Nennius intimates some Domestic Fear that was the Occasion of Vortigern 's
sending for the Saxons, as well as that of their common Enemies, i. e. he was
very apprehensive of a sudden Rising of the Roman Party yet left in the Island,
and of Ambrosius. But he leaves it wholly in the dark, who this Ambrosius was,
and what Cause Vortigern had to be afraid of him. Gild. 25.
Gildas speaks of Ambrosius Aurelianus, as of a modest Man, and as almost the
only person of the Roman Nation then surviving, whose Parents were killed
enjoying the Purple, and whose Posterity was living in Gildas his time, but
much degenerated from the Virtues of their Ancestors. This is the only
Passage which gives us any light into this matter which is repeated by L. 1. c.
16.
Bid, who more plainly says, That his Parents had Royal Authority, and were
killed. Who these Parents of his were we are left only to conjecture. The
Galfr. l. 2. c. 6.
British History would clear the matter, if it deserved Credit, for there we
read, That Aurelius Ambrosius was one of the younger Sons of Constantine, King
of Britain, who was forced to fly from Vortigern after the Murder of their
Brother Constans by his contrivance. But we know that Constantine and his Sons,
Constans and Julian, were killed abroad; and it is not probable the Romans
would have permitted any one of his Sons to have remained here; or, if they
did, this Ambrosius must have been of Ripe years for Government long before
this time. For Constantine's Life was taken away when Theodosius was IV.
Consul, as Idatius and Marcellinus agree, Anno Dom. 411. So that Ambrosius
could not be very young when Vortigern took the Government, in whose fourth
year, they say, The Saxons were called in. But there is another Passage in
Gildas which helps to explain this: For he says, That after they found
themselves deserted by the Romans, they set up Kings of their own, and soon
after put them down again, and made choice of worse in their room; This setting
up of Kings he expresses by their being anointed; whether that Custom were
then used or not, it is plain, that he supposes that the Britains, in that
Confusion they were in, took upon them, without regard to their Duty, to place
and displace them. But that he takes anointing in a metaphorical Sense appears
by what follows, That the Anointers were those who destroyed them. Among these
in all probability was the Father of Ambrosius, and the rather because, it is
said, he was of Roman Descent: For the Britains thought none then able to
defend them that had not a Roman Spirit in him. At this time the Britains were
left to their full Liberty by the Roman Empire, which, as L. 1. c. 11.
Bid reckons, had the Dominion here for 470 years; And then there was no Line
remaining to succeed in the Government, nor so much as to determine their
choice, which made them so easily to make and unmake their Kings, who lost
their Purple and their Lives together. This must needs breed infinite
Confusions among them; and every one who came to be King lived in perpetual
fear of being served as others had been before him; And the natural consequence
of this Jealousy of their own Subjects was, looking out for Assistence from
abroad, which I doubt not was one great Reason of Vortigern's sending for the
Saxons, hoping to secure himself by their means against his own People:
although it proved at last the Ruin both of himself and his People. But this
Jealousy could not but increase upon them, while there was a Person descended
from a former King, and of Roman Parentage in being; So that Nennius seems to
have hit upon one of the main Reasons which swayed Vortigern to send for the
Saxons.

Hist. of Gavelkind, p. 40.
Some have gone about to defend Vortigern so far as to say, That he took the
most prudent course he could for the benefit and security of his Subjects, by
placing the Saxons upon the Picts Wall, and upon the Kentish Shores, which were
thought fit to be secured by the Romans. But, against whom? Was it not against
these very Saxons? And is it the best way to secure the Flock, to set the
Wolves to watch them? If they had the Command of those Shores, could not they
let in what Numbers they pleased of their own People to strengthen themselves
against the Britains? And, was this for the Peoples Security? What Success had
there been in that Age, in letting in the Barbarous Nations upon the several
parts of the Roman Empire? And, what could be expected in such a Condition as
the Britains were in, otherwise than what did happen when a fierce,
ungovernable, military People were called in to defend a Nation so long kept
under, and wholly almost unacquainted with the exercise of Brutish Valor, and
unexperienced in the Arts of War? Especially when the Air, Situation,
Fruitfulness and all sorts of Conveniences were so much above those of the
Country which they came from? So that Gildas seems to have a great deal of
Reason, when he attributes this Act of Vortigern's, with a respect to the
Nation, to mere Sottishness and Infatuation.

De Gest. Sax. p. 3.
Witikindus tells a formal Story of a Speech made by the British Ambassadors
to the Saxons, wherein they magnify the Saxons courage, and lament their own
Miseries, and in short tell them, If they would come and help them, their Land
and themselves would be at their Service, for they knew none more worthy to
command them, since the Romans had left them. But neither Bid nor Ethelwerd,
although both Saxons, mention the least Promise of Submission; And it is
apparent by their Quarrel with the Britains afterward, that they came as
Mercenary Soldiers, upon promise of Pay. For Gild. 23.
Gildas says, The first Pretense of Quarrelling was for greater allowance,
which he calls their Epimenia, and Bid, Annonae: Which shows upon what Terms
they came. And Witikindus himself makes no other Pretense for their Rising
against the Britains, but that the Country pleased them, and they found they
were able to subdue the Inhabitants. For after Hengist and his Company had
tasted the Sweetness of it, they never left Wheedling that weak and vicious
King (as all describe him) with fair Promises, and necessity of more Succors
to secure himself and to defend his Country, till they had by degrees got over
Strength enough to bid defiance to the Britains. At first they seemed very
zealous and hearty against their common Enemies, and did great Service in
beating the Picts and Scots; insomuch that Hist. l. 5.
Buchanan confesses, they were driven beyond Adrian 's Wall; And some think
their King Eugenius was then killed. Scoti-chron. l. 3. c. 13, 14.
Fordon says, They went into Albany, and brought away great booty from thence;
and confesses, that he found in a certain History, that he was killed South of
Humber, by the Britains and the English. And it is easy to imagine how
insolent such a Barbarous People would grow upon their Success, when they knew
the Britains durst not oppose them. L. 1. c. 15.
Bid says, That they entered into a secret League with the Picts and the Scots
after they had beaten them, and then took occasion to quarrel with the
Britains; Only they still endeavored to keep Vortigern firm to them. To this
purpose Nenn. c. 37.
Nennius tells the Story of Hengist's fair Daughter Rovena, and how Vortigern
was ensnared by her, to the great dissatisfaction of the Britains. Hector
Boethius says, That Vodinus, Bishop of London, was killed by Hengist, for
reproving Vortigern for that Marriage; But we must not be too strict upon
Hector to put him to produce his Vouchers. And the L. 3. c. 1.
British History adds, that Hengist, being a subtle Man, insinuated still into
Vortigern, That his own People did not love him, and that they would depose
him, and set up Aurelius Ambrosius: and by such Arts they widen'd the Distance
between him and his People, when they designed nothing less than the
destruction of both.

It is certain, by what Gildas and Bid have left, that these heats soon brake
out into open Flames, to the Ruin and Desolation of the Country: But how the
War began, and by what means it was first managed on the British side is not so
clear. But Nenn. c. 3^.
Nennius says, That when Vortigern 's wickedness grew so great as to marry his
own Daughter, he was condemned in solemn Council of the British Nation both
Clergy and Laity, and upon the Advice of his Nobles, he withdrew himself from
Affairs to a private Castle. But the L. 3. c. 2.
British History makes it worse, viz. That the Britains forsook him, and set up
his Son Vortimer, who behaved himself with great Courage and Resolution against
the Saxons; And then reckons up four Battles, which he fought with them; The
first upon the Derwent, the second at Episford, or rather Alesford, the third
upon the Seashore, when he drove them into their Ships, and so home; but the
fourth is not mentioned; After which Geffrey relates Vortimer's being poisoned
by his Mother-in-law, and the restoring of Vortigern, and his calling for the
Saxons back again. Nenn. c. 45.
Nennius speaks of Vortimer's fighting with Hengist and Horsus, and adds his
Success to have been so great, as to have driven them into the Isle of Thanet,
and that there he besieged, and beat, and terrified them to that degree, That
they sent into Germany for fresh Succors; by which they were enabled to manage
the War with various Success against the Britains. And then reckons up the
three Battles, just as Geffrey does; Only the last, he says, was upon the
Seashore, juxta lapidem tituli; a little after which, he says, that Vortimer
died without any mention of Poison; But, he says, before his death he gave
command to have his Body buried on the Seashore, where the Saxons fled; which
was neglected, and to which Nennius imputes their Return, after which they
could never be driven out. Because, as he says, It was the Divine Pleasure
more than their own Valor which made them settle here. And it is he that
orders and rules the Nations of the Earth; And who can resist his Will? It is
plain by all this, that Nennius consulted the Honor of the British Nation as
much as it was possible, and nowhere uses that freedom which Gildas does, in
setting forth the great Sins among them which provoked God to punish them in so
severe a manner.

The Place where Vortimer desired to be buried is called by Nennius, Lapis
Tituli; from whence Brit. p. 240.
Camden and Archbishop Primord. p. 413.
Usher conceive it to be Stonar in the Isle of Thanet, near Richborrow; but
Nennius says only, It was upon the Shore of the French Sea; From whence Mr.
Roman Ports and Forts in Kent MS.
Somner rather concludes it to be Folkstone in Kent, because of its lofty
Situation, whereas Stonar lies in a low and flat level, apt to Inundations; But
then Nennius must have mistaken Lapis Tituli, for Lapis Populi; and, I dare
say, Nennius was guilty of greater mistakes than that. But, he farther
observes, that in the ancient Records, the name is not Stonar, but Estonar,
which signifies the Eastern Border, Shore or Coast.

Mat. Westminster. A. D. 454.
Matthew of Westminster gives this Account of these Proceedings: That the
British Nobility, forsaking Vortigern, set up Vortimer, who, with their
Assistence, pursued the Saxons to Derwent, and there killed many of them. Which
seems to have been Darent in Kent; thence Dartford, as Brit. p. 233.
Camden observes, is the same with Darenford. But he makes Vortigern to have
fled away with the Saxon Army, and to have given them all the Assistence he
could: And then, says he, Vortimer began to restore the Britains Possessions
to them, and to rebuild their Churches, and to show kindness to the Churchmen.
The next year, he says, The Saxons fought again with the Britains at
Ailesford; and after a sharp Fight the Saxons fled, and great multitudes of
them were slain; Not long after Vortimer, with his Brothers Catigern and
Pascentius, and the whole Nation of the Britains made War with the Saxons, and
in Battle Catigern was killed by Horsus, and Horsus by Vortimer, upon which the
Saxon Army fled. The next year, he says, Hengist fought three Battles with
Vortimer, and at last he was forced to go back into Germany, and four years
after, Vortimer, says he, was poisoned, Anno Dom. 460. and buried in London,
and then Vortigern recalled the Saxons.

De Gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 1.
William of Malmsbury says, That the Britains and Saxons agreed for seven
years after their Landing, and then Vortimer, finding their Deceit, incensed
his Father and the Britains against them, and so for twenty years there was
continual War and light Skirmishes, and four pitched Battles. In the first he
makes their Fortune equal, Horsa being killed on one side, and Catigis on the
other. In the rest, the Saxons being always superior, and Vortimer dead, a
Peace was made; And so the Britains Affairs went ill, till Ambrosius recovered
them.

Hist. l. 2.
Henry of Huntingdon relates this Story after a different manner: He tells us,
That Vortigern, after the Marriage of Hengist's Daughter was so hated, that he
withdrew to the Mountains and Woods, and that he and his Castle were consumed
together. After which Ambrosius Aurelianus, with Vortigern's two Sons, Vortimer
and Catiger, fought the Saxons; And he makes the first Battle at Ailestreu or
Elstree, the next after Vortimer's Death at Creganford or Crayford, in which,
he says, the Britains were quite beaten out of Kent, and from thence he begins
the Saxons Kingdom of Kent; The next, he says, was at Wippedsflede, which was
so terrible on both Sides, That from thence he says, That the Saxons and
Britains did not disturb each other for a great while, they remaining within
Kent, and the Britains quarrelling among themselves.

Chronic. A. D. 455.
Florentius Wigorniensis therein differs from the rest, that he makes the
Battle at Aegelsthrep to have been between Vortigern and Hengist; But, he
says, after the Battle at Creccanford, the Britains fled to London, and left
Kent to the Saxons: Wherein he follows the Saxon Annals; as he does in the
Account of the two other Battles; that at Wippedsfleot, and that which he calls
the great Victory over the Britains by Hengist and Esca his Son; which he
places Anno Dom. 473. when he says, the Britains fled from the Saxons as from
Fire.

Chronic. l. 1.
Fabius Ethelwerd agrees with the Saxon Annals and Florentius in these
Particulars; And so does Asserius in his MSS. Annals, as to Vortigern's
fighting with Hengist. Wherein they very much differ from the British
Traditions; But after the Translation of the British History by Geffrey, the
Monkish Historians generally follow that, as to the Success of these Battles,
and as to the Treachery used toward Vortigern by Hengist, upon Salisbury
Plain, near Ambresbury; Where it is said by Geffrey, that the Saxons killed 470
of the British Nobility, under a Pretense of a Treaty of Peace; Nenn. c. 49.
Nennius says but 300; and that Vortigern was then taken, and was forced to
give Estsex, Suthsex and Middlesex for his Redemption.

This Story passes for current among the Monks and our late Collectours of
English History: And that which seems to add most weight to it is, That William
of Malmsbury relates it, but he reports it much as he found it in Nennius,
only enlarging on the drinking part, that went before the Massacre. But when I
find the same Story in effect in De Gestis Sax. l. 1.
Witikindus, between the Saxons and the Thuringers, and the very same Word
given NEM ET EOVR SEAXES, I am apt to think one was borrowed from the other.
But I cannot but take notice of the Disingenuity of Verstegan. p. 142.
Verstegan, who lays this to the Charge of the Thuringers, whereas Witikindus
not only says, the Saxons did it, but adds, That the Saxons struck terror
into their Neighbors by it, and says, They were thought to have their Name
from it, as Verstegan himself thinks; Which were ridiculous, unless the Seaxes
belonged to the Saxons.

All the certainty we have as to the matter of the Proceedings between the
Britains and Saxons is, what Gild. 24.
Gildas relates, which is very Tragical, viz. That all the Cities and Churches
were burnt to the Ground, from the East to the Western Ocean; The Inhabitants
destroyed by the Sword or buried in the Ruins of Houses and Altars which were
defiled with the Blood of the Slain; in which horrible Devastation, the Rulers
of the Church and the Priests suffered together with the Common People. So that
he applies to this Desolation the Words of the Psalmist, They have cast Fire
into thy Sanctuary, they have defiled by casting down the dwelling Place of thy
Name to the Ground. And, O God, the Heathen are come into thine Inheritance,
thy holy Temple have they defiled, etc. And Bed. l. 1* c. 15.
Bid says, A Fire was kindled by the hands of the Heathens, which executed
Vengeance on God's People for their Sins, not unlike that of the Chaldeans
which burnt Jerusalemto the Ground: So here, says he, the wicked Conqueror
prevailing, or rather the just Judge so disposing, there seemed to be one
continued Flame from one Sea to another; All public and private Buildings
demolished, the Priests Blood spilt upon the Altars, the Prelates and People
destroyed together by Fire and Sword, and no Man durst to give them Burial.
Many of those that escaped at present, as Gild. 29.
Gildas says, had their Throats cut, and were thrown on Heaps in the
Mountains, or delivered themselves up to Slavery, to avoid being famished, and
thought it a Favor to be presently dispatched, and others hid themselves among
Mountains and Rocks and Woods to escape the Fury of their Enemies, where they
lived in continual Fear; and others went over into foreign parts: Which was the
Foundation of the Aremorican Colony of Britains; as will appear afterward.

But that which prevented a total Destruction of the Britains now was, that it
seems both by Gild. 25.
Gildas and Bed. l. 1. c. 16.
Bid, the Saxons having burnt so many Cities and Towns, and driven the
Remainder of the Inhabitants into inaccessible Places, did go home for some
time, And in that Interval, the dispersed Britains gathered together, and after
most earnest Supplications to God, that they might not be utterly destroyed,
they made choice of Ambrosius Aurelianus, as their King; and, under his
Conduct, God was pleased to give them Success: And, from that time, says
Gildas, now one Party prevailed, and then another (whereby God made a farther
Trial of the Britains, whether they would love him or not) to the Battle on
Badon Hill, wherein the Saxons suffered so great a Loss; Which was forty four
years after their first coming hither, as appears more plainly by Bid. But
Gildas adds, even at this time their Cities were far from being inhabited as
formerly; And when their Enemies gave them respite, they desperately quarreled
among themselves. So that we have here a Conjunction of so much Severity and
Patience, such Fears and Hopes, and yet such Defeating of these Hopes, by their
own Follies and Divisions, as commonly forerun a Churches Destruction and a
Peoples Ruin.

This is the best and truest Account of the British Affairs from the Saxons
coming till the Government of Ambrosius, by which we are to judge of the
probability of Nennius his Traditions.

As to the particular Conduct of the British Affairs under Ambrosius, we have
little more light than what Traditions and Conjectures give us. However, it may
not be amiss to lay together what we can find about them.

Nenn. c. 45.
Nennius says little more of him, than that Vortigern was afraid of him: and
afterward he confounds him with Merlin, when he tells Vortigern, after the
Story of his being without a Father, that he concealed his Father's Name out of
Fear, but that his Father was one of the Roman Consuls; and so Vortigern gave
him the command of the Western parts of Britain.

But Galfr. l. c. 1, 2, 3.
Geffrey gives a more ample account of him, not only that he was one of
Constantine's Sons; But that he, understanding the condition of the Britains,
came over from Aremorica with his Brother Other Pendragon and considerable
Forces, and after his Revenge upon Vortigern, burning him in his Castle, he
makes the Saxons to retire beyond Humber, through the terror of his Name;
Whither Aurelius pursued them, and overcame Hengist in a set Battle, who fled
to Caer Conan or Conisburgh, where they fought again, and Hengist was taken by
Eldol, Duke of Gloucester, and beheaded by him, according to the Advice of
Eldad, then Bishop of Gloucester.

Flores Hist. A. D. 487, 480.
Matthew Westminster transcribes these Passages out of Geffrey, and puts them
to such years as he fansied; but it is observable that he makes Aurelius
Ambrosius to have fought the Battle at Wippeds fleet with Hengist and his Son
Aesc, 16 years before this; which according to him was seven years after his
coming into Britain: So that even Matthew Westminster durst not wholly rely on
Geffrey's Relation. But, as to the death of Hengist, Florentius says, he died
after he had reigned in Kent thirty four years, and Aesca succeeded him, Anno
Dom. 488. The Saxon Annals take no notice of Hengist's death, but place Aesc's
Reign Anno Dom. 487.

Huntingd. l. 2.
Henry of Huntingdon says, That Hengist died the fortieth year after his
coming into Britain, the 39th. says William of Malmsbury. But neither of them
mentions any violent Death by the hands of his Enemies, and that after a
Victory by the Britains under Aurelius Ambrosius; which are such Circumstances
they could not easily have omitted, if they had then heard of them. But if they
had heard of them, and yet left them out, it is a shrewd Sign, they gave no
Credit to them. We are then to consider, that Geffrey of Monmouth, according to
Leland, flourished in the time of H. I. Of King Stephen say Bale and Pits; but
Leland observes, That he dedicated his Translation of Merlin to Alexander
Bishop of Lincoln, the same that was Henry of Huntingdon 's Patron: And William
of Malmsbury dedicates his History to the same Robert of Gloucester, Son to
Henry I. to whom Geffrey dedicates his Translation of the British History, who
died 12 of King Stephen. So that in all probability Geffrey's Book was seen by
both these Historians, and since they do not follow him where they have
occasion to mention the same matters, They plainly discover they preferred
Nennius before him, whom both of them follow; But it appears by H. Huntingdon
he then passed under the Name of Gildas.

But these two Historians thought it best for them to decline taking any
public notice of Geffrey's History, it being so great a Novelty then, and
probably enough in some esteem with Robert of Gloucester, whose Father, as
Cambr. l. 2. c. 1.
Giraldus Cambrensis says, had lately subdued the Britains in Wales; and such
a History seemed to add to his Father's Glory. But after Robert's death,
William of Newborough very frankly delivers his Opinion of it, charging the
Original with Falsehood, and the Translatour with Insincerity. Geffrey, in the
Conclusion of his History, mentions William of Malmsbury and H. of Huntingdon,
as then Writing the English History; But he bids them not to meddle with the
British Kings, since they had not the British MS. which Walter of Oxford
brought out of Britany. But they do not forbear to make use of Nennius; and
Huntingdon transcribes several things out of him; But they do not enlarge or
alter or adorn their History in one Point from the British MS. although in all
likelihood set forth before their Death.

As to what he next adds, That after his Victory over the Saxons, Aurelius
Ambrosius called the Princes and Great Men together at York, and gave order for
repairing the Churches which the Saxons destroyed, there is far greater
probability in it. For after the Battle at Wippedsfleet, which was seventeen
years after the Saxons coming; H. Huntingdon says, Things remained quiet for a
good while between the Britains and Saxons; and in that time it is reasonable
to presume that Ambrosius and the Nobles and People did their endeavor toward
the recovering the honor of their Churches, as well as of the Kingdom. And
after the care he took in other places, says Geffrey, he marched to London,
which had suffered as well as other Cities; and having called the dispersed
Citizens together, he went about the repairing of it; all his design being the
restoring the Church and Kingdom. From thence he went to Winchester and to
Salisbury. And in the passage thither Geffrey launches out to purpose in his
History of Stonehenge, translated, says he, by Merlin out of Ireland, to make
a Monument for the British Nobles, slain there by Hengist 's Treachery: Which
is such an Extravagancy that it is to be wondered any should follow him in it,
and yet Matt. Flores, A. D. 490.
Westminster transcribes the main of it; and W. Coventry in Praefat.
Walter Coventry sets it down for authentic History; But he adds two
circumstances which make it seem probable that Stonehenge had some Relation to
Ambrosius, viz. That here Ambrosius was Crowned, and was not long after buried;
from whom Polyd. Virg. Hist. l. 3.
Polydore Virgil makes it the Monument of Ambrosius; and John of Tinmouth in
the Life of Dubricius calls it Mons Ambrosii: And the Name of Ambresbury near
it does much confirm the probability, That it had rather a respect to
Ambrosius, than either to the Romans or the Danes. But I cannot now insist on
this.

Flores Hist. A. D. 488.
Matthew Westminster confirms Geffrey's Relation concerning the great Zeal of
Ambrosius in repairing the British Churches every where, and setting up Divine
Worship in them, and giving great encouragement to the Clergy to perform all
Divine Offices, and particularly to pray for the Prosperity of the Church and
Kingdom. But Geffrey adds yet farther concerning him, that in a solemn Council
of the Britains he appointed two Metropolitans for the two Vacant Sees at that
time, viz. Sampson one of eminent piety for York, and Dubricius for Caer-leon.
This says Matt. Westminster was done An. Dom. 490. and he makes them both to
live and flourish An. Dom. 507. But he says, That Sampson was afterward
driven over to Aremorica, and there was Archbishop of Dole among the Britains.
For Anno Dom. 561. he says, Another Sampson succeeded in that See, the former
who came out of Great Britain to the Less. Sigebert of the old Edition, Anno
Dom. 566. speaks of Sampson then Archbishop of Dole, Kinsman to Maglorius, who
came from the Britain beyond the Sea to that on this side. This second
Sampson's Life is extant in the Bibliotheca Floriacensis, where he is said to
have been born in Britain, and the Scholar of Iltutus, and consecrated by
Dubricius. But Itiner. Camb. l. 2. c. 1.
Giraldus Cambrensis says, The Pall was carried over from Wales to Dole, in
the time of another Sampson, who was the 25 th. from St. David, and went over
because of the Plague which discolored People like the Iaundice, and therefore
called Flava Pestis: Which is transcribed by Hoveden, p. 454.
Roger Hoveden. But here are several Mistakes in this Account. For there was no
such thing as a Pall then known or used in the Western Church; And if this
Sampson went over on the occasion of that Plague, there could not be 25.
between St. David and him: For in the Life of St. Teliaus, St. David's Sister's
Son, that Plague is described, and then Sampson is said to be Archbishop of
Dole, and to have received Teliaus and his Company with great joy, having been
School-fellows under Dubricius, and Sampson being consecrated by him. But still
we have two Sampsons Archbishops of Dole, and in the time of the great
Controversy about that Archbishopric, (of which afterward) it was a Question
from which the Title was derived. And Innocent III. as Giraldus relates, said
it was from this Sampson Archbishop of York: but the Sammarthani only mention
him that came from St. David's, when Maglorius succeeded among the Aremorican
Britains; but we are not yet come to them.

It is observed by H. of Huntingd. l. 2.
Huntingdon, that after the Britains had a little respite from their Enemies,
they fell into Civil dissensions among themselves, which is very agreeable to
what Gildas had said. Of this the Galfr. l. 5. c. 6.
British History gives no improbable account, when it relates that one of
Vortigern's Sons called Pascentius, raised a Rebellion in the North against
Ambrosius among the Britains, who were overcome by him, and put to flight; but
afterward he hired a Saxon to poison Ambrosius at Winchester. This says
Matthew Westminster happened Anno Dom. 497. But we are not to pass over what he
affirms of him, Anno Dom. 485. viz. That he commanded in the Battle at
Mecredsburn against Aella and his Sons, in which they were so much worsted as
to send home for Supplies, as he says. This Aella and his Sons Cymen, Plenting
and Cissa came into Britain, Anno Dom. 477. and landed at a place from his
eldest Son called Cymenshore, on the Coasts of Sussex. Brit. p. 223.
Camden says it has lost its Name; But he proves from a Charter of Cedwalla
to the Church of Selsey it must be near Wittering. Here Aella and his Army
fought the Britains at his first Landing, and forced them to retire to
Andredeswald, say the Saxon Annals, and Matt. Westminster, Florentius and
Huntingdon. The Saxon Annals and Huntingdon call it Andredesleage: by that no
question is meant the vast Wood which began in Kent, and ran through Sussex
into Hampshire, called by the Britains Coid Andred, by the Saxons Andred, and
Andreswald; from whence as Mr. Somner observes, that part of Kent where the
Wood stood is still called the Weald; and Perambulation of Kent, p. 211.
Lambard observes, that no Monuments of Antiquity are to be met with in the
Weald either of Kent or Sussex. The Saxons after this Battle continued to
inhabit on the Shore, till at last the Britains finding them to incroach
farther, resolved to fight them at a place called Mecredsburn. And a different
account is given of the Success of this Battle: The Saxon Annals and Ethelwerd
only mention it, boasting of no Victory; Florentius makes it a clear Victory
on the Saxon side: Matt. Westminster says Aella quitted the field, but
confesses the Britains had great loss: H. of Huntingdon says, It was a drawn
Battle, both Armies having sustained great damage and avoiding each other.
After this Aella and Cissa, say the Saxon Annals, besieged Andredescester and
killed all the Inhabitants, leaving not one Britain alive; and so Florentius
and Matt. Westminster relate it. But he Matt. West. A. D. 492.
says, That the Britains came out of the Wood, and galled the Saxons so much,
that they were forced to divide their Army; and the Inhabitants perished by
Famine as well as by the Sword: And he observes that the Saxons utterly
demolished the City, and the place where it stood was in his time showed to
Travelers. Therefore the question among our Antiquaries, which was the
Anderida of the Ancients, Newenden or Hastings or Pemsey is quite out of doors,
unless one of these be proved to be built in the place of Anderida since Matt.
Westminster's days; which were toward the end of Edw. 3. Those words Brit. p.
247.
Camden applies only to H. of Huntingdon, and he says it was new built in
Edw. 1. his time, and therefore called Newenden; but they are likewise Matt.
Westminster's who lived after that time, and therefore it cannot be Newenden if
it were rebuilt in the time of Edw. 1. for he says, The desolate place was
showed in his time; unless one transcribed the other, without any regard to the
difference of their own times.

After Ambrosius his death, according to the Galsr. l. 6. c. 2.
British History, his Brother Other Pendragon succeeded, who routed the Saxons
in the North, relieved York besieged by them, took the Sons of Hengist
Prisoners, marched to London, and there called a Parliament, and was solemnly
Crowned, and fell out with Goalois Duke of Cornwall, about his Wife Igerna, and
under his shape had King Arthur by her; but her Husband was killed at the Siege
of his Castle. After which it is said, that he overcame the Saxons at Verulam,
where he was after poisoned by their means, and his Son Arthur succeeded.

This is the sum of what is there more at large related; but taking it all
together, it is a very blind and partial account of the proceedings between the
Britains and Saxons of that time. For even Matt. Westminster, Anno Dom. 494
takes notice of Cerdic and Kenric his Son, Landing with new Forces at a place
called from him Cerdicshore, (near Yarmouth says Brit. p. 348.
Camden where the name Cerdicsand still remains) and fought the Britains at
their first Landing, till they were forced to withdraw and leave room for them,
who after went into the Western parts, and laid the foundation of the Kingdom
of the West Saxons. To the same purpose Florentius, Ethelwerd and Huntingdon.
Seven years after him came Port and his two Sons Bleda and Magla, and arrived
at Portsmouth, which had its Name from him, as the same Authors inform us from
the Saxon Annals. Now how comes Geffrey to think of none of these, but only of
Hengist's two Sons in the North? Besides, he lets slip one of the greatest
Battles that was fought between Cerdic and Nathanleod, and pretends to give no
account at all of it. This the Saxon Annals, Florentius, Ethelwerd and Matt.
Westminster all place Anno Dom. 508. But Huntingdon the sixtieth year after the
first coming of the Saxons. This Nazaleod, as he calls him, was the greatest
King of the Britains, one of great Fame and Pride, from whom the Country about
Charford did take its Name. At this place the whole Forces of the Britains were
gathered together, and Cerdic procured assistence from Aesc of Kent, from Aella
of Sussex, from Port and his Sons; so that here was a pitched Battle of the
Strength of both sides; and Nazaleod behaved himself with so much Courage, that
he drove Cerdic out of the Field, and pursued him; which his Son who commanded
the other Wing perceiving, followed him close and cut him off, and 5000 of his
Men who fled upon the death of their King. And from this memorable Battle, the
Place was called Cerdicsford, and since Charford, upon the Aven between
Salisbury and Ringwood. But who was this mighty King of the Britains, who lost
his Life in this Battle? Brit. p. 187.
Mr. Camden professes he cannot ghess; unless it were Aurelius Ambrosius, whose
Name he observes the Saxon Annalists never mention, nor the Battles wherein
they were worsted. And the British History is even with them for that, which
takes no notice of this great Fight, wherein their King was slain. Matt.
Westminster will not have him to be King, but only to be General under Other,
who was then sick, which contradicts Ethelwerd, and Huntingdon, and Florentius,
who affirm him to have been then King, and as Huntingdon says Rex Maximus
Britannorum; which seems to imply, that there were more Kings then among the
Britains, as there were among the Saxons; and that one was the Chief as in the
Heptarchy. Archbishop Prim. p. 466.
Usher thinks this King was the same whom the British History calls Other, and
that Nathanleod was his true Name, and Other was a Nickname to denote his
fierceness, as the Annotatour on Nenn. c. 63.
Nennius calls Arthur Mab Vter in the British Tongue for the same reason: And
so Arthurus in Latin from the British Arth, which signifies a Bear. This is an
ingenious conjecture: But we are not so sure there ever was such a King as
Other, as we are from Gildas, that there was such a one as Ambrosius; But
Gildas says, That some of the Race of Ambrosius were living in his time;
therefore he died not without issue, as the British History supposes, and this
might probably be his Son, who was slain in this Battle.

But what then is to be said to King Arthur, who was Son to Other, and
succeeded him, whose mighty Feats are so amply related by the British History?
I think both sorts are to blame about him, I mean those who tell Incredible
Tales of him, such as are utterly inconsistent with the Circumstances of the
British Affairs at that time; and those who deny there was any such Person, or
of any considerable power among the Britains. William of Malmsbury takes notice
of the British Fables about him, (and if I mistake not makes a severe reflection
upon Geffrey's History without naming it, when he says, Hic est Arthurus de
quo Britonum Nugae bodieque delirant) but he wishes a true Account had been
given of him, for he was the support of his Country, for a long time, who
sharpened the broken Spirits of the Britains, and made them Warlike. But after
all, he will not allow him to have been Monarch in Britain, but only the
General under Ambrosius. And in all this William keeps close to Nennius; for
Nennius speaking of the Wars between the British Kings and the Saxons, says of
Arthur, Ipse Dux erat Bellorum; although he exceeds the bounds of Truth in the
next Words, and in omnibus Bellis Victor extitit, he came off always
Conqueror. If this had been true, the Saxons could never have kept footing in
England. I will allow the Saxon Annals to be partial in not recounting their
Losses; and on the other side it is unreasonable to suppose, that the Saxons
should be always beaten, and yet always get ground even in Arthur's days. For
after the great Battle wherein Nathanleod was killed, (the only British King
mentioned in the Saxon Annals) Cerdic's two Nephews, Stuff and Witgar, landed
upon Cerdicshore, which Mat. Westminster. A. D. 514.
Matt. Westminster here places on the Western Coasts (and not on the Eastern as
Camden does, which seems more probable, because they came with supplies to
Cerdic their Uncle) but all agree, that as they fought upon their Landing, they
had the better of the Britains; Huntingdon says, It was such a Victory as laid
open the Country to them; the force of the Britains being scattered, God
having cast them off. Where was Arthur at this time? Again, five Years after
says Ethelwerd, Cerdic and Cenric, came the second time to Cerdicsford, and
there fought the Britains; the Saxons Annals say nothing of the Victory, but
Florentius gives it to the Saxons, and so does Huntingdon, who says, the
Britains had a terrible blow that day. And as an evidence of the Saxons
Conquest, Ethelwerd says, That year Cerdic began the Kingdom of the West
Saxons: From that very day says Huntingdon, Anno Dom. 519. Here Matt.
Westminster is so hard put to it, that taking in King Arthur at Anno Dom. 516.
he is forced to leave out this Battle, and to tell Geffrey's Story of King
Arthur's beating the Saxons in the North about York and Lincoln, and driving
them as far as the Caledonian Wood, and takes no notice of Kerdic's setting up
a Kingdom in the West: But the following Year, Anno Dom. 520. he brings
Colgrin, Badulph and Cheldric to Totnes with new Forces, with which they
besieged Bath; And then Arthur with his Caliborn did incredible execution, for
he says, he killed 840 with his own hands, and so totally routed the Saxons;
and not a word of Kerdic or Kenric, whereas Anno Dom. 528. he remembers them
again, and tells what a mighty Army they had in the Isle of Wight, which H.
Huntingdon calls Witland, and what slaughter they made at Witgaresburgh, which
had its Name from Witgar, one of Kerdic's Nephews, to whom he gave the Isle of
Wight, and was buried at Witgar says Huntingdon.

But before this there was another Battle between Kerdic and the Britains at
Cerdics Leage; which Huntingdon makes the same with Cerdicsford, in which there
was great slaughter on both sides, and in that time, he says, many Saxons came
in out of Germany into Eastangle and Mercia, but they were not yet formed into
Kingdoms; however innumerable Battles were fought in many places by Persons
whose Names are not recorded. And now Huntingdon mentions Arthur, as a most
valiant General on the British side, who commanded in twelve Battles, in all
which he had the better; and so reckons them up in order just as Nenn. c. 64.
Nennius had done, whom he transcribes, and when he has set down the places of
the twelve Battles he confesses they were then unknown, but he adds, that there
was almost perpetual fighting, in which sometimes one side had the better and
sometimes the other; but still the Saxons poured in greater Numbers upon them:
And Nenn. c. 65.
Nennius says, They increased here without intermission, and fetched new Kings
out of Germany to Rule over them. And then sets down the foundation of the
Northern Saxon Kingdom under Ida, c. 66.
who governed all beyond Humber twelve years, which was branched into two,
Deira and Bernicia. This Kingdom began, says Huntingdon, in the thirteenth
year of the Reign of Kenric (who succeeded Kerdic) Anno Dom. 547. and Ida
descended from Woden was the first King. Kenric in his eighteenth year, says
the same Author, fought against the Britains, who came with a powerful Army
to Salisbury, where he dispersed them and made them fly. But this is supposed
to have happened after Arthur's death, which is placed by Matt. Westminster and
others Anno Dom. 542.

We must therefore look back to judge of Arthur's prowess. We have already seen
several Saxon Kingdoms established, that of Kent, of South Saxons, of
West Saxons and Saxons in other parts, not yet gathered into Kingdoms; and
besides these, before Kendic had gained the Isle of Wight, H. Huntingdon says,
The Kingdom of East Saxons was founded by Erkinwin, whom Slede succeeded, who
married the Daughter of Ermenerick, King of Kent, Sister of Ethelbert, and
Mother to Sibert the first Christian King there. Now, if Arthur were a King so
powerful, so irresistible as the British History makes him, how came all these
Kingdoms to grow up under him? Why did he not send the Saxons all out of
Britain? Nay, how came Cerdic and Kenric to grow so strong in the Western parts
as they did? Cerdic, says De Gestis Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
William of Malmsbury, came hither eight years after the death of Hengist, Anno
Dom. 495. He was here 24 years before he set up his Kingdom, and lived in it 16
years. This was in the midst of Arthur's fame and greatness. If it were such as
Geffrey describes; would he have suffered such a terror to the Britains to have
been so near him? Polychr. l. 5. c. 6.
Ranulphus Higden says, That Arthur was so tired out with fighting Cerdic (so
weary of overcoming) that 26 years after his coming he yielded part of the West
to him: And to the same purpose Chronic. l. 2. c. 1.
Rudburn speaks. What is the meaning of all this? The plain truth is, they
followed Geffrey as far as they could, but they found at last they must give
away Kerdic's Kingdom to him; and so they had better make it a free Act of King
Arthur.

Let us now compare with this, the Account the British History gives of him:
which is this in short.

Galsr. l. ^.
After the death of Other Pendragon the British Nobility met at Silcester,
where the^ desired Dubricius to consecrate Arthur^, For the Saxons had
conquered from Humber to Cathnes. (It seems all was clear on this side Humber).
And so he was no sooner Crowned but away he marches for York, (leaving the
Saxons here in quiet possession) where Childeric came with 600 Ships to assist
the two Brothers Colgrin and Baldulph (whose Names the Saxon Annals conceal.)
Upon this dreadful conjunction Arthur repairs to London, and calls a
Parliament: And they send over to Hoel King of Little-Britain, his Nephew, and
who brings 15000 to his assistence at Southampton, (notwithstanding Port and
his Sons were so near) then away he marches for Lincoln, and there kills 6000
Saxons, and pursued the rest into Scotland: and there dismissed them home upon
promise of Tribute; but they perfidiously returned to Totnes, and so marched to
besiege Bath: Where after he had done the execution Matt. Westminster related,
the Saxons get upon the Hill, which Arthur by the help of his Caliburn
recovered, killed the two Brothers, and made Childeric fly, whom Cador pursued
to the Isle of Thanet, (although the Son of Hengist had all Kent as his
Kingdom.) After this he drives Gillomarus and his Irish home; and determined to
root out the Scots and Picts, but upon great submission he spared them. This
being done he returns to York, where he rebuilds the Churches, and settles
Pyramus Archbishop in the place of Samson, and restores the British Nobility.
Next Summer he goes for Ireland, and having subdued that, he sails for Island,
(not then inhabited says Crymog. l. 1. c. 2.
Arngrimus Jonas a Learned Native there) but upon notice of his coming, the
Kings of Seland and the Orcades yielded themselves. Then he returns home and
settles the Nation in a firm peace for twelve years (although the Saxons were
every where about them.) After which time, his Name was dreaded abroad, and
away he sails for Norway, and there conquered Riculfus and the whole Country:
from thence to Gaul, where he chopped in pieces the Head of Flollos the Governor
in single Combat, and disposed the several Provinces (...) his Servants, and
returning home resolved to keep a solemn Court at Caer-leon, (this was well
thought upon, for we read of no Saxons thereabouts) where besides several
Kings the three Metropolitans met, of London, York and Caerleon, besides all
his Nobility. But to pass over the great Solemnities there, the Emperor Lucius
(not to be found elsewhere) sends to demand Tribute on the account of Julius
Caesar's Conquest, upon which he makes great preparations to conquer Rome; and
leaves Britain to Mordred his Nephew, who rebelled against him, and forced him
to return home, when, after he had conquered Lucius, he was marching for Rome:
and here Mordred had associated Saxons, Scots and Picts, all against Arthur;
but upon his coming the other fled to Winchester, from thence to Cornwall,
where near the River Camblan he waited for Arthur's coming, the issue of the
Battle was, Mordred was killed, and Arthur mortally wounded, who was carried
into the Island of Avalon, and there died and was buried.

This is the British Legend of King Arthur, which has raised the laughter of
some, and the indignation of others. William of Newburgh was the first who
openly and in plain terms charged it with falsity and inconsistency; but
against some parts of it he makes trifling objections; as about the Three
Archbishops, denying that the Britains had any Archbishops, because the first
Pall was given to Augustine the Monk. But this was a piece of Monkish ignorance
in him, for there were Metropolitans before, and without Palls from Rome; and
Archbishops or Metropolitans did assume the use of Palls to themselves, without
asking the Pope's leave; and when he says Archbishops came so late into the
Western Churches, it is true the use of the word did, but the jurisdiction over
Provinces was long before, as I have already showed.

Upon the reviving of Learning some were so offended at this ridiculous Legend,
that they questioned whether ever there were such a Person as Arthur, against
whom Leland undertook the defense of King Arthur. But some of his Authors will
not be allowed to bear witness in this cause, being partial followers of
Geffrey; such as Alfred of Beverly, Gray the Author of Scalae-Chronicon, Joh.
Burgensis, Joh. Ross, etc. Others do not speak home to the point, such are the
Testimonies of Nennius, Malmsbury, Huntingdon, which make him only General of
the British Forces: others are too modern, as Trithemius, Volaterranus,
Philippus Bergomas, Nauclerus, Hector Boethius, Pontius Virunnius, etc. Others
overthrow the main part of it, as to Arthur 's Sovereign Dominion in Britain,
as the Chronica Divionensis, which says, That after several Combats Cerdic had
the possession of the West Saxon Kingdom by Arthur 's consent: and as parts of
this Kingdom he reckons Seven whole Provinces from Surry to Cornwall. But the
British History takes no notice of Cerdic, but supposes all under Arthur's
command, and his Nephew Mordred's in his absence. If Cerdic had the WestSaxon
Kingdom, then how comes no notice of him in the Battle at Camblan? how came the
fight within his Territories? Again, the Author of the Life of Gildas cited by
him, says, p. 24.
That one Meluas had stolen his Wife Guenhere, and defiled her, and that
Arthur a long time besieged him in the Marshes near Glassenbury. Is this
agreeable to the mighty power of King Arthur, to have his Queen detained by
force so long by such an inconsiderable Person as Meluas? Especially if it were
as Caradoc of Lancarvan there says, p. 8.
She was restored at last, more by the entreaty of Gildas than out of respect
to Arthur 's Authority. As to Arthur's Seal which he lays so much weight upon,
it certainly belonged to the Diploma he gave to the University of Cambridge, in
his time, mentioned by Leland; and the Church of Westminster, p. 12.
if they have it still, ought to restore it. But after all Leland has
sufficiently proved, That there was such a Person as King Arthur from the
Cair-Arture in Wales, two Mountains so called; And Arthur's Gate in Mongomery;
and the abundant Testimony he brings about his Coffin in Lead found in
Glassenbury, either in Henry the Second's time, or at least in the beginning of
Richard the First, with an Inscription set down often by him, and more exactly
by Brit. p. 166.
Camden. Where the Letters appear very rude, and the Inscription very plain,
and therefore more likely to be true. HIC IACET SEPVLTVS INCLITVS REX ARTVRIVS
IN INSVLA AVALONIA.

Where are all the Noble Titles given him in the British History and contained
in the Inscription about his Seal? PATRICIVS ARTVRIVS BRITANNIAE, GALLIAE,
GERMANIAE, DACIAE, IMPERATOR.

So much greater a Man was Arthur living, when he used this Seal, than dead,
when so mean an Inscription was put upon the lower part of his Leaden Coffin!
How soon were all his great Titles forgotten!

But since Leland, Sir John Hist. Brit. Desens. p. 109.
Price has undertaken to vindicate the Story of King Arthur: and the first
Argument he uses is from the Inscription on his Coffin, and the Antiquity of
the Letters; but the modesty of the Inscription is a better Argument to me, for
if the Monks designed a Cheat in Heu. II. his time, and laid this Coffin there
on purpose to deceive, they might counterfeit such Letters, but they could
never have held from speaking more glorious things of so great a Hero. Then he
produced the Testimonies of Nennius, p. 117.
Malmsbury and Huntingdon, and proves that these two could not take out of
Geffrey; that they did not I grant, but the other is not proved. p. 120.
The Verses of Thaliessin (who he says lived in the time of Maglocunus
mentioned by Gildas) do prove That Arthur commanded in the Battle at Badon
Hill, which I see no reason to question; but Polydore Virgil will have Aurelius
Ambrosius to do it, which I see no reason to believe. Besides, he quotes old
British Chronicles, p. 121.
which reckon from Vortigern to the Battle on Badon Hill, wherein Arthur beat
the Saxons, 128 years; from that Battle to the Battle at Camblan wherein Arthur
was killed, 22 years And he finds the Name of Arthur in many ancient British
Poems; and in the old Register of Landaff: p. 125.
But that only proves, there was one Arthur, whose Son's Name was Noe; but
what is more material, he finds some passages agreeing with Geffrey in the old
Chronicles of St. David's and Caer-Mardin, p. 128.
as to his fighting against Lucius Hiberus in Burgundy, and the Battle at
Camblan; but it does not appear, that these Chronicles were before Geffrey's
time. p. 129.
As to King Arthur 's Crown and Seal, they may go together. But as to Gildas
his silence, from whence some would prove that there was no such Person, he
answers from Giraldus, that Arthur having killed his Brother Hoel, p. 141.
he purposely left him out, which is no clear Answer; For if Gildas did this in
revenge, he would rather have mentioned his Cruelty, as we see he spares not
the Kings of his own time. But his better Answer is, That Gildas designed no
History, but a serious exhortation to the Britains to repent of their Sins, and
therefore passes over other things; only by the by mentioning Ambrosius
Aurelianus, and addresses himself to his main business; which is reason enough
why he never names King Arthur.

Joh. Scotich. l. 4. c. 25.
Fordon follows Geffrey, as far as he thinks consistent with the honor of his
Country. This appears in the Story of King Arthur; for he says, he was set up
by a Faction against the lawful Heirs, who were Mordred and Walwan, the Sons
of, Uther 's Daughter by Loath, then a great Man in Scotland; but descended from
Fulgentius; but he after excuses it, on the account of necessity; which
Dubricius alleged, they being then under age so much, as not to be able to go
into the Field. But he justifies Mordred's Rebellion afterward against Arthur
on this ground, that he had the right. Title to the Crown. Hist. Scot. l. 9. p.
164.
Hector Boethius says, That Lothius put in his claim, according to the ancient
Law of the Britains, and that he ought to have the Regency during the Minority
of his Sons; But the Britains would by no means hear of Strangers coming to
their Crown; and so Arthur took possession of it; who first conquered the
Saxons 10 Miles from London, then took London (which it seems the Saxons had
before) and so went toward Humber; and then he goes on with the British
History, only interspersing some News of his own. Particularly he tells what a
profane Christmas Arthur kept with his Nobles at York for thirteen days
together; And that such Iollity and Feasting then had its original from him.
Buch. l. 5. p. 44.
Buchanan is so pleased with this notable observation, that he sets it down for
good History; saying upon it, that the old Saturnalia were renewed, only the
Days increased, and Saturn 's Name changed to Caesar 's, for, says he, we call
that Feast Julia. But why should the Name of Saturn be changed into Caesar's?
Was he worshipped for a God among the British Christians, as Saturn was among
the Old Pagans? But the Name Julia imports it: by no means. For Buchanan does
not prove that this Name was ever used for that Festival among the Britains;
And the Saxons who brought in both the Feast and the Name give another reason
for it. For De ratione Temp. c. 13.
Bid says, That December was called Giuli from the conversion of the Sun and
the increase of the days. And Giul, as Antiq. Suec. Goth. l. 1. c. 5.
Loccenius observes, signified a Wheel, or any thing that turns round, in the
Gothic Language. At which time among the Northern Nations, the Feast of the
New Year was observed with more than ordinary jollity; thence as Fasti Danici.
l. 1. c. 12.
Olaus Wormius and Upsal. c. 16.
Scheffer observe they reckoned their Age by so many Iola's, and Snorro
Sturleson describes this New Years Feast, just as Buchanan sets out the British
Saturnalia, by feasting and sending Presents or New Years Gifts to one another:
Thence some think the Name of this Feast was taken from Iola, which in the
Gothic Language signifies to make merry. But Atlantic. c. 5. p. 125.
Olaus Rudbeck thinks the former more proper, not only from Bede's Authority,
but because in the old Runick Fasti a Wheel was used to denote that Festival:
And as he observes, this Festival continued twelve days from their first of the
Juul. The true reason whereof was, as Olaus Rudbeck at large proves; p. 100.
from the Joy they had at the hopes of the return of the Sun; at which time
they made Solemn Sacrifices to the Sun. But after Christianity prevailed, all
their Idolatrous Sacrifices were laid aside, and this time of Feasting was
joined with the Religious Solemnities of that Season, which in other parts of
the World were observed by Christians. Which is certainly a very different
thing from the Roman Saturnalia, although Buchanan thought fit to parallel them.

But to proceed with the Story of King Arthur, as it is in Buchanan, who takes
his Materials from Hector, and puts them into a finer dress. Arthur, he says,
made a League with the Scots and Picts, and Lothus brought his Sons to him: And
then a resolution was taken to drive out the Saxons, and to restore
Christianity; Then followed the Battle against Colgrin; of which before: And
the rest of Arthur's Battles: But upon the whole, he concludes that Geffrey 's
Relations have no color of Truth; and yet he makes use of no other, but where
he follows Hector's own inventions. The remainder of his Story is, That things
being quieted here, Arthur goes over into Lesser Britain, and leaves the
Government to his Nephew Mordred; But while he was abroad, some had prevailed
with him to declare Constantine the Son of Cador his Successor being born in
Britain; which being done, Mordred set up for himself, and in a Battle about
Humber, says he, Mordred was killed, and Arthur mortally wounded. Thus
Buchanan having picked what he thought fit out of Hector, concludes with a
bitter Invective against the fabulous Relations about Arthur; But he gives him
an extraordinary Character, saying, he was certainly a great Man, of mighty
Courage and wonderful kindness to his Country, preserving them from Slavery,
and keeping up or restoring the true Religion.

And that is the Subject I am now to consider, viz. The State of Religion here
in King Arthur 's days. It was under great Persecution almost wherever the
Saxons came, who were cruel both to the Bodies and Souls of the poor Britains:
Most of the Southern and Western parts were under their Tyranny; and Antiq.
Oxon. Acad. Apol. l. 1. 87.
Brian Twyne quotes a passage out of Matt. Westminster, which is not so full in
the printed Copies, concerning the Persecution of the British Christians in the
Eastern parts of the Land. For, says he, Anno Dom. 527. The Pagans came out of
Germany, and took possession of the Country of the East Angles, and omni
crudelitatis genere Christianos affecerunt, They tormented the Christians with
all sorts of Cruelty. Although this be wanting in other Copies, yet it may be
reasonably presumed, The Saxons using the British Christians in such a manner
in the most places where they prevailed. It is true that De Gest. Reg. l. 1. c.
2.
Malmsbury says, many of the Britains submitted to Cerdic, and it is probable
they were the better used for doing so. Tho. Chron. l. 2. c. 1.
Rudburn says, That Cerdic allowed Liberty of professing the Christian
Religion to the Cornish upon a certain Tribute. I rather think that Cerdic
never went so far, but left that part to the Britains, who still continued
there: For in Gildas his time Constantine is said to be King of the Danmonii:
and Brit. p. 141.
Camden observes out of Marianus Scotus, that Anno Dom. 820. the Britains and
Saxons had a terrible Fight at Camelford in Cornwall, which Leland thinks to
have been Camlan, where King Arthur fought with Mordred, and near which is a
Stone, says Mr. Survey of Cornw. p. 122.
Carew, which bears Arthur 's Name; but now called Atry. To prove what I have
said, that the West Saxon Kingdom did not extend to Cornwall, we may observe
that De Gest. Reg. l. 1. c. 2.
William of Malmsbury says, That Ceaulin, Granchild to Cerdic, was the first
who took Gloucester, Cicester and Bath from the Britains, and drove them thence
into the Rocky and Woody places: And in the time of Athelstan, above 400 years
after the coming of the Saxons; the Cornish Britains did inhabit in Exceter, l.
2. c. 6.
and were driven thence by him beyond the River Tamar, and confined by that, as
the other Britains were by the Wye. This shows that the Britains in Cornwall,
and thereabouts, were free from the Yoke of the West Saxon Kingdom. As to the
Northern Britains, l. 1. c. 3.
they came to some agreement after a while with Oeca and Ebusa, whom Hengist
sent thither; and that they had their own Government, and the Christian
Religion among them appears by the History of Ceadwalla, a Prince of these
Britains in l. 2. c. 20.
Bid. But these were but small remnants in the Northern and Western parts. As
to the Eastern, we have had the Testimony of Matt. Westminster already. And
although the Kingdom of the East Angles did not begin till afterward, about
Anno Dom. 575. yet in the ninth year of Cerdic, about Anno Dom. 517. Huntingdon
observes, That many Angles or Saxons were come out of Germany, and took
possession of the Country of the East Angles and Mercia, and wherever they
prevailed, the poor British Christians suffered to the highest extremity. Which
is enough to considering Men to overthrow the credit of the supposed Diploma of
King Arthur to the University of Cambridge, which bears date Anno Dom. 531. But
Brian Twyne has brought no fewer than 15 Arguments against it, which are far
more than needed. For I cannot think that Dr. Cajus in earnest believed it, for
he goes not about to prove the Diploma, but King Arthur; And I cannot think it
any honor or service to so famous and ancient an University, to produce any
such sespected Diplomata or Monkish Legends to prove its Antiquity. It is not
certain in whose possession London was at that time, from whence the Charter is
dated: For the Kingdom of the East Saxons was then set up by Erkinwin, and
London commonly was under that, and that Kingdom as De Gesti^ Reg. l. 1. c. 6.
Malmsbury observes, had the same limits which the Diocese of London now has,
viz. Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartfordshire: Matt. West. A. D. 586.
Matt. Westminster agrees, that Middlesex was under the Kingdom of the
East Saxons, but he will not yield that Theonus Bishop of London did retire
with his Clergy into Wales till Anno Dom. 586. and then he confesses that he
and Thadioc, Bishop of York, when they saw all their Churches demolished, or
turned into Idol Temples, did for their security retire thither.

And there was the freest Exercise of their Religion kept up, even in the Reign
of King Arthur; There flourished the Schools of Literature set up by Dubricius
and Iltutus, and there were the Persons of greatest Reputation for Learning and
Sanctity in the British Churches, such as Dubricius, Iltutus, Paulinus,
Gundleus, Cadocus, Sampson, Paternus, Daniel, and St. David above the rest,
whose Reputation continues to this day, and was preserved in the Saxon Churches
of Britain, as appears by the Breviary of Salisbury, where nine Lessons are
appointed upon his day; And Trophea Congr. Bened. To. 1. p. 263.
Maihew observes that this was by a Provincial Constitution in the Province of
Canterbury; But the nine Lessons were taken out of the first Chapter of the
Legend of his Life, a little being added at the end concerning his Death. It is
the just complaint of Acta Sanct. Mart. 1. 1. n. 5.
Bollandus, that there is nothing extant concerning him, which was written near
his own time; and what is extant has many fabulous mixtures, so that it is
hard to find out the Truth. The oldest MS. of his Life he says is that of
Vtretcht, which he has published; the next he accounts is that in Colganus,
which he would have thought to be the Life written by Ricemarchus, quoted by
Archbishop Prim. p. 843, 844.
Usher; whom he supposes to have lived before Giraldus Cambrensis, who
transcribed much out of him. But Colganus withal intimates, That the Life was
taken out of an old Book, wherein Augustine Macraidin, the Author of the Annals
of Ulster had written many things, and probably might write that too; and to
confirm this Bollandus observes, only a little difference in Style between
this and the Vtretcht MS. But if we add to these, Giraldus his Life, with that
of John of Tinmouth, or Capgrave, we shall after all find, the Life of St.
David, not much clearer than that of his Nephew Arthur, for he is supposed to
have been Uncle to him by the Mother's side, whose Name is said to be Nonnita
in Capgrave; Nonna in the Utrecht MS. Nemata in Colganus, Melari in the Life of
St. Kenna; so Colganus and Bollandus say; But in Capgrave I find Melari said to
be the Mother to the Father of St. David, i. e. to Xantus King of the Provincia
Ceretica, i. e. Cardiganshire (so called from Ceretus Father to Xanctus say
some; from Caraticus, who ruled here, as Brit. p. 518.
Camden seems inclinable to believe) That Melari was one of the 12 Daughters of
Braghanus King of Brecknock; from whom, Itiner. Camb. l. 1. c. 2.
Giraldus says, the County took its Name; And he said from the British
Histories that he had 24 Daughters; but Capgrave says he had 12 Sons and 12
Daughters. D. Powell in his Notes on Giraldus says, this Brachanus his Father
was Haulaphus, King of Ireland, and his Mother a Britain, viz. Marcella
Daughter to Theodoric Son of Tethwaltus King of Garthmathrin afterward called
Brecknock; Another Daughter of Brachanus, he says, was Wife to Congenus Son to
Cadel, King of Powisland, and Mother of Brochmiel, who killed Etheldred King of
Northumberland, and routed his Army about Anno Dom. 603. By this we see what a
Number of Petty Princes there was about that time among the Britains; but
whether St. David were Uncle by the Mother to King Arthur or not, we have not
light enough to discover. I shall pass over all the Legendary parts of his
Life; and consider only what relates to the Church History of those times. His
Domestic Education is said to have been under Pauleus or Paulinus a Disciple
of St. German; with whom he continued ten years; in the Isle of Wight, says
Giraldus, but it seems more probable to have been Whiteland in Caermardenshire;
the School of Iltutus being not far off in Glamorganshire at Lantwitt, i. e.
Fanum Iltuti; and in his Life it is said, that he came to the King of
Glamorgan; and after, that Sampson, Paulinus, Gildas and David were his
Scholars. But Bollandus shows, that there must be a mistake as to David; and
that instead of him it should be read Daniel, who was a Disciple of Iltutus,
and consecrated first Bishop of Bangor by Dubricius. After this it is said,
that David and Eliud, or Teliaus, and Paternus went to Jerusalem, and David was
there consecrated Bishop by the Patriarch. And it is not to be wondered, that in
such a distracted time at home, they should go to Jerusalem, when Epist. 17.
Saint Jerome in his time mentions the Britains going thither; especially such
as were more inclined to Devotion; which humor spread so much, that Gregory
Nyssen wrote against it, as a thing very much tending to Superstition if not
arising from it. But it was most excusable in such a troublesome time at home.
Not long after his return, the famous Synod at Brevy was held at a place called
Lhandewy-brevy, the Church of Saint David at Brevy. Here the Vtrecht MS. says,
was a Synod assembled of all the Bishops of Britain upon the account of the
Pelagian Controversy then revived. Giraldus says, It was a general Convention
of Clergy and Laity. But the former MS. says, there were present 118. Bishops,
besides Abbats and others. One would think it hard to find so many Bishops in
Britain at that time: And Bollandus startles at it, but Colganus undertakes to
defend it; having premised that Giraldus and Capgrave leave it out; But he
says, there were more Bishops at that time than afterward; and more Bishops
than Bishoprics, Dioceses not being then so limited as afterward; And every
Monastery almost having a Bishop its Superior; By which means he justifies
Saint Patrick 's consecrating, as Jocelin says, 350 Bishops with his own
hands. But after all this, Giraldus did much better to omit such a number in
such a time, unless there were better Testimony concerning it. However there
was a considerable number there present, yet St. David was absent, and first
Paulinus was sent to him, but he prevailed not, then Daniel and Dubricius went,
upon whose entreaty he came, and by his Authority and Eloquence put an
effectual stop to Pelagianism: And before the end of the Synod it is said, That
by general Consent he was chosen Archbishop of Caerleon, Dubricius desiring to
retire on the account of his Age.

But here we meet with a considerable difficulty concerning the Succession to
Dubricius, viz. That Teliaus is said to succeed Dubricius at Landaff, and to
have power over all the Churches of the Western parts of Britain; How can this
be consistent with St. David's succeeding Dubricius in the Sea of Caerleon,
which had the Metropolitan Power over those Churches?

De Praeful. p. 618.
Bishop Godwin out of Bale, and as he supposes, out of Leland says, That St.
Dubricius was first Bishop of Landaff being there consecrated by Germanus and
Lupus, and that afterward he was removed by a Synod to Caerleon, and Teliaus
placed in Landaff. But this by no means clears the difficulty; for although
Bale does there exactly follow Leland, yet Leland himself did not seem to have
consulted the Book of Landaff; Where it is said, That when Dubricius was made
Archbishop, he had the Sea of Landaff conferred upon him, by the Gift of
Mouricus then King, and the three Estates, i. e. the Nobles, Clergy and People,
and all the Land between the Taff and Elei: And Collect. Vol. 2. p. 42.
Leland himself out of another Author says, That when Dubricius was made
Archbishop, Landaff was made his Cathedral Church. After Dubricius his time
Teliaus is said to be Archbishop several times in the Book of Landaff; and
after him Oudoceus is called Summus Episcopus; and the Bishop of Landaff in
(...) Sermon to Calixtus 2. Anno Dom. 1109. says, That it appears by the hand
writing of St. Teliaus, That the Church of Landaff was superior in dignity to
all other Churches in Wales. That which seems to me the most probable account
of this matter is, That when Landaff was given to Dubricius then Archbishop, he
fixed his See there, and so Landaff was the Seat of the Archbishop of Caerleon.
But afterward when St. David removed the Archiepiscopal See to Menevia, a
remote, barren and inconvenient place, as Giraldus himself confesses; The
Bishops of Landaff assumed the Archiepiscopal Power, which had been in that
See, and would not submit to the Bishops of St. David's. This is apparent from
that passage of Oudoceus (who succeeded Theliaus) in the Book of Landaff, that
he would not receive Consecration from the Bishop of St. David's, as his
Metropolitan, but had it from the Archbishop of Canterbury. This is a very
improbable thing at that time considering the hatred the Britains did bear to
the Saxons, and their Bishops to Augustine the Monk: It is far more likely that
they received it from the Archbishop of Dole in Britany; or from the Archbishop
of London then resident in those parts; who probably kept up their Succession
for some time, as long as there were any hopes of returning to their own See,
as is before observed.

After this Giraldus speaks of another great Council held by St. David, which
he calls Victoria; in which he says all the Clergy of Wales were present; And
the Decrees of the former Council were confirmed, and new Canons made for the
Government of the British Churches; But this Second Synod is not mentioned in
the old Vtrecht MS. nor in Capgrave, but it is in Colganus, and by the
Expressions it appears to have been taken out of Giraldus, who confesses, that
no Copies of those Canons were to be seen in his time, that Coast being so
often visited by Pirates, (who no doubt came to steal MSS. and especially
Church-Canons.) I will not deny that the British Churches at that time, and in
those parts might be said to be in a flourishing condition in comparison with
other parts of Britain, and there might be more Christians there, because they
had been driven out from other places; and their Brethrens afflictions might
increase their Devotion; But Gildas takes no more Notice of St. David than he
does of King Arthur. The Battle at Badon-hill according to Archbishop Usher,
was the year after the Synod at Brevy, and from that time the British Churches
had some quiet from their Enemies: But then Gild. 26.
Gildas says, The Britains quarrelled among themselves; but yet so as that
some kind of Order and Government was then kept up among them, by the
Remembrance of their late Calamities. And at this time he speaks the best of
the Britains, that he does in his whole Book; for he says, That Kings and
Public and Private Persons, Bishops and other Churchmen (for Sacerdotes in
that Age often signified Bishops, and Gildas calls it Sacerdotalem Episcopatus
Sedem) did all keep to the Duty of their places. But then he adds, when the
Sense of these Calamities was worn out, and a new Generation arose, they fell
into such a degeneracy as to cast off all the Reins of Truth and Justice, that
no remainder of it appeared in any sort of Men, except a few, a very few, whose
number was so small in comparison with the rest, that the Church could hardly
discern its genuine Children when they lay in her Bosom.

But before I come to this last and saddest part of the History of the British
Churches it will be necessary now to give some Account of those Britains, who
being wearied out here went for Refuge to that Country in France, which from
them is called Bretagn.

It seems hard to determine when the first Colony of Britains was settled in the
parts of Aremorica. For in the declining times of the Roman Empire, there was
so frequent occasion of the British Soldiers removing into the Continent, and
so little encouragement to return hither, that it is not improbable, that after
the Troubles of Maximus and Constantine a Colony of Britains might settle
themselves upon the Sea Coasts near to Britain, where they might be ready to
receive or to go over to their Countrymen; as the Condition of affairs should
happen. This I am very much induced to believe, not from the Authority of
Nennius, or Geffrey, or William of Malmsbury, or Radulphus Niger, etc. but from
these Arguments;

First from Sidonius Apollinaris; and there are two passages in him which tend
to the clearing this matter, the first is concerning Aruandus accused at Rome
of Treason, in the time of Anthemius, for persuading the King of the Goths to
make War upon the Greek Emperor, i. e. Anthemius, who came out of Greece, and
upon the Britains on the Loir, as Epist. l. 1. Ep. 7.
Sidonius Apollinaris expressly affirms, who lived at that time, and pitied his
case. This happened about Anno Dom. 467. before Anthemius was the second time
Consul. From whence it appears, not only that there were Britains then settled
on the Loir, but that their Strength and Forces were considerable, which cannot
be supposed to consist of such miserable People as fled from hence for fear of
the Saxons: And it is observable, that about this time Ambrosius had success
against the Saxons, and by Vortimer's means, or his, the Britains were in great
likelihood of driving them out of Britain; so that there is no probability that
the Warlike Britains should at that time leave their Native Country. A second
passage is concerning Riothamus, a King of the Britains in the time of L. 3.
Ep. 9.
Sidonius Apollinaris, and to whom he wrote, who went with 12000 Britains to
assist the Romans against Euricus King of the Goths, but were intercepted by
him, as De Rebus Get. c. 45.
Jornandes relates the Story, and Sigebert places it Anno Dom. 470. Now what
clearer Evidence can be desired than this, to prove that a considerable Number
of Britains were there settled, and in a condition not only to defend
themselves, but to assist the Romans; which cannot be imagined of such as
merely fled thither after the Saxons coming into Britain. Besides we find in
Sirmondus his Gallican Councils, Mansuetus a Bishop of the Britains subscribing
to the first Council at Tours, which was held Anno Dom. 461. By which we see
the Britains had so full a settlement then, as not only to have Habitations,
but a King and Bishops of their own; which was the great encouragement for
other Britains to go over, when they found themselves so hard pressed by the
Saxons at home. For a People frighted from hence, would hardly have ventured
into a foreign Country, unless they had been secure before hand of a kind
reception there. If they must have fought for a dwelling there, had they not
far better have done it in their own Country? From whence I conclude, that
there was a large Colony of Britains in Aremorica before those Numbers went
over upon the Saxon Cruelties; of which Annal. A. D. 786. Hist. Francic.
Script. coat. To. 2. p. 639.
Eginhardus and other foreign Historians speak. Archbishop Usher seems to think
this Riothamus himself to have been the first Leader of them; But it is hard to
think a Person of his Valor and Experience would leave his Country in that
distressed Condition it was brought into by the Saxons.

But Sur. Dec. 13.
Florentius the Author of the Life of Judocus Son to a King of Bretagn says,
That his Name was Rioval, a Prince here in Britain, who gathered a good Army
and Fleet together, and with that subdued the People who lived on the
Aremorican Coasts, being then left destitute and unable to defend themselves.
For that was the effect of the Roman Government, which was kept up by the force
of the Roman Legions in all parts of it, and so when these were broken, the
Nations were so unaccustomed to War, that they lay open to all Invaders. So
that the Aggressors did generally succeed in their attempts where the Roman
Legions were withdrawn: and next to the wise Providence of God which orders
all things, there was no one cause which contributed so much to the miseries of
those times, and the strange Revolutions which happened in them, as the Natives
being not trained up to Martial Discipline, but depending wholly on the Roman
Legions for their Defense and security; thence, whatever People had the Courage
to invade, did usually take possession of the Country where the Roman Legions
were at a distance, or otherwise engaged against each other. Thus in France,
the Goths, the Burgundians, the Franks, and the Britains took possession of the
several parts they attempted; and the Goths and Vandals in Spain: So Goths and
Lombards in Italy it self. So that it is not to be wondered, if the Saxons
prevailed here at last; but with as much difficulty, and after as many Battles,
as were fought by any People of that time without foreign Assistence. But to
return to the Aremorican Britains, whether they came over under Rioval in the
beginning of the distractions here, when the People were so Rebellious against
their Princes, as Gildas relates, or whether they went over to assist
Constantine and his Son, and so remained there, I shall not determine. But that
the Britains were well settled there before Sampson Archbishop of York and his
Company passed the Seas, appears by what A. D. 1199.
Mat. Paris says, That they went to their fellow Citizens and Country Men,
hoping to live more quietly there. And after the death of the Bishop of Dole,
he was by the consent of the Britains put into his Place, and from thence
forwards exercised his Archiepiscopal power there; the Kings of that Province,
not suffering his Successors there to pay any Obedience to the Archbishop of
Tours. Which begot a Suit which held 300 years in the Court of Rome, and was
this year manfully decided by Innocent III. as Mat. Paris there relates: Who
states the Case very unskilfully, laying the weight of it upon the Archbishop's
bringing over his Pall from York, which the Pope had given him there. Suppose
this were true (although the Popes gave no Palls then, nor a great while after)
yet this were no reason to contest it in the Court of Rome so long together.
But the difficulty of the Case lay upon another point, viz. according to the
Old Canon of the Church, If a Province were divided into two, each Province was
to have a Metropolitan; Now this Reason held much stronger when new Kingdoms
were erected out of the Roman Provinces: For what Reason was there why the
Bishop of Dole in the Kingdom of Bretagn should yield subjection to the Bishop
of Tours in a distinct Kingdom? and there was the fairer Color for this when
one actually an Archbishop before came to be settled there; and from hence they
insisted on a Prescription of a very long time, wherein no Subjection had been
made to the Bishop of Tours, as appears by the account given of this Cause by
Epist. l. 2. F^. 82.
Innocent III. in his Epistles lately published by Baluzius. On the other side
it was pleaded, that all Britanny was under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop
of Tours, but that the Britains conspiring against the King of France, and
setting up a Kingdom of their own, they made use of Sampson, Archbishop of
York, coming to establish a Metropolitan power within that Kingdom: and upon
Complaint made to Rome, the Popes had put it upon this issue, whether any of
their Predecessors had granted the Pall to the Bishop of Dole, which not being
proved, the Pope, as it was easy to imagine, gave Sentence against the Bishop
of Dole. But it is certain, that they went upon a false suggestion, viz. That
the Kingdom of Bretagn was set up in Rebellion to the Kingdom of France. For
Childeric had not extended his Dominions in France as far as the Loir: and
before his time, the Britains were in quiet possession of those parts of
Aremorica; and the best Mezeray, To. 1. p. 18.
French Historians now grant that the Britains came thither in the time of
Merovee, who obtained but little in Gaul, as Rer. Fran. l. 3. p. 146.
Hadrianus Valesius confesses. And the Vit. Gild. c. 12.
Author of the Life of Gildas observes, That the Power of the Kings of France
was very inconsiderable in the time of Childeric, Son of Merovee, at what time
Gildas went over into Aremorica, as his School-fellows under Iltutus, Sampson
and Paulus had done before him; whereof one succeeded the other Sampson at
Dole, and the other was made Bishop of the Oxismii, the most Northern People of
Bretagn; which Diocese is since divided into Three, Treguier, S. Pol de Leon,
and S. Brieu.

Here Gildas at the request of his Brethren who came out of Britain, says the
Author of his Life, wrote his Epistle, wherein he so sharply reproves the
several Vices of the five Kings of Britain* whom he calls by the Names of
Constantine, Aurelius, Vortiporius, Cuneglasus and Maglocunus; and speaks to
them all as then living. The Galfr. l. 8.
British History makes them to succeed each other; Constantine, according to
that, was killed in his third year by Aurelius Conanus. He died in his second
year, and Vortiporius succeeding him Reigned four years. After him he places
Malgo, and leaves Cuneglasus wholly out. But that they Reigned at the same time
in several parts of Britain is evident from Gildas, because he says, He knew
that Constantine was then living; Now Constantine Reigning the first of these,
how could he speak to the four Kings that succeeded him, if he were still
living? For there is no color, for imagining that Gildas still added his
Reproof as one died and another succeeded; for any one may discern it was
written in one continued style, and he writes to them all as then living
without the least intimation that they succeeded each other: Besides, he calls
Constantine the Issue of the impure Damnonian Lioness; and at this time the
Britains in the remote Western parts were separated from the other by the West
Saxon Kingdom; and therefore there is far less Probability that all the
Britains at that time should be under one Monarch. And where they had greatest
freedom of living together, they were divided into several Principalities. For
he, whom Gildas calls Maglocunus, is by the British Writers called Maelgun
Guineth, and Mailgunus mentioned by John of Tinmouth, in the Life of St.
Paternus, and by Thaliessin in Sir John Price, from whom it appears that he was
King of North Wales. And as Gildas calls Vortiporius the Tyrant of the Demetae,
by whom the Inhabitants of South Wales are understood: Aurelius Conanus,
Archbishop Prim. p. 537.
Usher thinks was King of Powisland; which was sometime a third Kingdom. And
for Cuneglasus, it seems probable, he had the Command of the Northern Britains;
for it is plain from Bid they had a distinct Principality there. All these
Gildas does very severely reprove for their several Vices; and then taxes the
Judges and Clergy to the Conclusion of his Epistle, to the end they might
repent of their Sins, and acquit the just and wise Providence of God in the
judgments he brought upon them, which were very terrible, and ended in the
desolation of the Country and the ruin of the British Churches, excepting
only those Remnants which were confined to the Corners of the Land. For our
Ranulph. Nig. in Chronic. Matt. Westmin. A. D. 586, 596.
Historians say, That the Saxons left not the Face of Christianity wherever
they did prevail.

This is a very sad Subject, which ought not to be passed over without that
Reflection which St. Romans 11.22.
Paul made on the Church of the Jews and Gentiles.

Behold the goodness and severity of God; on them which fell severity, but
toward thee goodness; if thou continue in his goodness, otherwise thou also
shall be cut off.

It remains only, that we consider the Liberty or Independency of the British
Churches; of which we can have no greater Proof than from the Carriage of the
British Bishops toward Augustine the Monk, when he came with full power from
the Pope to require Subjection from them. And this material point relating to
the British Churches I shall endeavor to clear from all the Objections which
have been made against it. In order thereto, we are to understand, That Bed. l.
1. c. 27.
Augustine the Monk by virtue of the Pope's Authority, did challenge a
Superiority over the Bishops of the British Churches, which appears not only
by Gregory's Answer to his Interrogations, c. 29.
but by the Scheme of the Ecclesiastical Government here, which Gregory sent to
him, after he had a fair prospect of the Conversion of the Saxons, which was at
the same time that he sent Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus and Rufinianus, with the
Archiepiscopal Pall to him. There he declares that there were to be two
Archbishops Sees, one at London (which out of honor to Ethelbert or Augustine
was fixed at Canterbury, or rather by Ethelbert's own Authority) and the other
at York, which had been a Metropolitan See in the British times, and both these
Archbishops were to have twelve Suffragan Bishops under them. The Bishop of
London was to be consecrated by his own Synod, and to receive the Pall from the
Pope; But Augustine was to appoint the first Bishop of York, who was to yield
Subjection to him for his time, but afterward the Sees were to be Independent
on each other. But by all this, it should seem, that he had Authority given him
only over those Bishops who were consecrated by him, And the Archbishop of
York; what then becomes of those Bishops in Britain who were Consecrated by
neither, and such they knew there were? Concerning these Gregory gives a plain
Answer, That they were all to be subject to the Authority of Augustine; and to
govern themselves in Life and Doctrine and Church Offices according to his
Direction. Augustine being furnished with such full Powers, as he thought,
desires a Meeting with the British Bishops, at a place called Augustinsac, as
L. 2. c. 2.
Bid says, in the Confines of the Wiccii and the West Saxons. Where this
place was is very uncertain, and not at all material; Camden could find nothing
like it, and the Conjectures of others since have no great probability, either
as to Austric, or Haustake, or Ossuntree, but at this place, the British
Bishops gave Augustine a Meeting; where the first thing proposed by him was,
That they would embrace the Unity of the Catholic Church, and then join with
them in Preaching to the Gentiles, for, says he, they did many things
repugnant to the Unity of the Church; Which was in plain terms to charge them
with Schism; and the Terms of Communion offered, did imply Submission to the
Church of Rome, and by consequence to his Authority over them. But the utmost
that could be obtained from them, was only that they would take farther
advice, and give another Meeting, with a greater Number. And then were present
Seven Bishops of the Britains, and many Learned Men, chiefly of the Monastery
of Banchor, where Dinoth was then Abbat; And the Result of this Meeting was,
That they utterly refused Submission to the Church of Rome, or to Augustine as
Archbishop over them. And for the Account of this, we are beholding to Bid,
whose Authority is liable to no exception in this matter.

But against this plain Matter of Fact, there have been three Objections made
which must be removed.

1. That Augustine did not require Subjection from the British Bishops, but
only treated with them, about other matters in difference between them.

2. That their refusing Subjection to the Bishop of Rome depends upon the
Credit of a Spurious British MS. lately invented and brought into light, as the
Answer of Dinoth.

(3.) That if they did refuse Subjection to the Pope, it was Schismatical
Obstinacy in them, and contrary to the former Sense of the British Church.

To all these I shall give a clear and full Answer.

(1.) As to the matter of their Conference, it cannot be denied that other
things were started; as about the Paschal Controversy and some Rites of
Baptism, etc. but this was the main point; which Augustine did not in plain
Terms insist upon, because it would look too invidiously to require Subjection
to himself, but he cunningly insinuates it under the Name of Ecclesiastical
Unity. For I dare appeal to any Man's common sense, whether upon the Principles
of the Church of Rome, the British Bishops complying in other things and
rejecting the Pope's Authority would have been thought sufficient? If so, then
Submission to the Pope is no necessary term of Communion; and Men may be in a
very safe Condition without it. But if it were necessary, then Augustine must
imply it within the terms of Catholic Peace and Ecclesiastical Unity. It is
therefore ridiculous in Annal. Eccles. A. D. 604. n. 11.
Alford and Church. Hist. l. 13. chapter 19. n. 6.
Cressy, and such Writers to say, That Augustine did not insist upon it: For it
is to charge him with Ignorance or Stupidity, that he should leave out so
necessary an Article of Communion: And yet Gregory had so great an opinion of
him, as to make him the Directour of the British Churches. And therefore it
cannot be supposed that he should offer terms of Communion without requiring
Submission to the Pope's Authority; if those were in a state of Schism who
denied it.

But it is said, That in the Conclusion of the second Meeting, Augustine did
not insist upon, nor so much as mention any subjection to him from the British
Churches, but only required Compliance in three Points, viz. the time of the
Paschal Solemnity agreeable with the Church of Rome; following the Roman
Customs in Baptism; and joining with them in Preaching to the Saxons; and upon
these they brake up the Meeting.

To which I Answer.

That these things were required by Augustine, not as Conditions of Brotherly
Communion, but as the Marks of Subjection to his Authority; which appears from
Bede's own Words, Si in tribus his mihi obtemperare vultis, etc. Which Cressy
very unfaithfully renders, If they would conform in three points only: Whereas
the meaning is, If they would own his Authority in those three things; and
therefore the British Bishops answered very appositely, when they said, we will
neither do the things nor submit to you as Archbishop over us. Why should they
deny Subjection if it had not been required of them? Which shows they very well
understood his meaning, and gave Answer in short, to the main point. And upon
this Account I suppose it was, that, the Anchoret's advice was followed about
observing Whether he rose up to the British Bishops at their entrance; Not that
they were so offended for want of a Complement, as Mr. Cressey suggests, but
this was looked on by them, as a Mark of that Superiority which he challenged
over them; And therefore they had reason to take so great notice of it, and to
infer harder usage from him, when they should be under his Authority. They
could not be ignorant what Authority the Pope had given Augustine, and that made
them more Observant of his whole Behavior, and finding it so agreeing to the
Character of an Archbishop over the British Churches, They give him that
Resolute Answer, That they would not own any Authority he had as Archbishop
over them. Which is a sufficient proof, that this was really the main point
contested between them.

(2.) As to the British MS. which contains Dinoth's Answer more at large; I
Answer;

1. De Script. in Dinoth.
Leland observes, That the British Writers give a more ample account of this
Matter than is extant in Bid; who is very sparing in what concerns the British
Affairs. But from them he says, That Dinoth did at large dispute with great
Learning and Gravity against receiving the authority of the Pope, or of
Augustine; and defended the Power of the Archbishop of St. David's; and affirmed
it not to be for the British Interest to own either the Roman Pride or the
Saxon Tyranny. And he finds fault with Gregory, for not admonishing the Saxons
of their gross Usurpations, against their Solemn Oaths; And adds, that it was
their duty, if they would be good Christians to restore their unjust and
Tyrannical Power to those from whom they had taken it. For Dinoth, out of his
great Learning could not but know, that the Pope under a pretense of bringing
in the true Faith could not confirm them in their unjust Usurpation. For if
that should be admitted no Princes could be safe in their Dominions. And no
doubt the British Bishops looked upon this attempt of Augustine upon them to be
the adding one Usurpation to another: Which made them so adverse to any
Communication with the Missionaries which otherwise had been inexcusable.

(2.) The certainty of the British Churches rejecting the Pope's Authority, and
Augustin's jurisdiction does not depend upon the Credit of this British MS. for
this is sufficiently clear from Bede's own Words, wherein they declare, they
would not own Augustine as Archbishop over them. But if they had owned the
Pope's Authority, they ought to have Submitted to him, who acted by virtue of
his Commission: And it was not possible for them at such a distance from Rome,
to express their disowning his Authority more effectually than by rejecting
him, whom he had sent to be Archbishop over them. And Nich. Trivet in his MS.
History cited by Sir H. Council. p. 111.
Spelman, says expressly, that Augustine did demand Subjection from the Britains
to him, as the Pope's Legate, but they refused it. So that if this MS. had
never been heard of, the Matter of Fact had been nevertheless fully attested.

(3.) The Objections against this MS. are not sufficient to destroy the
Authority of it. Sir H. Spelman who sets it down at large in Welsh, English and
Latin, tells from whom he had it, and exactly transcribed it, and that it
appeared to him to have been an Old MS. taken out of an Older, but without Date
or Author, and believes it to be still in the Cotton Library. Here is all the
appearance of Ingenuity and faithfulness that can be expected; and he was a
Person of too great Judgment and Sagacity to be easily imposed upon by a modern
Invention, or a new found Schedule, as Mr. Cressy Phrases it. The substance of
it is, That the Abbat of Banchor, in the Name of the British Churches declares,
That they owe the Subjection of Brotherly Kindness, and Charity to the Church
of God, and to the Pope of Rome, and to all Christians: but other obedience
than that, they did not know to be due to him whom they called Pope; And for
their parts they were under the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Caerleon upon
Usk, who was under God their Spiritual Overseer and Directour. But, say the
Objectors, There was then no Bishop of Caerleon upon Usk, and had not been
since the time the Metropolitan Jurisdiction was by St. David transferred to
Menevia. I grant that from the time of Dubricius the Sea was transferred first
to Landaff, and then to St. David's, but this latter Translation was not agreed
to by all the British Bishops; And it appears by the foregoing Discourse, That
the Bishops of Landaff did at that time when Oudoceus lived, challenge the
Metropolitical Power of Caerleon to themselves, and therefore would not be
consecrated by the Bishop of St. David's. And Caerleon having been the ancient
Metropolitical See, it was no absurdity at all to mention that in a Dispute
which depended upon ancient Right. For the Authority over the British Churches
was not upon the account of St. David's or Landaff, but the Metropolitan Right
which belonged to the Sea of Caerleon. As if in the British times the
Metropolitan See had been removed from London to Canterbury, what incongruity
had it been in a dispute of Superiority to have alleged, that the British
Churches of these parts were under the Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of
London, although at that time the Sea were removed to another place? And if
this be all to make it appear to be a Forgery, as Mr. Cressy pretends, for all
that I can see, it may be a very ancient and genuine MS.

But Alford goes deeper, for he disproves it, because it contradicts the Sense
of the British Churches before, which professed subjection to the Roman See.

This is indeed to the purpose if it be well proved, which in the last place
comes to be considered.

(3.) To this purpose he alleges, (1.) The Confirmation of St. David 's Synod
by the Pope's Authority. But from whence has he this? From no other Testimony
than that of Giraldus Cambrensis cited by Bishop Usher, who in the same place
confesses, That there was no Monument of those Synods at all remaining, nor of
the Pope's Confirmation of them; and the other MSS. and Legends of St. David's
Life say not a Word of this. How then came Giraldus to affirm it? We are to
remember that Giraldus had a Cause depending in the Court of Rome, about the
Bishopric of St. David's, and he knew well enough what Doctrine was pleasing
there, and therefore the Testimony of such a one, having no concurrent Evidence
to support it is of very little force in this matter. (2.) He mentions the
Respect Kentigern showed to the Church of Rome, going seven times thither, and
having at last his uncanonical Ordination purged, or confirmed by the Pope; as
the Author of his Legend relates. But this seems to me a senseless and
ridiculous Legend: For as 13. Jan. Vit. Kentigern.
Bollandus observes, if Kentigern went seven times to Rome how came he to put
off the Error of his Consecration to the last? If it were good before, why not
then? If naught before, then all the Acts performed by him by virtue of his
first Consecration were invalid. But there is no more Error supposed in the
Consecration of Kentigern by one Bishop, than there was in that of Seruanus by
Palladius, which as De Gest. Scot. l. 2. c. 2.
Joh. Major says, was good in case of necessity. But the Writers of the
Legends, living long after the times of the Persons, framed their Stories
according to the Customs of their own times; and because such a Consecration
was not then held good, therefore the Author of his Legend takes care to have
that defect supplied at Rome, and to make amends he says, That Kentigern at
his death recommended to his Disciples the Decrees of the Fathers, and the
Customs of the Roman Church. But what is this to the necessity of Subjection to
the Roman See from the general sense of the British Churches? What if Kentigern
having been often at Rome, were pleased more with the Customs of that Church,
than of the Britains? Does it hence follow, that those Britains who maintained
Customs contrary to the Romans, did think it necessary to conform to the Church
of Rome, when the plain Evidence of Fact is to the contrary; and which has far
more authority than such Legends as these? (3.) Ninianus is Bid. l. 3. c. 4.
said to have learnt the Christian Doctrine at Rome, who converted the Southern
Picts, and founded the Church ad Candidam Casam; being the first built of
Stone. But what follows from hence? Because Ninianus was made a Christian at
Rome, therefore the British Churches always owned the Pope's Supremacy. They
are indeed to seek for Arguments who make use of such as these. (4.) He offers
to prove the constant Submission of the British Churches to the Roman See from
Gildas himself, and he makes use of two Arguments.

(1.) From his calling the British Churches Sedem Petri, the Sea of St. Peter.
I confess Gildas has these words, but quite in another Sense; For in the
beginning of his Invective against the Clergy, among other things he charges
them, that they did Sedem Petri Apostoli immundis Pedibus usurpare. Does he
mean that they defiled St. Peter 's Chair at Rome? No certainly, but he takes
St. Peter's Chair for that which all the Clergy possessed, and implies no more
than their Ecclesiastical Function; and so he opposes it to Gild. p. 58, 60.
the Chair of Judas, into which, he says, such wicked Men fell. But if they
will carry St. Peter 's Chair to Rome, they must carry the Chair of Judas
thither too.

(2.) A. D. 548. n. 4.
Alford insists on this Passage in Gildas, That they were more ambitious of
Degrees in the Church than of the Kingdom of Heaven; And after a bitter
Invective against their Symoniacal Contracts, he adds, that where they were
opposed they ran beyond Sea to compass their ends. Now says Alford, whither
should this be but to Rome? For as Leland observes in the Case of Giraldus
Cambrensis, sunt enim omnia Venalia Romae: all things are bought and sold
there; and therefore whither should such notorious Symoniacal Persons go, but
to Rome? This is a very surprising Argument, and is more wisely past over by
Mr. Cressy than insisted on by Alford, as being a horrible Reflection on the
Court of Rome in those days. But to say Truth, there is not one Word of Rome in
Gildas; but if they will apply it to Rome, how can we help it?

To conclude this Discourse, A. D. 604. n. 10.
Alford is much displeased with Council. p. 110.
Sir H. Spelman for paralleling the Case of the British Bishops, and Augustine,
with that of the Cyprian Bishops against the Patriarch of Antioch: But for what
Reason? Why, says he, The Council of Ephesus did not permit the Cyprian
Bishops to decline the Judgment of their Patriarch, but declared the Bishop of
Antioch not to be their Patriarch. Very well! And is not this the very case
here? The Bishop of Rome challenged a Patriarchal Power over the British
Churches, and appoints an Archbishop over them, but they deny that he had such
Authority over them, they being governed by their own Metropolitan, as the
Cyprian Bishops were: and therefore by the Decree of the Council of Ephesus,
they were bound to preserve their own Rights, and consequently to oppose that
foreign Jurisdiction, which Augustine endeavored to set up over them.

THE END.

