Imprimatur, G. Jane R. P. D. Henr. Episc. Land. a sac. domesticis. June 3.
1676.

A DEFENSE OF THE DISCOURSE Concerning the IDOLATRY Practiced in the CHURCH OF
ROME, In ANSWER to a BOOK Entitled, Catholics no Idolaters.

By ED. STILLINGFLEET, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

The two First Parts.

London, Printed by Robert White for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix
in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White-Hart in Westminster Hall. 1676.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER in GOD HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, One of the
Lords of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I Have heard that in some famous Prophetic Pictures pretending to represent
the Fate of England, the chief thing observable (in several of them) was a
Mole; a creature blind and busy, smooth and deceitful, continually working
under Ground, but now and then to be discerned by the disturbance it makes in
the Surface of the earth: which is so natural a description of a restless party
among us that we need no Judge of Controversies to interpret the meaning of it.
Our Forefathers had sufficient Testimony of their working under Ground; but in
our Age they act more visibly, and with that indefatigable industry, that they
threaten (without great care to prevent them) the undermining of our Church,
and the Ruin of our established Religion. Which since they cannot hope so
easily to compass alone, they endeavor to draw in to their Assistance, all
such discontented parties, who are so weak, (if any can be so) to be prevailed
on to be instruments to serve them, in pulling down a Church, which can never
fall, but they must be stifled in its Ruins. One would think, it were hardly
possible, for any to run into a snare, which lies so open to their view; or to
flatter themselves with the vain hopes of escaping better than the Church they
design to destroy. But such is the admirable Wisdom of Divine Providence to
order things so above all humane Discretion, that when the Sins of a Nation
have provoked God to forsake it, he suffers those to concur in the most
pernicious Counsels for enslaving Conscience, who pretend to the greatest zeal
for the Liberty of it. So that our Church of England in its present condition,
seems to stand as the Church of Corinth did of old, between two unquiet and
boisterous Seas; and there are some very busy in cutting through the Isthmus
between them, to let in both at once upon it, supposing that no strength will
be able to withstand the force of so terrible an inundation. It is a
consideration that might dishearten those who are engaged in the Defense of our
Religion against the common Adversaries, to see that they promise themselves as
much from the folly of some of their most seeming Enemies, as from the interest
and Power of their Friends: 2 Cor. 7.5.
thus like S. Paul in Macedonia, we are troubled on every side, without are
fightings, and within are fears. If men did but once understand the things
which belong to our Peace, we might yet hope to weather out the storms that
threaten us, and to live, as the Church has frequently done, in a tossing
condition, with waves beating on every side. But if through Weakness or
Wilfulness, those things should be hid from our eyes, the prospect of our
future condition is much more dreadful and amazing than the present can be.

If it were reasonable to hope, that all men would lay aside prejudice and
passion, and have greater regard to the Common Good, than to the interests of
their several parties, they could not but see where our main strength lies, by
what our enemies are most concerned to destroy; And that no men of common
understanding would make use of disunited Parties to destroy one Great Body,
unless they were sure to master them, when they had done with them; And
therefore the best way for their own security were to unite themselves with the
Church of England. That were a Blessing too great for such a People to expect,
whose sins have made our Breaches so wide, that we have too great reason to
fear the common enemy may enter through them; if there be not some way found
out to repair those Breaches, and to build up the places which are broken down.

For my own part, I cannot see, how those who could have joined in Communion
with the Christian Church, in the time of Theodosius the Great, can justly
refuse to do it in ours. For that is the Age of the Church, which our Church of
England since the Reformation, comes the nearest to; Idolatry being then
suppressed by the Imperial Edicts, the Churches settled by Law under the
Government of Bishops, Public Liturgies appointed, Antiquity Reverenced,
Schism discountenanced, Learning encouraged, and some few Ceremonies used, but
without any of those corrupt mixtures which afterward prevailed in the Roman
Church. And whatever men of ill minds may suggest to the disparagement of those
times, it is really an Honor to our Church, to suffer together with that Age,
when the Christian Church began to be firmly settled by the Countenance of the
Civil Power, and did enjoy its Primitive Purity without the Poverty and
Hardships it endured before. And the Bishops of that time were men of that
exemplary Piety, of those great Abilities, of that excellent Conduct and
Magnanimity, as set them above the contempt or reproach of any but Infidels and
Apostates. For then lived the Gregory's, the Basils, the Chrysostoms in the
Eastern Church; the Ambroses, and Augustins in the Western; and they who can
suspect these to have been Enemies to the Power of Godliness, did never
understand what it meant.

It were, no doubt, the most desirable thing in our State and Condition to see
the Piety, the Zeal, the Courage, the Wisdom of those holy Bishops revived
among us in such an Age which needs the conjunction of all these together. For
such is the insolency and number of the open contemners of our Church and
Religion, such is the activity of those who oppose it, and the subtilty of
those who undermine it, as requires all the Devotion and Abilities of those
great Persons to defend it. And I hope that Divine Spirit which inflamed and
acted them has not forsaken that Sacred Order among us: but that it will daily
raise up more who shall be able to convince Dissenters, that there may be true
and hearty zeal for Religion among our Prelates; and those of the Church of
Rome, that Good Works are most agreeable to the Principles of the Reformation.
Nay, even in this Age, as bad as it is, there may be as great Instances
produced of real Charity, and of Works of Public and pious uses, as when men
thought to get Souls out of Purgatory, or themselves into Heaven by what they
did. And if it were possible exactly to compare all Acts of this nature which
have been done ever since the Reformation, with what there was done of the same
kind for a much longer time immediately before it, if the Protestant Charity
should seem to fall short in outward Pomp and Magnificence, it would be found
much more to exceed it, in number, and usefulness.

Which makes me so much the more wonder to hear and see, the ill effects of the
Reformation in this kind, so much insisted on of late, to disprove the Goodness
of it. If some Great men had sinister ends in it, when was there any great
Action of that nature, wherein some Persons did not aim at their own advantage
by it? Who can excuse all the Courtiers in the time of Constantine, or all the
Actions of that Great Emperor himself? Must Christianity therefore be thought
the worse, because it did prevail in his time, and very much by his means? And
there were some partial Historians in those days, that impute the demolishing
of Heathen Temples and the suppressing of Idolatry to the Rapine and Sacrilege
of the Times. For even those Heathen Temples were richly endowed; and it is not
to be supposed, that when such a Tree was shaking, there would be no scrambling
for the Fruit of it.

However, we are not concerned to justify the Actions or Designs of any
particular Persons how Great soever: but that which we plead for, is, that the
Reformation it self was a just, pious, prudent, and necessary thing; and had
both sufficient Authority to warrant it, and sufficient Reason to justify it.

We read in the Spanish History a remarkable Precedent, which vindicates the
proceeding of our Reformation in England. The Gotthick Nation had been infected
with Arianism two hundred and thirteen years, when by the means of Leander
Bishop of Sevil, the King Reccaredus being duly informed in the Orthodox Faith,
called a Council at Toledo, Council. Tolet. 3. (...)
wherein Arianism was renounced by the declaration and subscription of the King
himself, being present in Council; and afterward by the Bishops who joined
with him, and the Great men; which being done, the Council proceeded to make
new Canons and Constitutions, which the King confirmed by his Edict, declaring,
that if any Bishop, Priest, or Deacon refused to observe them, he was sentenced
by the Council to excommunication; if any of the higher rank of the Laity, the
penalty was paying half their estates to the Exchequer, if others, confiscation
and banishment. All which is extant in the Records of that Council. The Arian
Bishops, as Mariana relates, Marian. de rebus Hisp. l. 5. c. 14, 15.
such as Athalocus and Sunna with others, having the old Queen Goswinda and
several of the Nobility to join with them, made all the disturbance they could,
to hinder the Reformation. But, God not only carried it through, but
wonderfully preserved the Life of the King, notwithstanding many conspiracies
against him; after whose death, the Arian faction was very busy, and made
several Attempts by Treason and Rebellion to be restored again; and they once
thought themselves sure, when they had gotten Wittericus of their party to the
Throne, but his short Reign put an end to all their Hopes. I find some of the
latter Spanish Historians much troubled to see all done in this Reformation, by
the King, and the Bishops, and Great men, without the least mention of the
Popes Authority. Lucas Tudensis therefore says, that Leander was the Popes
Legate, but Mariana confesses, Marian. l. 6. c. 1.
that the very Acts of the Council contradict it. He would have it believed,
that they sent Legates to the Pope afterward to have the Council confirmed by
him; but, he acknowledges, that nothing appears in History to that purpose:
and if any such thing had been, it would not have been omitted in the Epistles
of Gregory, Greg. Registr. l. 1. ep. 41.
who writ to Leander a Letter of congratulation for the conversion of
Reccaredus. But then National Churches were supposed to have Power enough to
Reform themselves, provided, that they proceeded according to the Decrees of
the Four General Councils.

And this is that we maintain in behalf of the Church of England, that it
receives all the Creeds which were then received, and has reformed those
Abuses only which have crept into the Church since that Time.

This, My Lord, is the Cause, which by Command of my Superiors, I was first
engaged to defend; among whom Your Lordships Predecessor (whose constant
Friendship and Kindness I must never forget) was one of the Chief. Since that
time, I have had but little respite from these (not so pleasing to me, as
sometimes necessary) Polemical Exercises; and notwithstanding all the Rage and
Malice of the Adversaries of our Church against me, I sit down with that
contentment, that I have defended a Righteous Cause, and with an honest Mind;
and therefore I little regard their bitterest Censures and Reproaches.

In the midst of such a Crowd of Adversaries, it was no unpleasant
entertainment to me to see the various methods, with which they have attacked
me; some with piteous moans and outcries, others grinning and only showing
their teeth, others ranting and Hectoring, others scolding and reviling; but I
must needs say, the Adversary I now answer, has showed more art and cunning
than all the rest put together; and has said as much in Defense of their
Cause, as Wit and Subtilty could invent (I wish I could speak as freely of his
Fair dealing, and Ingenuity.) Him therefore I reserved to be answered by
himself, after I had shaken off the lesser and more barking Creatures.

What I have now done, I humbly present to Your Lordships hands; and I am very
glad of this opportunity to declare what satisfaction the Members of Your own
Church, and the Clergy of this great City have to see a Person of so Noble
Birth, so much Temper and Prudence, so firm an Assertor of the Protestant
Religion and Church of England, appointed by his Majesty to have the Conduct
and Government of them. That God Almighty would assist and direct Your Lordship
in those things which tend to the Peace and Welfare of this Church, is the
hearty Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most dutiful and obedient Servant, ED. STILLINGFLEET.
May 30. 1676.
TO THE READER.
IT has been long expected that I should have published an Answer to T. G. as
the most considerable Adversary that appeared against me; but it is very well
known, that before his Book came out, I had undertaken the Answer of several
others; which when I had set forth, a Person of Honor, who had been pleased to
defend me against one of my keenest Antagonists, was assaulted by him; whom I
was in the first place obliged in gratitude, to ease of any farther trouble.
Since that time I have applied my self to the consideration of T. G.'s Book, as
much as health, and other business would permit.

And finding such confusion in most Discourses about Idolatry, and that till
the Nature of it were fully and clearly Stated, men would still dispute in the
dark about these matters, in my last Summers retirement, I set my self to the
strict examination of it, by searching with my utmost diligence into the
Idolatries practiced in all parts of the world, by the help of the best
Authors, I could meet with, either ancient or modern; when I had done this, I
compared those observations I had made with the Sense of the Scriptures, and of
the Fathers of the several Ages of the Christian Church, who had managed the
Charge of Idolatry against Heathens, or Heretics. From hence I framed the
First Part of the following Book, wherein I have not only examined and confuted
T. G.'s false notion of it, but endeavored to settle the True one in its place.

Which being dispatched, and the main principles of his whole Book thereby
weakened and overthrown; I betook my self to the particular Defense of the
Charge of Idolatry practiced in the Roman Church in the Worship of Images; and
I apprehended nothing of greater consequence in this Debate, than to give a
true Account of the state of the Controversy between us; which T. G
endeavored with all his art to blind and confound. After which, I have given a
distinct Answer to every thing material or plausible in that part of his Book.
Which swelling this Discourse beyond my expectation, I must respite the other
part to a farther opportunity; which I may the better do, because the Remainder
of T. G's Book has already received a sufficient Answer from a learned and
worthy Person.

THE CONTENTS.
PART I. A General Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry. CHAP. I. T. G's
notion of Idolatry examined and confuted. page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Nature of
Divine Worship. p. 184
PART II. Being a particular Defense of the Charge of Idolatry against the
Church of Rome in the Worship of Images. CHAP. I. The State of the Controversy
about the Worship of Images, between Christians and Heathens. p. 349 CHAP. II.
The State of the Controversy about Images in the Christian Church. p. 487
CHAP. III. Of the Sense of the second Commandment. p. 670 CHAP. IV. An Answer
to T. G 's charge of Contradictions, Paradoxes, Reproach of the second Council
of Nice, School disputes; and to his parallel Instances. p. 784

PART I. A General Discourse concerning the Nature of Idolatry.
CHAP. I. T. G's notion of Idolatry examined and confuted.
TO make good the Charge of Idolatry against the Roman Church,. 1.
which is my present business, there are two things necessary to be done,

1. To lay down the right notion of Idolatry.

2. To examine what T. G. and others have said, to justify themselves, from
the particulars of this Charge.

I begin with the consideration of the Nature of Idolatry, not only because my
Adversary calls me to it in these words, T. G. p. 203.
Here the Ax is laid to the root, and if ever the Dr. will speak home to the
purpose, it must be upon this point. He must speak to the Nature of the thing,
etc. But because the weight of the whole matter in debate depends upon it, and
whosoever reads through T. G 's answer to me, will find the only strength of it
to lie in a very different notion of Idolatry which he sets up, which if it
prove true, the main of my charge must fall to the ground; although however by
his way of writing he can hardly answer the character I had given him, either
of a Learned or ingenuous Adversary.

The notion of Idolatry which T. G. lays down may be gathered from these
assertions of his, p. 64.
That, God being the only supreme and superexcellent Being above all and over
all, to him therefore Sovereign honor is only to be given, and to none beside
him; That as no command of God can make that to be not Idolatry which is so in
the nature of the thing; so no prohibition (if there were any) could make that
to be Idolatry, which has not in it the true and real nature of Idolatry;
That, the worship of Images forbidden in the Commandment, p. 203.
is the worshipping Images instead of God; and the reason of the Law was to
keep the people in their duty of giving Sovereign worship to God alone, P. 39
by restraining them from Idolatry. p. 63.
That this Law was made particularly to forbid Sovereign worship to be given
(as he says, it was at that time given by the Heathen) to graven Images, p. 67.
i. e. representations of imaginary Beings; or to any similitude, i. e. the
likeness of any thing, which although it had a real being, yet was not God:
That, p. 99.
the Image Worship condemned by S. Paul, was the worshipping Images for Gods,
or as the Images of false Gods: That, p. 103.
evil Spirits or false Gods did reside in their Images by Magical incantation:
p. 349.
That, the supreme God of the Heathens was not the true God but a Devil, and
that the Poets who call him the Father of Gods and men, p. 348.
were those whom Horace confesses, that they took the privilege to dare to
feign and say thing. From these assertions, it is no hard matter to form T. G
's notion of Idolatry, viz. That it is, The giving the Sovereign worship of God
to a creature, and among the Heathens to the Devil. And now who dares charge
the Church of Rome with Idolatry? I do not wonder that he calls this so foul,
so extravagant, so unjust a charge; and parallels me with no meaner a person
than Julian the Apostate, saying, That surely a more injurious Calumny scarce
ever dropped from the pen of the greatest enemy of Christianity, p. 350.
except that of Julian the Apostate. But I am so used to their hard words, that
I can easily pass them over, and immediately apply my self to the debate of
these things, which will tend very much to the clearing the true notion of
Idolatry,

1. Whether Idolatry be not consistent with the acknowledgement of one Supreme
Being?

2. Wherein the Nature of that Divine Worship lies, which being given to a
Creature makes it Idolatry?

For if those who acknowledge one Supreme Being, the Creator and Governor of
the world, were notwithstanding this, guilty of Idolatry, and that Idolatry be,
as T. G. confesses, p. 27.
the giving the worship due to God to a creature; then if we can prove, that
the Church of Rome does give any part of that worship which is due to God to
any thing besides him, we may still justly charge them with Idolatry, although
they believe one Supreme God, and reserve some worship which he calls Sovereign
to him.

1. Whether Idolatry be not consistent with the acknowledgement of one Supreme.
2.
and Governor of the world? Whom I suppose T. G. will not deny to be the true
God. It is agreed by him, that the whole Heathen world was guilty of Idolatry,
without excepting the more intelligent and wiser persons among them; therefore
our only business as to them is to enquire, whether they did acknowledge this
Supreme Being; and it is without dispute, that all Christians do acknowledge
the True God; if I can then prove, that such have notwithstanding been charged
with Idolatry, by those whose judgment T. G. dares not refuse, I hope these
two things being made out, will be sufficient to prove, that those may be
guilty of Idolatry, who acknowledge one Supreme God.

As to the Heathens, who are confessed Idolaters. I have such plenty and choice
of evidence in this matter, that it is not easy to know which to leave out;
for, if either the Testimony of the Heathens themselves may be taken; or the
Testimony of the Writers of the Roman Church concerning them; or the Testimony
of the Scriptures; or of those Fathers who disputed against their Idolatry, or
of the Roman Church it self, I do not doubt, to make it evident, that those
Heathens who are charged with Idolatry, did acknowledge one Supreme God. In so
great store I have reason to consider the temper of the person I have to deal
with; For, if I produce the Testimony of the Heathen Writers themselves, it may
be he may suspect, that the Devil dwelt in their Books as well as in their
Images; and being a very cunning Sophister that he might persuade their
Philosophers to write for one God, that he might have the worship belonging to
him: as O. C 's Instruments were for a single Person, that the Government might
be put into his hands. But, I have a better reason than this, viz. that this
Work is already undertaken, by a very learned Person of our Church.

The Testimony of Scripture is plain enough in this matter to any unbyassed
mind; as appears by S. Paul's saying to the men of Athens when he saw the Altar
to the unknown God; Whom ye ignorantly worship, him I declare unto you; Act.
17.23.
Did S. Paul mean the Devil by this? Did he in good earnest go abroad to preach
the Devil to the world? yet he preached him whom they ignorantly worshipped, i.
e. the Devil, says T. G. Although S. Paul immediately says, v. 24.
it was the God that made the World, and all things in it: and afterward
quotes one of their Poets for saying (...), For we are his offspring; v. 28.
and it is observable that the words immediately going before in Aratus are
(...), and he uses (...) twice more in the verses before, (...) -- (...), p.
348.349.352.
which is the very word that T.G. says does signify an Arch-Devil. Does S.
Paul then say, we are all the Devils offspring? and not an ordinary one
neither, but the very Arch-Devils? Was this his way of persuading the Athenians
to leave the worship of Devils, to tell them, that they were all the Devils
offspring? No: it was far enough from him, for he infers from that saying of
Aratus, that they were the offspring of God, (...). v. 29.
So that if Saint Paul may be credited rather than T. G. their Jupiter was so
far from being the Arch-Devil, that he was the true God, blessed for evermore.
And it is observable, that S. Paul quotes one of their Poets for this saying;
notwithstanding T. G 's sharp censure of them out of Horace; with which, the
force of S. Paul's testimony is overthrown. But he was not alone in making this
to be the Poets sense, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 13. c. 12.
for Aristobulus the Jewish Philosopher produces it to the same purpose, and
adds, that although he used the name of Jove, yet his design was to express the
true God. Minucius Felix says wisely in this case, Minuc. Felix in Octav. p.
19.
They who make Jove the chief God, are only deceived in the name, but agree in
the Power; so far was he from thinking their Jupiter Father of Gods and men,
(which he applauds the Poets for saying) to have been the Arch-Devil.

But T. G. quotes Origin for saying, Orig. c. Cells. l. 5.
that the Christians would undergo any Torments rather than confess Jupiter to
be God; for they did not believe Jupiter and Sabbath to be the same, neither
indeed to be any God at all, but a Devil, who is delighted with the name of
Jupiter, an enemy to men and God. I grant, Origin does say so; but suppose St.
Paul and Origin contradict one another, I desire to know whom we are to follow?
Yet if T. G. had considered Origin as he ought to have done, he would have seen
how little had been gained by this saying of his. For when Celsus had said, it
was no great matter whether they called the Supreme God Jupiter, or Adonai, or
Sabbath, or Ammon as the Egyptians did, or Pappai as the Scythians. Origin
answers. 1. That he had spoken already upon this subject, which he desires may
be remembered; now in that place he says, that by reason of the abundance of
filthy and obscene fables which went of their Jupiter, the Christians would by
no means endure to have the true God called by his name; Orig. c. Cells. l. 4.
p. 196. ed. Cant.
having learnt from Plato to be scrupulous about the very names of their Gods.
2. Origin has a particular conceit about the power of the Hebrew names; and
has a very odd discourse, unbecoming a Philosopher and a Christian, about the
power of words in enchantments, and that the same words had great force in
their Originals, Orig. c. Cells. l. 1. p. 19. etc.
which they lost being translated into other Languages; and if it be thus,
says he, in other names, how much more ought we to think it so in the names of
God? And therefore he would by no means have those powerful names of Adonai and
Sabbath to be changed for any other. By which for all that I can see, Origin
would as much have scrupled calling the Divine Being God, as Jove, If Vossius
his conjecture be true, that God is the same with the old German Good, or
Godan, Voss. de Idolol. l. 1. c. 37.
and according to the common permutation of those letters, Wodan, who was the
chief God among the Germans. 3. He says, that it was no fault at all for any
persons to call the Supreme God by the names used in their own language; as the
Egyptians might call him Ammon, and the Scythians Pappai: and then why not the
Greeks (...) or (...)? and I do not see he finds much fault with them for it;
but he would not have those names brought into the Christian Religion, which
had been defiled by such impure stories and representations among the Heathens:
which is the best thing that he says to this purpose: But we see that Origin
himself does not deny that either the Greeks, or Egyptians, or Scythians did
own a Supreme God, or that they had proper names to express him by: but he
would not have the Christians bring those names into their Religion; And that
Origin grants that the Heathens did acknowledge the Supreme God, will be proved
afterward. But whatever his opinion was, we are sure S. Paul by the God that
was known among the Heathens, did not mean the Devil: For was the believing the
Devil to be the Supreme God, that holding the truth in unrighteousness, Romans
1.18.
which S. Paul charges the Heathens with? Was this indeed that (...) That which
is known of God, which he says, v. 19.
not only was manifest in them, but, that God himself had revealed it to them?
Was this that eternal Power and Godhead which was to be seen by the things
that were made, so as to leave them without excuse? v. 20.
Was this their knowing of God, v. 21.
and that incorruptible God whose glory they turned into the Image of a
corruptible man, etc? Was all this, v. 23.
nothing but Jupiter of Crete, and the Arch-Devil under his name? But what will
not men say, rather than confess themselves Idolaters?

Although these Testimonies of Scriture, be never so evident;. 3.
yet I am not sure but T. G. may be the Polus mentioned in Erasmus now, (whom
he mentions for my sake, p. 37.203.
more than once) and may espy a red fiery Dragon, even the old Serpent there,
where I can see nothing but the discovery of the True God. Therefore supposing
that the Testimony of Heathens or the Scriptures may not weigh much with him,
methinks he might have considered what the Learned men of their own Church have
said to this purpose. Th. Aquinas confesses, Th. Aquin. c. Gent. l. 1. c. 42.
in fin.
that the most of the Gentiles did acknowledge one Supreme God, from whom they
said all those others whom they called Gods did receive their being; and that
they ascribed the name of Divinity to all immortal substances, chiefly by
reason of their wisdom, happiness, and Government. Which custom of speaking,
says he, is likewise found in Scripture, where either the holy Angels, or Men,
and Judges are called Gods; I have said Ye are Gods, and many other places.
Franciscus Ferrariensis in his Commentaries on that place says, that Aquinas
his meaning was, that the Scripture only agreed with the Heathens as to the
name, but that they called their Gods properly so, whereas the Scripture speaks
of them only by way of participation. And did Aquinas, mean any otherwise of
the Heathens, when he says, that all their inferior Gods derived their very
being from the Supreme? The same Aquinas, in his Book purposely written against
the Gentiles, Id. l. 3. c. 120.
gives this account of their Principles of Religion; that some of them held one
God the first and universal principle of all things; but withal all they gave
Divine Worship (Latriam) next to the Supreme God to intellectual substances of
a heavenly nature, which they call Gods, whether they were substances separated
from bodies, or the Souls of the heavenly Orbs and Stars: in the next place to
intellectual substances united to aerial bodies, which they called Demons,
whom they made Gods in respect of men, and thought they deserved divine worship
from men as being Mediators between the Gods and them; and in the last place
to the Souls of good men, as being raised to a higher state than that of this
present life. Others of them suppossing God to be the Soul of the World, did
believe, that divine worship was to be given to the whole world, and the
several parts of it, not for the sake of the Body but the Soul, which they said
was God: as a wise man has honor given him not for the sake of his Body, but
of his mind. Others again asserted, that things below men as Images, might have
divine worship given to them, in as much as they did participate of a Superior
nature, either from the influence of heavenly bodies, or the presence of some
Spirits, which Images they called Gods, and from thence they were called
Idolaters. And so he proves, that they were, who acknowledging one first
principle did give divine worship to any other being: because it weakens the
notion and esteem we ought to have of the Supreme Being to give divine worship
to any other besides him; as it would lessen the honor of a King, for any
other Person to have the same kind of respect showed to him, which we express
to the King: and because this divine worship is due to God on the account of
Creation, which is proper only to him, and because he is properly Lord over us
and none else besides him: and he is our great and last end; which are all of
them great and weighty reasons, why divine worship should be appropriated to
God alone. But, says he, although this opinion which makes God a separate
Being and the first Cause of all intellectual Beings, be true: yet that which
makes God the Soul of the World, though it be farther from truth, gives a
better account of giving divine worship to created Beings. For then they give
that divine worship to God himself: for according to this principle, the
several parts of the world in respect of God, are but as the several members of
a man's body in respect of his Soul. But the most unreasonable opinion, he
says, is that of animated Images, because those cannot deserve more worship,
than either the Spirits that animate them, or the makers of them, which ought
not to have divine worship given them; besides, that by lying Oracles and
wicked Counsels, these appear to have been Evil Spirits, and therefore deserve
no worship of us. From hence, he says, it appears, that because divine worship
is proper only to God, as the first principle; and none but an ill disposed
rational Being can excite men to the doing such unlawful things, as giving the
worship proper to God to any other Being, that men were drawn to Idolatry by
the instigation of evil Spirits, which coveted divine honors to themselves:
and therefore the Scripture says, they worshipped Devils and not God. From
which remarkable Testimony we may take notice of these things. 1. That he
confesses many of the Gentiles whom he charges with Idolatry; did believe and
worship the Supreme God as Creator and Governor of the world. 2. That divine
worship is so proper to the true God, that whosoever gives it to any created
being, though in it self of real excellency, and considered as deriving that
excellency from God, is yet guilty of Idolatry. 3. That relative Latria being
given to a creature, is Idolatry; for so he makes it to be, in those who
supposed God to be the Soul of the world. And I desire T. G. or any other
cunning Sophister among them to show me why a man may not as lawfully worship
any part of the world with a relative Latria, supposing God to be the Soul of
the world, as any Image, or Crucifix whatsoever? For if union, contact, or
relation, be a sufficient ground for relative Latria in one case, it will be in
the other also; and I cannot but wonder so great a judgment as Aquinas had,
Aquin. Sum. p. 3. q. 25. art. 3.
should not either have made him justify the Heathens on this supposition, or
condemn the Christians in giving Latria i. e. proper divine worship to the
Cross. For there is not any shadow of reason produced by him for the one, which
would not held have much more for the other. For, if the honor of the Image is
carried to the Prototype; is not the honor of the members of the Body to the
mind that animates them? If the Image deserve the same worship with the person
represented by it; is not much more any part of the body capable of receiving
the honor due to the Person? as the Popes Toe is of the worship that is given
to him. Why should it be more unlawful to worship God, by worshipping Fire or
Water or the Earth, or any inferior creature, supposing God to be the Soul of
the World, than it is to show Reverence to the Pope by kissing his Toe? which I
suppose, can be upon no other reason, but because it is a part of his body,
which is animated by the same Soul in all the members of it. 4. That Aquinas
does not therefore say, that the Heathens worshipped Devils, because the
Supreme God whom they worshipped was an Arch-Devil, as T. G. says, but because
none but evil Spirits would draw men to give divine worship to any thing but
God himself; and then, that evil Spirits did appear to heighten and encourage
this devotion, by acting and speaking in Images. The consequence of which I
desire T. G. to consider. And this testimony of Aquinas is the more
considerable, not only for his great Authority in the Roman Church; and because
Pius 5. in the approbation of his Works A. D. 1567. very gravely mentions
Christ's speaking to him from a Crucifix, when he was praying before it, that he
had written well concerning him ( it seems the Crucifix was animated too); but
because I find this Book so highly applauded by Possevin, Possev. Biblioth. l.
9. c. 25. Thom. a Jesus de Convers. gent. l. 11. c. 2.
and others for the best account of the Christian Religion in opposition to
Heathenism.

Card. Cajetan in his Commentaries on Aquinas speaking of the Images of God,
Cajet. in Th. p. 3. q. 25. art 3.
he distinguishes them into 3. sorts. 1. Some that were to represent the
Divinity, which he utterly condemns. 2. Some to set forth the appearances of
God mentioned in Scripture. 3. Some by way of Analogy, that by sensible things
we may be brought to the veneration of insensible, as the Holy Ghost in the
form of an old man holding a globe in his hand, etc; which last way, says he,
comes near to the custom of the Heathens who represented God diversely, as he is
the cause of diverse effects, as under the form of Minerva by reason of his
Wisdom, and the like. Would Cajetan ever have paralleled the Custom of the
Church of Rome, with that of the Heathens, if he had thought they had only
pictured the Devil under these representations? In another place he puts this
Question; how it could be said that all the Gods of the Heathens were Devils,
In Aq. 2.2. q. 94. art. 4.
since although they worshipped many Gods, yet withal they worshipped one
Supreme God? To which he answers. 1. That the Devils were the causes of
Idolatry, and so they were Devils causally though not essentially. 2. That
although those they worshipped were not in themselves Devils, as the heavenly
intelligences; yet they were so as they were the Gods of the Heathens: i. e. as
they had divine worship given to them. And the true God himself, he says, was
not worshipped according to what he was, but according to what they conceived
of him. But he grants before that they conceived of him, as the Supreme God:
which was a right conception of him; but if he means it was imperfect, is it
not so in those who worship him most truly?

Martinus Peresius Ayala a learned Bishop in Spain, Mart. Peers. de divin.
trad. part. 3. p. 120.
treating the Question of the worship of Images; says expressly, That S.
Augustine condemned all divine worship or Latria to be given to any kind of
Images, not, says he, in regard of their matter, for there was no need to give
caution against that, but in regard of their representation, and he calls them
Idolaters which give that worship to Images which is due to God ( with T. G 's
leave I translate Simulachra Images, for so I am sure Peresius understands it)
Neither says he, was S. Augustine ignorant, that there were few or none among
the Gentiles who thought the matter of their Idols so fashioned to be Gods or
God: ( let T. G. mark that) but on that account he seems to condemn them, that
they gave divine honor to their Images, as they represented God: for there
were many Idols among them in which there was no Devil who gave answers, but
they only represented God as their benefactor: neither did all the things which
the Gentiles worshipped signify a false God. For there was an Altar at Athens
to the unknown God. Ioh. Ferus says, Ferus in Act. 17.
that the intention of the Heathens, was through their Idols to give worship to
the true God Now T. G. knows that humane acts d^ certainly go whither they are
intended* so that according to Ferus, these Heathens did truly worship the true
God Athan. Kircher lays it down as a certain principle, Kirch. Oedip. Aegy.
synt. 3. c. 1.
that there never was in any Age, any People so rude and barbarous which did
not acknowledge and worship one Supreme Deity, the first principle and
Governor of all things. c. 2.
But says he that they might teach the people that the Supreme Being, whom we
call God, w^^ present in all places, therefore they ma^^ abundance of Gods in
all places and ov^^ all things. So that as Max. Tyrius says no place was left
without a Deity. Petavius not only makes use of the arguments produced by the
Heathens to prove one Supreme God, Petav. dogm. The. To. 1. c. 1.. 9.
and thinks them considerable: but says that S. Paul demonstrates ( mark that)
that the Gentile Philosophers attained to the knowledge of God by the works of
Creation: and quotes the saying of Max. Tyrius with approbation, Max. Tyr.
dissert. 1*
that however the several Nations of the world differed from each other in
customs and languages and modes of worship, yet they all agreed in this, that
there was one God, Lord, and Father of all, and says, that the Testimony of
Orosius is most true, Oros. l. 6. c. 1.
that both the Philosophers and common Heathens did believe one God the author
of all things, Petav. l. 1. c. 3.. 3.
and to whom all things are referred: but that under this God they did worship
many inferior and subservient Gods: and he adds that passage of S. Augustine,
Aug. c. Faust. l. 20 c. 10.
that the Heathens supposed all their Gods to come at first out of one
substance: but I wonder he omitted what is very observable in the same chapter,
viz. that Faustus the Manichean holding two first principles, says, that the
Christians joined with the Heathens in believing but one: and S. Augustine
confesses, that the greatest part of the Heathens did believe the same with
the Christians in that point; but the difference, he says, lay here, that they
worshipped more Gods than one: and therein the Manichees agreed with them, and
the Christians only with the Jews: c. 9.
but the Manichees in that were worse than the Heathens, that these worshipped
those things for Gods which were, but were not Gods; but they worshipped those
things, which were so far from bein Gods that they were not at all. Faber
Faventinus, Ph. Faber Faven. advers.
in his discourse against Atheists, Atheos disp. 1. c. 2. n. 27.
insists upon this as an argument of some weight to prove a Deity, because all
mankind had so settled a notion of one first principle in their minds from
which all things come, and by which they were governed, and however they
differed in other conceptions about this first principle, yet they all agreed
in this, that it was immortal, and not only good in it self but the fountain of
all good. Which surely was no description of an Arch-Devil. But what need I
farther insist on those Authors of his own Church who have yielded this; when
there are several who with approbation have undertaken the proof of this in
Books written purposely on this subject: such as Raim. Breganius, Raim. Bregan.
Theolog. Gentil.
Mutius Pansa, Mutius Pansa de Osculo Ethnicae and Christianae Philoso.
Livius Galantes, Live. Galant. Christianae philosoph. cum Platon. comparat.
Paulus Benius Eugubinus, Paul. Benii Eugub. Platon. and Aristot. Theolog.
but above all Augustinus Steuchus Eugubinus, Aug. Steuch. Eugub. de perenni
Philo.
who have made it their business to prove, that not only the Being of the
Deity, but the unity as a first principle, the Wisdom, Goodness, Power and
Providence of God, were acknowledged not merely by the Philosophers, as Plato
and Aristotle and their followers, but by the generality of mankind. But I am
afraid these Books may be as hard for him to find as Trigautius was, and it
were well, if his Principles were as hard to find too, if they discover no more
learning or judgment than this, that the Supreme God of the Heathens was an
Arch-Devil.

But T. G. says,. 4. T. G. p. 350.
that the Father of Gods and men among the Heathens, was according to the
Fathers an Arch-Devil. Is it not possible for you to entertain wild and absurd
opinions your selves, but upon all occasions you must lay them at the doors of
the Fathers? I have heard of a place where the people were hard put to it to
provide Godfathers for their Children; at last, they resolved to choose two
men that were to stand as Godfathers for all the Children that were to be born
in the Parish; just such a use you make of the Fathers, they must Christen all
your Brats, and how foolish soever an opinion be, if it comes from you, it must
presently pass under the name of the Fathers. But I shall do my endeavor to
break this bad custom of yours, and since T. G. thinks me a scarcerevolted
Presbyterian, I shall make the right Father stand for his own Children. And
because this is very material toward the true understanding the Nature of
Idolatry, I shall give a full account of the sense of the Fathers in this
point; and not as T. G. has done from one single passage of a learned (but by
their own Church thought heretical) Father, viz. Origin, presently cry out, the
Fathers, the Fathers. Which is like a Country Fellow that came to a Gentleman
and told him he had found out a brave Covie of Partridges lying in such a
Field; the Gentleman was very much pleased with the news and presently asked
him how many there were: what half a score? No. eight? No. Six? No. Four? No.
But how many then are there? Sir, says the Country Fellow, it is a Covie of
one. I am afraid T. G 's Covie of Fathers will hardly come to one at last.

Justin Martyr is the eldest genuine Father extant who undertook to reprove the
Gentiles for their Idolatry, Justin. Martyr. paraen. p. 4. ed. Paris.
and to defend the Christian worship. In his Paraenesis to the Greeks he takes
notice, how hardly the wiser Gentiles thought themselves dealt with, when all
the Poetical Fables about their Gods were objected against them (just as some
of the Church of Rome do when we tell them of the Legends of their Saints,
which the more ingenuous confess to be made by men, who, took a privilege of
feigning and saying any thing, as well as the Heathen Poets); but they appealed
for the principles of their Religion to Plato and Aristotle: both whom he
confesses, p. 6.
to have asserted one Supreme God; although they differed in their opinions
about the manner of the formation of things by him. Afterward he says, That
the first Author of Polytheism among them, viz. Orpheus, did plainly assert
one Supreme God, p. 16.
and the making of all things by him: for which he produces many verses of his:
and to the same purpose an excellent testimony of Sophocles, viz. that in truth
there is but one God, who made Heaven and Earth and Sea and Winds: but the
folly and madness of mankind brought in the Images of Gods, and when they had
offered sacrifices and kept solemnities to these, they thought themselves
Religious. p. 18.
He farther shows that Pythagoras delivered to his disciples the unity of God,
and his being the cause of all things, and the fountain of all good: that Plato
being warned by Socrates his death durst not oppose the Gods commonly
worshipped, but one may guess by his Writings, that his meaning as to the
inferior Deities was, that they who would have them might, and they who would
not might let them alone: but that himself had a right opinion concerning the
true God. p. 19.
That, Homer by his golden chain did attribute to the Supreme God a Power over
all the rest; p. 22.
and, that the rest of the Deities were near as far distant from the Supreme as
men were: and that the Supreme was he whom Homer calls, (...) God himself,
which signifies, says Justin, (...) the truly existent Deity: and that in
Achilles his Shield he makes Vulcan represent the Creation of the world. p. 27.
From these arguments he persuades the Greeks to hearken to the Revelation
which the true and Supreme God had made of himself to the world, and to worship
him according to his own Will. In his Apologies to the Roman Emperors,
Antoninus Pius and Marcus Aurelius, and the Roman Senate and People ( for so
Baronius shows, Baron. A. 164. n. 14.
that which is now called the first, was truly the second, and that not only
written to the Senate, but to the Emperor too, who at that time was Marcus
Aurelius, as Eusebius says and Photius after him) he gives this account of the
State of the Controversy then so warmly managed about Idolatry: Eusebius. hist.
l. 4. c. 17
that it was not whether there were one Supreme God or no: or whether he ought
to have divine worship given to him: but whether those whom the Gentiles called
Gods were so or no; and whether they or dead men did deserve any divine honor
to be given to them; and lastly, that being supposed, whether this honor ought
to be given to Images or no? For every one of these Justin speaks distinctly
to. As to their Gods, he denies that they deserved any divine worship, because
they desired it and were delighted with it; From whence, p. 44.
as well as from other arguments, he proves, that they could not be true Gods,
but evil Demons: that those who were Christians, did only worship the true God
the Father of all virtue and goodness; and his Son who has instructed both men
and Angels, (for it is ridiculous to think that in this place Justin should
assert the worship of Angels equal with the Father and Son, and before the Holy
Ghost, as some great men of the Church of Rome have done) and the Prophetic
Spirit, in Spirit and truth. p. 68.
In another place he says, that they had no other crime to object against the
Christians, but that they did not worship the same Gods with them; nor offer up
libations and the smoke of sacrifices to dead men; p. 66.
Nor crown and worship Images; that they agreed with Menander, who said we
ought not to worship the work of men's hands: not because Devils dwelt in them,
but because men were the makers of them. And he wondered they could call them
Gods, p. 57.
which they knew to be without soul, and dead, and to have no likeness to God:
(it was not then upon the account of their being animated by evil Spirits, that
the Christians rejected this worship, for then these reasons would not have
held) All the resemblance they had, was to those evil Spirits that had appeared
among men; for that was Iustins opinion of the beginning of Idolatry, p. 44.
that God had committed the Government of all things under the heavens to
particular Angels, but these Angels prevaricating by the love of Women, did
upon them beget Demons, that these Demons were the great corrupters of
mankind; and partly by frightful apparitions, and by instructing men in
Idolatrous rites did by degrees draw men to give them divine worship, the
people not imagining them to be evil Spirits, and so were called by such names
as they liked best themselves, as Neptune, Pluto, p. 55.
etc.

But the true God had no certain name given to him, for says he, Father, and
God, and Creator, and Lord, and Master, are not names, but titles arising from
his works, and good deeds: and God, p. 44.
is not a name, but a notion engrafted in humane nature of an unexpressible
Being. But, that God alone, is to be worshipped, appears by this, which is the
great command given to Christians. p. 65.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, with all
thy heart and with all thy strength, even the Lord God that made thee. Where we
see, the force of the argument used by Justin in behalf of the Christians, lay
in Gods peremptory prohibition of giving divine worship to any thing but
himself; and that founded upon Gods right of dominion over us by virtue of
creation. In his Book of the Divine Monarchy, he shows, that although the
Heathens did make great use of the Poets to justify their Polytheism, yet they
did give clear testimony of one Supreme Deity, who was the Maker and Governor
of all things; for which end he produces the sayings of Aeschylus, Sophocles,
Orpheus, Pythagoras, Philemon, Menander, and Euripides; all very considerable
to this purpose. In his works there is extant the resolution of several
Questions by a Greek Philosopher, and the Christians reply, in which nothing
can be more evident, than that it was agreed on both sides that there was one
Supreme God infinitely good, powerful and wise. Nay the Greek Philosopher looks
upon the ignorance of God as a thing impossible, p. 160.
because all men naturally agree in the knowledge of God.

. 5.
But there are plain evidences in that Book that it is of later date than
Iustins time; therefore instead of insisting any more on that, I shall give a
farther proof, that in his time it could be no part of the dispute between the
Christians and Heathens, whether there were one Supreme God, that ought to be
worshipped by men; and that shall be from that very Emperor to whom Eusebius
says, Justin Martyr did make his second Apology, viz. M. Aurelius Antoninus.
It is particularly observed of him, by the Roman Historians, that he had a
great zeal for preserving the Old Roman Religion: and Iul. Capitolinus says,
Iul. Capit. vit. Anton.
that he was so skilful in all the practices of it, that he needed not, as it
was common, for one to prompt him, because he could say the prayers by heart;
and he was so confident of the protection of the Gods, that he bids Faustina
not punish those who had conspired against him, for the Gods would defend him:
his zeal being pleasing to them; and therefore Baronius does not wonder that
Justin and other Christians suffered Martyrdom under him. Baron. A. 164. n. 7,
8, 9.
But in the Books which are left of his writing we may easily discover, that he
firmly believed an eternal Wisdom and Providence which managed the World; and,
that the Gods, whose veneration he commends, were looked on by him as the
subservient Ministers of the Divine Wisdom. Reverence the Gods, says he; but
withal, Anton. l. 6.. 30. l. 2, 3. l. 5.33. l. 5.21. l. 6.5.42. l. 5.32. l.
4.40. l. 7.9. l. 9.4.
he says, honor that which is most excellent in the world, that which
disposes and Governs all: which sometimes he calls the all-commanding reason,
sometimes, the Mind and Soul of the World, which he expressly says is but one.
And in one place he says, that there is but one World, and one God, and one
substance, and one Law, and one common reason of intelligent beings, and one
Truth.

. 6.
But the great objection against such Testimonies of Antoninus and others lies
in this, that these only show the particular opinions of some few men of
Philosophical minds; but they do not reach to the public and established
Religion among them, which seemed to make no difference between the Supreme God
and other Deities; from whence it follows, that they did not give to him any
such worship a^ belonged to him. Which being the most considerable objection
against the design of this present discourse, I shall here endeavor to remove
it, before I produce any farther testimonies of the Fathers

For which we must consider, wherei^ the Romans did suppose the solemn and
outward acts of their Religion to consist, viz. in the worship appropriated
(...) their Temples, or in occasional prayers and vows, or in some parts of
divination, whereby they supposed God did make known his mind to them: If I can
therefore prove, that the Romans did in an extraordinary manner make use of all
these acts of Religious worship to the Supreme God, it will then necessarily
follow, that the controversy between the Fathers and them about Idolatry,
could not be about the worship of one Supreme God, but about giving Religious
worship to any else besides him.

The Worship performed in their Temples, was the most solemn and frequent among
them; in so much that Tully says, therein the people of Rome exceeded all
Nations in the world; De Aruspic. Resp. c. 9.
but the most solemn part of that Worship was that which was performed in the
Capitol at Rome, and in the Temple of Jupiter Latialis in Alba; and both these,
I shall prove were dedicated to the Supreme God. Eusebius. Chronic. p. 118.
The first Capitol was built at Rome by Numa Pompilius, and called by Varro the
old Capitol, Varro de Ling. Lat. l. 4.
which stood at a good distance from the place where the foundations of the
great Temple were laid by Tarquinius Priscus, the one being about the Cirque of
Flora, the other upon the Tarpeian Mountain. There is so little left of the
memory of the former, that for the design of it, we are to judge by the general
intention of Numa as to the worship of the Deity: of which Plutarch gives this
account; Plutarch. in Numa.
That he forbad the Romans making any Image of God, either like to men or
beast; because the First Being is invisible, and incorruptible, and can only be
apprehended by our minds. From hence, says he, it was that the Romans,
although they built Temples and holy places, yet for 160. years had no graven
or painted Image of God; accounting it a profane thing to represent the more
excellent by what was below it; and because we cannot come near to God any
other way than by our understanding. I do not deny, that Numa did allow the
worship of inferior Deities, as of Juno, Minerva, and of Deified men, as of
Quirinus, as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus says; Dionys. Halicarn. Antiq. Romans l.
2.
but since it is plain from hence that he acknowledged a First, invisible,
incomprehensible Being, since he deduced the reason of Divine worship from
considerations proper to him, since he appointed a Flamen Dialis as the chief
of all the rest, Live. hist. l. 1. c. 19.
as Livy tells us, and erected a Capitol to Jove, it is incredible that he
should design it for any other than the Supreme Deity. What force was there in
Numa 's reason against Images, if the First, and invisible Being were not
worshipped by him? to what end were reasons framed against a thing never
intended? and which would not hold against the worship of Deified men, unless
the worship of them were supposed to be carried at last to the Supreme God? But
not only Plutarch attested this, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 4. c. 31.
but Varro says that for 170. years the Romans worshipped their Gods without
Images: i. e. till the New Capitol were erected: which was vowed by Tarquinius
Priscus in the Sabine War; Dionys. l. 3.
but he was only able to prepare the place and lay the Foundations; Tacit.
hist. l. 3. c. 72.
Servius Tullius carried it on, Tarquinius Superbus was at vast charge upon it,
designing, says Livy, Live. l. 1. c. 53.
a Temple of such a capacity as might become the King of Gods and men; Varro de
Ling. lat. l. 5.

Plaut. Capt. Act. 3. sc. 4.


which was the common phrase whereby Ennius, Plautus and Virgil did set forth
the Supreme Deity. This magnificent Temple which, according to Dionysius, stood
upon 800. foot of ground, was not finished till after the expulsion of Tarquin,
and was then dedicated with great solemnity by Horatius Pulvillus being both
Consul and Pontifex. And from that time this was accounted the great seat of
God and Religion among them; Live. l. 2. Senec. Consol. ad Marciam.

Live. l. 5. c. 50.

Ovid. Fast. l. 2.

Cic. in Verr. 4. c. 58.

Tacit. hist. 3.72.

Plin. Panegyr.


it was sede^ Iovis, in Livy; Iovis Summi arx, in Ovid; terrestre domicilium
Iovis, in Cicero; Seeds Iovis Opt. Max. in Tacitus; which are all as plain
Testimonies that this Temple was designed for the Supreme God among them, as
can be desired; bu^ if any thing more can be added, it is only what Pliny says
in his Panegyric that God was as present there as he w^^ in the heavens. To
this Temple the greatest resort was made especially by the Magistrates on all
solemn occasions hither the Consuls came and made their vows and offered
sacrifices before the^ went into their Provinces, on the ver^ day they entered
upon their Office, sait^ Livy, Live. l. 4. c. 32. l. 21. c. 63.
for it was one of the charges again Flaminius, that he went away without doing
it; hither those that triumphe^^ came and offered up their Laurels an^ laid
them in the lap of Jupiter O. M. here the great Soldiers consecrated the^^
Arms, Plin. hist. l. 15.30. Sen. ad Helv. c. 10.
and hung up the Spoils of the Enemies, by which means it came to incredible
riches; A. Gel. l. 7. c. 1.
Here, the great Scip^^ was observed to be very often conversant in the night
in cella Iovis; an^ Alexander Severus never missed attending the service of the
Capitol, if he were in the City, every seventh day, as Lampridius says in his
Life; by which we see in what extraordinary esteem the service of Jupiter O. M.
in the Capitol was among the greatest persons in Rome: from whence, Lactantius
says, Lactant. l. 1. c. 11.
it was summum caput Religionum suarum publicarum; the very top of their
Religion; and Isidore thinks it was called Capitolium, Isidor. Origin. l. 15.
c. 2.
because it was Romanae urbus and Religionis caput summum; so that it was not
only the worship of the Supreme, but a higher degree of worship than was used
at any other Temple in Rome. If any worship can be supposed more solemn than
this, it was that of Jupiter Latialis upon the Mountain of Alba, whither the
Roman Coss. went upon the Feriae Latinae, and there met the Ambassadors sent
on purpose from the whole Society of the Latins; where they all joined together
in a common sacrifice to the same Jove, as Dionysius, Strabo, and Livy relate.
Dionys. hist. l. 4.

Strabo. l. 5.

Live. l. 21. c. 63.22. c. 1.38. c. 44.41. c. 16.42. c. 35.45. c. 3.44. c. 19.




I con foresee but 2. Objections against this evidence for the worship of the
Supreme God among the Romans. 1. That Jupiter was not worshipped alone in the
Capitol, but Juno and Minerva too. 2. That this Jupiter was not the Supreme
God, but Jupiter of Crete. To these I answer. 1. I confess that Juno and
Minerva had their Images in the Capitol; but we are to consider that it was a
rule in their Pontifical Law, that a Temple could be consecrated only to one
God; and therefore M. Marcellus could not dedicate the same Temple to Honor
and Virtue, because the Pontifices, says Livy, Live. l. 7.
told him, unum Templum, duobus numinibus non recte dedicari. But there might
be Images or little cells, of other Gods besides; as T. G. knows, in a Church
dedicated to God or the B. Virgin, there may be Chapels to Saints, which do
not hinder the main design of the worship being to God: and so it was in this
(and many other things among the old Romans;) as Diana and the Muses were in
the Temple of Apollo; and the Graces of Phidias in the Temple of Jupiter
Olympius; but Livy particularly says, as to this Temple of the Capitol, that
they cleared the ground as much as they could of all worships besides, Live. l.
1. c. 55.
ut area esset tota Jovis, that it might wholly belong to Jove.

The only question then is, whether Jove they meant the Supreme God, or Jupiter
of Crete? For which we are to observe, 1. That the Poetical Fables were
rejected at Rome. 2. That the character given of Jupiter by the Romans can
belong only to the Supreme God.

That the Poetical Fables were rejected Rome. I do not mean only that they were
rejected by their Wisemen as Varro, Seneca, and others, but by their most
ancient Laws about Religion. Marlianus mentions a Table of the Laws of Romulus
preserved in the Capitol, among which this is one, DEORUM FABULAS NE CREDUNTO.
Marlian. Topogr.

Romae, l. 2. c. 8.


And that this was no invention of his own, appears by what Dionysius
Halicarnassaeus at large discourses on this subject: Dionys. Halicarn.
where he shows, that although the customs and rites of Religion instituted by
Romulus were agreeable to the best among the Greeks; Antiq. Romans l. 2. p. 90.
yet he utterly rejected all their Fables concerning their Gods (which are
indeed so many blasphemies and reproaches of them) as wicked, unprofitable and
indecent, and not becoming good men, much less those which were worshipped for
Gods: And that he disposed the minds of men to speak and think things worthy of
that blessed nature they supposed them to have. And he particularly instances
in the Fables of Saturn and Jupiter, and the Mysteries of Ceres and Bacchus,
and the madnesses and wickedness of the Greeks in celebrating their Religious
mysteries; but, he says, all things that concerned Religion were said and done
among the Romans, with greater gravity than among the Greeks or Barbarians. By
this he would not have any think him ignorant, that some of the Greek Fables
might be useful to some persons, either for natural or moral Philosophy or
other purposes; but upon the whole matter he did much more approve the Roman
Theology, because the benefit of those Fables was very little to any, and those
very few; but the common people who are not versed in Philosophy, are apt to
take these things in the worst sense, either from thence to learn to contemn
their Gods, or to follow their examples. I do not undertake to defend all the
Roman Theology, nor can it be said that the Romans did in all things maintain
that (...) or decency of worship which Dionysius magnifies them for, as appears
by the many indecencies which the Fathers charge the practice of their Religion
with; but as they were not to be excused in other things, so we ought not to
charge them with more than they were guilty of; I mean when all the Poetical
Fables of Jupiter are applied to Jupiter O. M. that was worshipped in the
Capitol at Rome. But some Writers are to be excused, who having been bred up in
the Schools of Rhetoricians, and practicing that art so long before, when they
came to be Christians, they could not easily forbear giving a cast of their
former employment. As when Arnobius had been proving the natural notion of one
Supreme God in the minds of men, he brings in the Romans answering, Arnob. c.
gent. l. 1. p. 19.
that if this were intended against them, it was a mere calumny, for they
believed him and called him Jupiter O. M. and built a most magnificent Temple
to him in the Capitol; which he endeavors to disprove because God is eternal,
and their Jupiter was born and had a Father and Mother and Uncles and Aunts, as
other mortals have. Which indeed was an infallible argument, that Jupiter of
Crete could not be the Supreme God; but for all that, might not the Romans call
the Supreme God by the name of Jupiter O. M? The Question is not, whether they
did wisely to make use of a name so corrupted and abused by abominable Fables;
but whether under this name they meant the Supreme Being or no? and they
thought it a sufficient distinction of him from that infamous Jupiter of the
Poets, that they called him Optimus Maximus: which Lactantius confesses, Lact.
l. 1. c. 10.
were the titles the Romans always gave him in their prayers; Quid horum
omnium Pater Jupiter, qui in solenni precatione Opt. Max. nominatur? Which not
only shows the titles they gave him, but the supplications they made to him,
and the believing him to be the Father of Gods and Men: and yet after this,
Lactantius rips up all the extravagancies of the Poets; as though the Romans at
the same time believed him to have done all those things, and to have been the
Supreme Governor of the world, as he confesses they did. c. 11.
Regnare in coelo Iovem vulgus existimat, id and doctis pariter and indoctis
per suasum est; quod and Religio ipsa and precationes, and hymni and delubra
and simulacra demonstrant; Which words are a very plain testimony, that they
not only believed him to be Governor of the world, but that they did intend to
give solemn worship to him by prayers and hymns and sacrifices. But when he
immediately adds, that they confess the same Jupiter to have been born of
Saturn and Rhea; he might have done well to have explained himself a little
more, for not long after he acknowledges, that many did reject the Poets in
these matters, as guilty not only of lying but of sacrilege; and besides
these, the Philosophers he says, did make two Jove's, the one natural, the
other fabulous, i. e. in truth, they made but one, rejecting the other as a
figment of the Poets. But he says, they were to blame in calling him Jove; and
what then? this is only a dispute about the name, whereas the question is, whom
they understood by that name; and some think it was the most proper name they
could have used, Jove being only a little varied from the name the Supreme God
was called by in the Scripture. And Lactantius himself confesses, they had the
knowledge of the Supreme God among them, and what other name had they to call
him by? especially when they joined those two attributes of Power and Goodness,
as sufficient to prevent any mistake of him.

That the character given of this Jupiter O. M. by the Romans can belong only
to the Supreme God, S. Augustine confesses, that they believed him, whom they
worshipped in the Capitol, to be the King of the Gods as well as men; Aug. de
Civit. Dei, l. 4. c. 9.
and to represent this, they placed a Scepter in his hand, and built his Temple
upon a high hill; and that it is he of whom Virgil says, Iovis omnia plena;
and the same in Varro 's opinion that was worshipped by some without any Image,
by whom he means the Jews, says S. Augustine. Luc. Balbus in Cicero says,
Cicer. de Not. Deor. l. 2. c. 1.
by Jove they understood Dominatorem rerum and omnia nutu regentem, and
praesentem ac praepotentem Deum: which are a full description of Gods infinite
power and presence and Government of the world. When we call Jupiter Opt. Max.
and Salutaris, and Hospitalis and Stator, De Finib. Bon. and Mal. l. 3. c. 20.
we mean, says Tully, that the safety of men depends upon his protection. And
that they gave him the titles of Opt. Max. to express his Power and Goodness;
Pro Domo sua. c. 57.
but first Opt. then Max. because it is a greater thing to do good, De Not.
Deor. l. 2. c. 25.
than to exercise power. You may safely, says Seneca, call God by the titles
of Jupiter Opt. Max. and Tonans and Stator, Seneca de Benefic. l. 4. c. 7.
not from stopping the Roman army, but because all things do stand by him. And
you may give him what names you please, while you thereby express his divine
power and efficacy, as Liber Parens because he is the Author of all things,
Hercules because of his irresistible force, Mercury for his Wisdom. If you had
received a kindness from Seneca, and you should say you owed it to Annaeus, or
Lucius, you would not change the person but his name: for what name soever you
call him by, he is the same person still; you may use what name you please,
while you mean the same thing. And lest we should think this only a
Philosophical subtilty in Seneca, Senec. Nature. Quaest. l. 2. c. 45.
he tells us elsewhere, that their Ancestors were not such Fools to imagine
that Jove, as they worshipped him in the Capitol and elsewhere, did send forth
thunderbolts from his hand, (as his Image was there placed sitting in a chair
of State with sometimes a Scepter, sometimes a Globe in one hand, and a
Thunderbolt in the other) but by Jove they meant the same that we do, the
preserver and Governor of the Universe, the Soul and Spirit, and Lord and
Maker of the world: which is as full a testimony as can be wished for, to our
purpose. The title of Jupiter Omnipotens is so frequent in Virgil, Virg. Georg.
2.325.
that it is needless to cite any places for it; and he was particularly
observed by the ancient Critics, Aen. 1.64.2.689.3.251.4.25.6.592.7.141.770.
etc.
to be so nice and exact in all matters that concerned their Religion, as if he
had been Pontifex Max. as Macrobius observes: Macrob. Saturn. l. 7. c. 1.
He is called in the known verses of Valerius Soranus produced by Varro Jupiter
omnipotens Regum Rex ipse, Deusque
Progenitor, genitrixque Deum, Deus unus and omnis.


Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 7. c. 9. c. 11.
And this man was accounted the most learned among the Romans before Varro; on
which account his testimony is the more considerable. But besides the Poets, we
find others attributing omnipotency to their Jove; Tacitus disputing what God
Serapis was, Tacit. hist. l. 4. c. 84.
says, some called him Jove, ut rerum omnium potentem; whereby it appears that
they looked on omnipotency as proper to him: So in the speech of young Manlius
in Livy to Geminius, when he asked him, when the Roman Army would come out, he
said, Live. l. 8. c. 6.
very speedily, and Jupiter would come with them, as witness of their
Falseness, Jupiter qui plus potest polletque: which signifies no less than an
Almighty power. When the miraculous victory was obtained by M. Antoninus over
the Marcomanni by the prayers of the Christians (as Tertullian and Apollinaris
say upon good grounds, although the Heathen historians attribute it to the
virtue of Antoninus, or to some Magicians with him) the whole Army made this
exclamation, says Tertullian, Tertul. ad^. Scap. c. 4.
Deo Deorum and qui solus Potens, whereby they did, says he, in Iovis nomine
Deo nostro testimonium reddere: by which it is evident they intended this
honor to their own Jove; for in the whole Army only the Legio Fulminatrix are
supposed to have been Christians; and besides this upon Antoninus his Column at
Rome, Baronius tells us there is still to be seen the Effigies of Jupiter
Pluvius; Baron. An. 176. n. 24.
destroying men and horses with thunder and lightning. Dio Chrysostom who
lived in Trajans time, Dio Chrysostom. orat. 36. p. 447.
says that by Jupiter whom the Poets call the Father of Gods and men, was
meant the first and greatest God, the Supreme Governor of the world, and King
over all rational Beings; and that the world is Jupiters house, or rather his
City, being under his care and government; and that in their prayers to him
they called him Father: which shows not only their esteem of him, but the
particular worship they gave to him as Supreme God.

Besides the worship of him in the Temple, they made solemn addresses, and
prayers, and vows to him on special occasions. Livy mentions Romulus his prayer
to Jove with his Arms lifted up to Heaven, Live. l. 1. c. 12.
when his Army was flying, Jupiter tuis jussus avibus, etc. At ^^ Pater Deum
hominumque hinc saltem arc^^ hosts; and then makes a vow to him of building a
Temple in that place Statori Iovi: and presently he speaks to his Soldiers, as
if he were sure his prayers were heard, Jupiter Opt. Max. resistere atque
iterare pugnam jubet: upon which Livy says, they stopped as if they had heard
a voice from heaven. Dionys Halicarnassaeus mentions his prayer he made when
the people chose him King (...), Dionys. Halic. l. 2.
to King Jupiter and the other Gods: as Julius Caesar when M. Antony would have
pu^ the Diadem on his head, sent it to the Capitol to the Statue of Jupiter O.
M with this saying, Su^ton. Caesar. c 79.
solum Iovem Regem Romanorum esse. When Numa Pompilius was to be inaugurated,
the Augur made this prayer in Livy, Jupiter Pater, Plutarch. in Caes. Dio. l.
44.
si est fas hunc Numam, etc. When some were applauding the felicity of P.
Camillus upon the taking of Veii, Plutarch says, Plut. in Camill.
he made this appeal to heaven, (...). O mighty Jove, and ye Gods that behold
the good and evil actions of men, etc. When Manlius Torquatus found Annius,
Live. l. 8. c 6.
after his insolent speech against the Romans in the Senate, lying dead at the
foot of the steps of the Temple of Jupiter Capitolinus; he cried out, Est
coeleste Numen, Es Magne Jupiter; haud frustrate Patrem Deum hominumque hac
sede sacravimus. There is a God in heaven, Thou art O mighty Jove. It is not in
vain that we have consecrated this Temple to thee the Father of Gods and Men.
Plautus affords us many instances of prayers to the Supreme God; so Hanno the
Carthaginian in his Poenulus, Plaut. Poenul, Act. 5. sc. 3.
Magne Jupiter restitue certas mihi ex incertis opes: and the Punick Nurse
cries out at the sight of him, Proh Supreme Jupiter! and more fully Hanno in
the following Scene, sc. 4.
Jupiter qui genus colis alisque hominum, per quem vivimus,
Vitale aevum: quem penes spes, vitaeque sunt hominum omnium:
Da diem hunc sospitem quaeso rebus meis agundis.
And in his Capteivi, Capt. Act. 4. sc. 1.
Jupiter Supreme servas me. and again, Act. 5. sc. 2.
Serva Jupiter Supreme and me and meum gnatum mihi.

It was a custom among the Romans, as Turnebus observes, Turneb. Advers. l.
11. c. 17.
to lift up their eyes to heaven, and by way of amplification to cry ille
Jupiter. So Plautus in Amphitryo, Amphit. sc. 1.
Quod ille faciat Jupiter; and in his Mostellaria, Mostel. Act. 2. sc. 1.
Ita ille faxit Jupiter: in his Curculio, Curcul. c. 1.
nec me ille sirit Jupiter Virgil likewise has many prayers to the Supreme God
with the acknowledgement of his Almighty Power; as in the prayer of Anchises,
Jupiter omnipotens, precibus si flecteris ullis, Virgil- Aen. 2.689.

Aspice nos, hoc tantum: and si pietate meremur,
Da deinde auxilium Pater, atque haec omina firma.
And in the prayer of Aeneas, Jupiter omnipotens, si nondum exosus ad ununo
Aen. 5.687.

Trojanos, si quid pietas antiqua labores
Respicit humanos, da flammam evadere classi
Nunc Pater, and tenues Teucrum res eripe letho.
So in the prayer of Ascanius, Constitit ante Iovem, supplex per vota precatus;
Aen. 9.625.

Jupiter omnipotens audacibus annue coeptis.
In the prayer of Venus, Aen. 10.18.
O Pater, o hominum Divumque aeterna Potestas,
(Namque aliud quid sit quod jam implorare queamus?)
Which is after explained in these words
Infit.
And in the prayer of Turnus,
Duxisti?


But besides Virgil (who was so Critical in the rites of Religion that he would
never have brought in such prayers as these, if they had not been agreeable to
the Roman customs) we have the like instances in others, as in Silius It^licus,
Sili. Ital. l. 4.
-- Nosco te sum Deorum,
Adsis o firmesque tuae Pater alitiomen.
And in Persius, Pers. Satyr. 3.
Magne Pater Divum, saevos punire Tyrannos
Haud alia ratione velis --


But this was not only the custom of their Poets, whom T. G. may imagine to
have been as extravagant in their prayers as in their Fables ( although the
Theater and Poets have seldom erred on the right side in Religion), yet it will
appear to have been the practice of their Orators upon solemn occasions to
make a particular address to Jupiter O. M. especially in the beginning; as not
only appears by Pliny 's Panegyric, but by the Testimony of Valerius Maximus,
Valor. Max. Praef.
Nam si prisci oratores a Jove Opt. Max. been orsi sunt; and Cicero quotes it
as the old formula of beginning their Orations, Iovem ego Opt. Max. which
himself practices in his Oration pro Rabirio; Cic. Divin. in Q. Caecil.
but in other places reserves it for an extraordinary occasion. Quo circa te
Capitoline Jupiter, Pro domo sua c. 57.
quem propter beneficia P. R. Optimum, propter vim Maximum nominavit; and at
the conclusion of his Orations against Verres, Nunc Te Jupiter Optime Maxim,
etc. but most emphatically pro Milone, Pro Milon. c. 31.
Tuque ex tuo edito monte Latiari Sancte Jupiter, etc. (where the Feriae
Latinae were kept.) And a little before, where he speaks of those that seemed
to question a divine Power, he breaks out into those admirable words. Est, est
profecto illa vis, etc. And to confute Servius his observation, that they only
invocated Jove in their exordiums, because they attributed the beginnings of
things to him, we see they made their solemn addresses to Jove likewise in the
conclusion; Well: Paterculus concludes his Book, Jupiter Capitoline and auctor
and stator Romani nominus; and Pliny both in the beginning and end, To
praecipue Capitoline Jupiter precor, as he speaks at the conclusion of his
Panegyric. But this was not only practiced by Orators, but by their Commanders
in the Field, as appears by that prayer of Vocula in Tacitus when he was in a
great straight. Tacit. hist. l. 4. c. 58.
Te Jupiter Opt. Max quem per octingentos viginti annos, to triumphis coluimus,
etc. Thus we see that solemn addresses were made to the Supreme God, by all
sorts of person upon great ocasions: but this was no^ the only way whereby they
testified there devotion to him. For they erected Altars to him, as in that
inscription which Manutius transcribed from the Marble.

HANC. TIBI. ARAM. JUPPITER. OPT. MAX. DICO. DEDICO QUE. UTI. SIS. VOLENS.
PROPITIUS. MIHI. COLLEGISQUE MEIS. etc. Inscript. Antiq. 23.12.
As King Antiochus in Cicero dedicated his rich Candlestick made with admirable
workmanship of Gold and Jewels in these words, Cicer. in Verr. l. 4. c. 29.
Dare, donare, dicare, consecrare Iovi Opt. Max. testemque ipsum Iovem suae
voluntatis ac Religionis adhibere. In the old Roman inscriptions we find
several vows made to Jupiter O. M. for the safety of the Emperors, as in
these: I. O. M. Inscrip Ant. 11.3, 4, 5.

PRO. SALUTE. IMP. etc.


Sometimes they made vows for the return of the Emperors, as in those of the
Coss. Cl. Nero, and Quintilius Varus for Augustus: 11.1, 2.
LUDOS. VOTIVOS. PRO. REDITU. IMP. CAESARIS. DIVI. AUGUSTI. PONTIFICIS. MAXIMI.
JOVI. OPTIMO. MAXIMO. FECIT. EX S. C.

They made these inscriptions to Jupiter O. M. in behalf of their Emperors,
because they believed them to be under his particular care, tibi cura Magni
Caesaris fatis data, Horat. Od. 1. l. 3.
says Horace. Thence in the inscriptions, JUPPITER.

CUSTOS.

20.1.
DOMUS. AUG.

And, 10.6.
NUMINI. DEORUM. AUG. JOVI. OPT. MAX. AEDEM. VOTO. SUSCEPTO. Q. LEPIDUS.

It were endless to repeat the Inscriptions that were made to him alone; or to
him under his several attributes that were peculiar to him, as DEO. QUI. EST.
MAXIMUS. 17.9.

(...)
(...)
Or his other titles, as CONSVERATOR, CUSTOS. STATOR.
(...). 1064.11.



Or to him, where he is distinguished from the rest of the Gods: as in this, I.
O. M. ET. CONSESSUI. DEORUM. DEARUMQUE. PRO. SALUTE. IMPERII. ROMANI. 2.11.


But these are sufficient to my purpose, which was to show, that the Romans did
express their devotion to the Supreme God, in all their solemn Acts of Religion.

Of which there is but one part remaining, viz. in the way of enquiring into
the mind of God, which they supposed was to be done by Divination. And that
they looked on this as a part of Religion, is seen by Tullies dividing their
Religion in Sacra, and in Auspicia, and in Monita. De Not. Deor. l. 3. c. 2.
Thence there were three chief Colleges of Priests; the Pontifices, who looked
after the rites of sacrificing, the Augures and Aruspices, who were the Judges
in Divination. But the College of Augures as appears by many passages in
Tully, De Leg. l. 2. c. 12.

De Arusp. Res. c. 9. Plin. ep. l. 9. c. 8.


had a very great esteem and authority in the Commonwealth, so that nothing of
moment was done without them: and the younger Pliny calls it sacerdotium
priscum, religiosum, sacrum and insigne: but the great reason of this seems to
be, that they were sacred to Jove; Philip. 13.5.

de Div. l. 1. c. 34.


thence they are said by Tully, to be interpretes, internuntiique Iovis Opt.
Max. and Iovis consiliarii and administri; and the birds were said to be aves
internuntiae Iovis; 2. c. 34.
and they who refused to hearken to them, c. 37.
nolle moneri a Jove* So that this sort of Priesthood was peculiar among them,
to him whom they believed to be the Supreme God. And from hence we may
understand the passage in Arrian, Arrian. l. 2. c. 7.
where he blames the persons that came to the Augury with so much solicitude
of mind, which he calls (...), coming to God to know his pleasure as to
particular events; which they did, says he, observing the Augury trembling,
and crying (...), Lord have mercy upon me: which is so plain a form of
supplication to the Supreme God, Card. Bona. Rerum Liturgic. l. 2. c. 4.
that Cardinal Bona brings this as a particular instance of the addresses they
made to Him: and as the common Litany of mankind. Thus much I have thought
necessary here, to clear not only the acknowledgement but the worship of the
Supreme God among the Romans. I now proceed to other testimones of the Fathers
in their disputes against the Heathen Idolaters.

Athenagoras made an address to the same Emperor M. Aurelius Antoninus in the
behalf of the Christians,. 7.
Athenag. legate. pro Christ. p. 6. ed. Justin.
wherein he does at large assert the concurrence of the Heathens with the
Christians in the belief of one Supreme God; and proves it from the Testimonies
of Euripides, Sophocles, Philolaus, and other Pythagoreans; and from Plato and
Aristotle, and the Stoics; concerning whom he adds, that although they seemed
to make many Gods, p. 7.
by the several names they gave according to the difference of matter which the
divine Spirit did pass through, yet in truth they did assert but one God: nay
he says farther, that the generality of mankind, were agreed in this whether
they would or no, (...), that there was but one God. But then to the question
why the Christians did refuse to worship Images? He gives this considerable
answer; If God and matter were but several names for the same thing, p. 14.
we might be charged with impiety, if we did not believe stone, and wood, and
silver and Gold to be Gods; and consequently give divine worship to them; but
if these are infinitely distant from each other; as far as the clay is from the
Potter which forms and fashions it, why are we charged with impiety for not
giving the same honor to the Clay that we do to the infinitely wise Framer of
these things? And if the artificer shows his skill in the vessels he makes, the
honor is given to him and not to the vessels; so it is here, the honor and
glory is not to be given to the matter, but to the wise contriver, who is God
himself: therefore if we look upon any of the several parts of matter as Gods,
we shall thereby discover how little sense we have of the true God, by making
things corruptible equal to him that is eternal. But wherein could they make
them equal? not believing them to be equal in Power and Wisdom, for he supposed
before, that one Supreme God was allowed on both sides; it could be therefore
no otherwise than by giving divine honor to the creature as well as to the
Creator: and that not for their own sakes, for he still supposes them to be
thought the Works of God; but although it were designed to give honor to the
Supreme Architect by falling down before any parts of matter, he thought it as
senseless and unreasonable a thing, as for a man to honor an artificer by
falling down before his Work. It was not then we see the supposing evil Spirits
to dwell in Images, which made the Christians so peremptorily deny divine
worship to them; but because in so doing they should make the creature equal to
the Creator. Although, says he, the beauty, and greatness, and capacity, and
figure and order of the world, deserve our admiration; yet we ought not to
worship the world but only the Maker of it. As when any of your Subjects make
their addresses to you, would it be well taken for them to pass you by, and
turn themselves to your Palaces? but men are not so foolish as to do so, but
they admire the beauty and excellency of them in passing by, and pay their
whole respect and service to your selves. If we look upon the World as a
Musical instrument, well tuned and harmoniously struck, we ought not therefore
to worship the instrument, but him that makes the Music: and those who are the
Judges at the Music exercises, do not crown the Vial, but him that played upon
it. If it be said, that all this proceeds upon the supposition, that the
Supreme God is passed by and has no peculiar honor given to him. I answer, 1.
The contrary appears, by what I have already said; for they did give particular
honor to the Supreme Deity as such. 2. It is unreasonable to suppose that
those who believe one Supreme God to be the Maker of all things, should in
their inward intention wholly pass him by in the worship they give to his
creatures. Of the Laws of the Church, chapter 25.
Mr. Thorndike indeed says, suposing in a man as uncorrupted opinion of the
incomparable distance that indeed is found between God and the most excellent
of his creatures, it is impossible for him to attribute the honor due to God
alone to that which he conceives to be a mere creature: Which would be true,
if all the honor due to God, did lie only in the inward esteem of our minds;
but as Card. Tolet well observes, Tolet. Sum. Casuum. l. 4 c. 14. n 2.
although Idolatry do suppose an error in the mind, yet that error lies in
judging that to deserve divine honor which does not: which may be consistent
with the belief of the Supreme excellency of God. And I do not deny that those
who acknowledge one Supreme God, may have their minds so corrupted as to judge
it fit to give that divine worship to a Creature which is only due to the
Creator; but I say, it is unreasonable to suppose that as long as they
acknowledge them to be creatures, they should not give at least that relative
Latria to them, which T. G. says, is carried to the Creator at last. But of
these things afterward. 3. The reasons which Athenagoras gives do equally
hold, supposing the true God not to be wholly passed by: for the creatures are
still at as great a distance from the Creator; which is the main reason he
gives against the the worship of them. 4. It is possible to suppose, that those
who believe a Supreme excellent Being may yet give him no eternal adoration at
all not out of any disrespect to him, but out of the great esteem they have of
his excellency; looking upon him, as far above all our service and adoration.
And that this is not a bare supposition of a thing only possible, appears by
that testimony of Porphyrius produced by S. Cyril against Julian; Cyril. c.
Iul. l. 2. p. 60.
Let us sacrifice, but a^ becomes us, to the God over all, i. e. as a Wise man
said, by offering up no sensible thing to him. For every material thing is
impure when compared with an immaterial: Therefore the best sacrifice to God is
to offer up our Lives to him (for even our words and thoughts are below him)
which is the most proper Hymn to him, and the most beneficial to ourselves. And
the same S. Cyril observes out of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, Cyril. c. Julian.
l. 6. p. 193.
that a^ Numa would allow no Image of God in the Temples, because unsuitable to
his nature; so he would not have any material sacrifices to be offered up to
him on the same reason: and some of the Platonists are quoted by him, saying,
tha^ the Supreme God being incorporeal, l. 9. p. 311.
stand in need of nothing without him; but the other Gods, especially those
that are visible, ought to be pleased with inanimate sacrifices. Therefore we
ought not to conclude, that the Heathens did not believe one Supreme God, if we
do not find any peculiar and external sacrifices that were offered to him; for
we see they might forbear them out of the opinion they had of his supereminent
excellency. Aquinas supposes this to have been one of the principles of the
Heathens, Aquin. 2.2. qu. 94. art. 2.
that only visible sacrifices belonged to other Gods, and internal acts of the
mind as being better, to the Supreme God; And the Supreme and Invisible God's
being so far above any need of our service, was the reason given by the
Mandarins in China, and the Ynca's of Peru, why they showed so little outward
Reverence toward him whom they believed to be the Supreme God. Were these
persons Idolaters for the worship they did not give to the Creator, or for the
worship they did give to his Creatures? and it is plain by Athenagoras the
latter was the matter of their dispute: for they did not quarrel with the
Christians about the worship of the Supreme God; but for not worshipping those
things they looked on as his Creatures; and if their fault only had been, that
they wholly passed by the Creator, this would have been no reason against the
Christians, who might have worshipped the Creator and the creatures together,
and consequently have freed themselves from the force of the Laws, which
required no more but giving divine worship to the Deities publicly worshipped,
without any declaration of their minds concerning them. For they might
understand them as they pleased; as we see the wise men among them did, without
any censure or reproach from others. If it were lawful then for Christians to
give a relative Latria to any creatures with an intention to honor God
thereby, I cannot see how the Christians were excusable in their sufferings;
for all that was required from them was only, to obey their Laws and offer
incense to their Gods. Nothing being expressed by the Laws as to the disowning
the true God, nor as to declaring in what sense they did intend to worship
them; the Emperor declared, he was for the Laws being observed, and himself in
his own writings had expressed his mind as to one God; what was it then made
the Christians refuse obeying the Laws, when so many Philosophers had said,
that these Gods were only parts of the Universe, and deserved divine worship
because of Gods presence in them? If they had not thought it Idolatry to give
divine worship to any creature, it is very hard to make out their title to
Martyrdom. For if we look over the Acts of the Martyrs, we shall find it came
to this pinch with them; will you obey the Laws in offering incense, or will
you not? When Justin Martyr was summoned before Rusticus the Prefect of the
City, after some previous discourses, Let us come, says he, to the business in
hand; Baron. A, 165. n. 5.
Come you Christians hither and sacrifice with one consent to the Gods; Justin
answers, No true Christian will forsake his Religion, and return to errors and
impiety: and the rest agreeing with him; the Judge pronounced their sentence,
that because they would not sacrifice to the Gods and obey the Emperors Edict,
they should be scourged, and have the punishment of death inflicted upon them:
which was accordingly executed. When Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria was
summoned before Aemilianus, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 11.
he gives this account himself of the passages between them; that he told
Aemilianus plainly, that he would worship none but the true God, and that he
would never depart from this resolution; the Governor dismisses him for that
time; the next time he lets him know the Emperor had so great a regard to
their safety, that if they would but act according to reason, and worship the
Gods that preserved the Empire, they might be safe. Dionysius answers, We,
says he, worship the one true God the Maker of all things, who has bestowed
the Empire on Valerianus and Gallienus; and to him we pray continually for the
safety of the Empire. But, says Aemilianus again, who forbids you, to worship
that God you speak of, and the other Gods too? Dionysius then gave that as his
final answer, we worship none else besides him. I might bring multitudes of
instances to the same purpose, but I instance in these two, because they were
men of eminency for their learning as well as piety. Now I appeal to the
conscience of T. G. whether upon the principles of worship which he delivers,
these men could have suffered for conscience sake any otherwise than as weak
Brethren that wanted good information. For they might have reserved the
Sovereign worship due only to God, on the account of his Supreme excellency,
and have given only a Relative Latria to those whom they called Gods, but in
truth were only Gods creatures and Subjects; and what harm was there in all
this? O, but, says T. G. they were called Gods, but in truth were Devils whom
they were to worship; how does that appear to have been the cause, when they
say no such thing, and give no such reason of their refusals? besides they
might make them Gods by giving them absolute Latria, for that is due only to
God himself; but no more was required of them, than to sacrifice to them, and
they never debarred them of the freedom of directing their intention to the
Supreme God; and T. G. knows, acts go whither they are intended, and those whom
they called Gods, they might understand them only by way of participation, or
as some Analogical representations of the true God. O but sacrifice was
required of them, and that is the worship peculiar to God: but how comes
sacrifice alone to belong to God? and what sacrifice? burning of Incense: and
that T. G. knows, is allowed to be done to creatures with a respect to God, by
the Rules of their Church. So that for all that I can see, if relative Latria
may be allowed to creatures, the Primitive Christians were not so wise, as they
might have been; and the Modern doctrines of worship in the Roman Church, would
have saved the lives of thousands of the Primitive Martyrs, and not only of the
common sort but of the best, and wisest of them; Who sacrificed their lives on
this principle, that, Divine worship (and not merely Sovereign worship) is to
be given to none, but to the Supreme God. But if that pass for good Divinity,
that they who believe one Supreme God, cannot possibly give the honor due to
him to any creature: I do not see why the Christians needed to have been so
afraid of giving divine worship to any thing besides God, for upon this
principle they were afraid of impossibilities: For as long as they preserved in
their minds a just esteem of the incomparable excellency of God above his
creatures, they were incapable of any real Idolatry. But I think it is hard to
pitch upon a principle more repugnant to the sense of the Primitive Church than
this is; as I hope to make it clear before I have done with this argument.

Athenagoras proceeds to dispute against the worshipping any of the parts of
the Universe, how beautiful or useful soever they be; p. 15.
for why should we seek that from matter which it self has not, and can do
nothing but in obedience to a higher Cause? And let the things be never so
beautiful, yet they retain the nature of matter still; for Plato confesses that
the heavens and the Frame of the world are corporeal, and therefore subject to
mutability. But, says he, if I refuse to worship the Heavens and Elements as
Gods whose workmanship I so much admire, because I know them to be corruptible;
how can I be persuaded to do it to those things, which I know to be made by
men? and thence shows not only the novelty of the Poetical Gods, but of the art
of framing Images; p. 17.
which was so late, he says, that they were able yet to name the first makers
of them. But, Because it was pleaded by some among them, that all the worship
they gave to their Images was only a relative worship, and that they looked on
them only as representations of their Deities; therefore he begs leave of the
Emperors, to search into the Nature of their Poetic Theology, which he
derives from Orpheus, as the rest do; and overthrows the worship of the
Poetical Gods upon this principle, because they were not eternal, and were
confessed to be at first made out of matter; p. 18.
and why should we worship them which are material, p. 20.
and generated, and liable to all sorts of passions, according to the Poets
description of them? But, it may be, this was nothing but Poetical figments,
and they ought all to be understood of the natures of things, as Empedocles
explains them, p. 22.
why then, says he, should we attribute the same honor to matter which is
subject to corruption and mutation, p. 23.
as to the eternal, unbegotten, and immutable God? Jupiter according to the
Stoics was the most active and fiery principle of matter, Juno the air,
Neptune the water; but they all agreed that by their Deities were understood
the several parts of the Universe, although with different manners of
explication. Now, says he, against the Stoics I thus argue, ( and here
Athenagoras knew, that the Emperor M. Aurelius would think himself
particularly concerned) If you own one Supreme God, eternal and unbegotten, and
all other things to be made up of matter, and the Spirit of God to receive
different names as it passes through the various changes of matter; then these
several kinds of matter will make up one body, whereof God is the soul, and
consequently upon the general conflagration, (which the Stoics acknowledged)
all the several names of matter will be lost by the corruptions of the kinds,
and nothing will be then left but the Divine Spirit; why should we therefore
look on those as gods, that are liable to such a change? And so he proceeds to
argue against the other hypotheses, as the Egyptians and others, whereby all
their Deities were reduced to the principles of nature too, from the same
principle, viz. that because these things were made and corruptible, p. 24.
they were not capable of receiving divine honor from us. By all which we see,
that the fundamental principle which Athenagoras went upon in this elaborate
discourse of his to one of the Wisest Emperors Rome ever had, was this, that
nothing but the eternal God ought to receive Divine Worship from men; whether
they called it Sovereign or Relative, or what name soever they gave it; nay,
although they did acknowledge one supreme God, yet if they gave divine worship
to his Creatures, as the Stoics did, the Christians thought it so unlawful,
that they would rather die than comply with them in it. And here I appeal again
to T. G 's conscience (for since he has showed me the way, I hope I may follow
him in it) whether he think so Wise and Virtuous an Emperor as Antoninus was,
would not have preserved the Christians from suffering persecution, (as they
did very smartly in his days) if they would have declared themselves to have
understood the principles of the Roman Religion, after the Emperors own way,
viz. by believing one Supreme God; and worshipping the several parts of the
Universe under the names of those Deities, that were commonly received: and
they might have directed this worship as they had thought fit, and have
disowned all the ridiculous and profane stories of their Poetical Gods, as the
Stoics did; and what principle then could hinder the Christians from complying
with the Laws but this, that they accounted it Idolatry to give divine worship
to any created Being?

. 8.
From Athenagoras I proceed to Clemens Alexandrinus, who understood the
principles of the Heathen Theology as well as any; and exposes all their
Poetical Fables and Greek Mysteries with as much advantage as any Christian
Writer, in his Admonition to the Greeks. After he has sufficiently derided the
Poetical Theology and the Vulgar Idolatry, he comes to the Philosophers who did
he says (...), Protrept. p. 42. Ed. Paris.
make an Idol of matter, (the Images whereof were not surely the representation
of a thing not existent, as a Centaur, or Sphinx, and yet called an Idol) and
after reckoning up Thales, Anaximenes, Parmenides, Hippasus, Heraclitus and
Empedocles, he calls them all Atheists, because with a foolish kind of Wisdom
they did worship Matter; and scorning to worship Wood and Stones did Deifie the
Mother of them. And so runs out, after his way, into a discourse about the
several Nations that despised Images and worshipped the several parts of the
Universe and the symbols of them, as the Scythians, Sarmatians, Persians and
Macedonians, who, he says, were the Philosophers Masters in the worship of
these inferior Elements which were made to be serviceable to men. Then he
reckons up other Philosophers that worshipped the Stars, as animated beings;
others, the Planets and the World, and the Stoics who said, God passed through
the meanest parts of matter: yet after all this, he confesses, that there is a
certain divine influence distilled upon all men, p. 45.
especially on those who apply themselves to learning; by virtue of which they
are forced to acknowledge one God, incorruptible and unbegotten; who is the
only true Being, and abides for ever above the highest Heavens, from whence he
beholds all the things that are done in Heaven and Earth: who, according to
Euripides sees all things without being visible himself. And for the proof of
this, he brings the Testimonies of Plato, Antisthenes and Xenophon, who all
acknowledge Gods incomparable excellency, p. 46.
as well as unity; and then adds the Testimonies of Cleanthes, and the
Pythagoreans; and not contented with the Philosophers he heaps the testimonies
of the Poets to the same purpose, as Aratus, Hesiod, Orpheus, Sophocles,
Menander, Homer and Euripides, In the fifth Book of his Miscellanies (for so
his Stromata truly are) he falls upon this subject again; p. 590.
and then says to the same purpose, that there is a natural knowledge of one
omnipotent God, p. 591.
among all considering men: p. 597.
he grants, the Stoics opinion about God to be agreeable to the Scriptures;
and shows, that Thales confessed Gods eternity and omnisciency; that Epicharmus
attributed omnipotency to him; and Homer the creation of the world, which he
described in the shield of Achilles; p. 597.
and then makes this observation (as though it were purposely intended for T.
G.) he that is called both in Verse and Prose (...) or Jupiter, p. 598.
carries our apprehension to God, (not to the Arch Devil as T. G. says) and
therefore he is said to be all things, and to know all things, and to give and
take away all things, and to be King over all: that Pindar the Baeotian being a
Pythagorean, said, there was one maker of all things whom he called (...) the
Wise Artificer, and then he repeats several of the Testimonies which he had
produced before; p. 601.
to which he adds that of Xenophanes Colophonius proving God to be one and
incorporeal; and of Cleanthes, reproving the opinion of the vulgar about the
Deity; and of Euphorion, p. 603.
and Aeschilus about Jupiter, which for T. G 's better information I shall set
down, (...)
(...).
Jupiter is ether and Earth and Heaven and all things, and if there be any
thing above all, Jupiter is it; and Clemens is so far from thinking this an
improper speech, that he says it was spoken (...). with a great deal of
decency and gravity concerning God. By this it appears, that they who boast so
much of the Fathers, are not over conversant with them: but Father Bellarmine,
or Father Coccius, serves them, for a whole Jury of them. But I commend T. G.
for his modesty, for when he had said, this was the sense of the Fathers, he
produces no more but good Father Origin; and he is so kind hearted to him, that
though I believe he has heard how he has been condemned for a Heretic, yet
he with great judgment supposes, that what he said was the common sense of the
Fathers. But besides this, p. 604.
Clemens quotes a saying of Heraclitus approved by Plato, wherein the only Wise
Being is called by the name of (...), or Jove. And to show that one Supreme
Being was received among the Greeks, he cites farther an express testimony of
Timaeus Locrus, wherein he says, there is one unbegotten principle of all
things; for if it were begotten it were no first principle, but that out of
which it were begotten would be that principle: which Clemens parallels with
that saying of Scripture, Hear, O Israel, the Lord thy God is one God, and him
only shall thou serve. I omit the testimonies of Authors cited before, but to
them he adds Diphilus the Comaedian, who was a little younger than Menander,
and lived in the time of the first Ptolemy; who speaks plainly concerning the
omniscience, providence and justice of God in the verses cited out of him; and
calls God the Lord of all, whose very name is dreadful: and whose words
afterward are so full of Emphasis, that I cannot forbear setting them down;
(although I beg pardon for mixing so much of a foreign language in an English
discourse) he bids those men look to it, who presume upon Gods patience because
he does not at present punish them. p. 606.
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
Look to it, you that think there is no God. There is, there is; if any man do
ill, Let him think time is gain; For certainly, Suffer he shall for what he
has done amiss. But withal he quotes a saying of Xenocrates Chalcedonius,
wherein he calls God (...) the Supreme Jove, and another of Archilochus Parius
a very ancient Poet, p. 604.
(in the 23 Olympiad says S. Cyril of Alexandria) wherein he begins (...) O
Jove, Cyril. c. Iul. l. 1.
thy Power is in Heaven, and thou see all that is done there, whether good or
evil; and Menander says, that God is in all things good: and Aeschylus
celebrates the mighty power of God to this purpose. p. 609.
Think not that God is like to what thou see; Thou know him not, for he is
like to that which cannot be touched or seen. He makes the mountains tremble,
and the Sea to rage, when his commanding eye does on them look, For the great
God can do what he thinks fit: But Diphilus says yet farther, Honor him alone
that is the Father of all good things. From all which Clemens concludes, p. 611.
that the East and West, the North and South have one and the same anticipation
concerning the Government of one Supreme Disposer of things; p. 612.
because the knowledge of his most common operations have equally reached to
all; but especially to the inquisitive Philosophers of Greece, who have
attributed a wise Providence to the invisible, and only, and most powerful, and
most skilful contriver of all things.

Although these things might be sufficient to convince a modest man,. 9.
that the Gentiles who were charged with Idolatry by the Primitive Fathers, did
agree in the acknowledgement of one Supreme Deity, and were so thought to do,
by those who managed that charge against them; yet I shall proceed from Clemens
to Origin his disciple: and see if the state of the Controversy were altered
in his time. The dispute between Celsus and him did not at all depend on this,
whether there were one Supreme God or no, or whether Sovereign worship did
belong to him; for Celsus freely acknowledged both these. I know Origin several
times charges him with being an Epicurean, but whatever his private opinion
was, he owns none of the Epicurean principles about Religion in his Book
against the Christians, wherein he declares himself to be both for God and
Providence. He calls God the universael Reason, he acknowledges him to be the
maker of all immortal beings, and that all things are from him, Orig. c. Cells.
l. 5. p. 247.
and says, that God is common to all, good, and standing in need of nothing,
and without envy: nay he calls him (...) the great God: l. 6. p. 320. l. 4. p.
200.
and says, that men ought to undergo any torments rather than to think or
speak any thing unworthy of him, l. 8. p. 392.
p. 421. p. 419.
that he is at no time to be forsaken by us, neither night nor day, in public
or private, in our thoughts or actions; but our soul ought always to be intent
upon him. Thus far Celsus seems a good Christian; what is the matter then
between Origin and him, that they could not agree about Divine Worship, since
Celsus does acknowledge the supreme excellency of God, and consequently that
Sovereign Worship is only due to him? Why, the dispute lay in this point,
Celsus contended with great vehemence, that since God made use of inferior
spirits to govern the World, that those ought to have divine honors given to
them, according to the customs of their several Countries; that this tended
more to the honor of the supreme Deity: for that devotion, p. 421.
says he, is more perfect which passes through all to him; that it was not to
be conceived that God should envy the honor of his own Ministers; but we ought
rather to suppose that the Great God is better pleased with it. p. 381.
So that all that Celsus pleaded for, was either an inferior service of (...),
or at the utmost but a Relative Latria, a divine worship which was to fall
after an inferior manner upon the lower Gods, but to be finally terminated
upon the supreme. To this Origin answers two ways. 1. By showing that these
inferior Deities were not good Angels, but Demons, i. e. evil Spirits; which
he proves many ways, but chiefly by this, that they seemed so covetous of
divine worship from men. 2. By insisting on this as the fundamental principle
of worship in the Christian Religion, that divine worship is to be given only
to God himself; and to his Son Christ Jesus. This he inculcates upon all
occasions; this he lays down in the beginning of his Book, that God alone is to
be worshipped, all other things whether they have beings or have not, are to be
passed by, l. 1. p. 10.
and although some of them may deserve honor, yet none of them do worship or
adoration: and elsewhere, l. 3. p. 158.
that only the Maker of all things ought to be worshipped, admired and adored
by us, that neither the work of men's hands, nor those assumed to the honor of
Gods can be decently worshipped by us, either without the Supreme God, ^r
together with him: where the Latin Interpreter has apparently shuffled,
rendering that place only thus, nihilque praeter eum aut pari honor cum eo; as
though all that Origin condemned were only giving equal divine worship to other
things besides God. Whereas Celsus never pleaded for that, but that men should
give (...), i. e. in the very terms of the Council of Trent, l. 8. p. 414.
due veneration: To which Origin answers, we desire only to be followers of
Christ who has said, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall
thou serve. It is true, p. 415.
says he, several Nations have avoided the worship of Images, some for one
reason and some for another; but the Christians and Jews do it because of that
Law, Thou shall fear the Lord thy God and him only shall thou serve, l. 7. p.
275.
and several places to the same purpose, so that we ought rather to die than to
defile our selves with these impieties. And they who did forbear Images, did
worship the Sun or Gods Creatures which we are forbidden to do. This he so
frequently insists upon throughout his Books, that it would be to no purpose to
bring all the places; these being sufficient to show that the state of the
Controversy about Idolatry, did not depend upon their giving sovereign worship
to any thing besides God, but any divine worship although they did acknowledge
the Supreme God. As Origin himself does very often declare, that the Heathens
did. S. Paul, he says, l. 3. p. 140.
spoke truly of some of the Wisemen of Greece, that they knew God, and that
God was manifested to them; and elsewhere, l. 4. p. 181.
we testify truly concerning them that they knew God; but their fault was,
that after their grave disputations they worshipped Idols and Demons as the
rest did. We cannot but assent, says he, to what Plato has said concerning
the chief Good; l. 5. p. 260.
for God has manifested this to them and whatever else they have said well: l.
6. p. 276.
but therefore they deserved punishment, because when they had a right
apprehension of God, they did not give him the worship which was worthy of him:
and he quotes a little after Plato 's epistle to Hermias and Coriscus, p. 280.
wherein he appeals to God as the Lord of all things: and several other
passages, wherein his Government, and Power, and Justice, and Excellency are
truly set forth: p. 285.
and after several other passages of Plato and Celsus about the ways of knowing
God, p. 287.
which he allows, he concludes with this, that God is so great a lover of
mankind that l. 7. p. 360. p. 363.
he made known his Truth and the knowledge of himself not only to his own
people, but to those who were strangers to the sincere worship and service of
him. Judge now Reader, whether Origin himself, T. G. 's single witness, does
make the Supreme God of the Heathens an Arch-Devil; and what reason he had upon
so slender a Testimony to cry out, The Fathers, the Fathers?

But I have not yet done with him; for if we come down lower into the times of
the Christian Church when this controversy of Idolatry was again revived in
the days of Julian the Apostate,. 10.
we shall find the very same acknowledgements made by the most learned and
judicious Fathers of the Christian Church S. Cyril of Alexandria who undertook
to answer the three Books of Julian against Christianity, S. Cyril. Alex. c.
Iul. l. 1. p. 16.
says, that the Greeks di^ speak admirable things concerning God and that they
did exceed themselves in those discourses; and that they could not have
attained to such a knowledge of God without some particular manifestation of
himself unto them. And afterward h^ produces the Testimonies of Orpheus, and
Homer, and Sophocles concerning him Thales, he says, made God the Soul of the
World; p. 26. p. 28.
Democritus, an active mind within a sphere of fire; Aristotle, a separate form
resting upon the sphere of the World; the Stoics, an active fire passing
through the parts of the world. Of these things, he says, Plutarch and
Porphyrius speak, but above all he commends what Pythagoras and Plato and
Hermes have said of God: p. 30.
with several of the Testimonies before mentioned; some of which are repeated
by Theodoret to the same purpose. Theod. de cur. Graec. sermon. 2.
But these things will be made more clear by considering the state of the
Controversy between Julian and S. Cyrill about Idolatry. Cyril. l. 2. p. 52.
Julian confesses, that there is a natural knowledge of God in the minds of
men, from whence comes that common inclination of all mankind toward a Deity;
and that supposition among all men, that he who is the King over all has his
Throne in Heaven: He acknowledges with Plato, p. 58.
that God is the maker of all things, that he is the Father of the Gods too;
(and S. Cyril never quarrels with him for giving the title of Gods to those
Superior and Intelligent Beings: for, says he, p. 59.
we grant that there are some in Heaven that are called both Gods and Lords;
nay men are called Gods in Scripture) Of these Gods' according to Plato, p. 65.
Julian says, some are visible, as the Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and the
Heavens, but these are only images of the invisible, and therefore Plato calls
these later (...), being invisible Deities represented by visible: but one God
is the Maker of them all. But Julian utterly rejected the Poetical Fables
concerning the Gods, and that for T. G 's reason, Cyril. l. 2. p. 44.
because the Poets took the liberty to feign and say any thing; nay he calls
them incredible and monstrous Fables; and this was the Scheme of his Theology,
l. 4. p. 115.
That there was one Supreme God the common Father and Lord over all, who had
distributed the several Nations and Cities of the World to particular Gods as
Governors over them: but although all perfections were in the Supreme God, yet
they were scattered and divided among the inferior Deities: and so Mars had
the care of Wars, and Minerva of Counsels, and Mercury of things that required
cunning more than courage: and every particular Nation followed the humor of
the Gods that were set over them; as he goes about to prove by the different
tempers of Nations. To which Cyril answers. That great p. 121.
Princes do choose some of the Wisest of their Subjects to be Governors of
Provinces, but they who are so employed do not Govern them by their own Laws,
but by their Princes, and on all occasions set forth their greatness, and pay
all duties to them; but these Deities assume those honors to themselves which
are due only to God; and by bringing in Images into Temples of several forms
and figures they endeavor to cast dishonor upon God; and by degrees draw men
to the neglect of him. Either then, God despises the service of men, or these
are not faithful servants to him; by bringing in visible objects of worship by
setting up Images, and persuading men to make oblations, and offer sacrifices
to them. And because it was so hard a matter to choke those natural motions of
men's minds toward the Supreme God and Father of all, p. 122.
therefore they endeavored to draw men farther from him, by tempting them to
all manner of impiety. Whereas the good Angels we read of in Scripture, always
directed men to pay their honors and adoration, not to themselves, but only to
the Supreme God: and teach men that it is not fit to give them to any of his
Ministers and Servants: p. 123.
but these Deities of Julian are willing to receive worship from men, and their
prayers, and acknowledgements, and praises, and gifts, and sacrifices; (where
we see he joins them all together as parts of that divine worship which is
proper only to God:) But Julian is very much displeased at the Second
Commandment, and would have been glad to have seen it struck out of the number
of ten (as some in the World have done) because God therein expresses so much
jealousy for his own honor; l. 5. p. 155.
Cyril in answer to him shows that this is no way unbecoming God to be so much
concerned for his honor, because men's greatest happiness, ( as Alexander
Aphrodisiensis said in his Book of Providence) lies in the due apprehension and
service of God. By which we see, that the controversy about Idolatry, as it
was hitherto managed between Christians and Heathens, did suppose the belief of
one Supreme God in those who were charged with the practice of it.

After these, it may not be amiss to consider, what the ancient Author of the
Recognitions under Clemens his name says upon this subject of the Heathen
Idolatry; he lived, says Cotelerius, in the Second Century; if that be true,
his Authority is the more considerable; however it is certain Ruffinus
translated this Book, and th^^ makes it ancient enough to our purpose. He
brings in the Heathen Idolaters pleading thus for themselves, Clem. Recogn. l.
5. n. 19.
We likewise acknowledge one God who is Lord over all, but yet the other are
Gods too; as there is but one Caesar who has many Officers under him, as
Praefects, Consuls, Tribunes and other Magistrates; after the same manner we
suppose, when there is but one Supreme God, he has many other inferior Gods,
as so many Officers under him, who are all subject to him, but yet over us. To
this, he brings in S. Peter answering, that he desires them to keep to their
own similitude; for as they who attribute the name of Caesar to any inferior
Officers, deserve to be punished; so will those more severely, who give the
name of God to any of his Creatures. Where the name is not to be taken alone,
but as it implies the dignity and Authority going along with it, and the
professing of that subjection which is only due to that Authority; for what
injury were it to Caesar for a man only to have the name of Caesar? but the
injury lies in usurping the Authority under that name; so the nature of
Idolatry could not lie in giving the name of Gods to any Creatures, but in
giving that worship which that name calls for; and yet this worship here is
supposed to be consistent with the acknowledgement of the supreme excellency of
God.

If we now look into the sense of the Writers of the Latin Church against the
Heathen Idolaters,. 11.
we shall find them agreeing with the other. Tertullian appeals to the
consciences of men for the clearest evidence of one true and Supreme God;
Tertul. Apolog. c. 17.
for in the midst of all their Idolatries, they are apt upon any great occasion
to lift up their hands and eyes to Heaven, De Testim. animae.
where the only true, and great, and good God is; and he mentions their common
phrases, God gives, and God sees, and I commend you to God, and God will
restore; all which do show the natural Testimony of conscience, as to the unity
and supreme excellency of God: and in his Book ad Scapulam, Ad Scap. c. 4.
God showed himself to be the powerful God by what he did upon their
supplications to him under the name of Jove. Minucius Felix makes use of the
same arguments, and says, they were clear arguments of their consent with the
Christians in the belief of one God, and makes it no great matter what name
they called him by, Minut. Fell. in Octav. p. 19.
as I have observed already, and afterward produces many Testimonies of the
Philosophers, almost all, he says, that they acknowledged one God, although
under several names. p. 21.
Arnobius takes it for granted, Arnob. c. gent. l. 2. p. 67. l. 3. p. 101.
that on both sides they were agreed, that there was one Supreme God, eternal
and invisible and Father of all things, from whom all the Heathen Deities had
their beginning: but all the dispute was about giving divine worship to any
else besides him. Lactantius says, there was no wise man ever questioned the
being of one God, Lact. l. 1.. 3.
who made and governed all things; yet because he knew the World was full of
Fools, he goes about to prove it at large from the testimonies of Poets and
Philosophers, as so many had done before him: and for T. G 's satisfaction, he
says, c. 5, 6, etc.
that Orpheus (although as good at feigning as any of the Poets) could not by
the Father of the Gods mean Jupiter the Son of Saturn; yet who can tell, but
such a Magician as Orpheus is said to have been, might mean an Arch-Devil by
him? But I am sure neither Lactantius, nor any of the Fathers ever thought so;
for if they had, they would not so often have produced his Testimony to so
little purpose. And to the Greek Testimonies mentioned before by others,
Lactantius adds those of Cicero, and Seneca, who calls the infeririour Gods the
children of the Supreme, and the Ministers of his Kingdom. Thus far we have the
unanimous consent of all the Writers of the Christian Church against the
Heathen Idolatry, that the Heathens did acknowledge one Supreme God. S.
Augustine tells us, S. Aug. de live. Dei. l. 4. c. 9.
that Varro thought, that those who worshipped one God without images, did mean
the same by him that they did by their Jove, but only called him by another
name; by those, De Consens. Evang. l. 1. c. 22.
S. Austin says, Varro meant the Jews, and he thought it no matter what name
God is called by, so the same thing be meant. It is true S. Augustine argues
against it from the Poetical Fables about Saturn and Juno; but withal he
confesses, that they thought it very unreasonable, c. 23. De Civ. Dei l. 7. c.
9. c. 11. c. 13.
for their Religion to be charged with those Fables which themselves disowned:
and therefore at last he could not deny, that they believed themselves, that by
the Jove in the Capitol they understood and worshipped the Spirit that quickens
and fills the world, of which Virgil spoke in those words, Iovis omnia plena.
But he wonders that since they acknowledged this to be the Supreme if not only
Deity, the Romans did not rather content themselves with the worship of him
alone, than run about and make so many addresses to the petty and Inferior
Deities? This indeed was a thing to be wondered at; and yet no doubt, they
thought they had as good reasons for it, as T. G. gives why incontinent persons
should rather make their addresses to S. Mary Magdalen in Heaven, than to her
Sister Martha, or to God himself. T. G. p. 369.
So the Roman women thought Lucina and Opis better for a good hour, than Ceres
or Minerva; and Levana and Cunina for new born Children, De Civ. Dei. l. 4. c.
11. c. 24.
than Vulcan or Apollo; and yet S. Augustine tells us, many of them did not
esteem these, as any distinct Deities, but only as representations of the
several powers of the same God suitable to the conditions of persons: but T. G.
will not say, that by S. Mary Magdalen, he only understood the power of Gods
Grace in converting incontinent persons; but if he had, he had given a much
better reason of their praying to her: yet even in such a case S. Austin thinks
it were better to pray directly to God himself. And the old Roman Matrons would
have thought they could have directed such persons to Temples proper for them,
viz. those of Virtue and Chastity, the one of which stood ad Portam Capenam,
the other in vico longo. But I need not give such particular directions, for I
am afraid their Ruins are scarce left in Rome: for neither Marlianus, nor
Alexander Donatus in their accurate descriptions of Rome can tell where to find
them.

For our better understanding the controversy about Idolatry as it is
represented by S. Augustine, De Civ. Dei l. 4. c. 27, 30, 31.
we are to consider that not only Scaevola and Balbus in Cicero, but Varro and
Seneca, and the rest of their wiser men, did with great indignation reject the
Poetical Theology as they called it; l. 6. c. 5, 6, 7. c. 10.
and wished several things reformed in the popular Religion; and thought
themselves as unjustly charged with the practices of the People, as T. G. does
for their Church to be charged with all the ridiculous addresses that some make
to Saints among them; T.G. p. 368.
for Varro confesses that the People were too apt to follow the Poets, De Civ.
Dei l. 4. c. 32.
(as in the Church of Rome they are to pray by their Legends) but they thought
the people were better let alone in their fopperies, than to be suffered to
break loose from that subjection which their Superstition kept them in; and
with these S. Austin reckons the Philosophers; l. 6. c. 1.
with whom, he says, the Question to be debated was this, whether we are bound
only to worship one Supreme God the Maker of all things? or whether it be not
lawful to worship many Gods, who are supposed to be made by him? And after he
has discoursed against Varro and those of his opinion, who reduced all their
Theology to Nature, and made God to be the Soul of the World, and the several
parts of the world capable of divine Worship on that account; in his eighth
Book, he undertakes those who asserted one Supreme Deity above Nature and the
Cause of all things, and yet pleaded for the worship of inferior Deities; he
confesses, that they had the knowledge of the true God, l. 8. c. 9. c. 10. c.
11.
and brings the several places of S. Paul mentioned in the entrance of this
discourse to prove it: and enquiring how the Philosophers came to such
knowledge of him, he first propounds the common opinion of the Fathers that
they learnt it in Egypt, meeting with the Books of Scripture there, but he
rather (and with good reason) resolves it into the natural knowledge of God;
for, says he, that which was known of God was manifest to them, for God had
revealed it to them. But it seems by S. Augustine, that there were two opinions
among them at that time about divine worship; for some, of whom he reckons
Apuleius the chief, c. 22.
were for the worship of Demons, although they acknowledged them to be subject
to evil passions; yet they looked on them as intercessors between men and the
Gods, and therefore to be worshipped; but others who kept closer to the
doctrine of Plato, believed none to be Gods but such as were certainly good; c.
13, 22.
but were shy of declaring their opinion against the worship of Demons for
fear of displeasing the people by it: l. 9. c. 1.
and with these S. Augustine declares he would have no controversy about the
name of Gods, as long as they believed them to be created, c. 23.
immortal, good and happy not by themselves, but by adhering to God; which, he
says, was the opinion either of all, or, at least, the best of the Platonists.

And now we are come to the true state of the Controversy, as it is managed by
S. Augustine in his tenth Book: which is, whether those rites of Religious
worship which are used in the service of the Supreme God, l. 10. c. 1.
may be likewise used toward any created Being, though supposed to be of the
highest excellency, and as near to God as we can suppose any creature to be?
And that this, and this only is the state of the Controversy, I appeal to his
own words, which I shall set down in the language he writ them, that I be not
blamed with artificial turning them to my own sense: Hoc est, ut apertius
dicam, utrum etiam sibi an tantum Deo suo, qui etiam noster est, placeat eis ut
sacra faciamus, and sacrificemus; vel aliqua nostra seu nos ipsos Religionis
ritibus consecremus? i. e. That I may speak plainly, whether it be pleasing to
them, viz. good spirits, that we offer divine worship and sacrifice to them; or
that we consecrate our selves, or any thing of ours to them by Religious rites?
And this, says he, is that worship which is due to the Deity, which because we
cannot find one convenient word in Latin to express it by, I would call Latria,
as that service which is due to men is called by another name, viz. (...): and
he gives this reason why he made choice of Latria to signify divine worship in
the Latin Tongue, because the Latin word colere is so very ambiguous, it
being applied to the tilling of land, inhabiting of places, and therefore
cultus could not so properly be applied only to divine worship; nor yet
Religion, because that according to the custom of the Latins is applied to
other senses; and the same reason he gives as to other names. For my part, I
quarrel not at all with S. Augustins use of the word, and think it proper
enough to apply it in his sense: which comprehends in it, not merely sacrifice,
but all those Religious Rites, whereby we give Worship to God. And nothing can
to me appear more senseless than to imagine that S. Augusti^^ should here speak
only of Soveraig^ Worship proper to God in regard of his Supreme Excellency,
distinguishing that from an inferior kind of Religious Worship due t^ created
Excellency, when it was agreed on both sides, that there was one Suprem^
Excellency, which was incommunicable to any creatures, so that the dispute
about Worship must suppose those to be created and dependent Beings; which
being supposed, it was impossible for them to believe they had supreme
Excellency in them. B^^ if it be said that the dispute was, whethe^ Sacrifice
did not belong only to God? ^ shall hereafter show, that there is no reason in
the world to appropriate divine worship only to sacrifice; my present business
is only to prove, that the Controversy of Idolatry did on both sides suppose
one Supreme God, which I think is manifest from S. Augustine, if any thing can
be made so. But if this be not full enough to our purpose, we may add the plain
testimony of Maximus Madaurensis to S. Austin, who says, that none but madmen
could deny that there was one supreme and eternal God who was the great Father
of nature, S. Aug. ep. 43.
whose influences diffused through the world, they worshipped under different
names. This man seems to have been of Varro 's way, and not of the Platonists,
for he makes God sine prole; and so understood all the Heathen Deities but as
several titles of the same God.

In the same time with S. Augustine Orosius lived, Paul. Oros. hist. l. 6. c. 1.
who says, that not only the Philosophers found out one God the maker of all
things, to whom all things ought to be referred; but that the Pagans of their
times, without distinction, when they were disputed with by Christians, did
confess that there was but one Great God, who had several Ministers under him.

. 12.
After so full and clear evidence of the consent of all the Fathers in this
matter, not taken from any single or incoherent passages, but from the series
and design of their discourses, I can foresee but one objection against it out
of Antiquity, which I shall endeavor to remove. And that is from the testimony
of Sanchoniathon mentioned by Eusebius and S. Cyrill concerning the
Phoenicians, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 1. c. 6. c. 9. c. 10.
S. Cyrill. c. Julian. l. 6. p. 205.
that they worshipped the Sun, Moon and Stars as the only immortal Gods, among
which the Sun was chief, whom they called Beelsamen Lord of Heaven; and their
mortal Gods were men Deified for the kindness they had done to the world. To
the same purpose Maimonides speaks of the Zabii, Maimon. More Nevoch. l. 3. c.
29.
whose sect, he says, did overrun the earth, that they had no other Gods but
the Stars. But although this take not off the force of our former evidence,
which lay in this, that those Fathers who did charge the Heathens with
Idolatry, did at the same time confess, that they owned one Supreme God; yet I
shall endeavor to prove, that even the Eastern Idolaters did acknowledge one
Supreme Deity. Gregorius Abulfarajus, and Sharestanius, Not. in Specim. Histor.
Arab. p. 143.
both cited by our Learned Doct. Pocock, do expressly contradict Maimonides, for
one of them says, that they have very strong arguments to prove the unity of
God; and the other, that although they call Planets Gods, yet they look on them
only as Mediators between the Supreme God and men; and that Learned and
Judicious Person thinks that we have more reason to believe Gregorius
Abulfarajus, because he conversed with many of their writings in their own
language, whereas Maimonides only saw the translations of some of them.
Sharestanius makes this their great principle, p. 140.
that between the Supreme God and us, there must be some Mediators, which say
they, are pure spiritual substances, which because we cannot immediately
converse with, therefore we have need of some means of communication with them;
which some make to be the celestial Houses, and others Images. Those who are
for the celestial Houses, worship the Bodies of the Planets as the habitations
of the living, rational and intellectual substances which they suppose to
animate them; and therefore they are very punctual in the observations of them,
and accordingly they make their Talismans; and if they have these about them,
and the proper garments on for the Planet, and the day and hour peculiar to
him, and say the Forms of prayer fitted for him, they do not question, but they
shall be heard in the things which depend upon his influence. And these are the
only persons I have heard of, that have discovered the invention of making
Astrological Prayers; which seem to me to be built on as good Reason, as the
Predictions are; and I doubt not, but they were able to produce as many
experiments for the hearing of those prayers, as others do to justify their
predictions. But there were others among them, that thought the Planets at too
great a distance, and too often out of sight, and therefore they would have
more constant and visible Mediators; for which purpose they made them Images,
but they must be sure to be of a Figure and Metal, proper to the Planet, with a
due observation of days, hours, degrees, minutes, habits, prayers, and whatever
else they knew to be most pleasing to the Wise and Intelligent Planet. Now by
the help of these, they hoped to get the favor of the Houses, and by the
favor of the Houses they hoped for that of the Intelligencies, and by their
favor they hoped for that of the Supreme God. But it seems there were some
amongst them who are called Harbanistae, who supposed God to be one in essence,
but to be many in regard of the different manifestations of himself to the
Planets and other visible beings; and that he committed the care of this lower
world to the celestial bodies whom they called Fathers, the elements Mothers,
and all compounds Children. If the former representation of their worship be
true, and that they thought there was no approach to the Supreme Deity, but by
Mediators (as it seems to be) that might give the occasion to Maimonides and
others, to say, that they worshipped only the Sun, Moon and Stars, and
accounted them for their Gods; because it seems they gave no immediate worship
to the Supreme Deity, but what honor they gave him was by passing through so
many to him. And this may be a very probable reason why the Sun in the
Phoenician and Chaldean Theology was looked on as the Supreme Deity, i. e.
visible, and the highest Mediator to whom any worship was offered: and
therefore called by the Chaldeans Baal, by the Phoenicians Beel Samen, by the
Ammonites Moloch, by the Persians Mithras; and by the Moabites Baal Peor and
Chemosh: so the Moon was called Astaroth or Astarte, and Malcha, or the Queen
of Heaven: and Saturn worshipped under the name of Ciun, or Cevan; the Pleiades
of Succoth Benoth: and it is not improbable, that from worshipping the Host of
Heaven this Sect of Idolaters might have their name from (...) Saba, rather
than from Sabius a fabulous son of Seth. Greg. Abulfarajus describes the
Religion of the old Arabs much after the same manner, that they all worshipped
the Stars, although some Tribes one more than another: and it is an ingenious
conjecture of Doct. Pocock 's, that whereas Herodotus says that the Arabians
only worshipped (...) as it is read in the Bodley MSS. and (...), Not. in Spec.
p. 107.
this latter Alilahat signifying Daughters, implies the lesser Deities, and
Olla taal the Supreme God, as the words signify: which he proves from
Sharestanius that the old Arabs did acknowledge. Abraham Ecchellensis speaking
of the Religion of the old Arabians, says, that those who were of the Sect of
Chaled, Abr. Ecchellens. Histor. Arab. c. 6. in Chron. Orient.
went upon this principle, that there was one Creator and Governor of all
things, most Powerful and most Wise: Besides these, there were those who
worshipped Intelligences, or Celestial Spirits; and these, says he, although
they confessed one Creator of the World, most holy, wise and powerful, yet they
said we had need of Mediators to him; therefore they invoked those Spirits with
all rites of Religious worship, and these, says he, were called the Daughters
of God, as they are in the Alcoran: not much different from these, were the
worshippers of Images, whom he describes as we have done before. But he tells
us, there was a Sect of Dahritae among them whom he calls Philosophers, who
were mere Atheists, and asserted the Eternity of the World, and these being
excepted, he says, that the ancient Arabs did believe the creation of the
world; and he tells out of them, c. 9.
their particular history of it. But Ecchellensis was aware of the parallel
between the worship practiced in the Church of Rome, and that among the
Arabians supposing they acknowledged one true God, and therefore puts the
Qustion, whether they did worship their Idols for Gods without relation to any
Superior, or only took them for second causes, and gave them the name of Gods
only Analogically? It was a question seasonably put, but not so wisely
answered. For, as if he had quite forgotten, what he had said before, he says,
without all doubt the most of them looked upon the Gods they worshipped as of
Supreme Authority, and Majesty, and Independent of any other. What, although
they acknowledged but one Supreme God, and called all the lesser Deities his
Daughters! Although all of them, a very few excepted, believed the creation of
all things by one most Wise and Powerful Being! But alas! he did not think of
this Question, when he said the other things; and he was not bound to remember
them now, but to say what served best for his present purpose to clear the
Roman Church from Idolatry. I will not deny then, but there might be a Sect of
Dahritae who did only in name own any thing of God and Religion, that did
assert the Eternity of the world, and that there were no other Gods, but the
Sun, Moon and Stars, both among the Phoenicians and Chaldeans as well as
Arabians; but I say, these were Atheists and not Idolaters; those who where
charged with Idolatry among them were such as believed a Supreme Deity, but
gave Divine Honors to Beings created by him.

The like is suggested by some concerning the Persians, as though they
attributed omnipotency and divine worship only to the Sun; and those who take
all things of this nature upon trust merely from Herodotus, or Justin, or other
Greek and Latin writers, may think they have reason to believe it; but if we
look into those who have been most conversant in the Persian writings, we shall
find a different account of them. Iac. Golius in his Notes on Alferganus says,
Gol. not. in Alferg. p. 20.
that the Persians gave the names of their Gods to their Months and Days;
according to the ancient Religion of the Persians and Magi, whereby they did
believe their Gods to preside over them; for it was a principle among them as
well as other Nations of the East, that the things of this lower world are
administered by Angels: and accordingly they had their particular prayers and
devotions according to the several Days and Months; and not only so, but their
very meat, drink, clothing and perfumes were different; and they had their
Tables or Rubricks to instruct them. And what worship they gave to the Planets,
was not, says he, p. 21.
to themselves but to those Intelligencies, which they supposed to rule them;
nay, they supposed particular Spirits to rule over all the material parts of
the world; the Spirit over fire was called Adar and Aredbahist, the Spirit over
Herbs and Trees Chordad, the Spirit over Bruits was Bahmen, the Spirit over the
Earth was Asfendurmed; and so they had an Angel of Night, and another of Death;
and the Spirit over the Sun was called Mihrgian, from Mihr the Sun, (whence the
word Mithras,) but above all these, they believed there was one Supreme God
whom they called Hormuz and Dei; p. 40.
and the Persian Writers say, that Zoroaster appointed six great Festivals in
the year, in remembrance of the six days creation. p. 24.
And to this is very agreeable what the Persees in Indosthan do to this day
deliver of the principles of their Religion; for, Lords descript. of the
Persees, p. 5.
they affirm God to be the maker of all things; but that he committed the
Government of the world to certain Spirits; and they worship the fire as a part
of God, and call the Sun and Moon Gods great witnesses; p. 8. p. 44.
and the description of them in Varenius fully accords with this, that they
acknowledged one Supreme God, every where present, Varen. de diverse. gent.
Relig. p. 269.
that governs the world, but he makes use of seven chief Ministers for the
management of it, one over men, another over bruits, another over fire as is
before described; and under these they place 25 more, who are all to give an
account to the Supreme God of their administration. With this account agrees
the relation of Mandelslo concerning them, Voyage des Indes du Sr. Mandelslo.
l. 1. p. 215.
who says, that the Parsis believe that there is but one God preserver of the
Universe; that he acts alone and immediately in all things, and that the seven
servants of God, for whom they have also a great veneration, have only an
inferior administration whereof they are obliged to give account: and after
the enumerating these with their particular charges, he reckons up 26 under
them with their several names, but they call them all in common Geshoo, i. e.
Lords, and believe, he says, that they have an absolute power over the things,
whereof God has entrusted them with the administration. Whence it comes, that
they make no difficulty to worship them, and to invocate them in their
extremities, out of a persuasion that God will not deny them any thing they
desire on their intercession. Schickard relates a particular story of the
Persian King Firutz, Schickard. Tarich. p. 130.
or Perozes, which shows the acknowledgement of a Supreme Deity among the
Persians; in his time, which was about the time of the Council of Chalcedon,
there happened a mighty drought in Persia, so that it rained not for seven
years, and when the Kings granaries were utterly exhausted, and there was no
hope of further supplies, he called his People out into the open Fields, and
there in a most humble manner he besought the great God Lord of Heaven and
Earth, to send them rain, and gave not over praying till a plentiful shower
fell upon them: which, says he, is another example, after the Ninivites, of
Gods great mercy after a public and solemn repentance. But that this Prince
was yet a worshipper of the Sun, appears by what follows, when the Emperor Zen^
had him at his mercy, and made him promise fidelity to him, by bowing of
himself to him; he to avoid the reproach of it among his People, carried
himself so, that he seemed only to them to make his Reverence to the Sun
according to the custom of his Country.

. 13.
But it will add yet more to the conviction of T. G. and to the discovery of
the Nature of Idolatry, to show that those Nations, which are at this day
charged with Idolatry by the Church of Rome, have acknowledged one Supreme God.
And I shall now show that those Idolaters who have understood their own
Religion, have gone upon one of these three principles, either (1.) that God
has committed the Government of the world under him to some inferior Deities,
which was the principle of the Platonists, and of the Arabians, and Persians.
Or, (2.) that God is the Soul of the world, and therefore the parts of it
deserve divine honor, which was the principle of Varro and the Stoics. Or,
(3.) That God is of so great perfection and excellency, that he is above our
service, and therefore what external adoration we pay, ought to be to something
below him: which I shall show to have been the principle of those who have
given the least external adoration to the Supreme God.

These things I shall make appear, by giving a brief account of the Idolatry of
those parts of the world, which the Emissaries of the Church of Rome have
showed their greatest zeal in endeavoring to convert from their Idolatries.

There are two Sects in the East Indies (if I may call them so) from whom the
several Nations which inhabit there have received what principles of Religion
they have; and those are the Brachmans and the Chinese; and the giving account
of these two, will take in the ways of worship that are generally known among
them:

For the Brachmans, I shall take my account chiefly from those who have been
conversant among them, and had the best reason to understand their Religion.
Francis Xaverius, who went first upon that commendable employment of converting
the Indians, Xaver. epist. Indic. p. 11.
says, that the Brachmans told him they knew very well there was but one God:
and one of the learned Brachmans in his discourse with him not only confessed
the same, but added, that on Sundays, which their Teachers kept very exactly,
they used only this prayer, I adore thee O God with thy Grace and Help for
ever. Tursellinus says, Tursell. vit. Xaver. l. 2.6.9.
that he confessed this to be one of their great mysteries, that there was one
God maker of the world, who reigns in Heaven and ought to be worshipped by men,
and so does Iarricus. Bartoli not only relates the same passages, Iarric. Rer.
Indic. c. 81.

Bartoli de vita and gest. Xaverii. l. 1. n. 30, 31.


but gives this account of their Theology; that they call the Supreme God
Parabrama, which in their language signifies absolutely perfect, being the
Fountain of all things, existing from himself, and free from all composition:
that he committed to Brama the care of all things about Religion; to Wistnow,
another of his Sons, the care of men's rights and relieving them in their
necessities; to a third, the power over the elements and over humane bodies:
These three they represent by an Image with three Heads rising all out of the
same trunk; these are highly esteemed and prayed to; for they suppose Parabrama
to be at perfect ease, and to have committed the care of all to them. But the
Brachman Padmanaba gave a more particular account of the management of all
things to Abraham Rogers who was well acquainted with him, and was fifteen
years in those parts. Linda descript. Orbis, p. 1 110.
Next to Brama, they make one Dewendre to be the Superintendent Deity, Voyage
des Indes du Sr. Mandelslo, l. 1. p. 201.
who has many more under him; and besides these, they have particular Deities,
over the several parts of the world, as the Persians had. They believe both
good and evil Spirits, and call them by several names: the former they call
Deutas and the other Ratsjaies, and the Father of both sorts to be Brachman the
son of Brama. In particular cases, they have some, says Mr. Lord (who
conversed among them and to whom Mons. Bernier refers us to one who gave a
faithful account of them) whom they honor as Saints and make their addresses
to; Lords descript. of the Banian Religion, p. 60.
Berniers Memoires Tom. 3. p. 157.
as for Marriage they invocate Hurmount, for Health Vagenaught, for success in
Wars Bimohem, for Relief Syer, etc. and I suppose incontinent persons may have
someone instead of S. Mary Magdalen to pray to. The custom of their daily
devotion as the Brachman Padmanaba said, was first to meditate of God before
they rise, Linda, p. 1108.
then after they have washed themselves they repeat 24 names of God and touch
24 parts of their bodies; upon Su^ rising they say prayers and pour down water
in honor of the Sun, and then (...) down upon their knees and worship him and
after perform some ceremonies (...) their Idols, which they repeat in the
evening. The particular devotion which the^ have to their Saints, and Images,
a^^ Relics is fully described by Boullaye-le-Gouz in his late Travels into
those parts Mandelslo says, Les voyages and observat. du Sieur de la
Boullaye-le-Gouz, c. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
Voyage des Indes du Sr. Mandelslo, l. 1. p. 202, 204.
that in the time of the public devotions, they have long Less^^ about the
Lives and Miracles of the Saints, which the Bramans make use (...) to persuade
the people to worship them, Intercessors with God for them. Amo^^ their Saints
Ram is in very great estim^tion, being the restorer of their Religi^^ and a
great Patron of their Braman Kircher supposes him to be the (...) with him
whom the Iaponese call (...), and the Chinese Ken Kian (...) Kircher, (...) Kia
says Marini, and those of Tunquin Chiaga, or as Marini Thic-Ca, Lords
descript. of Banyans, c. 14.
in all which parts he is in very great veneration; him they look on as the
great propagator of their Religion in the Eastern parts, Kirch. China illustr.
l. 3. c. 4.
and they say he had 80000 disciples, but he chose ten out of them, all to
disperse his opinions. From whence it is supposed that the Religion of the
Brachmans has spread it self not only over Indosthan, but Camboia, Tunquin,
Marini Rolat. du Royaume de Tunquin. c. 9. p. 194.
Cochinchina, nay China it self, and Iapan too; where it is an usual thing for
persons to drown, burn or famish themselves for the honor of Xaca. This Sect
was brought into China 65 years after Christ from Indosthan, as Trigautius, (
or rather Matthaeus Riccius tells us, for Bartoli assures us, Bartoli de vit.
Xaver. l. 3. n. 5. Trigaut. de exped. Christiana apud Sinas, l. 1. c. 10.
Bartoli Histor. Asiat. l. 1. n. 55.
that Trigautius only published Riccius his papers in his own name) which he
supposes, was brought in by a mistake for the Christian Religion, (and surely
it was a very great mistake) but for all that, Trigautius has found a ^trange
resemblance between the Roman Religion and theirs. For, says he, they worship
the Trinity after a certain manner, with an image having three Heads and one
Body; they extol coelibate (...) a high degree so as to seem to condemn
marriage; they forsake their Families, and go up and down begging, (i. e. the
Order of Friars among them,) their very rites and customs are like ours; they
have Images in their Temples, and their very habits agree with ours. I desire
T. G. once more to make use of his Friends kindness for Trigautius, that he may
see, whether I have translated him right or no. In all this, he mentions
nothing of the Christian Religion, but only the rewards and punishments of
another world; which most Nations of the world have believed; and for their
other resemblances much good may they do themselves with such parts of
Christianity. Histor. Asiatic. l. 1. n. 75.
To these Bartoli adds, the worshipping the Mother of God with a Child in her
Arms, their Penances, Monasteries, Nunneries, nay their very Beads and
Indulgencies; And Semedo says of their Priests, Semedo Hist. of China, p. 1.
c. 18.
that they wear their Head and Beards shaved, they worship Idols; they marry
not; they live in Convents 4 or 500 together, they beg, mutter prayers; they
sing; they have several offices and prayers against fire, tempests,
misfortunes, and especially for the dead; in which functions they use
sacerdotal garments; their Caps are like ours, and their sprinkling brushes
without any difference at all; they eat neither flesh, nor fish, nor eggs,
neither do they drink wine. But for this last cause of Fish and Wine, I might
have imagined he had been describing a sort of men much nearer home. The same
resemblances Bartoli finds, Bartoli de vita and gestis Fran. Xaverii, l. 3. n.
5, 6.
and stands amazed at in Iapan; here again, he finds one Image with three Heads
for the Trinity, and forty hands to denote his power, which they call Denix;
(but he says, their Philosophers interpret it of the Sun, Moon, Elements and
first Matter,) here they cross themselves, but with a S. Andrews cross; and
say their prayers exactly with their Beads, of which they have 180 on a string;
and which is yet more observable, they understand not one word of their
prayers, and yet they hope for forgiveness of their sins for saying them. They
have a kind of Ave-Mary Bell for the times of their prayers: have pilgrimages
to certain places, and have great indulgences promised them for visiting them
every year: they have a Tribunal of general confession; and Troops of persons
who carry their Images in procession, and have great honor to Relics;
especially to a Tooth of Xaca at Meaco, which they look upon as of mighty
virtue, being brought forth, either to obtain Rain or Fair weather: and which
adds yet more cause of admiration, they have a Pope too, the Dairo, whom he
calls Zazzus, who has the chief care of Religion, and of Canonizing whom he
thinks fit, and thence have the honor of Cami's or Saints; he consecrates
Patriarchs and Prelates, who make Priests with a power of sacrificing with
odors, and of disposing the merits of Xaca and Amida for the benefit of the
living and the dead. Besides, says he, they have multitudes of Religious
Orders, Black and Gray, Eremitical and Coenobitical; and Nuns which are very
serviceable and kind to the Bonzii, who shave their Heads, profess coelibate,
abstain from flesh and fish, and observe their hours of devotion to Xaca. These
things, Bartoli says, he had from those who were eyewitnesses, and had been
long conversant among them. But to increase the admiration yet more, Greuber in
his late account of his return from China, A. D. 1661. by the way of Lassa, or
Barantola, as Kircher calls it, Kircher. China illustr. part. 2. c. 1.
but Greuber himself Baranateka (where, Voyage du Greuber. p. 18.
he says, no Christian had ever been) yet there he found Extreme Unction,
Solemn Processions, worshipping of Relics, Monasteries of men and women,
barefooted Missionaries, and several other things, which caused amazement in
him; but above all he wondered at their Pope, to whom they give divine honors,
and worship his very excrements, and put them up in Golden boxes, as a most
excellent Remedy against all mischiefs; and to him all the Kings of Tartary
make their solemn addresses, and receive their Crowns from him; and those that
come near him, kiss his Toe, as Kircher says, Kirch. China, p. 2. c. 4.
and give the same adoration that they do to the Pope at Rome; and, says he,
is only due to him: which he looks on, as a notable trick of the Devil, to
steal these customs from Rome, and to carry them into such a remote part of the
world, where he little dreamed of being found out in his villainy, had not
Greuber chanced to have passed that way from China. I find these Authors very
much puzzled, what account to give of all these customs and ceremonies of
theirs among Infidels and Idolaters: Kircher runs back to Presbyter John,
others to S. Thomas; when alas! they all came from the very same fountain, from
whence they came into the Roman Church, viz. folly and Superstition.

And they do not want wit to defend themselves upon the very same grounds,. 14.
that they do: as for instance, in their worship of Images, and Saints, (as
they esteem them) as most proper to our purpose. Nicolaus Pimenta in his
epistle to Claudius Aquaviva General of the Jesuits from God, A. D. 1600.
says, that when they disputed with the Brachmans, Epistolae Indic. Antw. 1605.
p. 839.
about their worship, they told them; And we likewise worship one God as well
as you, and refer all the honor to him which we give to other things. I would
he had told us what answer he gave them; but I find not a word of that: neither
can I see what it was capable of, unless he told them, that they lied. And we
have a considerable Testimony of an understanding Gentleman of Rome, who had
the curiosity to enquire strictly into the worship the Gentiles in India gave
to their Deities; that they have no other name to express their Deity but Deu
or Deuru, Viaggi di Pietro Della Valle part 3. Letter 6. (...) 10.
which are likewise given to Princes; from whence he infers that the Gods of
the Gentiles although adored and worshipped both in ancient and modern times,
were never looked on in the same degree with God the Creator of the Universe,
and wherein almost all Nations of the World have and do hold him, some calling
him the First Cause, others the Soul of the World, others Perabrahmi as the
Gentiles at this day in India: but the other Gods are and were always with
them, as Saints are with us: of the truth whereof I have great arguments at
least among the Indian Gentiles; or at the highest they esteemed them only as
men Deified by the Favor of God, as Hercules, Romulus, Augustus, etc. Mons.
Bernier when he was at the University of the Brachmans in Benares upon Ganges,
discoursing with one of the most learned men among them, he proposed to him the
Question, Bernier Memoires, Tom. 3. p. 171.
about the adoration of their Idols, and reproaching them with it, as a thing
very unreasonable; they gave him this remarkable answer, We have indeed in our
Temples store of diverse Statues, as those of Brahma, Mahadeu, Genich and
Gavani, who are some of the chief and most perfect Deutas; and we have also
many others of less perfection, to whom we pay great honor, prostrating our
selves before them and presenting them Flowers, Rice, Oils, Saffron and such
things with much ceremony; but we do not believe these Statues to be Brahma or
Bechen, etc. themselves, but only their Images and Representations, and we do
not give them that honor but upon the account of what they represent. They are
in our Temples, because it is necessary for praying well, to have something
before our eyes that may fix the mind; and when we pray, it is not the Statue
we pray to, but he that is represented by it. For the rest we acknowledge, that
it is God that is absolute, and the only omnipotent Lord and Master. This, says
he, was his answer without adding or substracting any thing. And I desire to be
resolved by T. G. whether upon these principles they were guilty of Idolatry,
or no? I am sure their Church accounts them so; and yet they neither believe
their Images to be Gods, nor terminate their worship upon them; and if they be
guilty upon these principles, T.G. can never clear the Church of Rome.

But besides, they have another way of defending themselves, which the same
Author gives this account of, viz. that God or that Sovereign being whom they
call Achar (immutable) has produced or drawn out of his own substance, not
only souls, p. 178.
but also whatever is material and corporeal in the Universe, so that all the
things in the world are but one and the same thing which is God himself; as all
numbers are but one and the same unity repeated. If this principle of theirs
were true, I hope they might stand upon even terms with T. G. as to the
adoration of the Host. For if the belief on one side will justify his Church
from Idolatry, a sufficient object of adoration being supposed to be present, I
hope the same supposition on their side may do it too; so that if men can be
but foolish and extravagant enough in their opinion about a thing, they need
not doubt the lawfulness of the worship they pay to it. And that this is not a
mere supposition not only appears by the Testimony of this inquisitive Person,
but by what Trigautius says of the Chinese, Trigaut. de exp. apud Sinas, l.
1. c. 10.
that this opinion is very prevalent among the Learned men there, that makes
the world and God to be one substance, of which all particular things are
members; and by what Alexander Valignanus, Possevine Biblioth. l. 10. c. 2.
Provincial of the Jesuits in the Indies for thirty years, has said upon this
subject. In his discourse about the best means of converting the Iaponese,
printed by Possevine, he tells us of a Sect among them, who hold but one
principle, which they call the first reason, and the true opinion, and the
divine truth, and that this principle is all things, and all things are nothing
but it extended now and do return into it again upon their dissolution, that
the soul of man is the same with it, that men by inward contemplation may now
attain to a knowledge of and union with this first principle; and as one of the
Iaponese converts said, after a man has spent thirty years in this
contemplation, he is then fit to be Canonized, and to be worshipped among their
Cami's and Fotoques. This first principle they grant to be one, absolutely
Perfect and Wise, but not thoughtful, but living in perfect ease and happiness.
This, says Bernier, is the great Cabala of the Brachmans and Persians; and if
Valignanus may be credited, is so of the Iaponeses too: and it seems to be the
very same which Orpheus had from the Egyptians, and contains in it the most
plausible Reason of giving divine worship to any thing, which is proposed for
adoration. Valignanus offers a great many arguments against this opinion, but I
dare say not one of them stronger or plainer than those which are daily brought
against transubstantiation: and yet T. G. will by no means allow any Idolatry
therein, because the object supposed to be present, deserves our adoration. But
the generality of the people Valignanus confesses did acknowledge a Supreme
Being whom they called Tento, and believed him to be the Governor of the
World, and to him in their great distresses they made supplications, believing
that all things are well known by him; but under him they suppose many Cami's
and Fotoques to be, whom they acknowledge to have had a beginning, such as
Xaca, and Amida, and Canon, and Toranga and many others, to whom they make
their daily addresses in their Temples. And the Reasons which Valignanus gives
against this way of worship among them deserve our consideration. 1. Because
God only has the power of conferring the blessings of this life or another
upon us; c. 5.
and his argument must hold as to both, or else it does not reach home; for the
Iaponeses are observed more to pray to their Saints or Deities for riches, and
health and honor, than for what belongs to another life. 2. Because Xaca and
Amida and the rest of the Cami and Fotoque were once men, and therefore the
administration of the world cannot be committed to them, being a thing above
humane understanding. Very well again: and if* this argument signify any
thing, it must extend to their incapacity of receiving their addresses for want
of divine knowledge; otherwise they might pray to Amida and Xaca still, as
Mediators at least between God and them. 3. Because the world was, before they
had a being, and consequently was governed by that Wise Being which made it;
and he that disposed of things then, does so still; therefore it is an absurd
thing to pray to and adore such beings which did not make the world. All which
I grant to be reasonably, and truly said, and only desire they may be remembered
against another day: and what he adds about the great affront which is offered
to God, when the honor which belongs to him is given to any creatures, ^. 6.
either dead men, or Images, or Devils; and yet he makes no scruple
notwithstanding the former pretenses, to charge these Gentiles with Idolatry.

. 15.
It remains now, that I consider the Religion of the Chinese; that I mean,
which is properly theirs, and is by Writers commonly called the First Sect
among them, and by Martinius the Philosophical Sect. Martin. praefat. Atlant.
Sinic. p. 7.
Although he admires them for their morality; yet, he says, although anciently
they did believe and worship one God, yet that now they have left off to
worship him because they do not know how to do it: but Greuber, Voyage du
Greuber, p. 6.
who came later from thence says, that they do profess to worship one Supreme
Being which they call Sciax-Ti, and adore him by certain sacrifices of paper
and incense. They worship no Pagod or Idol, says Semedo, Semedo hist. of
Chinach. 18.
but acknowledge a Superiority or Deity, who is able to chastise or reward: but
they have no Churches wherein they worship him, nor any divine service which
they celebrate, nor any prayers that they rehearse, nor any Priests or
Ministers which officiate at his service. Yet they speak and write very
honorably of him, neither do they attribute any undecent thing to him, as our
Ancestors did to their Gods: but they have Temples for Heaven and Earth in
Nankin and Pekim, in which the King himself offers the sacrifice; and in the
Cities they have Temples for Tutelar Spirits, to which the Mandarins do
sacrifice; as, to the Spirits of the Rivers, Mountains and four parts of the
World, etc. and there are Temples to the honor of great Benefactors to the
public, and therein are placed their Images. Trigautius says, Trigaut. de
Christ. exped. apud Sinas, l. 1. c. 10.
that he finds in their ancient Books that the Chinese did of old time worship
one Supreme God, whom they called King of Heaven, or by another name Heaven and
Earth: and besides him they worshipped Tutelar Spirits; to the same purpose
with Semedo: and the same, he says, continues still in the learned Sect among
them, whose first Author was their famous Confutius: to him they have a Temple
erected in every City with his Image, or his name in golden letters, whither
all the Magistrates every new or full Moon do resort, to give honor to
Confutius with bowings, and Wax-candles, and incense: the same they do on his
birthday, and other set times; there to express their gratitude for the mighty
advantages they have had by his Doctrine, but they make no prayers to him, and
neither seek nor hope for any thing from him. They have likewise Temples to
Tutelar Spirits for every City and Tribunal; where they make oblations, and
burn perfumes, acknowledging these to have power to reward and punish. Bartoli
says, Bartoli Asiat. hist. l. 1. n. 73.
it is not out of any contempt of Religion, but out of reverence to the Deity
because of the excellency of his Majesty, that they suffer none but the King to
offer Sacrifice to him: and accordingly the larger Power the Tutelar Spirits
are supposed to have, the greater Magistrates are to attend their service: and
the lesser those of Cities, and Mountains, and Rivers. But that which is more
material to our present business, is, to consider the Resolution of a case of
Conscience not long since given at Rome by the Congregation of Cardinals de
propaganda fide, after advising with and the full consent of the Pope obtained
12 Sept. 1645. Which resolution, and decree was Printed in the Press of the
Congregation the same year, with the Popes Decree annexed to it, and his
peremptory command for the observation of it by all Missionaries; and that Copy
of the Resolution I have seen, was attested by a public Notary to agree with
the Original Decree: which case will help us very much to the right
understanding the Notion of Idolatry according to the sense of the Church of
Rome.

The case was this; The Missionaries of the Society of Jesuits, having had a
plentiful harvest in China, and many of the Great men embracing the Christian
Religion by their means; the Missionaries of other Orders, especially the
Franciscans, had a great curiosity to understand the arts, which the Jesuits
used in prevailing with so many Great persons to become Christians; and upon
full enquiry, they found they gave them great liberty, as to the five Precepts
of the Church, as they call them, viz. hearing Mass, annual Confession,
receiving the Sacrament at Easter, Fasting at the solemn times, and Tenths and
First Fruits: besides, they did forbear their Ceremonies of baptism, their oil
and spittle in the ears, and salt in the mouth, when they baptized Women, and
giving extreme Unction to them, because the jealousy of their Husbands would
not permit them to use them; but that which is most to our purpose is the
liberty they gave the Mandarins in two things. 1. To go to the Temple of the
Tutelar Spirit in every City, as they are bound by virtue of their office to do
twice a month, or else they forfeit their places, and there to prostrate
themselves before the Idol, with all the external acts of adoration that others
used; and swearing before it when they enter into their office, so they did
secretly convey a Crucifix among the flowers, that lay upon the altar, or hold
it cunningly in their hands, and direct all their adorations to the Crucifix by
the inward intention of their minds. 2. To go to the Temple of Keum-Fucu, or
Confucius, twice a year, and to perform all the solemnities there, that the
rest did: and the same as to the Temples of their Ancestors which are erected
to their honor according to the precepts of Confucius; because the Chinese
declared that they intended only to give the same reverence to the memory of
their Ancestors, which they would do to themselves if they were still living;
and what they offer to them is nothing but what they would give them, if they
were alive, without any intention to beg any thing from them, when they know
them to be dead: and the same allowance they gave, as to the Images of their
Ancestors, about which many Ceremonies were used by them. The Missionaries of
S. Francis order, being well informed of the Truth of these things, from the
Philippines they send a Memorial to the King of Spain concerning them, who by
his Ambassador represents it to the Pope, whereupon the Congregation of
Cardinals was called, and after great deliberation and advising with the Pope
about it, they made their Decree, wherein, they by several resolutions, declare
it unlawful upon any of those pretenses to use acts in themselves unlawful, and
superstitious, although directed by their intention to the worship of the true
God. And lest any should imagine it was only matter of scandal, which they
stood upon (as T. G. does, T. G. p. 92.
about worshipping toward the Sun) they make use of several expressions, on
purpose to exclude this, for so they resolve the seventh Quere, nullatenus
licere, it is by no means lawful; and the eighth, nullo praetextu, under no
pretense whatsoever, and to the ninth expressly, that it could not be salved
propter absentiam gentilium, if there were no gentiles present: from this
Resolution we may observe several things to our purpose.

That Idolatry is consistent with the belief of the Supreme God, and reserving
sovereign worship as due only to him: For the Congregation calls the Image of
the Tutelar Spirit an Idol, and consequently the act of adoration must be
Idolatry, yet it is very clear that the Chinese (especially the Christians)
did never intend to give to the Tutelar Spirit the honor proper to the Supreme
Deity: And Bartoli has at large proved, Bartoli hist. Asi. l. 1. n. 70.
that the Chinese did of old acknowledge the true God, and his Providence over
the World: and that their Princes do worship the same God still, to whom they
offer Sacrifice: and they call him by two names, Scianti, which signifies
supreme Monarch, and Tienciu, Lord of Heaven, and as he tells us, they put an
apparent difference between Tienciu and Tienscin, i. e. between God and Angels,
and say that the power of forgiving sins belongs only to God and not to them;
that, upon a debate among the Missionaries about the use of these words for the
true God, and some scruples raised from some misinterpretations of it by an
Atheistical Sect among them, they were satisfied by plain and perspicuous
testimonies out of their Books, that they could mean no other than the true
God: and that he to whom the King every year offers sacrifice is a pure Mind,
free from all mixture, governing all things, and therefore to him all the acts
of sovereign worship are performed; such as Sacrifices, Vows, Prayers and
thanksgivings. Therefore the worship they give to the Tutelar Spirits or
Guardian Angels, ( as they suppose them) must be of an inferior nature, and
yet the Congregation of the Cardinals by the direction of the Pope, condemn
this for Idolatry.

That giving an Inferior Worship on the created excellency, when it appears to
be Religious, is utterly unlawful among Christians. For this is the only
imaginable reason why the Congregation did so absolutely condemn the worship of
Confutius and their Ancestors; and Hurtado in the explication of this decree,
Thom. Hurtado Resolutiones de vero Martyrio Fidei, p. 487.
confesses, that the Chinese did not esteem Confutius, as a God, but only
looked on him as a holy and virtuous Philosopher; yet, says he, because they
did those acts to him which are only proper to God, they commit manifest
Idolatry in it. For, says he, they who give to a creature the worship due only
to God, do commit Idolatry; and from hence the Gentiles who acknowledged one
God were Idolaters, because they gave to the creatures the honor due to him,
in the doing of which they made an acknowledgement of divine excellency in the
things they gave it to. By which it appears, that there are some external acts
of worship so proper to God, that although a man has never so clear
apprehension in his mind of the Supreme excellency of God above the creatures
he worships, yet the giving that worship to them makes his act Idolatry. The
Jesuits to excuse these things, speak very high things of Confutius, and of his
admirable Life and doctrine, and surely not without great reason, if their
relations hold true, as I see no reason to suspect them: but the more Confutius
is extolled, the worse they make their own case, for all these acts of external
worship toward him, are condemned for Idolatry: and how then comes the worship
of Ignatius Loyola to be otherwise, who, I dare say, never was so great a
Philosopher, nor did so much good in the world, as the Jesuits say Confutius
did? But at last, they would have all these honors to Confutius to be only
civil honors; although Trigautius confesses, Martin. hist. Sinic. l. 4. p. 151.
that he has a Temple in every City, that his Image with that of his
Disciples, is set up in it; that these Disciples are looked on as a sort of
Divi, i. e. as Canonized Saints; Bartoli hist. Asiat. l. 1. n. 54. Trigaut. l.
1. c. 10.
that bear they make use of all the rites of adoration, genuflections,
wax-candles, incense, oblations, prayers only excepted: but we see,
notwithstanding all their pretenses, the Pope and Congregation of Cardinals
have condemned them as guilty of Idolatry.

That the Pope and Congregation of Cardinals were not of T. G 's mind, that
acts do certainly go whither they are intended; For all these acts of worship
were directed by the intention of the persons to the secret Crucifix, which lay
among the flowers upon the Altar; but notwithstanding, this in their opinion
were a fit object of worship, yet other circumstances did so much alter the
nature of it, that they declare these acts to be in themselves unlawful. By
actions going whither they are intended, I do not mean, as T. G. suggests, that
the Physical act of the mind does not pass to the object whither the act is
directed, i. e. that I do not think of that which I do think of; but my meaning
is, that such a directing the intention of the mind does not give a moral
denomination to the nature of the action, viz. that it becomes lawful or
unlawful, by virtue of such an intention of the mind, but that the Law of God
may so determine the nature of our acts of worship, as to make them unlawful,
whatever the intention of the mind be. And thus the Congregation of Cardinals
here resolves the case; the Persons used only those acts of adoration that may
be directed to God, by a secret intention of the mind; they suppose a Crucifix
a fit object for divine worship, and going together into an Idolatrous Temple,
and using all the external equivocal acts (as T. G. calls them) which the rest
did, they direct their acts by virtue of this intention to the Crucifix; yet
although the Congregation thought this intention rightly directed, they condemn
the acts as in themselves unlawful. But of these things hereafter; the first
observation being sufficient to my present purpose, viz. to show that according
to the present sense of the Roman Church the practice of Idolatry is consistent
with the acknowledgement of one Supreme God.

From the Idolatry of the East Indies,. 16.
I proceed to that of the Tartars, whose Dominion has extended it self over
that vast Continent from the utmost North-East parts, to the borders of Europe
that way; and this acount I shall give from the least suspected witnesses in
this matter, viz. the Emissaries of the Roman Church, who had conversed most
among them, and made it their design to understand their Religion. In A. D.
1246. after the horrible devastations made by the Tartars in Poland and
Hungary, Pope Innocent 4. sent Johannes de Plano Carpini as his Legate, or
Nuncio to them: Ioh. a Plano Carpini Libellus historicus de Tartaris, c. 3.
and after a year and four months stay among them he gives this account of
their Religion, unum Deum credunt, quem credunt esse factorem omnium
visibilium, and invisibilium; and credunt eum tam bonorum in hoc mundo quam
poenarum esse factorem; non tamen orationibus, vel laudibus aut ritu aliquo
ipsum colunt. They believe one God, whom they believe to be the maker of all
things visible and invisible; and to be the Author of all worldly goods and
punishments; and yet he says, they had no manner of worhip of him: but their
worship they gave to Images, which he there at large decribes. But there is an
inferior Deity, whom he calls Itoga, Paulus Venetus Natagay which they believe
to be the God of the earth, Paul. Venel. de Reg. orient.l. 1. c. 58. l. 3. c.
47.
and him they worship with great superstition; and besides they worship the
Sun, Moon and Fire, and make oblations to the Image of their first Emperor;
and the same thing is affirmed by Vincentius Bellovacensis. Specul. hist. l.
29. c. 72, 74.
After him, Lewis the ninth of France sent William de Rubruquis, a Franciscan,
A. D. 1253. who passed through the several Courts of the Tartarian Princes, and
gave an exact account to his Prince of the Religion he found among them. In the
conference he had with Mangu-Chan (who was then Emperor) about Religion; the
Emperor told him, Gul. de Rubruquis Itiner. c. 43.
We Moals (which is the name they call themselves by, that being the name of
the Tribe from whence Iingiz-chan came, the Tartars being another Tribe, but
better known to the Europeans,) We, (says he,) believe that that there is but
one God, through whom we live and die; and we have an upright heart toward
him: and he added, that as God had given to the hand five fingers, so he has
given many ways to men. But there was a Sect of Idolaters among them, whom he
calls Tuinians, who held two first Principles, and many Gods; but it seems by
their discourse, that they acknowledged the Superiority of one above all the
rest. For when the Friar said there was but one God; the Tuinian who disputed
with him before Mangu-Chan, said, Fools say there is but one God, but wisemen
day there are many; are there not great Lords in your Country? and here is a
greater Lord Mangu-Chan. So is it of the Gods, because in diverse countries
there are diverse. And afterward he acknowledged, that there is one Highest God
in the Heavens, whose Generation we know not yet, and ten are under him, and
under them there is one Inferior: and in the earth there are infinite. And of
another Sect, called Iugurs, he confesses, that they believe on God, c. 42.
and yet make Idols; from whom the Tartars had their letters; and he affirms
the same of the Moals or Tartars in general, c. 27.
and yet they make and worship many Images: and their Priests pray by their
Beads, having a string with a hundred or two of Nutshels upon it; and the
repeating of certain words with them, they account meritorious at Gods hand.
Haithon, the Armenian, Haithon. Armen. hist. Orient. c. 48.
agrees with the former, saying of the Tartars, that they confess one immortal
God. Gregorius Abul-pharajius brings several examples of Iingiz-Chans
acknowledging one Supreme and omnipotent God, Greg. Abulpharai. hist. Dynast.
p. 285. p. 290.
( who laid the foundation of the Tartarian Empire) as, when he made his
prayers to him upon the injury of Gayer-Chan: when he owned his Power to be
given him from the God that is King over all and omnipotent; and therefore,
Haithon makes that the first command of Jingiz-Chan to his followers, that they
ought to believe and obey the immortal God, Haithon. hist. Orient. c. 16.
by whom he obtained his Empire. And that the Tartars, who have not embraced
Mohometism, did still acknowledge and worship one Supreme God maker of Heaven
and Earth, is confessed by Iacobus Navarchus among the Indian Epistles; Iac.
Navarch. Epist. Asiatic. p. 344.
and the same, Nicephorus Callistus affirms, Niceph. Callisth. l. 18. c. 30.
of the ancient Turks, who were a race of Tartars living beyond the Bactrian
Mountains.

The like might be easily discovered of the most considerable Nations of the
West Indies, if it would not have swelled this discourse into too great a Bulk;
in general we take this remarkable Testimony of Josephus Acosta, Joseph. Acosta
Natural and Moral History of the Indies, l. 5. c. 8.
a learned Spanish Jesuit, who lived seventeen years in those parts. They,
(says he, speaking of the Indians) do commonly acknowledge a Supreme Lord and
Author of all things, which they of Peru call Viracocha, and gave him names of
great excellence, as Pachacamac, or Pachaiackachic, which is the Creator of
Heaven and Earth, and Usapu which is admirable, and such like. Him they did
worship as the chiefest of all, whom they did honor in beholding the Heaven.
The like we see amongst them of Mexico, and China, and all other Infidels.
Which accords well with what is said by S. Paul in the Acts of the Apostles,
where he did see the inscription of an Altar Ignota Deo, To the unknown God:
whereupon the Apostle took occasion to preach unto them, saying, Him whom you
worship without knowing him, do I preach unto you. In like sort those which at
this day do preach the Gospel to the Indians, find no great difficulty to
persuade them that there is a high God and Lord over all, and that this is the
Christians God, and the true God. As it is therefore a truth conformable to
reason, that there is a Sovereign Lord and King of Heaven, whom the Gentiles
with all their Infidelities and Idolatries have not denied, as we see in the
Philosophy of Timaeus in Plat. in the Metaphysics of Aristotle, and in the
Asclepius of Trismegist, as also in the Poesies of Homer and Virgil: So the
Preachers of the Gospel have no great difficulty to plant and persuade this
truth of a Supreme God, be the Nations to whom they preach never so barbarous,
and brutish. But it is hard to root out of their minds that there is no other
God, nor any other Deity than one: and that all other things of themselves have
no power, being, nor working proper to themselves, but what this great and only
Lord does give and impart to them. To conclude, It is necessary to persuade
them by all means, in reproving their errors, as well in that wherein they
generally fail, in worshipping more than one God, as in particular, which is
much more to hold for Gods, and to demand favors and help of those things
which are not Gods, nor have any power, but what the true God their Lord and
Creator has given. De procuranda Indorum salute, l. 5. c. 10.
And in another place he says, Hoc enim commune apud omnes pene barbaros est,
ut Deum quidem omnium rerum Supremum and sum bonum fateantur. This is common
among almost all the barbarous nations, to acknowledge one Supreme God,
infinitely good. But there is so pregnant a Testimony concerning the
acknowledgement of a Supreme Deity among the Yncas of Peru, that it ought not
to be slightly passed over. The thing it self is confessed not only by Acosta,
but by Eusebius Nierembergius, Eusebius. Nieremb. hist. Nature. l. 8. c. 13.
Augustinus de Zarate, Antonius de Calancha who was himself a Peruan born, and
afterward an Augustinian: August. de Zarate, l. 2.
and these two mention the conference between Atahuallpa the last of the Yncas,
and Vincentius de Valverde, about Religion, wherein, the Ynca told the Spanish
Priest, Anton. de Calancha apud Ioach. Brul. hist. Per^^an. l. 2. c. 9.
that they believed in Pachacamac the Creator of the World, and after him they
worshipped the Sun and Moon for their universal influence on the World. But the
most perfect account of their way of worship is delivered by Garcilasso de la
Vega, who was himself of the blood of Yncas by the Mother, and he corrects
several mistakes of Acosta and other Spanish Authors, which were occasioned by
their ignorance of the Peruvian language and Customs. He says, that Manco
Capac, Le Commentaire Royal Des Ynca 's live. 2. c. 1.
(who was the founder of the Empire of the Yncas,) did reduce the barbarous
Indians from the promiscuous Idolatry of almost all sorts of creatures before,
to the worship of the Sun, as the great instrument of Pachacamac in the
Government of the World; but although they had a great veneration for the Moon,
as Wife and Sister of the Sun, yet he cannot find that they did ever worship
her as a Goddess; or offer Sacrifices, and build Temples to her. Thunder and
Lightning they called, the Executioners of the Justice of the Sun; and did not
look on them as Deities, as the Spaniards imagined. But the main thing he
discovers as to their Religion is, c. 2.
that they had only two Deities, the one visible, the Sun; the other invisible,
the Creator of the World, whom they called Pachacamac, from Pacha which
signifies the World, and Camac from the verb Camar to enliven, and that from
Cama the Soul; so that Pachacamac is as much as, the Soul of the World: which
word they had in so great veneration that they durst not pronounce it but with
a great deal of ceremony, and with the most humble posture of adoration: which
was the external sovereign worship which they gave to the Supreme Deity, and
above what they gave to the Sun, whose name they did usually pronounce: from
whence he infers, that although the external worship of Sacrifices was
performed to the Sun, yet they had in their Soul a greater adoration to
Pachacamac, as an invisible Deity, that gave being and life to the World. He
says, that without all question the Yncas and their Amautas or Philosophers,
did intend no other by this word, but the true Sovereign Creator of the World;
however the Spaniards thought some Devil was understood by it: but, says he,
the Indians when they meant the Devil they called him Cupay; and at the naming
him did spit on the ground in token of execration; but when they mentioned
Pachacamac, they did it with all the Reverence and Devotion imaginable. And
withal he adds, that whatever Acosta and others say, this is the proper name
for God in the Peruvian Language; and they do not know how to express him
otherwise; and that all other names given by the Spaniards, as Tici Viracocha,
Pachaia Chacher, Pacharurac, do not set forth the unexpressible Majesty of God
in their Tongue, as Pachacamac does. He tells us, that it was an inviolable Law
of the Yncas, throughout their Empire, c. 3. p. 146.
that Divine Worship should be given only to Pachacamac as the Sovereign Deity,
and to the Sun for the great benefit the world received by him: and that it was
held a very reproachful thing among them to attribute the Name, Honor,
Authority, Power of God or any other Divine perfections to any sublunary
things: but they had an inferior reverence for the Moon as Wife and Sister of
the Sun, and for the Stars, which they called her Daughters and Servants of her
House; and so they had for their Yncas too, whose bodies were set up in the
Temple of the Sun in Cozco, on either side his Golden Image; l. 3. c. 20.
and in the Chapel of the Moon were the bodies of the Empresses after the same
manner: in which he observes, that the Yncas were wont to make their vows to
the Moon, c. 21.
and recommend themselves to her as their Mother; but they offered no
sacrifices to her, as they did to the Sun. They have likewise great respect for
the Stars, and especially for the Planet Venus, which they call the Page of the
Sun; as they have for the Thunder, and Lightning, and Thunderbolt, which he
says again, they did not hold to be Gods, but to be his domestic Servants;
which the Spaniards, because they represented them as three in one, mistook for
the Trinity worshipped among them, which Eusebius Nierembergius from Acosta
calls Tangatanga: Garcilasso knew nothing of it, but says, that they called
them Yllapa. They have likewise a great veneration for the Rainbow as the
production of the Sun; and for the City of Cozco; but as to all these, they
give only an inferior and honorary worship to them; but they reserve the
Sovereign internal worship for Pachacamac, and external by sacrifice for the
Sun. This Pachacamac, although he had no Temple erected by the Yncas, yet the
same Author tells us, l. 6. c. 30.
that under the power of Cuysmancu, King of the Yuncas, there was a Valley,
called the Valley of Pachacamac, where was a Temple erected to his worship; and
when the Ynca of Peru demanded subjection to him, and to join in the worship of
the Sun; he said, Pachacamac was Creator and preserver of all, c. 3.
and therefore greater than the Sun, whom they worshipped, with the utmost
expressions of adoration; the King himself not daring to enter the Temple with
his face toward his Image: and besides Him they only worshipped the Oracle of
Rimac, and Mamacohca i. e. the Sea; But for the Sun, they found too great
inconvenience by his heat for them to worship him. The Ynca replied, that they
did not only worship the Sun, but Pachacamac too; but because he was an
invisible and incomprehensible Deity, they offered him no sacrifices, nor built
him any Temple: but they had the greatest inward veneration toward him, which
they expressed by all possible demonstrations as often as they mentioned his
name. At last the difference was composed on these terms, the Yuncas were to
retain the Temple of Pachacamac, but to forbear any Image of him, as unworthy
of him, and humane sacrifices, and to receive the worship of the Sun; and the
Yncas to admit the Oracle of Rimac. Huayna Capac, one of the Yncas, made use of
this argument to the High Priest his Uncle, that the Sun could not be the
Supreme God: l. 9. c. 9.
who dares, said he, command me to go a long journey and never rest? But if I
command any Officer I have to go to Chili, he dares not disobey: surely then,
says he, our Father the Sun (so the Yncas still called him) must needs have a
greater Lord than himself, which commands him to take such a journey every day.
By these things, it fully appears, that the mighty Empire of Peru, while it was
under the Power of the Yncas, did acknowledge one Supreme God, to whom they
gave internal worship as most proper for him; and external adoration at the
mention of his name, although they offered their Sacrifices to the Sun. And it
is observable what the same excellent Author farther adds, l. 9. c. 4.
that the Indians worshipped Pachacamac, under the very title of the Unknown
God: which was the inscription on the Altar at Athens, from whence S. Paul
said, whom ye ignorantly worship, him I declare unto you.

Acosta says, Acosta l. 5. c. 4.
that the Supreme God was worshipped in Mexico with a very magnificent Temple,
and after him the Sun; in Virginia, one that had it from intimate familiarity
with the Priests declares, Hariots descript. of Virgin.
that they believe there are many Gods, which they call Mantoac, but of
different sorts and degrees, one only chief and great God, which has been from
all eternity. Who, as they affirm, when he purposed to make the world, made
first other Gods of a principal order, to be as means and instruments to be
used in the creation and government to follow, and after, the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, as petty Gods, and instruments of the other order more principal. And
when Tomocomo a principal person of Virginia was here in England, Purchase
Pilgr. l. 8. c. 6.
he averred, that they worshipped the God that made Heaven and Earth: who was
the Author of all good to them. Creuxius the Jesuit, Creux. hist. Canad. l. 1.
p. 78.
in his late History of Canada, says, that when Paulus Juvenaeus discoursed
with the Inhabitants about God, and describing him to be of infinite power, and
that made Heaven and Earth, they cried out to each other Atoachan, Atoachan,
intimating that all things were made by that God whom they worshipped under
that name: but they believe the seasons of the year, and the affairs of humane
life to be managed by certain Spirits under him, p. 86.
whom they endeavor to propitiate by certain rites of worship.

Leo Africanus, Leo Afric. descrip. Afric. l. 1.
testifies concerning some of the ancient African Idolaters, that they
worshipped Guighimo, i. e. the Lord of Heaven; which part of Religion, he
says, was not delivered to them, by any Prophet or Teacher, but was inspired
into them by God himself. Varenius takes notice of the false and imperfect
description which is commonly given of the Religion of the Negroes, Varen. de
diverse. gent. Relig. p. 304.
and says, he understood by those who lived long among them, that although
they worship many Gods, yet they acknowledge one Supreme, whom they call
Fetisso: and believe him to be the Author both of the good and evil they
receive, and therefore endeavor to appease him by many Sacrifices, Ceremonies
and Prayers. Mandelslo says, Mandelslo Voyage l. 3.
of the Inhabitants of Madagascar, that he was informed, that they believe
there is one God who made Heaven and Earth; and will one day punish bad actions
and reward the good. Ioh. de Barros says, Barros Dec. 1. l. 10. c. 1.
that the Inhabitants of Monomotapa, believe in one God whom they call Mozimo;
and if we believe him, they worship nothing else besides him: Linda descript.
Orbis, p. 1149.
the same others say of the Mordui, a people that inhabit the farther parts of
Muscovy, who declare, Archontolog. Cosmic. de Mosco.. 44.
that they worship only the Creator of the Universe to whom they offer the
first fruits of all things, even of their meat and drink, casting some parts of
them toward Heaven: but they have no Idols, nor baptism, and say they live
according to nature: but Brietius says, Briet. Geog. To. 2. l. 6. c. 2.
they worship Idols, or are Mahumetans. Texeira and Pimenta say that the Sect
of the Baneans called Lon Kah, Indiae vera descript. p. 118.
worship only the Supreme God, without Idols; but Mexery has Idols and does
worship them. Josephus Indus, a Native of Cranganor says, that the Gentile
Idolaters there, did worship the God of Heaven, Piment. in Ep. Ind. Joseph.
Indi Navig. c. 3.
under the form of a Statue with three faces, and his hands folded, whom they
called Tambram: and he says, the King of Calecut is of the same Religion with
them of Cranganor: and Ludovicus Vartomannus says, Lud. Vartom. Navig. l. 5.
c. 21.
that in Calecut, they call the Great God Tamerani, whom they believe to be the
maker of the World; but he adds, that they believe him to live at ease, and
that he has committed the Government of the world to Deumo, whose Image they
worship, having on his head, says Vartomannus, just such a Crown as the Popes
of Rome have, only it has three horns upon it: and the same is confessed by
Iarricus. Iarric. Rerum Indic. l. 1. c. 4.
The people of Narsinga likewise believe one Supreme God, but worship Idols as
the rest of the Indians do. Linschoten, Linda. p. 1145. Linschot. Navig. c. 33.
gives this general testimony of them, that although they worship the Sun and
Moon, yet they acknowledge one God, Creator and Governor of all things; and do
believe the rewards and punishments of another life to be according to men's
good or bad actions in this life. But withal they worship Idols called
Pagodes, after such a terrible representation as we make of Devils, whom they
assert to have lived formerly upon earth, and to have been famous for sanctity
and miracles, and to whom they address themselves, as Mediators to the Supreme
God for them. The Kingdom of Siam is supposed to have been the ancient Seat of
the Bramans, from whence the Religion of the Indies did spread it self: and
here Schouten, Schoutens descript. of Siam. p. 141.
who lived long among them, says, that the common persuasion of the Gentiles,
although different in other points, is, that there is one Supreme God, who
created all things, and after him many inferior Gods in Heaven; that men shall
receive rewards and punishments in another life according to their actions
here. And that this Religion has been delivered down to them by the succession
of many ages; and confirmed by the Testimony of Saints, whose memory they
worship in their Images, which they have set up like so many lesser Deities:
who have merited Heaven by their good Works. The Ceremonies of their worship,
the nature of their Images, the manner of their Oblations, the customs of their
Talapois, (or Friars) are such, that, some few things excepted, one would
imagine no great difference between the Varelles of Siam, and the Jesuits
Church and devotions there. M. de Bourges, Relation du voyage de Mons. l'
Eveque de Beryte, c. 13. p. 170.
who has given an account of the late French Mission into those parts,
confesses, that their external devotion to their Images is extraordinary, that
they offer no bloody sacrifices, but all their oblations are of the fruits of
the earth: and that they free themselves from the charge of Idolatry, because
they acknowledge and worship one God, who is Lord over all; and that their
Images are intended to preserve the Memories of their Saints, that by the sight
of them the people might be excited to imitate their virtues. And it is very
true, says he, that the Priests of Siam do thus answer the Christians who
charge them with Idolatry, and think themselves no more guilty than the
Missionaries of the Church of Rome who charge them. But he thinks, he has
cleared the difference between them by saying, that those of Siam are more
uncertain in the belief of the Supreme God, and defective in giving any
peculiar worship to him: and that they terminate their worship absolutely upon
their Idols, and ask of them those things, which God alone can give. As to the
former, we have seen the general consent of the Indians in the belief of a
Supreme God, (which is no token of their uncertainty) and that many of them did
think internal worship most proper to him; and for the latter, if they suppose
those Deities to be so by participation, and subordinate to the Supreme, I do
not see, how the difference is made appear between the addresses they made to
their Saints by their Images, and those made in the Church of Rome; unless it
be sufficient to say, that the Pope at Rome has only power to Canonize Saints,
and not the High Priest of Siam. And therefore Campanella very wisely confesses
upon these principles, Campanel. Atheism. triumph. c. 11. p. 155.
the Heathens were no more guilty of Idolatry than themselves, in case the
persons they worshipped had real virtues: and he does not blame the wiser
Gentiles, but the common people who forgot the true God, and worshipped their
Varelles or Images with the worship of Latria; which the Church of Rome
likewise gives to the Cross: but of these things afterward.

If from the Indies, the model of this Discourse would allow us to search into
the Idolatries of these Northern parts, we should find that the Nations which
were the deepest sunk into Idolatry, did yet retain a sense of one Supreme
Deity. Among whom we may justly reckon our Saxon Ancestors; and yet from the
Gothic Antiquities which have been lately published, we have reason to
believe, that there was a Supreme God acknowledged among them too. For in the
Edda of Snorro Sturleson which contains the ancient Religion of the Goths; Edda
Islandorum edita a Resenio Hauniae. A. D. 1665.
the first Question proposed is, who was the Supreme, and the most ancient of
the Gods? To which the Answer is, that the most-ancient of the Gods is called
Alfader, the Father of all: and he had twelve names which are there enumerated:
and after it is said of him, that This God lives for ever, and governs all
things, Mytholog. 304.
that he made the Heaven, and Earth, and Air, and all things in them; and which
is the greatest of all, he made Man and gave him a Soul that should live for
ever, although the body be destroyed; and that those who were good should be
with him in a place called Gimle or Wingulf, but those that were bad to Hela,
and from thence to Niflheim. Which Niflheim, they add, was made many ages
before the Earth; and then they proceed to the creation of things, which is
there reported after a fabulous manner. It is true, this Tradition came to be
corrupted among them, when the attributes and worship belonging to this God
were given to that Prince who conducted the Goths from their former Seat about
the Palus Maeotis into the Northern Regions, who was called Odin, or Woden; and
so there came in such a confusion in their Idolatry as was among the Greeks
between Jupiter Olympius, and him of Creet. But since they do mention this Odin
as chief of the Asae, and tell the circumstances of his leading the people
first to one place, then to another, they cannot mean by him, the same God whom
they assert to have been from eternity, and to have created all things: but all
this confusion did arise among them and other Nations, when vain and ambitious
men did take upon them the names of the Deity on purpose, that they might have
worship given to them; and such a one this Odin is described to have been by
all the Northern Historians; and from hence likewise the names of Deified men,
have been given to him whom they worshipped for the Supreme God. Thus also Thor
was the Son of Odin; yet in some of the Northern parts, they worshipped the
Supreme Deity under his name, attributing the power over all things, even the
inferior Deities to him. And accordingly he was worshipped with a Crown on his
Head, a Scepter in his hand, and twelve Stars about him; as he is described by
Olaus Magnus and others; Olai Magni hist. l. 3. c. 3.
and Ioh. Magnus says, that Thor was worshipped in the Golden Temple at
Upsalia, tanquam potentissimus and summus omnium Deorum; Steph. Stephan.
Comment. in Sax. Gr. l. 6.
and to this day among the most barbarous Laplanders the Supreme God is
worshipped under the same representation of Thor, Ola. Worm. Mon. Dan. l. 1. c.
4.

Alb. Crant. Vandal. l. 1.

Ioh. Magn. hist. Goth. l. 1. c. 8.

Schesser. Lappon. c. 7. p. 61. c. 10.


( as we are informed by a late credible Writer) and to him they give besides,
the name of Iumala: under him they worship a Deity, whom they call Storjunkare,
or Viceroy, like the Tartars Natagay; under whose care they suppose all
inferior creatures to man to be, and therefore they living much by hunting,
make many supplications to him, and worship him under the representation of a
rough hollow stone, which as rude and barbarous as they are, they are far
enough from thinking to be the Deity it self, but only a Symbol to represent
him. And the Idolatrous inhabitants of Samogitia, although they worship a
multitude of Gods under several names, and as having a particular care over
some things, and a sort of Serpents as Ministers of their Gods, yet they
confess a Supreme God: so Lasicius says, Ioh. Lasicius de Samogit. p. 46.
they have one omnipotent God, but many Zemopacii, or terrestrial Gods; which
he there at large enumerates; and the same is acknowledged by Ioh. Meletius,
Ioh. Meletii ep. de Relig. Boruss.
who lived among them and describes their Idolatrous customs in an Epistle to
Georg. Sabinus, A. D. 1553. who says, that in the first place they invocate
Occopirnus, the God of Heaven and Earth; and then the inferior Deities who are
set over the Sea, Air, Spring, Woods, etc. Thus far I have clearly proved, that
the acknowledged Idolatry of the present world, does not exclude a Supreme God,
but either the Idolaters suppose him to be above their worship, or think it not
unlawful to worship inferior Deities with the same external acts of worship
which they perform to the Supreme God.

The last thing I shall prove the consistency of Idolatry with giving Sovereign
Worship to the Supreme God by is,. 17.
from the Testimony of those Fathers who have charged such Christians with
Idolatry, concerning whom there could be no dispute whether they believed and
worshipped a Supreme God.

Athanasius frequently lays this to the charge of the Arians, Athanas. c.
Arian. orat. 1. p. 286. ed. Par.
that by giving adoration to the Son of God, supposing him to be a Creature,
they did bring in the Heathen Idolatry among Christians: (...), which words are
the more remarkable, because he accuses them of doing the same thing, which S.
Paul charges the Gentiles with; which therefore does not imply, the passing by
the worship of the Creator, but giving the same divine worship to a creature,
which they do to the Supreme God. The same words he repeats afterward in the
same Oration, and desires the Arians to show the difference between the Greeks
and them, p. 296.
if they believed Christ not to be the true God, but only by participation, as
the Greeks supposed their Gods to be. The force of this argument were wholly
lost, if either the Greeks supposed many independent Deities, or Idolatry were
inconsistent with the acknowledgement of one True God; for the Arians might
upon either of those grounds have showed the disparity between them and the
Greeks. Afterward he says expressly, they fell into the Polytheism of the
Greeks; p. 297.
from whence it unavoidably follows, that their Polytheism did not suppose
several Deities of necessary and eternal existence; but one Original and
Supreme God, and the others only made so by participation from him. If it be
impossible for a man who has a right opinion of Gods incomparable excellency
above the most noble creatures, to attribute the honor due to God alone, to
that which he conceives to be a mere creature; then the Arians were unjustly
charged with Idolatry; for they were supposed to do that, which it seems is
impossible to be done: for they asserted, Christ to be a mere creature, and yet
Athanasius says, they were therein guilty of Idolatry, although they believed
God to be incomparably above his creatures, in as much as all creatures, and
Christ himself had what he had by participation from him: and whatever
excellencies are attributed to a mere creature, as to Power, or Wisdom or
Goodness, supposing them to be derivative from a Superior Being, they do still
suppose an incomparable distance between the Creator and the creature. And it
is farther observable in Athanasius, that he does not lay the force of his
argument in any distinction of the degrees of the divine worship, but uses
promiscuously the terms of Latria and Dulia, as to the worship given to a
creature; for where he speaks afterward of the Arians and Gentiles agreeing in
giving divine worship to a creature, Orat. 3. p. 385.
he thus expresses it, (...), giving the worship of Dulia to a creature as well
as to the Creator; not as though he looked on the worship of Dulia as distinct
from Latria, but by using these words promiscuously he shows, that he
understood by both of them that divine worship which is alone proper to God,
and which being given to a creature makes it Idolatry. He farther says, that
supposing what excellencies we please in Christ, p. 387.
although derived from God, yet if we withal suppose him to be a mere man, if
we give divine worship to him, we shall be found (...) worshippers of man, i.
e. such kind of Idolaters as the Heathen were in the worship of Deified men:
from which nothing can be more evident, than that the supposing the most real
excellencies in a creature to have been by participation from God, does not
take off from the guilt of Idolatry, when that worship is given to the
creature, which belongs only to God. S. Athanasius farther argues, that nothing
but the divine nature is capable of adoration, and not any created excellency
how great soever it be. p. 394.
For says he, if the height of glory did deserve adoration, then every
inferior creature ought to worship the Superior; but it is no such matter,
(...), for one creature is not to worship another, but a servant his Lord, and
the creature God. From hence Peter forbad Cornelius who would have worshipped
him saying, For I also am a Man. And the Angel S. John saying, See thou do it
not, for I am also thy fellow servant; worship God. Whence he infers, nor that
the Angel complemented S. John, not that S. Peter only did it to show his
humility, but (...), that it is proper only to God to be worshipped, without
any distinction of the nature, kinds, or degrees of worship. But how many
distinctions would T. G. and his Brethren make before they would grant that
proposition? It is true, say they, of Latria, sovereign and absolute worship,
which is proper only to God; but not of an inferior kind of divine worship,
which may be given to a creature on the account of divine excellencies
communicated to it by God: This we may suppose was the Answer of the Arians;
but S. Athanasius was not certainly so weak a man to argue at this rate, if he
had supposed this a sufficient answer; for he could not but foresee it; and a
man of so much understanding, as it is evident he was, would have prevented
this answer if he had thought it to the purpose; but instead of that, he sets
himself to prove, that the Angels, knowing themselves to be creatures, have on
that account rejected all divine worship; on the other side the Angels are
commanded to worship Christ, and Christ did receive divine worship; therefore,
says he, let the Arians burst themselves they can never make it appear that
Christ would have been worshipped, if he had been a creature. And to prevent
all subterfuges in this matter, in his fourth Oration, Orat. 4. p. ^64.
he argues against joining Christ together with God in our prayers to him, if
he were a creature, (...). No man would ever pray to receive any thing from God
and Angels; or from God and any creature. Little did Athanasius think of men's
joining God and the Saints, or God and the B. Virgin in their prayers or
praises: little did he imagine, that ever it would have been received in the
Christian Church, to conclude their Books with a Doxology to God and the B.
Virgin, Laus Deo and B. Virgini, as many of the greatest reputation in the
Church of Rome have done: and as Baronius has done it very solemnly at the end
of every Tome of his Annals: as at the conclusion of the First, after the
mention of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, he adds, Baron. Ann. To. 1. in Fine.
Nec non and sanctissimae virgini Dei Genitrici Mariae, ut conciliatrici Divini
Numinis; ipsi namque sicut haec omnia nostra accepta ferimus, ita pariter and
offerimus; ut ipsa eadem qualiacunque sint dilecto filio suo porrigut, etc. And
in the end of the second he has these words, Tom. 2. A* 306. in Fin.
Et beneficii memor actura gratias (oration) ex more ad sanctissimae Dei
Genitricis Mariae pedes prona se sternat; ut Cui accepta fert Omnia, dono
offerat quicquid a Deo se ejus precibus intelligit consecutam. Is not this
joining God and the creature together, which Athanasius supposes no Christian
would ever do? but supposing they did it, he does not at all suppose them to be
excused from Idolatry in so doing. But Athanasius goes on showing, Athan. or.
4. p. 468.
that if the Arians confess Christ to be God, and to be of a distinct substance
from his Father, they must bring in Polytheism; or at least worship two Gods,
the one uncreated and unbegotten, the other created and begotten: and in so
doing they must oppose one to the other. For, says he, (...), we cannot see
one in the other, because of their different natures and operations. Which is
an argument I desire T. G. to consider the weight of. He is proving, that
supposing Christ to be of a different nature from God, although he had all
imaginable excellencies in him communicated from the Father, yet God could not
be worshipped in the worshipping of the Son; but these two worships must be
opposite to each other, because the one is the worship of a created, the other
of an increated Being. How far was Athanasius then from supposing, that the
worship given to any created Being on the account of communicated excellencies,
is at last carried to the Supreme, and terminated only upon him? For, he says,
that these two worships do (...) fight one against the other: and therefore who
ever do give such different worships, they must bring in more Gods than one,
which is an Apostasy from one God: where we still observe that Polytheism is
consistent as well as Idolatry, with the acknowledgement of one Supreme Being:
and that they are said to worship other Gods, who do believe the true, but give
divine worship to a Creature. And therefore he would have the Arians to reckon
themselves together with the Gentiles: and although they shun the reproach of
the name, yet they hold the same opinion with them: And it is to no purpose for
them to say that they do not worship Two uncreated Beings, for this is only to
deceive the simple: for although they do not worship two uncreated, yet they
worship Two Gods of a different nature, the one created, the other uncreated.
For, says he in these remarkable words, p. 469.
if the Heathens worshipped one uncreated and many created; and they worship
one uncreated, and one created, what difference is there between them and the
Gentiles? for that one whom they worship is but as the many which the Gentiles,
being of the same created nature together with them: therefore, he says, they
deny Christ and join with the Gentiles, giving the same worship to several
Gods. I do not think any proposition in Euclid can be made more clear, than it
is from these expressions of Athanasius, that he believed Idolatry to be
consistent with the belief and worship of one God. Epist. ad Adelph. p. 157,
158, 160, 161.
The same thing he urges in other places, but if this be not proof enough, I
know not what will be.

S. Gregory Nazianzen parallels those who worshipped the Son or Holy Ghost,
Greg. Nazian. orat. 40. p. 669.
supposing them to be creatures, with those who worshipped Astaroth or Chemosh
or Remphan, because they were creatures too: For whatever difference of honor
or glory there be, all creatures are our fellow servants, and therefore not to
be worshipped by us. Might not the Arians have chared Gregory Nazianzen to have
imitated Julian the Apostate upon as good reason as T. G. does me? For however
in words they professed to abhor the worship of Ashtoreth, or Chemosh, or
Remphan, as much as he did; yet he did not regard their professions, but
thought it reasonable to judge by the nature of their actions. And what
profaneness would T. G. have accounted this, to parallel the worship of the Son
and Holy Ghost with that of Chemosh and Ashtoreth? Yet we see Gregory does not
forbear making use of the similitude of the worship, although there were so
great a disparity in the objects. Gregory Nyssen says, Greg. Nyssen. in laud.
Basil. Tom. 3. p. 484.
that the Devil by the means of Arianism brought Idolatry again insensibly into
the world, persuading men to return to the worship of the creature by his
sophistry, and that Arius, Eunomius, Eudoxius and Aetius were his instruments
in restoring Idolatry under a pretense of Christianity. In another place, De
Fide ad simpl. Tom. 3. p. 38.
he has this considerable passage. God commands by the Prophet, that we should
have no new God, nor worship any strange God; but that is a new God which was
not for ever; and that is a strange God which is different from our God. Who is
our God? the true God; who is a strange God? he that has a different nature
from the true God. He that makes the Son a creature, makes him of a different
nature. And they who make him a creature, do they worship him or no? if not,
they join with the Jews, if they do worship him, (...), they commit Idolatry.
Therefore we must believe him to be the true Son of the true Father, that we
may worship him, and doing so, that we be not condemned as worshipping a
strange God. To the same purpose he argues against Eunomius; Greg. Nyssen. c.
Eunom. orat. 2. p. 450.
that it is the property of Idolaters to worship the creature, or any new or
strange God; and that they who divide the Father and the Son, must either
wholly take away the worship of the Son, or they must worship an Idol (the very
word used by S. Gregory) making a creature and not God the object of their
worship, (...), placing the name of Christ upon an Idol: that this was the
fault of the Heathen Idolaters that they did (...), p. 437.453.
worship those which were not Gods by nature, and therefore could not worship
the true God: where it is observable that he uses the word (...) both for the
worship given to Idols by the Heathens, and for that which is proper to God:
from which it is evident that these Fathers knew of no such distinction of the
nature of divine worship, as is understood in the Roman Church under the terms
of Latria and Dulia: for if they had, having to deal with subtle adversaries,
they would not have failed to have explained themselves in the matter; which
had been absolutely necessary to the force of their own arguments, if any such
distinction had been known or allowed in the Christian Church. Again he says,
that he that puts the name of Son to a creature (...) must be reckoned among
Idolaters; Orat. 4. p. 563.
for they, says he, called Dagon, and Bell, and the Dragon God: but for all
that they did not worship God; and therefore he still urges against Eunomius,
that either with the Jews he must deny the worship of Christ, or he must join
with the Gentiles in the worship of the creature. p. 443.


S. Basil charges the Arians and Eunomians with bringing in the Polytheism and
Idolatry of the Greeks; S. Basil. homil. 27. Sabel. and Ari.
for they who say, that the Son of God is a creature, and yet worship him as
God, do worship a creature and not the Creator, and so introduce Gentilism
again. And against Eunomius, C. Eunom. l. 4. (...).
he urges the same places and reasons, which I have already mentioned out of
Nyssen, viz. that if Christ be not the eternal God, he must be a new and
strange God; and to worship that which by nature is not God, is the fault S.
Paul charges the Heathen Idolaters with.

Epiphanius proves, Epiph. haeres. 64. n. 8.
that Christ's being a creature, and having divine worship given him, are
inconsistent according to the Scriptures: and that those who worship a
creature, fall under S. Paul's reprehension of the Heathen Idolaters, who did
call the creatures God: but true faith teaches us to worship the Creator and
not the creature. He thinks this Rule sufficient against all the arts and
sophistry of men, (...), that no creature ought to be worshipped. For, says
he, upon the same reason we worship one, we may worship all together with their
creator, (...): where we see he does not speak of such worship as does exclude
the Creator, but of that which is supposed to be joined together with his; nor
of a Sovereign Worship to be given to them, but of such as does suppose the
distance between the Creator and his Creatures. Upon this principle, Haeres.
69. n. 31.
he says, the Arians made the Son of God like to the Idols of the Heathens:
for if he be not the true God, he is not to be worshipped; nay, he adds, that
those who said Christ was to be worshipped although a creature, did build up
Babylon again, and set up the image of Nebuchadnezzar, and by their words as by
Musical instruments draw men to the worship of an Image rather than of the true
God. n. 36.
Is it credible, says he, that God should make a creature to be worshipped,
when he has forbidden men to make any likeness of things in Heaven or Earth,
and to fall down and worship it? when the Apostle makes this the Idolatry of
the Heathen that they worshipped the creature as well as the Creator: wherein
they became Fools: for it is a foolish thing to attribute divinity to a
creature, and to break the first Commandment of the Law, Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Therefore, says he, the holy
Church of God does not worship any creature, but the Father in the Son, and the
Son in the Father, together with the Holy Ghost. To the very same purpose, he
speaks in his Ancoratus. Ancor. n. 50.
If the Son of God be a creature, he is not to be worshipped; for it is folly
and wickedness to worship a creature. But these are not the only persons whom
Epiphanius charges with such Idolatry as is consistent with the belief of one
True God: for he charges those with Idolatry who gave Divine Worship to the B.
Virgin; and says, Haeres. 78. n. 23.
that this was that very Idolatry which God condemned in the people of Israel,
(...) there shall be worshippers of the dead: which worship of the B. Virgin,
was offering up a Cake to her ( which surely is not so much as men's offering up
themselves to be her slaves, and offering up their devotions and services to
her) yet this Epiphanius cries out upon as rank Idolatry, Haeres. 79. n. 4.

78. n. 23.


and destructive to their Souls who did it, and the device of the Devil; who
always brought in Idolatry, says he, 79. n. 5.
under fair pretenses. Which of all the Prophets ever suffered a man to be
worshipped, not to speak of a woman? And although she have never so great
excellencies, yet her nature remains the same with others: But neither is Elias
to be worshipped, although still alive; nor S. John, although he received
extraordinary favor from Christ; nor Thecla, nor any other of the Saints. For,
says he, the old deceit shall not prevail over us, to leave the living God,
and to worship the things that are made by him: for they, says S. Paul, served
and worshipped the creature more than the Creator, and therein became Fools.
But if it be not lawful to worship Angels, how much less to worship the
Daughter of Anna? Of whom our Savior said on purpose (...); n. 4.
what have I to do with thee? Lest any should think more than was fitting of
her, he calls her Woman, as foreseeing the Schisms and Heresies that would come
into the world on her account. We are not to imagine that these people were so
silly to take the B. Virgin for the Great God, nor that they did forsake the
worship of God and Christ for that of the B. Virgin; but all that Epiphanius
says of them is, that they brought her in (...) instead of a Deity, i. e. that
they gave divine honor to her; and whosoever did give this to a creature, they
looked on them as guilty of forsaking the true God, however they might in words
still profess and acknowledge him; So he charges those with Idolatry who
worshipped Iephthas daughter, 78. n. 24.
and Thermutis the daughter of Pharaoh; but it were madness to think that
either of these were esteemed by their worshippers, the Supreme Deity. But
Epiphanius fully explains himself, 79. n. 4.
when he says that Idolatry comes into the world through an adulterous
inclination of the mind, which cannot be contented with one God alone; like an
adulterous woman that is not satisfied with the chaste embraces of one Husband,
and wanders in her lust after many Lovers. Therefore as adultery is consistent
with the owning of one lawful Husband, so is Idolatry with the profession of
one true God. Therefore Epiphanius bids men, have a care of too great an
admiration of the Saints, lest it should lead them into this dangerous error;
78. n. 23.
that the safest way is to honor their Lord; that those are equally to blame
who too much extol the B. Virgin, as those who depress and vilify her; 79. n.
1.
too great praises being apt to become an occasion of others falling: 78. n. 23.
and therefore he repeats it twice as the saying he would have all Christians
remember, (...), Honor the Virgin, but worship God; 79. n. 7, 9.
and lest any should think worship were a part of that honor which was due to
her, he says expressly, (...), Let no man worship the B. Virgin: for that
belongs neither to the Woman, nor to her Husband, nor to Angels, but to God
alone. How punctually has the Church of Rome followed the Counsel of
Epiphanius! But of this at large hereafter.

S. Cyril of Alexandria likewise makes those guilty of Heathen Idolatry, S.
Cyril. Alex. Thesaur. assert. 15. p. 149.
of worshipping the creature rather than the creator, who give adoration to
Christ supposing him to be a creature: and he undertakes to demonstrate out of
Scripture, that no creature ought to be worshipped as God; and that nothing
which does give adoration to God, ought to receive it from others: which he
proves, from the examples of Peter to Cornelius, the Angels to S. John, and
Manoe; and that whatever excellency we suppose in creatures, it does not make
them capable of divine worship; but although they have different excellencies,
yet one sort is not to worship another, but all of them are to worship God
alone, and his Son Christ Jesus. Again, if Christ be not God, Assert. 32. p.
307.
and we give him worship, we shall be found (...), worshipping the creature
rather than the Creator; (where we are to observe that S. Cyril applies (...)
to proper divine worship.) Again, it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God, p. 314.
and him only shall thou serve; how then, if he be a creature, can he be
worshipped by us? And elsewhere, De Incarn. unigenit. p. 700.
the question being proposed, whether we may worship Christ as man? he answers,
God forbid: for, says he, this would be vanity, Council. Ephesians. Cyril. (...).
31.
error and deceit; and we should differ nothing from those who worshipped the
creature rather than the Creator, and be liable to the same charge S. Paul
draws up against the Heathen Idolaters, viz. that they changed the Truth of God
into a lie, etc. and at large there shows, that this would be relapsing into
the old Idolatry. In his Commentaries on S. John he shows, Comment. in Evang.
Ioh. l. 2. p. 217.
that although Christ had never so divine excellencies communicated to him, yet
he was not a fit object for our worship if he were not the true God; because we
are bound to serve and worship God alone: and that if he be not so, not only
mankind but the Angels will be guilty of Idolatry in giving him adoration. l.
10. p. 850.
In his Dialogues about the Trinity, Dialog. 4. de Trinit. p. 512.
he says, it is one of the great blessings we have by Christ, to be delivered
from the worship of the Creature; but in case we return to that, the
institution of Moses will be found better than that of Christianity; for that
did strictly forbid all worship of creatures, and called men from them to the
worship of God alone; that this was the reproach of the Gentiles, p. 528, 529.
that they worshipped Creatures, and that the Christians returned to Gentilism,
if they worshipped a Creature together with God; (...): and afterward, he
calls this a falling from Christ; Dial. 5. p. 566.
all which does fully discover S. Cyrils judgment that Idolatry is consistent
with the acknowledgement and worship of one Supreme God.

Theodoret says, Theodor. de haeret. fab. l. 5. c. 3.
he that came to take away the worship of the creature, would never set it up
again: for this would be a most absurd thing, v. Theod. in Exodus q. 37. in Romans
1.24.
to bring them back again, (...) to the worship of creatures, where he uses
dulia likewise for the adoration that is due to the Son and Holy Ghost.

S. Chrysostom says, S. Chrysostom. Tom. 6. (...) p. 955.
that the Arians and Macedonians making one Great God, and another less and
created God, did bring in Gentilism again. For it is that which teaches men to
worship a Creature, and to make one great God, and others inferior. Such as
these S. Paul condemns, for giving worship to a creature: and they are accursed
according to the Law of Moses: which says, Cursed is every one who worships a
creature, or any thing that is made.

S. Ambrose goes farther and says, S. Ambros. de Fide, l. 1. c. 7. ad Great. De
Fide c. Arian. c. 2.
S. Paul foresaw that Christians would be brought to the worship of Creatures,
and therefore not only condemns the Gentiles, but warns the Christians by
saying, that God would damn those who worship the creature rather than the
Creator. Either therefore let the Arians cease to worship him whom they call a
creature; De Incarn. Sacr. c. 8.
or cease to call him a creature whom they worship; lest under the name of
worshippers they be found to commit the greater sacrilege.

S. Augustine says, S. Aug. c. Sermon. Arian. c. 29. c. Max. l. 1.
that the Arians by giving worship to Christ as God, whom they believed to be a
creature, did make more Gods than one, and break the Law of God which did
forbid the worship of more than one God; and set up Idols to themselves, l. 3.
c. 4. Ep. 66.
although they acknowledged one Great God, and made the Son and Holy Ghost
lesser and inferior Gods.

From this unanimous consent of the Fathers in charging the Arrians with
Idolatry, it most evidently follows, that according to them Idolatry is
consistent with the belief and worship of one Supreme God; which is not, the
only considerable advantage we gain by those Testimonies, but from them it
likewise appears, 1. That it is Idolatry to give divine worship to any
creature, how great soever the excellencies of that creature be; for none can
be imagined greater, than those which the Arians attributed to the Son of God.
2. That the Fathers looked on the worship of Dulia as divine worship; as
appears by their applying that term to the worship which was given to Christ.
3. That the name of an Idol does belong to the most real and excellent being,
when divine worship is given to it; for they give this name to Christ himself,
when he is worshipped as a Creature. 4. That relative Latria is Idolatry, when
given to any Creature. For this was all the Arians subterfuge, that it could
not be Idolatry to worship Christ as a Creature, because they worshipped him
only as the Image of God, and relatively terminating their worship on God the
Father through him: notwithstanding which answer of theirs, the Fathers with
one consent, declare such worship to be Idolatry; and that it would make way
for the worship of any creature, and was the introducing of Heathen Idolatry
under a pretense of Christianity. These things which are here only observed in
passage, will be of great use in the following Discourses.

CHAP. II. Of the Nature of Divine Worship.
. 1.
I Now come to the second Enquiry, Wherein the Nature of that Divine Worship
lies, which being given to a creature makes that Worship Idolatry? And that I
may proceed with all possible clearness in this matter, I shall enquire, 1.
What Worship is? 2. What Divine Worship is, and what are the proper acts of it?
3. How the applying of these Acts to a Creature, does make the worship of it
Idolatry?

worship is. Aquinas has given this distinction between honor and worship;
Aquin. 2.2. q. 102. art. 2.
that honor is quaedam recognitio excellentiae alicujus, an acknowledgement of
another excellency, but cultus or worship in quodam obsequio consistit,
implies subjection to another. The foundation of this distinction does not lie
so much in the force and signification of the words, as in the different
effects that excellency alone considered has upon our minds; from what it has
when it is joined with Superiority and a Power over us. Mere excellency does
produce only in our minds a due esteem according to the nature and degrees of
it; which is a debitum morale, as the Schoolmen speak, from us toward it, i.
e. something which according to nature and reason we ought to give it, and
therefore it is accounted a part of natural justice, to esteem whatever
excellencies we apprehend to be in others, although we receive no benefit by
them our selves; and whatever implies a real excellency, whether it be
intellectual or moral, whether infinite or finite, whether natural or acquired,
it deserves an estimation suitable to its kind and degree. But the honor which
is due to excellency does not only lie in an act of the mind; but in a
correspondent inclination of the will to testify that esteem by such outward
expressions as may manifest it to others; and that either by words, which is
called Praise; or by gestures, as bowings of the body; or by facts, as gifts,
statues, etc. All these Aquinas tells us do belong to honor. q. 103. art. 1.
But Worship implies something beyond this; which is subjection to anotheron
the account of his Power over us; for we may express honor and esteem toward
equals or inferiors, because the reason of it may be in those as well as
others; therefore there must be a different duty in us with respect to
Superiority; and this is worship. So the Schoolmen define adoration; adorare
non dicimur, nisi in dignitate constitutos, quos nobis Superiores cognoscimus,
says Vasquez. Vasquez in 3. part. Tho. disp. 93. c. 1.
Honor potest esse ad aequalem, says Suarez, Suarez. in 3. part. disp. 51. q.
25. sect. 1.
juxta illud ad Romans 12. honor invicem praevenientes; adoratio vero respicit
alium ut excellentem and superiorem. Ex part adorantis plane necessarium est,
says Tannerus, Tanner. Theolog. Scholast. Disp. 5. de Rel. q. 2. dub. 1. n. 27.
ut is rem adorandam concipiat, tanquam aliquo modo se superiorem seu
praestantiorem. But more fully Bernardus Pujol, Pujol. de sacro adorat. cultu
disp. 1. sect. 1.
Adoratio est submissio quaedam and quasi humiliatio, quam subditus facit
propter excellentiam superioris, and in honorem illius: and Gamachaeus,
Gamache. Comment. in 3. p. Th. q. 25. de Adorat.
Adoratio essentialiter includit subjectionem ac submissionem aliquam. Adoratio
est inferioris ad superiorem, says Ysambertus: Ysambert. in 3. part. Thom. ad.
q. 25.
Cardinal Lugo goes farther, Lugo de mysterio Incarn. disp. 33. n. 2.
saying of Cultus, se apud probatos auctores videre, semper eam vocem applicari
ad significandam reverentiam erga superiores. And although Arriaga thinks
Cultus of a larger signification, Arriaga in 3. Th. disp. 50. sect. 1.
yet the definition he gives of adoration is, that it is honor exhibitus
superiori in signum submissionis and humiliationis. Bellarmine makes the first
act of adoration, to be in the mind, and that only the apprehension of the
excellency of the object; but the second in the will, to be not only an
inclination of it toward the object, but a willing by some internal or
external act to acknowledge the excellency of the object and our subjection:
and to these he adds, the external act, either of bowing the head, or bending
the knee, or some other token of subjection. So that Bellarmine agrees with the
rest in making the formal act of adoration to be subjection to a superior:
Bellarm. de sanct. beatit. l. 1. c. 12.
but withal, he makes the mere apprehension of excellency to include the
formal reason of it; whereas mere excellency without Superiority does not
require any subjection but only estimation. For let us apprehend never so great
excellency in a Person that has no Authority over us, the only effect of it
in us, is only a mighty estimation; whereas the apprehension of Power and
Authority in a Person, where there is not that opinion of excellency does
naturally incline men to submission to him. Nay, although we apprehend a
conjunction of Excellency and Power together, if that power does not respect
us, we find no inclination in our selves by any acts to testify our subjection
to it. As if we apprehend the greatest things in the world of the Emperor of
China, or Iapan; how does that apprehension move us to express any acts of
subjection to either of them? we are well enough contented for all that to let
them govern at home, and think it more our own interest and duty to submit to
those who have the Power over our Selves. Nay, yet farther, if according to the
Epicurean Hypothesis, we could suppose God himself to be a most excellent
being, but to exercise no power or Authority over the world, there would be
still reason for a great esteem left; but not for the subjection of our selves
to him: and we might express that esteem by praises, and other testimonies of
his honor; but there would be no ground for any proper service or worship of
him; either in prayers or thanksgivings, or any rites of Religious worship
which imply any dependence upon him, or subjection to him. So that the notion
of Honor and Worship are in themselves distinct things, the one arising from
the apprehension of excellency, and the formal reason of the other, being
Superiority and a Power over us.

2. For the nature of Divine Worship;. 2.
it must consist in such a subjection of our selves to God; as is most suitable
to the apprehensions we ought to have of his infinite Power and Sovereignty
over us. And because his Sovereignty is supreme, absolute and peculiar to
himself; therefore our worship of him must approach as near to the expression
of this, as it is possible for us to come, i. e. it must be of the highest
nature, with the greatest submission of our souls to him, it must be entire,
not divided between him and others, and it must have such a peculiarity in it,
as may not be given to any besides himself. For whatever worship is common to
him and others, does not serve to express the sense of our minds as to his
peculiar Sovereignty over us; and this is one of the inviolable Rights of
Sovereignty, to have such acts of Worship appropriated to it, that the giving
of these to any other, is a violation of the Royal Dignity: and this has been
looked on as a crimen Laesae Majestatis, and to deserve as high a punishment as
any other whatsoever; because it is an immediate attempt upon the Sovereign
Power, and whatever lessens it tends to overthrow it. If then God be
acknowledged by all to have the only Supreme Power over us, nothing can be more
unreasonable in it self, nor a greater affront to his Majesty, than to make all
outward expressions of our duty to him common to himself and his Creatures.

I know it is not denied by T. G. or his Brethren, that there is a Sovereign
Worship which belongs to God: but we are to consider, T.G. p. 178. p. 288.
that withal they tell us, (1.) That the external acts of adoration or worship
are equivocal, and sometimes may signify the honor which belongs to God, and
sometimes that which belongs to the Creature. (2.) That even sacrifice it self,
which they look on as most peculiar to God and an acknowledgement of the
absolute worship due to him, does receive the formality of such an act from an
intention to profess a total submission of our selves to God as the Supreme
Author of life and death; otherwise T. G. says, T.G. p. 182.
the material action of sacrifice may be done for several ends and intentions.
By which it appears that upon the whole matter, the nature of divine worship is
not, according to them, to be taken from any external acts, but from the inward
intention of the mind.

But that there are some peculiar external acts of Divine Worship which ought
to be attributed to none but to God himself; I prove, 1. From the nature and
design of Religious worship. 2. From the Law of God appropriating some acts
only to God. 3. From the practice of the Christian Church, condemning those for
Idolatry, who have given them to any creature.

1. From the nature and design of Religious worship, which is to put a
difference between the worship we give to God and to his Creatures. For since
God has appointed Government among men, it is plain that his intention was,
that some kind of worship should be given from some of his creatures to others,
although of the same nature with themselves; for where there is a power to
punish and to reward, there is the foundation of worship in those who are under
that power: which worship lies in expressing a due regard to that power, by a
care not to provoke it, and an endeavor to obtain the favor of it; which
being among mankind living in Society with each other, is therefore called
civil worship. Which denomination it does not lose although we give that
worship to Superiors upon a Religious account, i. e. though I give worship to
my Sovereign with a respect to God, because he has commanded it, and I intend
to honor him by it; yet the worship does not take its denomination from my
intention, but from the nature of the Act, which being civil, the worship
continues to bear that name. By which we see that the external circumstances
which do accompany men's acts, are those which do so circumscribe and limit
them, that from thence they become either civil or Religious. I cannot
therefore but extremely wonder to see men of understanding so much to seek in
this matter, because the same external acts are common to divine and civil
worship; but what then? does it therefore follow that there is no certain way
to discriminate these one from the other? I grant the same external act of
adoration may be used to men which is used to God; as Abraham bowed to the
Children of Heth in token of civil respect, as well as when he worshipped God;
but could not any one that considered the circumstances make a plain difference
between these two sorts of adoration? When the Roman Emperors would have
divine honors given to them, were any of the people of Rome so senseless to
say they knew no difference between them and the worship given them before,
because they might use the same external acts of adoration in both cases?
Suppose the Pope one day to sit on, a throne as a temporal Prince, and on that
account summoning his subjects to give homage to him, and another day to be
placed upon the Altar, as he is after his election by the Orders of the Roman
Church, Ceremon. Romans l. 1. sect. 6.
there to receive adoration from the Cardinals as the Vicar of Christ; would
any man say he could see no difference in these, because the same postures may
be used in both? Although then the outward acts may be the same, yet the
signification of those acts may be far from equivocal, because determined by
the circumstances which do accompany them. I grant then, that the mere external
act of adoration in bowing or kneeling, may be given both on the account of
honor and worship, i. e. upon the account of excellency, and superiority; as
some of the Patriarchs bowed to Angels, as a token of honor of their
excellencies, and not out of Religious worship; and men may bow and kneel to
their Sovereign Princes on the account of civil worship; and Children to their
Parents in token of their subjection to them; as well as creatures to their
Creator in their solemn acts of devotion: but I say in all these cases, the
different signification of these acts is to be gathered from the circumstances
of them.

. 3.
And that acts of Religious, and civil worship might be distinguished from each
other, came the appointment of set times and places, and solemn rites for the
performance of Religious worship. From hence Cicero gives that definition of
Religion, De Invent. l. 2. c. 53.
Religio est, quae superioris cujusdam naturae (quam divinam vocant) curam
ceremoniamque affert: therefore they thought the solemn rites and circumstances
of Religious worship were sufficient to discriminate the nature of that worship
from any other: and these they thought so peculiar to the divine nature, that
whatever Being they gave this solemn worship to, they thought to deserve the
name of a Deity although inferior and subordinate: because these acts of
worship were appropriated to a Divine Being. Aquinas cannot deny that there are
some external acts of Religion so peculiar to God that they ought not to be
given to any other; Aqu. 2.2. q. 81. art. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
and on this account he makes Religion a moral virtue, and a part of justice,
because it is its office reddere cultum debitum Deo, to give God the worship
which belongs to him; now, says he, because the excellency of God is peculiar
to himself, being infinitely above all others, therefore the worship which
belongs to him ought to be peculiar. Ad Religionem pertinet, says Cajetan,
Cajet. Comment. in Aq. 2.2. q. 81. art. 3.
exhibere reverentiam uni Deo, secundum unam rationem, in quantum sc. est
primum principium creationis and gubernationis rerum. But since this reason of
Religious worship, from the creation and government of the world, is so
peculiar to God, as to be incommunicable to any else besides him, is there not
all the reason in the world that the Acts of this worship should be peculiar to
him too? And upon this ground Aquinas does grant it in the case of sacrifice;
Aq. 2.2. q. 85. art. 2.
hoc etiam videmus in omni Republica observari, quod summum Rectorem aliquo
signo singulari honorant, quod cuicunque alteri deferretur esset crimen laesae
Majestatis; and ideo in lege divina statuitur poena mortis iis qui divinum
honorem aliis exhibent. From whence we infer, not only that there ought to be
peculiar external acts of Religious worship appropriated to God, but that the
giving the worship done by those acts to any creature, is a crime of the
highest nature. The same Aquinas, Aqu. c. Gentes c. 120.
disputing against the Heathens, says, that it is an unreasonable thing, to
those that hold one first principle, to give divine worship to any other
besides him: and we give worship to God, not that he needs it; but that hereby
the belief of one God may be confirmed in us by external and sensible acts,
which cannot be done, says he, unless there be some peculiar acts of his
worship, and this we call divine worship. Besides, this external worship is
necessary to men, to raise in their minds a spiritual reverence of God; and we
find that custom has a great influence on men's minds; but it is a custom among
men that the honor or worship given to the Supreme Governor should be given
to none else; therefore it ought to be much more so toward God; because if a
liberty be allowed of giving this worship to others of a higher rank and not
only to the supreme, then men and Angels might give divine worship to one
another. To which he adds, that the benefits we receive from God are peculiar
to him, as that of creation and preservation, and that he is our Lord by a
proper title, and Angels and the best of creatures are but his servants,
therefore we ought not to give the same worship to them that we do to God as
our Lord. In his disputation about Idolatry, Aq. 2.2. q. 94. art. 2.
he shows, that the command Exodus 20. does reach to external as well as
internal worship; and he argues against those, who pleaded that all visible and
external worship ought to be given to other Gods, and only internal to the
supreme God; as being much better, upon this principle, that the external
belongs only to him, to whom the internal belongs; and he disputes against
those Heretics, who thought it lawful in time of persecution to give external
worship to Idols, as long as they preserved the true faith in their minds; for,
says he, the external worship is a profession or sign of the internal, but as
it is a pernicious thing for a man to speak contrary to his mind; so it is to
act contrary to it, and therefore S. Augustine condemned Seneca as so much the
more culpable in the worship of Idols, because he acted against the sense of
his own mind. In the next article, art. 3.
he shows, that Idolatry is a sin of the highest nature; for, says he, as in a
commonwealth, it is the greatest crime to give the honor due to the Sovereign
to any other (for this is as much as lies in a man to put all things into
disorder and confusion) so among the sins that are committed against God, that
seems to be the greatest, whereby a man gives divine worship to a creature: and
says, that it includes blasphemy in it, because it takes away from God the
peculiarity of his dominion; Cajetan there says, that the Idolater, as much as
in him lies, tollit a Deo suam singularem excellentiam qua solus est Deus; robs
God of that peculiar excellency whereby he is God alone. Thus we see the
necessity of some peculiar external acts of divine worship is asserted by these
men in order to the preserving the belief and worship of one God in the world.
Suarez grants, Suarez in 3. p. q. 25. disp. 51. sect. 4.
that as the excellency of God is singular and above all creatures; so he ought
to have a singular and incommunicable worship, as is plain from those words of
Scripture, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve:
but then he makes this worship peculiar to God, to consist chiefly in the
internal acts of the mind, which only in themselves and of their own nature are
such as do belong to the worship of God; but external acts are not so
determined of themselves, but they may be given either to God or to the
creature: however, he grants, that although outward acts be in themselves
indifferent, yet when sufficient Authority has apprepriated some acts as
peculiar to divine worship, they ought to be used for no other purpose; and
that if these acts of worship be applied to a creature, it makes that worship
at least external Idolatry, if it be not done ex animo and out of a false
opinion.

In this point of the external acts of divine worship,. 4.
these two things may be observed of the Divines of the Roman Church.

1. That in the general they confess, that there ought to be some peculiar
external acts of divine worship, as most agreeable to Gods incommunicable
excellency; and in particular, when they are pressed with any difficulties
from Scripture or Fathers, about not giving divine worship to a creature, then
they are sure to tell us, those places are to be understood of the worship that
is proper only to God. Thus they think to escape the force of that place which
is so evident, that it blinds them with the light of it; Mat. 4.10*
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; which was
certainly understood of an external act of worship; for the Devil said to
Christ, Fall down and worship me. Yes, say they, that is very true of the
adoration proper to God; but what is that? for they say there is no outward act
of adoration but is common to God and his Creatures. Tannerus excepts no
creature, Tanner. To. 3. disp. 5. de Rel. q. 2 dub. 1. n. 19.
inanimate or animate, but only the Devil; yet lest he should have gone too far
in this, he says afterward, that physically speaking God may be worshipped in
any creature, but then men must have a care that they do not truly and
properly worship the thing it self; but only use the external signs of divine
honor before it, applying them to what is represented. I confess this gives a
very slender account of our Saviors answer, for it seems he might physically
speaking have worshipped God, by falling down before the Devil; all the danger
was in the scandal and indecencie of it: but being done in a Wilderness, the
scandal of it, as to men at least, had not been great. Vasquez resolves the
case, Vasquez in 3. p. Thom. disp. 110. ^. 5.
that if the Devil appear to a man, he may do all the external acts of
adoration before him, provided he be not well assured it is the Devil, and that
he direct his worship to God: and that he proves by this demonstrative
argument, because all external acts of adoration are to be directed by the
inward intention of the mind; but he confesses many of their Divines allow only
a conditional adoration in this case; however it seems our Savior spoke a
little too peremptorily, in utterly refusing it upon any terms. But then they
tell us the Devil was too fancy, and demanded the absolute worship proper only
to God; i. e. says Vasquez, not merely the external act of adoration, disp.
94. c. 1.
but that inward submission of mind which is only due to God, which is more
than appears by the words. Bellarmine and the rest of them say that our Savior
refused to give the worship of Latria to the Devil; Bellarm. de sanct. beatit.
l. 1. c. 14.
by which it seems, our Savior did not answer to the purpose, for the Devil
expressed no more, than falling down and worshipping him; which according to
them might be done without Latria, by the same external act, but not the same
intention of mind: which not being in the power of him that demands, but only
of him that gives, nothing had been more necessary than to have expressly
required the intention of the mind, otherwise the Devil might have been easily
cheated by directing the intention of the external act quite another way; but
for all that we can see, the Devil was then to learn these subtilties. However,
this now serves to turn off the plainest places that would seem to prove, that
all external acts of Religious worship are to be given only to God. The
Heretics, says Arriaga, Arriag. in 3. p. Th. disp. 54. sect. 1. n. 5.
object many things out of Scriptures, and Fathers, and Councils, in which it
is said that God only is to be worshipped; but to all these we answer in one
word, that they only speak of the worship of Latria which is proper to God: and
so they would have answered thousands of places more, as well as those that are
urged against them: so that the reserving this worship as peculiar to God
serves them to very good purpose, viz. to turn off as with a wet finger
whatever is urged against them. So Bernardus Pujol without more ado sends away
all the Testimonies of the Fathers, Pujol de cultu Adorat. disp. 2. sect. 3. in
fin.
Ad loca sanctorum Patrum respondemus, illa intelligenda esse de adoratione
Latriae quae soli Deo tribuitur; and so fare them well, without any farther
examination. And yet some of these men upon better thoughts have concluded that
some of the places of Scripture cannot be understood of the worship of Latria.
For although Aquinas, Tannerus and several others, Aq. 2.2. q. 84. art. 1.
Tanner. ubi supra.
answer the instance of Mordecai refusing to worship Aman, with the common
shift, that he would not give Latria to him, yet Cajetan, Suarez, Vasquez,
Pujol and Arriaga, all conclude, that this is not to be understood of the
worship of Latria; but that Mordecai refused to use the same external act of
adoration, which among the Jews they were wont to give to God: wherein Cajetan
thinks, Cajet. in Aq.
he was not so wise as he might have been, because Jacob worshipped his Brother
Esau; Arriaga, that he did well though he followed an erring conscience:
Suarez, Vasquez, and Pujol, Suarez in 3. p. disp. 52. sect. 3.

Vasquez. disp. 97. c. 3.

Pujol. ib.


that he did prudently, because the constant using of that act of adoration to
Aman, which among them did belong to the worship of God, would have tended to
the dishonor of God and Religion, and have been a great scandal to the Jews.
Neither is Cajetan satisfied with the same answer to the instance of St. John's
offering to worship the Angel, for this were, says he, to charge St. John with
committing a very great sin, which the Angel hindered him from the consummation
of: but, says he, St. John intended no more than the greatest external act of
Reverence; but because so great reverence ought to be reserved only to God,
that some outward reverence might be appropriated to Him, therefore the Angel
forbad him giving it to him. Suarez confesses, that it cannot be understood of
Latria, but that the Angel put it off with a complement, as St. Peter did to
Cornelius: and with him the rest agree, either as a complement to his Person,
or to humane nature since the Incarnation: but Aquinas pertinently says, it
was to avoid the occasion of Idolatry, because the Angel immediately adds,
Worship God. Thus far we find they go in the avoiding of difficulties.

2. But when they deliver their minds freely, they reserve no one act of
external adoration as proper to God; and to be performed by all Christians. De
sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 12.
Bellarmin says, that fere omnes actus exteriores communes sunt omni
adorationi, almost all external acts are common to the adoration of God and the
Creatures, excepting sacrifice, and what belongs to that, as Temples, Altars
and Priests, which, he says, God has reserved to himself. Arriaga says,
Arriag. ad 3. p. disp. 51. sect. 6. in sine.
that there is no external act of adoration but may be given to creatures,
excepting only sacrifice; Suarez, Suarez in 3. p. quest. 51. sect. 4. quest.
52. sect. 3.
that sacrifice it self does not signify our acknowledgement of Gods
sovereignty of it self, but only by custom and imposition; for the killing of a
sacrifice does not of it self signify that God is the Author of Life and
Death. And for other parts of Religious worship he confesses, that Temples are
erected and Festivals kept to the honor of Saints, at least secondarily; that
they are worshipped with Fastings, Vigils, Pilgrimages, and such like; that
their worship is deservedly called Religious worship. 1. Because it consists of
Religious actions. 2. Because it is so nearly conjoined with divine worship. 3.
Because it tends to men's improvement in Religion. 4. Because it is founded in
sanctity, which is next to Religion. It seems then nothing is left to God, but
having the same things done to him in the first place, which may in a secondary
respect be done to his creatures; for we are told, T.G. p. 393.
that even Sacrifice it self may be offered to God for the honor of his
creatures. But what is this Sacrifice now among Christians, which is peculiar
to God? There is no other, says Arriaga, but that of the Altar; Disput. 52.
sect. 2.
and this, as Cajetan observes, Cajet. in 2.2. q. 86. art. 4.
cannot reach to all Christians, but only belongs to the Priests to offer it:
but instead of this, he says from Aquinas, that two sorts of spiritual
sacrifices do belong to all, viz. the offering up of their minds in devotion to
God, and the offering up the acts of other virtues. So that at last we see no
one external act of proper Religious worship is by them left as peculiar to
God, which all mankind are obliged to perform.

And to this purpose we have the plain resolution of Cardinal Lugo, which I the
rather mention because of his great Authority, and Eminency, and writing since
the rest; He puts the question, Whether there be any sign, Lugo de Mist.
Incarn. disp. 33. sect. 1. n. 22, etc.
or external act of adoration, which it is not lawful to give to any, but to
God alone? For, says he, genuflection, and smitting the breast, and such like,
are given to Saints. To this he answers, 1. That it is possible such a sign or
external act may be instituted by men, as may signify only that worship which
is proper to God. 2. That Sacrifice is not properly an act of adoration, but of
another kind distinct from it. 3. That there is no one external act of
adoration, which is proper to Latria, or the worship peculiar to God.

. 5.
But to what end were there any such thing as public Religious Worship among
men, on the account of Gods peculiar Sovereignty over us, if the acts of that
worship be not appropriated to himself? For there is no necessity of public
worship for the acts of the mind, which are performed out of the view of
others. What is public must be external; and if there be any necessity that
God be publicly owned and worshipped by us, as our only Lord and Almighty
Maker of Heaven and Earth; the very same natural reason which directs to this,
does likewise show, that what is intended for his public worship, ought to be
communicated to none else besides him. Neither is it enough, that he have the
first and chief place in worship, which only implies a superiority of order and
degree; but since he is acknowledged to be infinitely above all creatures, and
to be the sole Creator and Governor of the world, the acts of worship to him
as such, ought to be peculiar, and appropriated wholly to himself: For if other
Beings come to have a share, although secondarily, with him in the acts of his
worship, they ought to have a share with him in the proper reason of that
worship, i. e. in the Creation and Government of the world. But if Creation and
Providence be the Foundations of divine worship, and those do suppose infinite
and incommunicable perfections, on what pretense of reason can beings
infinitely distant from God, come to have a share in the Acts of Religious
worship, which were purposely designed for the acknowledgement of such a Being,
whom the most excellent creatures are bound to adore as well as we? Is not this
joining subjects together with their Sovereign in the highest expressions of
our duty to him? What Prince in the world would bear such an affront from an
Ambassador of a Foreign Prince, as that in a public Audience, when he is
introduced on purpose to express the Honor that is to be given to the Person
of the King, he should use all the same expressions of it, to his servants and
subjects who stand about him, that he does to himself? Would this be a just
excuse, that these were done to him in the first place, and only secondarily to
his servants? And if this would not be born by one Prince from the subject of
another, how much less from his own? And if Princes will not bear this from
their subjects, who are of the same nature with themselves; how can men be so
vain to imagine the great God will bear it from his creatures, to have no
public Religious act of worship given to himself, but what is given to those
who are confessed to be infinitely distant from him? It is not the supposition
of excellency in them will ever justify this: For let their excellency be
never so great, it is still but a created excellency: And their excellency can
never make them so much above us, as their being created makes them inferior
to God: and in acts of Religious worship, we ought not so much to consider our
distance from them, as their distance from God. Let them be never so much above
us, they are creatures still, and that sets them at an infinite distance from
him, whereas all their excellencies can make them but finitely distant from us.
Let them be never so excellent, they still worship the same God that we do, and
with the most profound adoration of Him; and if their excellency be consistent
with their worship of a Being infinitely above them, it is not sufficient to
make them an object of adoration to us. We are willing to give them the utmost,
their excellency requires from us (provided, we be well assured of it) and that
is, a mighty esteem of them, and a readiness to express our honor in
celebrating their praises, and commending them as Heroic patterns of goodness,
and (supposing them actually present with us) the expressing our esteem in the
highest tokens of respect that are used among men: Thus far we go; and if those
beings are such, as we suppose them, they would not have us to go farther; but
(as the Angel said to St. John) they would bid us, Worship God. But we dare not
use the same solemn Acts of Religious worship in places and at times set apart
for the service of the Great God, to any of his Creatures how excellent soever
they be: for this is an encroachment upon the Divine Majesty, and as Cajetan
expresses it, A taking away from him, as much as in us lies, that peculiar
excellency whereby he is God over all, Blessed for evermore. We dare not apply
those things to the worship of his creatures, which God has ever appropriated
to His own worship as the proper acts of it; such as Sacrifice, Incense, etc.
we dare not give that honor to his servants, which God has forbidden to be
given to any creature, such as incurvation to Images, Invocation of Persons,
etc. we dare not express our adoration of any created being in such a way as
does suppose those perfections which can be only in an uncreated being, as
knowing the desires of our hearts, help in trouble, pardon of sin, strength in
Grace, and receiving to Glory; we dare not make the outward acts of Religious
worship common to God and his creatures, for that would be repugnant to the
nature and design of Religious worship, which was intended for a public
manifestation of the peculiar service we owe to the Creator and Governor of
the World.

And herein those of the Church of Rome fall short of the Heathens themselves,
who had so great an apprehension of the necessity of some appropriate acts of
divine worship, that some of them have chosen to die, rather than to give them
to what they did not believe to be God. We have a remarkable story to this
purpose in Arrian and Curtius concerning Callisthenes. Alexander arriving at
that degree of vanity, Arrian de exped. Alex. l. 4. Curt. l. 8.
as to desire to have divine worship given him, and the matter being started
out of design among the Courtiers, either by Anaxarchus, as Arrian, or Cleo the
Sicilian, as Curtius says; and the way of doing it proposed, viz. by incense,
and prostration; Callisthenes vehemently opposed it, as that which would
confound the difference of humane and divine worship, which had been preserved
inviolable among them. The worship of the Gods had been kept up in Temples,
with Altars, and Images, and Sacrifices, and Hymns, and Prostrations, and such
like; but it is by no means fitting, says he, for us to confound these things,
either by lifting up men to the honors of the gods, or depressing the gods to
the honors of men. For, neither would Alexander suffer any man to usurp his
Royal dignity by the votes of men; how much more justly may the gods disdain
for any man to take their honors to himself? Which freedom of speech cost
Callisthenes his life, a little after. And it appears by Plutarch, Plutarch
vit. Artaxerx. Aelian. Var. hist. l. 1. c. 21.
That the Greeks thought it a mean and base thing for any of them, when sent on
an Embassy to the Kings of Persia, to prostrate themselves before them, because
this was only allowed among them in divine adoration; therefore, says he, when
Pelopidas and Ismenias were sent to Artaxerxes, Pelopidas did nothing unworthy,
but Ismenias let fall his Ring to the ground, and stooping for that, was
thought to make his adoration; which was altogether as good a shift as the
Jesuits advising the Crucifix to be held in the Mandarins hands while they made
their adorations in the Heathen Temples in China. Justin. l. 5.
Conon refused to make his adoration, as a disgrace to his City; and Isocrates
accuses the Persians for doing it, Isocrat. Panegyr.
because herein they showed, that they despised the gods rather than men, by
prostituting their honors to their Princes. Herodotus mentions Sperchies and
Bulis, Herod. l. 7.
who could not with the greatest violence be brought to give adoration to
Xerxes, because it was against the Law of their Country to give divine honor
to men. Valerius Maximus says, Val. Max. 6. c. 3. l
the Athenians put Timagoras to death for doing it; so strong an apprehension
had possessed them, that the manner of worship which they used to their gods,
should be preserved sacred and inviolable. And yet Artabanus in Plutarch, when
he was persuading Themistocles to do it, Plutarch in Themist.
made use of the very argument of a relative Latria, viz. that he was to do it
to the King as the Image of God that preserves all things; which according to
T. G. and his Brethren was a sufficient salvo for it. T.G. p. 190.
For why may not a Prince have this relative Latria given him, with far better
reason than a senseless Image, in as much as he represents God with much more
Authority and Majesty than any Image can do? I confess Cajetan has in some
measure proposed this objection, Cajet. in Aq. 2.2. qu. 103. art. 3.
but he only puts it as to man in general as made after the Image of God, viz.
Why God may not be worshipped in that Image as well as in an inanimate one? And
the answer he gives, shows how much he was troubled with it; for he
distinguishes of a twofold Image, viz. one that is capable of no honor for it
self; and another that is, viz. a rational Image such as man is; now, says he,
we may give a relative Latria, where the Image is not capable of honor for it
self; but not where it is. For what reason, I beseech him? I had thought, the
more lively the representation had been; and the more excellent the Image, it
had been the greater Motive to worship what was represented by it. Otherwise
the more deformed and unlike the Image is, the fitter it were for worship; and
I should think there were no comparison between the representation of God, in
the perfections of men's minds, and their dominion over the inferior creatures,
and that which is made of dull and senseless matter: and among men no Image so
fit to represent God, as that of a mighty Prince sitting upon his Throne of
Majesty, which strikes more awe and terror into men's minds, than the picture
of an old man upon a Church wall: and notwithstanding what T. G. has admirably
said on behalf of pictures (which I shall consider in its due place) I am still
apt to think, T. G. p. 88, 89.
that the nearer any being approaches to God in Majesty and Wisdom, it does
give more lively and powerful representation of him, as an object of worship;
why then may not we worship God in the Person of a great Prince, better than in
a curious Image or Picture? All the sense that I can find by way of answer in
Cajetan is this, That we ought not to worship God in a man although he be the
Image of God, to avoid the danger of giving divine worship to a Creature: very
well! but is it not a greater fault to give divine worship to man's creature
than to Gods? for a picture at the best is but the work of men's hands. But he
cannot deny, that in such a case the Latria passes to God, through such an
Image as a man or a Prince is; but because of the danger men are in of giving
divine worship to creatures, they ought to abstain from it. Very good! but is
there not as much danger of men's worshipping Stocks, and Stones, and Images, as
there is in worshipping Princes or mankind? And if a relative Latria will not
justify the one, much less certainly can it do the other. But of this
hereafter. The thing I observe now is, how careful even the Heathens have been,
notwithstanding they heard of the same pleas that are used in the Church of
Rome, to preserve the customs of external adoration peculiar to their Gods.

2. I come now to show, That God by his Law has appropriated some external
acts of worship to himself,. 7.
so as to make it unlawful to use them to any other besides him. Maimonides
says, That to make a man guilty of Idolatry by the Law of Moses, Maimon. de
Idol. c. 3. sect. 2, 3, 4, 5.
it was necessary that he were convicted of one of these two things. 1. Either
that he did use the acts of worship proper to the Idol, therefore the Sanhedrin
were to enquire not only whom men worshipped, but in what manner. Or, 2. That
he made use of any of those acts of worship to an Idol, which God has
appropriated to himself, for which he instanceth in Incurvation, Sacrifice,
Incense, and Oblations: and adds, That whatever worship was made proper to God
by their Law, the using of that to an Idol, although it were not the proper
worship of that Idol, made a man guilty of Idolatry. Here are two things
farther to be enquired into. 1. What those acts are which God did appropriate
to himself? 2. How far Gods appropriating them to himself does now concern us?
i. e. whether the Church has any liberty to alter the nature of those acts, so
as to make any to be common to God and his creatures, which were then peculiar
to God?

1. What those acts are which God did appropriate to himself? i. e. which he
commanded to be used to himself, and did forbid to be used to any other?

1. And of these, the most indisputable between us and our Adversaries is
Sacrifice. For they confess in words, that Sacrifice is so peculiar to God that
it ought not to be offered to any else; because the words of Scripture are so
plain to this purpose. Exodus 22.20.
He that sacrifices to any God save unto the Lord only, shall surely be put to
death: which words are cited by Aquinas to this purpose; Aquin. 2.2. q. 85.
art. 2.
and my Adversary T. G. does confess, T.G. p. 389.
that the offering of sacrifice not only by the custom of the Church but of all
mankind, as St. Austin teaches, is appropriated to signify the absolute
worship due only to God. It seems so much the more strange to me, that after
this he should contend, that Saints may have a share in the honor of
sacrifices, but he pretends, that all that their Church means by it, is no more
than giving God thanks by a sacrifice offered to him for the virtues and
prerogatives (for instance) he bestowed on the Blessed Virgin, p. 395.
although the sacrifice be offered to God and not to her. What the sense of
their Church is, will be best understood by the practice of it. In the Missal
of Sarum, A. D. 1554. and in the Portiforium of Sarum, 1556. and in an old
Sarisbury Missal, A. D. 1494. I find this prayer to be used by the Priest, when
he offers the Sacrifice, as the express words of the Rubric are, Suscipe
sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem quam ego indignus peccator offero in honor
tuo, B. Mariae and omnium sanctorum pro peccatis and offensionibus meis, and
pro salute vivorum and requie omnium fidelium defunctorum. In nomine Patris and
Filii and spiritus sancti acceptum sit omnipotenti Deo hoc sacrificium novum.

In the old and new Roman Missal, and the Missal of Paris, 1520. and the Missal
of Lions, it is thus, Suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc oblationem quam tibi
offerimus ob memoriam passionis, resurrectionis, and ascensionis Jesus Christi
Domini nostri; and in honor B. Mariae semper Virginis, and B. Iohannis
Baptistae, and sanctorum Apostolorum, Pauli, and istorum and omnium sanctorum,
ut illis proficiat ad honorem, nobis autem ad salutem, and illi pro nobis
intercedere dignentur in coelis, quorum memoriam facimus in terris, per
Christum Dominum nostrum.

In the old Monastic Missals, mentioned by Cardinal Bona, Bona de rebus
Liturg. l. 2. c. 9.
the Offertory ran in this Form, Suscipe sancta Trinitas unus Deus, hanc
oblationem quam tibi offerimus in memoriam beatae Passionis, Resurrectionis,
and Ascensionis Domini nostri Jesus Christi, and in honorem B. Mariae semper
Virginis, genitricis ejusdem Domini nostri, and omnium sanctorum and sanctarum,
Coelestium virtutum, and vivificae crucis, ut eam acceptare digneris, pro nobis
peccatoribus, and pro animabus omnium Fidelium defunctorum.

In the Ambrosian Missal, it runs thus, Et suscipe sancta Trinitas hanc
oblationem quam tibi offerimus pro regimine and custodia atque unitate
catholicae fidei, and pro veneratione quoque B. Dei genitricis Mariae,
omniumque simul sanctorum tuorum; and pro salute and incolumitate famulorum,
famularumque tuarum, etc.

In the old Missal of Illyricus, published by Cardinal Bona, Bona Append. p.
545.
the form in other things agrees with the Roman Missal, only after Jesus
Christi, it has, and in honorem sanctorum tuorum, qui tibi placuerunt ab
initio mundi, and eorum quorum hodie Festivitas celebratur, and quorum hic
nomina and reliquiae habentur, ut illis proficiat ad honorem, nobis autem ad
salutem, etc

I desire to know of T. G. whether this be no more than giving God thanks for
their virtues, when a propitiatory sacrifice is offered up to God for their
honor? and that their honor may be increased by it, and at the same time to
pray, that they would intercede with God for them. What is joining creatures
together with God in the honor of sacrifice, if this be not? How comes a
propitiatory sacrifice for sin, and that both for the quick and the dead, to be
turned into a sacrifice of thanksgiving for the Graces of a particular Saint?
How strangely would it have founded among the Jews, for a man to have offered a
sin-offering to give God thanks for the Faith of Abraham, or the meekness of
Moses, or the wisdom of Solomon? And at the same time when this sacrifice was
pretended to be offered only to God, to pray that they would intercede with God
for him. Is not the address to be made to him to whom the sacrifice is offered?
And yet we find, that this is not only practiced but justified and defended in
the Roman Church; for Bellarmin not only says, Bellarm. de cultu sanct. l. 3.
c. 4.
that the Mass of St. Peter is so called, because it is offered to God to give
thanks for the Glory conferred on him, but because he is at the same time
called upon as a Patron and Advocate with God. But says T. G. Honor is
nothing but a Testimony or Protestation of some excellency; and whether thanks
be given to God by words or by sacrifice for the Gifts and Graces he has
bestowed on such a person, it is an evident Protestation of such excellency in
that person, and consequently for his honor, though both words and sacrifice
be directed to God and not to him. Who denies, that it is for the honor of a
Person to praise God for him? but the Question is, if sacrifice be appropriated
to the sole Honor of God, how the Honor of Saints comes to be declared by it?
For a man whose understanding is not shrunk up as Beggars arms use to be, might
have stretched it at least so far, as to have considered, that sacrifice being
an external sign, there are two things to be looked at in it. 1. The
signification of that sign. 2. The term to which it is directed. Now the main
thing to be regarded in it as to Honor, is not the direction of it to its term
by the mind, for that is secret; but the external signification of it among
men. For, says Aquinas, Aqu. 2.2. qu. 85. art. 1.
the reason of sacrifices is, that men by some sensible external Actings should
make a Protestation by offering them to God, of the subjection and Honor that
is due to him: now if this sign may be made use of to signify any other thing,
it is not a peculiar and appropriate sign only for that purpose to testify our
subjection to God. And to return the kindness of his twitch, by an example far
more pertinent to the purpose than his was; how strange would it have been
thought among the Persians, where prostration was appropriated to their King as
a sign of subjection to him alone, for a man to have said to him, Sir, I fall
down before you in honor of the Captain of your Guards; or of such and such a
Minister of State: would the King have taken this for an appropriate act of
Honor to himself? So that though he falls down only to the King, if he
declares he intends it for the honor of another, he takes away by his words,
the significancy of his action: Thus if sacrifice be so appropriate to the
honor of God, that it cannot signify any thing else; then it is nonsense to
sacrifice to God for the Honor of another; if it may signify any thing else,
and be so used in the Church of Rome, then they do not reserve so much as
sacrifice for an appropriate sign of the absolute worship of God.

. 8.
2. Religious adoration is appropriated to God in Scripture; for so the command
runs, as it is explained by our Savior, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God,
and him only shall thou serve. Mat. 4.10.
They who would make the restrictive particle belong to the latter clause and
not to the first, do not attend to the reason of our Saviors using these
words, Council. Nicen. 2. Leonard Ruben. de Idolol. l. 2. c. 15. n. 1.

Bellar. de sanct. Beatit. l. 1. c. 14


which was to reject the Devils temptation about adoration; and it would not
have had force against the temptation, if men were more at liberty as to
worship, than they are as to service. And it is observed by those who have most
considered the importance of the Hebrew word, (...), that it does not signify
an act of the mind, but of the body, either by incurvation or prostration.
Although adoration be sometime taken for all the external acts of Religious
worship, as John 4.20. Acts 8.27. yet the general signification of it, is that
act of Religious Worship which is performed by the motion of the body. And so
adoration is accounted in the Schools one particular part of proper Religious
worship; Aquinas, Aq. 2.2. q. 84. art. 1, 2.
puts it before sacrifice, and makes that place of our Savior the foundation
of it; and among external signs, he makes this the greatest; and that it is
intended not barely to declare our inward Reverence, but that by the use of
this, our inward devotion may be more excited, it being natural for us to
proceed from sensible to intellectual acts. And it is observed by Ysambertus,
Ysambert. in 3. part.

Thom. ad q. 25. disp. 1. art. 4.


a late Professor of Divinity in the Sorbon, That where ever the Scripture
speaks of adoration, it is always expressed by some external sign, as a note
of subjection in him that adores toward him that is adored: (which observation
if understood of a corporeal sign, is not intended for Angels, but men, for
adoration is in Scripture attributed to Angels.) And he well observes, as to
the sense of Aquinas, That he must make the external sign necessary to the
formal act of adoration, because he ranks prayer among the internal acts, which
he could do upon no other reason, but because prayer may have its complete act
in the mind, which he supposed that adoration could not; and withal he proves
(contrary to the opinion of Suarez) That the internal acts of virtue, though
designed by the mind, as a token of submission to God, cannot be the proper
acts of adoration, because they are not adequate and proportionable signs to
express our submission to God. And therefore Damascen defined adoration to be
(...), Damascen. orat. 3. p. 775. Synod. 7. Act. 4. Vasq. in 3. p. disp. 93. c.
4.
a sign of subjection, and Anastasius Bishop of Antioch, (...), an outward
expression of honor, by which, says Vasquez, he does not mean any bare
honor, but that which implies subjection. But Damascen yet more fully says,
it is a sign, not barely of honor, but (...) (...), of submission and
humility, not as it is taken for that particular virtue, whereby an inordinate
value of our selves is repressed, but as it implies an acknowledgement of Gods
superiority and dominion over us. And it is observable that St. Augustine, Aug.
de Civit. Dei. l. 10. c. 19
where he speaks of those things which are most peculiar to the worship of God,
he joins adoration and sacrifice together. Putaverunt quidam deferendum Angelis
honorem vel adorando vel sacrificando, qui debetur Deo; and eorum sunt
admonitione prohibiti, jussique sunt haec ei defer cui uni fas esse noverunt;
whereby we see he makes external adoration as peculiar to God as sacrifice; and
Ludovicus Vives there says, That he meant by the Angel that refused adoration,
the Angel that forbad St. John, and bad him to worship God. Which makes me
wonder, that T. G. should make the act of adoration aequivocal, and only
sacrifice according to St. Augustine, to be appropriated to signify the
absolute worship of God; for St. Augustine joins both together, and makes one as
unlawfal to be given to any creature as the other. How then comes St.
Augustin's authority to be quitted for the one, and so greedily embraced for
the other? Is it that sacrifice does of it self more properly signify our
inward and total subjection of our selves to God than the other does? But it
would become T. G's learning to inform us in this matter: since the best
learned of their Divines do confess, That sacrifice does not naturally signify
any worship of God but only by the imposition of men, and that which it
signifies, say they, is Gods being Author of Life and Death, and if we take
away this imposition it contains nothing of divine worship in it; so Suarez,
Suarez ad 3. p. Th. q. 25 disp. 51. sect. 4.
who says, he follows St. Augustine in it. How comes the destruction of any
creature under our command to signify the inward subjection of our selves to
God? What pleasure can we conceive the Almighty should take in seeing us to
destroy his creatures for his sake? Our minds may be as far from submitting to
God, as these things are of themselves from signifying such a submission. Nay
how comes a sacrifice to stand so much in our stead, that because we take away
the life of that, therefore we own God as our Lord? It might rather of it self
signify that we have the power of life and death over Beasts, than that God
has it over us: yet all that Sacrifice signifies, says Vasquez, Vasquez ad 3.
p. disp. 93. q. 25. art. 5.
is, that God is acknowledged thereby to be the Author of life and death; and
to this end, says Ysambertus, Ysambert. ad 3. p. q. 25. desp. 1. art. 4. in
fine.
it is necessary that the thing be destroyed, because the reason of Sacrifice
lies in the destruction of a thing offered to God. Be it so: but of all things
in the world, it would never have come into my mind, nor I think into any man's
well in his senses, to offer up God himself unto God as a Sacrifice, in order
to the testifying the devoting of our selves unto him; and yet this, after all
their talk, comes to be that external Sacrifice which is the only appropriate
sign of the absolute worship of God, viz. the Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein
the Priest is believed, to offer up God himself under the species of Bread and
Wine to the Eternal God in token of our subjection to him. Methinks yet it were
somewhat more reasonable to offer up brute Creatures that are under us, than
God that is so infinitely above us; and such is the weakness of my
understanding, that this seems to be rather an argument of our power over God,
than of our subjection to Him. But since the formal reason of a Sacrifice is
said to lie in the destruction of it, Tanner. ad 3. p. disp. 5. de Relig. q. 3.
dub. 1. n. 8.
Good Lord! what thoughts must these men have in their minds, (if they have
any) when they think it in their power, first to make their God by speaking
five words; then to offer him up as a Sacrifice; then to suppose him destroyed,
and all this to testify their submission to God! I want words to express the
intolerable blasphemy and absurdity of these things. Yet this, says T. G. is
so appropriate a sign of the absolute worship of God, T.G. p. 391.
that that Religion which admits no external visible Sacrifice, must needs be
deficient in the most signal part of the public worship of God. What external
visible Sacrifice have you that we have not, besides that of God himself whom
you believe to be personally present as the object of divine worship under the
species of Bread and Wine? and yet when you have pleaded so much for this
presence to justify your Adoration, you then make a Sacrifice of Him; and that
he may be so, you grant it is necessary there be some destruction of what was
before, i. e. (if to the purpose) of him that was the Sacrifice, otherwise the
species are made the Sacrifice, and not the body and blood of Christ. But
suppose you only make him a Sacrifice, as to his body and blood, and not as to
his divine nature; what becomes then of the body and blood of Christ? for, it
must be destroyed to make a Sacrifice; where, how, by what means comes the body
and blood of Christ to be destroyed? When you say, it is there without the
qualities of a body, that it cannot be seen, or felt, or tasted; and yet is
capable of being destroyed: suppose all this be passed over, how comes the
offering up the very body and blood of Christ to God to signify our absolute
worship of him? Will nothing else satisfy to testify, that we are his
subjects, unless we offer up to him the body and blood of his own Son? Is this
indeed the most signal part of divine worship, which we must be deficient in,
if we have it not? We do from our souls praise God for that unvaluable
Sacrifice, the Son of God was pleased to make of his own life, when he was
incarnate in our nature; We do frequently commemorate this Sacrifice of his
according to his own institution; and in the doing of that, we offer up our
selves unto Him as a reasonable service; We adore, and magnify Him for all His
mercies, especially the sending of His Son to die for us, as the greatest of
all: But we dare not let it enter into our thoughts, that we should ever eat or
swallow down the very body and blood of Christ; and then pretend we have
offered it up to God as a Sacrifice, and that in token of our absolute worship
of Him. But setting aside the nature of this Sacrifice, which is the only
external and visible sign of appropriate worship to God, they pretend to have;
I desire yet to know how a Sacrifice does come to signify this absolute
worship more than adoration? Not by nature, for the lowly submission of our
bodies seems more naturally to signify the behavior of our minds, than
anything without us can do? if it be by institution, it must be either Gods or
man's; if man's, then either offering Sacrifice to a creature is Idolatry, or
not: if not, then giving absolute worship to a creature is no Idolatry; if it
be, then it is Idolatry to make use of the outward signs of divine worship
which mankind have agreed upon, to any thing else but God. If it be said to be
Gods institution; then it follows, that the applying any outward signs of
worship which God has appropriated to himself, to any Creature, is Idolatry;
which is as much as I desire, for then it will equally hold for Religious
Adoration; especially if the principle of Arriaga hold true true, Arriaga in 3.
p. Thom. Disp. 50. sect. 4. n. 45.
that the value of Sacrifice lies in the act of adoration performed by it.

But T. G. pleads, That the act of adoration is equivocal, that is, that we
read in Scripture, that it has been given to men as well as to God, and
therefore cannot be such an appropriate sign of divine worship. To this I have
already answered, by distinguishing the Act, and the signification of it; the
external act I grant may be performed upon several grounds; As 1. Civil
subjection, as by Nathan to David, 1 Kings 1.23.2. Civil respect, as by Abraham
to the Children of Heth, Genesis 23.7.3. Religious respect, or as some call it,
Moral Reverence, i. e. out of an opinion of great sanctity, without
superiority, as Nebuchadnezzar to Daniel, Dan. 2.46. And so Abraham bowed to
the Angels, Genesis 18.2. if he knew them to be what they were; but if not, as
appears more probable both of him and Lot, by Heb. 13.2. then it was only an
expression of civil respect to them. 4. Out of a sudden transport, as St. John
did to the Angel twice, which he would not have done a second time, if he had
considered his being checked for the first, Rev. 19.10.22.8, 9. Now if these
things may by their circumstances and occasions be apparently differenced from
each other, and from that Religious adoration which God does require to be
given to himself, then there can be no reason from thence to make the
signification of external adoration to be equivocal. There is the same nature
in these acts that there is in words of different significations; which being
taken in general are of an equivocal sense, but being considered with all their
particular circumstances they have their sense so restrained and limited, that
it is easy to discern the one from the other. That we call therefore Religious
adoration, which is performed with all the circumstances of Religious worship,
as to time, place, occasion, and such like; as if men used prostration to any
thing within the Courts of the Temple, (wherein some of the Jews thought that
posture only lawful;) if it were done in the time of Sacrifice, or devotion; if
the occasion were such as required no respect of any other kind, as when the
Devil demanded of Christ to fall down and worship him; in these and such like
circumstances we say adoration has the determined signification of Religious
worship, and is an appropriate sign of it, by Gods own institution. Thence the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 95.6.
O come let us worship and bow down, let us kneel before the Lord our Maker;
and God forbids bowing down to and worshipping any graven Image, or similitude;
where the bowing down is one act of worship, and was so esteemed by the common
consent of mankind, as might be easily made appear by the several customs of
external adoration, that have been used in all parts of the world, and it might
for the universality of the practice of it, vye with Sacrifice. So that on this
account, as well as the proper signification of it, adoration ought to be
esteemed as significant and peculiar a sign of absolute worship as Sacrifice.
There are only two things that seem yet to make this adoration not appripriate
to God, (for the instances of Balaam and Saul are not worth mentioning) and
those are, Joshua's Religious adoration of the Angel that appeared to him; and
the adoration that the Jews performed toward the Ark; the latter is easily
answered, the Ark being only a Symbol of the divine presence of Gods own
appointing, toward which they were to direct their adoration; (but of this at
large, when I come to the worship of Images); the other cannot be denied to be
Religious worship, but we are to consider, what Aquinas says to this place,
Aq. 2.2. q. 84. art. 1.
that it may be understood of the absolute worship of God, who did appear and
speak in the person of an Angel. And St. Athanasius expressly says, Athanas.
orat. 4. c. Arrian. p. 467.
that God did speak in an Angel to Moses at the burning Bush, when Moses was
bid to put off his Shoes; as Joshua was now; and by the description on of him,
Exodus 3.5.
as Captain of the Host of the Lord, it is apparent Joshua looked not on him as
an ordinary Angel, but as the Angel of whom God said, Josh. 5.14.
that he should go before them, and whom they were bound to obey; and by
comparing the places in Exodus together, Exodus 23.21, 22, 23.
where God afterward threatens to send an Angel, and Moses would not be
satisfied till God said His Presence should go with them; 33.2, 14.
it is evident this Angel of His Presence was more than a mere Angel; and
therefore the Fathers generally suppose it was the Eternal Son of God who
appeared in the Person of an Angel, as Petavius has at lage proved: Petav. de
Trinit. l. 8. c. 2.
and is sufficiently manifest from hence, that they make use of Adoration as a
certain argument to prove, that Christ was not a creature; which argument were
of no force at all, if they did not believe, that adoration was an appropriate
sign of that absolute worship which belongs only to God: and therefore they
observe that when mere Angels appeared, they refused adoration, as the Angels
that appeared to Manoe and St. John; but when adoration is allowed or
commanded, it was the divine nature appearing in the person of an Angel.

3. The erection of Temples and Altars,. 9.
is another appropriate sign of divine worship which I need not go about to
prove from Scripture, since it is confessed by our Adversaries. Ad Latriam
pertinent templa and altaria, sacerdotia, sacrificia, festivitates, ceremoniae,
and hujusmodi quae soli Deo sunt exhibenda; says Durandus Mimatensis from
Innocentius 3. and the applying these things to any but God, he makes to be
Idolatry. Bellarmin joins Temples and Altars together with Sacrifice as
peculiar to God; Templum, says Cardinal Bona, est domus Numini Sacra, a house
Sacred to God; and yet Bellarmin had the confidence to lay down this
proposition, Innocent. 3. de Mist. Missae l. 3. c. 11.

Durand. Ration. divin. offic. l. 8. c. ult. Bellarm. de sanct.

Beatit. l. 1. c. 12.

Bona de reb. Liturg. l. 1. c. 19.

Bellarm. de cultusanctorum l. 2. c. 4


Sacrae domus non solum Deo, sed etiam sanctis recte aedificantur and
dedicantur: and he is not satisfied with the answer of some Moderns, that say,
That Temples cannot properly be erected to any, but God, any more than
Sacrifice can be offered to any but him; but because there are many Temples
dedicated to God, that they may be distinguished from each other, they have
their denomination from particular Saints, (which is an answer we find no fault
with, if they do not proceed to the worship and invocation of those Saints to
whose memory the Churches are dedicated, as the particular Patrons of it,) but
Bellarmin has found out a subtlety beyond this; for he saw well enough this
would not reach home to their case, and therefore he says, That sacred places
are truly and properly built to Saints; but how? not as they are Temples, but
as they are Basilicae; For, says he, Temples have a particular relation to
sacrifice, but Basilicae have not: and he confesses it would be Idolatry to
erect them as Temples to Saints, but not as they are Basilicae. This is a
distinction without any difference; for Isidore, Isidor. Origin. l. 15. c. 4.
who certainly well understood the signification of these words, as used among
Christians, says, Nunc autem ideo divina Templa Basilicae nominantur, quia ibi
Regi omnium Deo cultus and sacrificia offeruntur: and that which we insist
upon, is not, the names that Churches are called by, nor the preservation of
the memories of Saints in them, but the erecting them to Saints as places for
the worship and invocation of them. And the vanity of this distinction of
Temples from Basilicae, because Temples relate only to sacrifice, will easily
appear, if we consider that the proper signification of Templum was Domicilium,
as Turnebus observes, Turneb. Advers. l. 19. c. 5.

Varro de Ling. Lat. l. 6.


which is that which Varro calls Templum natura; and in this sense, he says,
Naevius called the Heaven, Templum magnum Iovis altitonantis; and from thence
it was applied to any place consecrated by the Augurs, A. Gell. l. 14. c. 7.
and so by degrees, was taken for any sacred place that was set apart for
divine worship; for that was it which made them sacred, sacra sunt loca, says
Isidore, Isid. Orig. l. 15. c. 4.
divinis cultibus instituta. Either therefore they must say, there is no proper
worship of God but Sacrifice, or the notion of a Temple cannot be said only to
refer to Sacrifice. And among the Jews, our B. Savior has told us, that the
Temple had relation to prayer as well as Sacrifice, My House shall be called a
House of Prayer. Mat. 21.13 Mark 11.17.

Luke 19.46


Would it not have been a pleasant distinction among the Jews, if any of them
had dedicated a Temple to Abraham, with a design to invocate him there, and
make him the Patron of it, for them to have said, they built it as a Temple to
God, but as a Basilica to Abraham; for they sacrificed there only to God, (or
to God for the honor of Abraham) but they invocated Abraham as the particular
Patron of it? This is that therefore we charge them with, upon their own
principles, that when they dedicate Churches to particular Saints as the
Patrons of them, and in order to the solemn invocation of them there, they do
apply that which themselves confess to be an appropriate sign of divine worship
to Creatures, and consequently by their own confession are guilty of Idolatry.
Neither can it be pleaded by them, that their Churches and Altars are only
dedicated to the honor of God for the memory of a particular Saint; for they
confess, that it is for the solemn invocation of that Saint. And with all in
the Form of dedication in the Pontifical, there is more implied, as appears by
these two prayers at the Consecration of the Altar; The first when the Bishop
stands before the Altar in these words, Deus Omnipotens, in cujus honorem, ac
Beatissimae Virginis Mariae and omnium Sanctorum, ac nomen and memoriam Sancti
tui N. nos indigni altar hoc consecramus, etc.

The other, after the Bishop has with his right thumb dipped in the Chrism,
made the sign of a Cross upon the Front of the Altar, Majestatem tuam, Domine,
humiliter imploramus, ut altar hoc sacrae unctionis libamine ad suscipienda
populi tui munera inunctam potenter been. dicere, and sanctificare digneris, ut
quod nunc a nobis sub tui nominis invocatione, in honorem Beatissimae Virginis
Mariae, and omnium Sanctorum, atque in memoriam sancti tui N. etc. Where we
see, besides the memory of the particular Saint to whom the Altar is dedicated;
the honor of the B. Virgin and the Saints are joined together with the Honor
of God in the general dedication of it.

By the Pontifical, no Altar is to be consecrated without Relics, which the
night before, the Bishop is to put into a clean vessel for that purpose with
three grains of Frankincense, and then to seal it up; which being conveniently
placed before the Church door, the Vigils are to be celebrated that night
before them, and the Nocturn and the Mattins, for the honor of the Saints
whose the Relics are; and when the Relics are brought into the Church, this
is one of the Antiphona's, Surgite Sancti Dei, de mansionibus vestris, loca
sanctificate, plebem benedicite, and nos homines peccatores in pace custodite.
The form of consecration of the Altar it self, is this, Sanctificetur hoc
Altar in honorem Dei omnipotentis, and gloriosae Virginis Mariae atque omnium
sanctorum, and ad nomen ac memoriam Sancti N.

In China, Trigautius says in the Chapel they had there, Trigaut. Exped. Sin.
l. 5. c. 15.
they had two Altars, one to our Savior, the other dedicated to the B. Virgin,
without any distinction at all. In the speech the Bishop makes to the people he
utterly overthrows Bellarmins distinction of Templum and Basilica; for, he
says, nullibi enim quam in sacris Basilicis, Domino offerri sacrificium debet.
It seems then Basilica is taken with a respect to sacrifice as well as Templum:
and then he declares that he has dedicated this Basilica in honorem
omnipotentis Dei, Beatae Mariae semper virginis, and omnium Sanctorum, ac
memoriam Sancti N. So that Basilica is here taken with a respect to God, and
not merely to the Saints; although they join them together with God in the
honor of dedication.

Let us now compare the practice of the Roman Church in this matter, with the
argument which the Fathers made use of, to prove the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, because we are said to be his Temple. If we are said, says S. Basil, S.
Basil. ep. ad Caesariens. ed. Basil. p. 361
to be his Temple because he is worshipped by us and dwells in us, then it
follows that he is God, for we are commanded to worship and serve God alone.
Where it is plain S. Basil takes a Temple with a respect to worship and not
merely to sacrifice. A Temple belongs only to God and not to a creature, says
S. Ambrose, Ambros. desp. sancto. l. 3. c. 13.
therefore the Holy Ghost is God, because we are his Temple. This is peculiar
to the Divine nature, says S. Cyril, S. Syril. Thesaur. sid. l. 34. p. 357. S.
August. ep. 66. c.
to have a Temple to dwell in. If we were to build a Temple, says S. Augustine,
to the Holy Ghost, in so doing, we should give him the worship proper to God,
and he must be God to whom we give divine worship, for we must worship the Lord
our God, and him only must we serve: the same argument he urges in several
other places; a Temple, Sermon. Arrian. c. 20.29. c. Maxim. l. 1. c. 11. l. 2.
c. 11. l. 3. c. 3.
says he, was never erected but either to the true God, as Solomon did, or to
false Gods as the Heathens; and this argument from our being said to be the
Temple of the Holy Ghost, he thinks is stronger, than if adoration had been
said to be given to it; for this is so proper an act of divine worship to erect
a Temple, that if we should do it to the most excellent Angel, we should be
anathematized from the Church of God. Hoc nunc sit quibuslibet Divis, (says
Erasmus there in the Margin.) This is every where now done to Saints, at which
Petavius is very angry; and says, they do it not to the Saints per se and
praecipue. Petav. de Trinit. l. 2. c. 16. n. 11.
But what becomes then of the argument of the Fathers, which supposes the
erecting a Temple to be such a peculiar act of adoration, that it cannot be
applied to any creature, no not secondarily? For then the opposers of the
Divinity of the Holy Ghost might have easily answered S. Augustins argument
after the same fashion, viz. that we were said to be the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, not per se and praecipue, but only secondarily, as it was the divine
instrument of purifying the Souls of men. From hence we see, how unanimously
the Fathers looked on the dedication of Temples and Altars, as an appropriate
sign of that absolute worship we owe to God; and that not merely as an Appendix
to sacrifice, but as it contains in it such an act of adoration as is peculiar
to God.

. 10.
4. The burning of Incense as a token of Religious worship. For otherwise, it is
of the nature of the outward act of adoration, and may be done on merely civil
accounts; and so far T. G. was in the right when he said, T. G. p. 90.
that burning incense is a ceremony of the like nature with bowing, i. e. it
may be accommodated to several uses; but as I have proved that Religious
adoration is a peculiar act of divine worship, so I shall now do, concerning
the burning of incense when it is used as a token of Religious worship. If
there were any difference under the Law between the Altar of burnt offerings,
and the Altar of incense, this latter seems to be more particularly
appropriated to the worship of God. For the High Priest is not only commanded
to burn upon it perpetual incense before the Lord; but it is said, to be most
holy to the Lord; Exodus 30.8.10.
and it stood in a more holy place. And we see by our Saviors interpretation
of the precept of worship, although the restrictive particle were not in the
words of the Law, yet he shows us that it was in the sense of it; and that
certainly is to be understood, where a thing is said to be most holy to God, i.
e. appropriated to himself after a peculiar manner: and we have seen by
Maimonides that incense is joined with sacrifice; so that a person is made by
their Law as guilty of Idolatry, if he burns incense to an Idol, as if he
offered Sacrifice. But we need not depend on the Jews testimony in this matter;
for the Scripture is express in it, where it speaks of Hezekiah's breaking in
pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made, for in those days the Children
of Israel did burn incense to it. 2 King. 18.4.
Bellarmine cannot deny, Bellarm. de imag. sanct. l. 2. c. 17.
that burning of incense was a sacrifice among the Jews, and that was the
reason that Hezekiah brake the brazen Serpent in pieces; but, he says, it is
not a sacrifice now. But how comes it to change its nature? has it lost any
part of its definition? if not, has the Church power to make that which was a
sacrifice to become none? i. e. to take away an appropriate sign of Gods
absolute worship? for so they acknowledge sacrifice to be. Paulus Maria Quarti
in his late Commentaries on the Rubricks of the Missal confesses that all the
material parts of the definition of a sacrifice agree to the burning of Incense
in the Roman Church, Paul. Maria Quarti Comment. in Rubric Missal. part. 2.
tit. 4. sect. 1. dub. 2.
for it is an oblation made to God for his honor by the change of a sensible
thing, but, he says, from Suarez that it is not a sacrifice among them, but
only an accidental appendix to a sacrifice: and might not the same have been
said among the Jews? and yet himself afterward grants, that it is a part of
Religious worship as honor is thereby given to those that are incensed; and is
to be determined according to the nature of the object; if it be given to God,
it is Latria, if to Saints, it is Dulia, etc. It seems now, it is become more
than an appendix, being a proper act of worship; but all their care is to avoid
its being a sacrifice, because they give it to Saints and Images, and when they
are off from that difficulty they think they can dispose of it as they please.
Catharinus grants, Catharin. de cultu and adorat. imaginum. p. 126.
that burning of incense had the proper nature of a sacrifice among the Jews;
and that the reason why Hezekiah brake in pieces the brazen Serpent was because
they did not direct their incense to the thing represented by it, but
terminated their worship on the sign: but (1.) it seems then, the Scripture
gives a very lame account of the reason of it, for that mentions no more but
their burning incense before it, which was no fault of it self; but only that
they did not direct their intention far enough. (2.) It seems, that sacrifice
it self may be offered to an Image; for Catharinus grants, that this had the
nature of sacrifice, and there was no harm in the mere oblation, but only in
the shortness of the intention. Sanders says, Sander. de honorat. imaginum
adorat. l. 2. p. 138.
that God commanded the Jews to give Religious worship to the brazen Serpent;
for, he says, their very looking upon it was such; and from thence he proves
it lawful to worship Images; but Cope (or rather Harpsfield) will not allow it
to be of the same nature with Images, Alan. Copi Dialog. 5. p. 662.
easily discerning, that the breaking of it down would make more against the
worship of Images, than the setting of it up ever made for them. For Vasquez
says, Vasquez in 3. p. disp. 104. art. 3. c. 5.
the peoples looking upon it in order to their being healed, was no part of
worship, being no token of submission; and that God intended no worship should
be given to it. And he ingenuously confesses, that when Hezekiah brake it in
pieces, it was not because it was worshipped for a God among them, or had the
worship terminated upon it, but because the people gave the same kind of
worship to it which in the Roman Church they give to their Images: but he
thinks that worship was unlawful to the Jews, which is lawful to Christians.
And then why not the offering sacrifice to Images, as well as burning of
Incense? But T. G. thinks, T.G. p. 428.
that perhaps the smoke of the incense (when used as a sign of Religious
worship) troubles my eyes so that I cannot distinguish between the use of it,
as applied to God, and as applied to his servants, or other things relating to
him. It is pity T. G. had not been Hezekiahs Confessor, to have better informed
him about the Jews burning of Incense before the brazen Serpent; for he would
in all probability have done his endeavor to have preserved it; and if
Hezekiah had pleaded the Law that appropriated incense to the worship of God,
he would have desired him to clear his eyes a little better; for then he might
discern that burning incense was an indifferent ceremony, and may be applied
either to God or the creature; and that the difference of these depends on the
intention of the persons who do them; now how could any man tell by the outward
act what the intention of these persons was? For all that appeared, they
intended only to honor God by it in memory of the great miracles he had
wrought by means of it; and then it was so far from being evil, that it was an
act of Latria to God. And why should Hezekiah destroy the brazen Serpent, for
being an occasion of Gods honor? This were fitter for Senacherib, or Rabshakeh
to do, than one that professed to worship the true God: Is not incense used
daily in the Temple, are not the Altar and the vessels of the Temple perfumed
by it? Why then should the brazen Serpent be profaned by that, which sanctifies
other things? Therefore only advise them to direct their intention aright, and
there can be no harm in the use of such an indifferent ceremony; and let the
Brazen Serpent stand, to excite the devotion of the people toward God in
remembrance of what he did to the people of old by the means of it. But it
seems Hezekiah had not looked over Aristotle's threshold so far as to know,
that acts go whither they are intended; and therefore he took the giving of
that part of worship which God had appropriated to himself, to the Brazen
Serpent, to be sufficient ground for the demolishing of it, without particular
enquiry into the intentions of the persons. Yet I must say for T. G. that he
does not seem so confident of the indifferency of this ceremony under the Law;
for he says, That it is not appropriated, at least in the new Law, to the
worship of God, and therefore it is in the freedom of the Church to determine
how and when it shall be used. If he means by the new Law, the Rubricks or
practice of their Church, he says true; for Incense is appointed to be burnt
to Images and Crucifixes, Bellarm. de sanct. beat. l. 1. c. 13.
and Relics out of Religious honor to them: but if by the new Law he means
the Law of Christ, that does not, that I can find, make any thing that God had
appropriated to himself, as a sign of his own worship, to be common to any
creature with him; but I am sure before, that burning of Incense before Images,
Ezekiel. 8.9, 10, 11.
was accounted one of the abominations of Israel.

5. Solemn Invocation was an external act of worship appropriated to God
himself.. 11.
My House is the House of Prayer, says our Savior of the Temple; Luke 19.48.
by which it appears that solemn Invocation was then looked on as a peculiar
part of divine worship. But I need not prove this, since it is granted by our
Adversaries, that one sort of Invocation is so proper to God, that to give it
to any besides him were Idolatry; which is, as T. G. expresses it, T.G. p. 288.
the Prayer we make to God as the Author and Giver of all Good; but a lower
sort of Invocation, he contends, may be given to Saints and Angels. My business
here, is not to discuss the point of Invocation, (which is to be handled at
large in its proper place) but to show, in what sense it was understood among
those to whom God gave the Laws of his worship, and whether this inferior sort
of Invocation were thought consistent with the true worship of God. We will
then suppose that in the Temple of Jerusalem, at the hours of prayer, the Jews
at the same time, and with the same outward solemnity of worship, should make
their prayers first to God, to have mercy upon them; and then immediately to
make their addresses to Abraham and Sarah, Isaac and Rebecca, Jacob and Joseph,
and Moses, and the Prophets to pray for them; whether would this have been
thought agreeable to the command of worshipping God alone? especially, if these
prayers were said before the Images of those persons set up in the Temple: for
if the Law did only forbid the worship of Heathen Idols, there would be no
repugnancy to the Law in all this. What course can we now take to resolve this
Question? I know but three ways of doing it. 1. By comparing this practice
with the precept of worship. For God being to appoint the Laws and Rules of it,
we are to enquire in the first place, what his will and pleasure was, as to
this matter; for he best knew what worship was pleasing to him. If he has
therefore appropriated all acts of Religious worship to himself, as it is plain
he has done by that Law, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only
shall thou serve, then it is unlawful to give it to any other. If it be said,
they do not give the worship proper to God; I desire to know who shall judge
what is the worship proper to God, He by his Law, or we by distinctions of our
own making? Has God himself made any such distinction as this is? Has He bid
men to pray to Him as the Author and Giver of all Good, but to Angels or Saints
as Mediators and Intercessors to Him? Nay has He not forbidden it, when he
commands that all Religious worship without distinction, be given to himself?
And where the Law does not distinguish, what presumption is it in us to do it?
2. By the practice of the Jewish Church; and it is granted by our Adversaries,
Bellarm. de Sanct.

Beatit. l. 1. c. 19, 20. Perron Replic. l. 5. p. 981.

Suarez in 3. p. Th. fo. 2. disp. 42. sect. 1. de orat. l. 1. c. 10.


that there was no Invocation of Saints then used, because, say they, the
Saints were then only in Limbo, and not in their perfect happiness, nor placed
over the Church as they are now; but the Jews knew of no such reason as this to
hinder them; for they believed those great Saints to be in a state of perfect
Felicity, therefore this could be no ground to hinder them; and withal they had
so mighty a veneration for the Patriarchs, and so great a dread of the Divine
Majesty, that if it had been lawful, none would have been more ready to have
made use of them as Mediators than they; for we see how ready they were to
entreat Moses to be a Mediator between God and them; Deuteronomy. 5.27.
why should not they have continued this after his death, if they had believed
one to be as lawful as the other? But although they did not Invocate Saints,
they might do Angels; and some have attempted to prove they did, although the
Jews know of no such practice among them, albeit they attribute so much to the
Power of Angels, Reuchlin. de art Cabalist. l. 3.

Vorstius in Maim. de Fund. legis p. 16, 17.


that nothing but the fear of Idolatry could restrain them; for they believe
one to be a Spirit set over Fire, and another over Water, another over Clouds,
etc. as the Eastern Idolaters did.

But did not Jacob pray to the Angel, Genesis 48.16. the Angel that redeemed me
from all evil, bless the lads? No says Abarbinel, Abarb. de capite fidei c.
12. ad dub. 2.
it was only a prayer to God, that had made use of his Angel; for, he says,
God before whom my Fathers did walk, the God which fed me all my life long unto
this day, the Angel which redeemed me, etc. if this were an invocation of the
Angel, it was an invocation of him as the Author and Giver of all Good; which
T. G. confesses to be Idolatry: but Abravanel parallels it with that saying of
Abraham, The Lord God of Heaven which took me from my Fathers House, Genesis 24.7.
He shall send his Angel before thee. But we need not run to the Jews to clear
this place, for S. Athanasius supposing it to be an Invocation, Athanas. c.
Arrian orat. 4. p. 464.
from thence proves, that it must be understood of the Eternal Son of God, for,
says he, Jacob would never have joined a Creature together with God in his
prayers: and S. Cyrill, Cyrill. thesaur. assert. 20. p. 209. S. Hier. in
Proverb. 2.
more generally; who would ever pray in the name of Angels? And S. Hierome in
terms as large and express as may be, Nullum invocare, i. e. in nos orando
vocare nisi Deum debemus; we ought to invocate none by praying to them but God
himself: and from thence he proves the Wisdom there spoken of could be no
created Wisdom. So that neither Jews nor Christians did believe the Invocation
of Angels to have been practiced in the Church of Israel.

3. In this case it is reasonable to appeal to the sense of Jewish Writers, who
must be presumed to understand their own customs best; especially in respect to
Idolatry, which they have suffered so much for; and they unanimously declare it
to be against the sense of the Law, to make Saints or Angels to be Mediators
between God and them. Maimonides makes this to be consequent upon the precept
against Idolatry; Maimon. ap. Abrav. p. 7.
and makes it the fifth Fundamental of the Law; That we ought to worship God
alone, and to make no Mediators between God and us; neither Angels, nor Stars,
nor Elements, nor any such things, because we ought to direct all our thoughts
to God alone. Abrav. de capite fidei c. 12. p. 43.
And Abravanel in his Commentary upon the Fundamentals of the Law, says, their
wise men interpreted that verse, the Lord our God is nigh unto us in all that
we call upon him for, that they should only invocate God, and not Michael or
Gabriel, etc. and says presently after, That this sort of worship belongs only
to God, and to none else, according to the sense of their Wisemen. Maimonides
says, Maim. More Nevoch. l. 1. c. 36.
That none of the Idolaters were ever so mad to think there was no God besides
the Idol they worshipped; or that the Figure they worshipped made and governed
the World; but they worship them as Mediators between the great God and them,
and so he interprets that place, Mal. 1.11. Incense shall be offered (...) not
Nomini meo, but propter me: as though the Incense they offered to their Idols
were for his sake, and so it is a mere relative Latria: and he adds, That the
Idolaters did believe one God, but offended against the precept which commands
Him alone to be worshipped. The Paraphrase of Jonathan upon 1 Kings 18.21. If
the Lord be God, follow Him; renders it thus, Is not God thy Lord? therefore
serve Him alone: and why do ye wander after Baalim in which there is no profit.
But I need mention no more since a Learned person of our Church has proved in
a set Discourse from the several Testimonies of Aben-Ezra, Kimchi, Iarchi, Very
Cultus unitas, etc. Auct. L.S. Land. 1643.
Moses bar-Nachman, R. Bechai, Alschech, and others of greatest reputation
among the Jews, that they were guilty of Idolatry by their Law, who believed
one true God, but gave Religious worship to other things, as Mediators between
God and them.

6. The last I shall mention as an appropriate act of divine worship, is,. 12.
making Vows to God; which the Scripture has so fully declared to belong to
God, as a part of divine worship, that our Adversaries do not offer to deny it.
For Vows are not only said to be made to God, Numb. 30.2. Deuteronomy. 23.21, 23. but
they are joined with Sacrifice and Oblations, Isa. 19.21. And therefore Aquinas
makes vowing one of the proper acts of Latria; and Bellarmin confesses, Aq.
2.2. q. 88.5.

Bellarm. de cultu sanct. l. 2. c. 9.


That it is an act of Religion due only to God. Who could now have imagined,
after such confessions to have found them in the Church of Rome making vows to
Saints as solemnly as to God himself; so that if ever men did condemn
themselves for Idolatry, they seem to do it by such plain confessions of both
parts, viz. that Vows are a part of the worship due only to God; and that they
give this worship to Creatures. Here one would think we had them fast; yet if
we do not look to our selves, they will slip through our fingers, and escape.
Is not, say I, a Vow a part of Latria that is due only to God? Yes, say our
Adversaries, it is so. Do not you make Vows to Saints as formally and solemnly
as to God himself; as the Dominicans Vow at entrance into their Order, as
Cajetan says, Cajet. in Aq. ib.
is made Deo, Beatae Mariae, Beato Dominico and omnibus sanctis? True, say they,
this cannot be denied. Do not you then give to the creature the worship proper
to God, which you confess to be Idolatry? Hold, say they, we distinguish: but
about what? about making Vows to Saints together with God; for may not we make
a Vow to men and to God too, and who will say that is Idolatry? as for
instance, may not a man Vow to A. and B. that he will give a hundred pound to
an Hospital? here the Vow is made both to God, and to A. and B. But here A. and
B. are only witnesses to the Vow, but the formality of the Vow lies in the
promise made to God to do such things for his service and honor; and A. and B.
have no concernment in this. But may not men Vow obedience to Superiors, and
that is more than making them witnesses? Very true, but then this obedience is
the matter of the Vow, or the thing that is vowed; and in all Vows of
obedience, there are many limitations employed, but there are none in the Vows
made to God or the Saints; but withal they Vow to God and the Saints that they
will obey their Superiors. So that their obedience to Superiors is but the
matter of the Vow made to God and the Saints. Well then, say they, suppose we
do make the Saints the object of our Vows as well as God; yet we do not
consider the Saints as rational creatures; but as they are Dii participative,
as Cajetan and Bellarmin both say. And is not this the very answer of the
Heathens, that they gave divine worship to creatures, not as creatures, but as
Gods by way of participation? Is it indeed come out at last, that we are to
look on the Saints as inferior Deities, and on that account may give to them
the worship proper to God? Votum non convenit sanctis, says Bellarmin, nisi
quatenus sunt Dii per participationem. I see truth may be smothered a long
time, and kept under by violence, but it will break out at last, one way or
other. I began to suspect something, when I found the Master of Controversies,
speak of the Saints being praepositi Ecclesiae set over the Church, De sanct.
beat. l. 1. c. 20.
but I could hardly have expected to have found them owned for inferior
Deities, for what are Gods by participation but such as derive their power from
God, and are employed by Him to take care of these lower things? So he says,
the Saints do curam gerere rerum nostrarum, take care of our affairs: and now I
do not wonder to see them make Vows to them, or perform any other act of
Religious worship to them as well as to God. But after all this ado, may we not
Vow to God upon a higher account, and to the Saints upon a lower? Yes, no
doubt; just as a man may swear Allegiance to his Prince upon the account of his
Sovereign Authority; and to one of his Subjects, as a less sovereign. For if
Allegiance be peculiar to Sovereign Authority, how can it be given to any one
that has it not? And in this case, it is confessed that Vows are a part of
that worship which is proper only to God; and how then can they be given to any
else besides Him? And Bellarmin confesses, That Vows in the Scriptures are
always taken for promises made to God; for when they were written, there was
no such custom of vowing to Saints. A very fair confession! But how then comes
that, which all the time when the Scripture was written was peculiar to God, to
become common to Him and His Creatures? why may not sacrifice be made common as
well as Vows? if it be in their power to change those things which God by the
acknowledgement of our Adversaries has throughout the Scripture made peculiar
to himself.

2. This therefore will require a farther debate,. 13.
viz. how far Gods appropriating these Acts of worship to himself does concern
us? For which we are to consider,

1. That it is granted by T. G. to be reasonable, that there should be some
external acts of worship peculiar to God; because the reason of his worship is
peculiar, as he is the supreme Lord and Governor of the world.

2. That acts of worship being designed to honor and please God, he is the
fittest to determine what those peculiar acts of worship shall be. For S.
Augustine mentions that saying of Socrates as a principle of natural reason;
August. de consens. Evangel. l. 1. c. 18.
Unumquemque Deum sic coli oportere, quo modo se ipse colendum esse
praeceperit; that God ought to be worshipped according to His own appointment.
To which himself adds, That if men worship God against His Will, they do not
worship Him, but their own imagination: and therefore they are to examine what
worship this God does reserve to himself, and what He will allow to any other.
Orig. c. Cells. l. 8. p. 384.
Origin embraces that saying of Celsus, That no inferior Being ought to receive
any Honor against the Will of the Supreme: and therefore he desires Celsus to
prove, that those Demons and Heroes, which had divine worship given them among
them, ever had the consent of the Supreme God for it; but it rather came from
the ignorance and barbarism of mankind, which by degrees fell off from the true
worship of God. And he insists upon the demonstration of this, as to all their
Deities, how they can show that ever God gave way they should be worshipped.
(...); but we can prove, says he, by evident arguments that it was the Will of
God that all men should honor the Son, as they do the Father. Dei honorem per
Deum docemur, says Hilary; Hilar. de Trinit. l. 5. p. 54.
we understand how to worship God by himself. S. Chrysostom says, Chrysostom.
hom. 60. ad pop. Antioch.
Let us learn to honor Christ as he would have us, for that is the most
pleasing honor, which he would have, and not that which we would give. S.
Peter thought to honor Christ by refusing to be washed, but this was not
honor, but directly contrary. Which I desire T. G. to take notice of, that he
may better understand, that God cannot be honored by prohibited acts of
worship, whatever the intention of the person be. But one would think this were
a principle so reasonable in it self, that I need not vouch Authorities for it;
yet we shall soon find that all these Authorities are no more than necessary.

3. Acts appropriated to the worship of God by his own appointment, must
continue so, till himself has otherwise declared. For who dares alter what God
has appointed? Indeed if the peculiar acts of worship had depended only on the
consent of mankind, there might have been some reason for men by common consent
to have changed the nature and signification of them. But since God by a Law
has appropriated some parts of worship to himself, we ought in manners to know
his mind, before we give away any part of that which was once peculiar to
himself, to any of his creatures.

4. Christ has no where made it lawful to give any Acts that were before
appropriate to the worship of God to any creature. We do acknowledge that
Christ did take away by the design of his doctrine, that external ceremonial
worship that was among the Jews; but he no where gives the least intimation,
that any acts which before were peculiar to God, might now be given to any else
besides him. Nay, instead of this, he lays down the same Fundamental precept
of worship which was in the Law, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, and he explains it more clearly to avoid all ambiguity
in it, by expressing that restrictive particle only, which was employed before:
His Apostles utterly refused any thing like divine honor being given to them,
and when one of them after an ecstatical manner fell down before an Angel, he
was severely rebuked for it, and bidden to worship God. So that our Adversaries
grant, that since the incarnation the Angels would not receive any adoration
from men; it seems then the Gospel is so far from giving any countenance to it,
that it suggests a new argument against it.

5. The notion of Idolatry under the Gospel, does remain the same that it was
before. For we find such a sin often expressed, and condemned, and cautions
given against it, Neither be ye Idolaters, 1 Cor. 10.7.14.
as were some of them: wherefore my dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry; Little
Children keep your selves from Idols. 1 S. John 5.21.
What notion of Idolatry could they have, but what was the same, which the Jews
had from the Law of Moses? The notion of Idolatry was a new thing among the
Gentiles who knew no harm at all in giving divine worship to creatures; from
whence should they understand the sinfulness and the nature of it, if not from
some Law of God? the Apostles pretended to give no new Law about it, and never
corrected any mistake among the Jews concerning it, as they did in other
things; therefore the notion of Idolatry did continue the same, that it was
before.

6. It was Idolatry among the Jews to give the appropriate acts of divine
worship to any thing but God: which I have already proved from the words of the
Law, and the concurrent Testimony of the Jewish Writers; and from these things
laid together, it follows, that it is Idolatry for men now to give any of the
forementioned appropriate signs of divine worship to any thing but God:
whether it be sacrifice, or adoration, or building Temples and Altars, or
burning incense, or invocation, or making Vows; for if all these were things
appropriated to the worship of God by his Law, the using of these to any
creature, is not mere disobedience to his Law, but a giving to the creature the
worship proper to God; which on all sides is confessed to be Idolatry.

. 14.
No, says T. G. this proves only an extrinsecal denomination of Idolatry; T.G.
p. 28, 29.
for if, for instance, God has forbidden external adoration to be given to an
Image, his prohibition of such worship may make it indeed to be unlawful, but
hinders not the Act from passing whither it was intended; and consequently if
it be intended or directed by the understanding and will to God, though after
an unlawful manner, it will not fail to be terminated upon God; and the act is
an act of disobedience, or of some other sin, and called Idolatry only by a
Metaphorical denomination, as Idolatry is called Adultery, and the Fields are
said to be joyful and sing. ^ 323.
For, as he says elsewhere, as no command of God can make that to be not
Idolatry, which is so in the nature of the thing; so no prohibition (if there
were any) could make that to be Idolatry which has not in it the true and real
nature of Idolatry.

To make this matter the more clear, I shall here take away this cavil of T.
G., because it relates to the right stating of the Nature of Idolatry; which is
agreed on both sides to be, giving to the creature the worship due only to God;
and the controversy between us is this, whether on supposition that God has
prohibited the act of adoration to an Image under the notion of Idolatry; that
act be real Idolatry or no? The only pretense on their side that it was not,
was this, that the intention of the Person being to terminate his worship on
God, and not barely on the Image, it could not be real Idolatry; my business
was to remove this pretense; which I did by this argument, because God himself
denies to receive it, and therefore it must be terminated on the creature: the
consequence of this T. G. rejects as utterly false, because humane acts go
whither they are intended, and that the prohibition of God only makes the act
unlawful, and does not hinder its going to its object. To take off this, I
undertook to show, that where God has prohibited any acts of worship, that
worship so given cannot be said to be terminated upon him: because worship
being as here understood, an outward signification of honor and respect, God
making a rule for his own worship, whatever has disobedience in it, must
dishonor God; and that were a contradiction to honor God by dishonouring him;
and therefore God giving it the denomination of Idolatry, men's intentions could
not excuse them from the guilt of it. For I said, whither soever men directed
their intention, it is plain from Scripture, that God does interpret this kind
of worship to be terminated on the Image; and therefore the Israelites are said
to worship the molten Image, although they directed their intention to God by
it. This is the short and true account of the force and design of that
discourse, upon which T. G. makes such clamours of vanity, impertinency,
changing the Question, contradiction, downright Sophistry, and what not? save
only answering the argument contained in it. But I beseech T. G. to let me
understand the Sophistry of this argument: T.G. p. 24, etc.
for he has not yet discovered any thing like it, but only that he did not, or
would not understand the strength and design of it. I will therefore do him the
kindness to make it plainer to him.

In all Acts of worship there are three things to be explained. 1. The inward
intention of the mind. 2. The outward act of worship. 3. The passing of that
outward act according to the inward intention; or the terminating of it.

1. The inward intention of the mind, is either (1.) Actual cogitation of the
object intended, or (2.) Directing the outward act to some particular end. As
when I see a picture that puts me in mind of a Friend, the inward intention of
the mind in the act of seeing is carried to the object represented, which is no
more than simple cogitation, or apprehension of the Person by an Idea of him in
my mind; but when I kiss that picture out of the esteem I have for him, the
intention of the mind is by that outward act to show the respect I have for his
Person.

2. The outward act of worship may be considered two ways. 1. Physically, and
abstractly from any Law, and so it depends upon the nature of the intention. 2.
Morally, as good or evil, and so it receives its denomination from the Law, and
not from the bare intention of the Person; as if a man steals with an intention
of charity, the goodness of his intention does not hinder the act from falling
under the denomination of theft.

3. The passing of the outward act according to the inward intention, or the
terminating of it, signifies no more out of these terms, than that it was the
intention of the person who did it to honor God by doing it; but whether this
be really an act of honor to God or no, is not to be judged by the simple
intention of the Doer, but by the Law and Rule of worship which God has given.
And how can God be honored by a palpable act of disobedience? and how can that
worship be terminated as worship upon him, who has utterly refused it? And
supposing that God has appropriated that outward act of worship to himself,
which is given to an Image, this is giving the worship to a creature, which is
proper to God; which T. G. cannot deny to be the definition of real Idolatry.
This was the meaning and intention of my former discourse, however T. G.
lamentably mistakes and perverts it.

1. He says, this is changing the State of the Question; how so? Why,
forsooth, my charge was of real Idolatry, and my proof is only of Metaphorical
Idolatry, and by extrinsecal denomination. What need is there that men have a
care of their words that have to do with such Sophisters! All that I said of
denomination, was no more than this, The Divine Law being the rule of worship
all prohibited ways of worship must receive that denomination which God
himself gives them: what is this to Metaphorical Idolatry? If I say that unjust
reproaching ones neighbor, or taking away his Goods, or lying with his wife,
must receive that denomination which the Law gives them, does this imply that
it is only Metaphorical Theft and Adultery, and false Witness? I do assure him,
I meant very real Idolatry, under that denomination; and that upon this reason,
which I have now more largely insisted upon, viz. that it belongs to God to
appropriate acts of worship to himself, that God having appropriated them, they
become due only to him; and therefore they who do these acts to any besides
himself, do give to the creature the worship due to God alone, which is the
very definition of real Idolatry T. G. contends for. But the real Idolatry I
meant, he says, was that which was so antecedently to any prohibition, as
appears by my contending that the Church of Rome does require the giving the
creature the honor due only to God. What strange arguing is this, for so a
subtle a Sophister! Would not any one that had looked over Aristotle's
threshold (to use his own phrase) discern, that if Idolatry does consist in
giving the creature the worship due only to God, as many ways as worship may
become due, Idolatry may be committed? Cannot God make any of the former
appropriate acts of worship to become due only to himself? cannot he tie us to
perform them to him? and then they become due to him: and cannot he restrain us
from doing them to any other? and then they become due only to him: and is not
then the doing of any of these prohibited acts to a creature, the giving to
them the worship due only to God? Is the outward act of sacrifice due only to
God antecedently to a prohibition or no? If it be due only to God antecedently
to his will, it is always and necessarily due to him, and to him alone: and
let T. G. at his leisure prove, that antecedently to any Law of God, it was
necessary to worship God by sacrifice, and unlawful so to worship any else
besides him. If it depends on the will of God, then either it is no Idolatry to
offer sacrifice to a creature; and then the Sacrifice of the Mass may be
offered to Saints or Images: or if it be, then real Idolatry may be consequent
to a prohibition. But he thinks he has a greater advantage against me by my
saying, that any Image being made so far the object of divine worship, p. 24,
25, 26.
that men do bow down before it, does thereby become an Idol, and on that
account is forbidden in the second Commandment. This is downright trifling; for
if I should say, that taking away a man's goods against his consent is Theft,
and on that account is forbidden in the eighth Commandment, would any man
imagine, that I must speak of Theft antecedent to the Command? for it implies
no more, than that it is contrary to the Command. But as it is in the case of
Theft, that is always a sin, although the particular species of it, and the
denomination of particular acts does suppose positive Laws about Dominion and
Property; so it is in the case of Idolatry, the general nature of it is always
the same, viz. the giving the worship to a creature, which is due only to God,
although the denomination of particular acts may depend upon positive Laws,
because God may appropriate peculiar acts of worship to himself, which being
done by him, those acts being given to a creature, receive the denomination of
Idolatry, which, without those Laws they would not have done. So that still the
general notion of Idolatry, is antecedent to positive Laws, but yet the
determination of particular acts, whether they are Idolatry or no, do depend on
the positive Laws which God has given about his worship. And if T. G. had
understood the nature of humane acts, as he pretends, he would never have made
such trifling objections as these: For is it not thus, in the nature of the
other sins forbidden in the Commandments as well as Idolatry, that are supposed
to be the most morally evil antecedent to any prohibition? Suppose it be
murder, adultery, or disobedience to Parents; although I grant these things to
have a general notion antecedently to any Laws; yet when we come to enquire
into particular acts, whether they do receive those denominations or no, we
must then judge by particular Laws, which determine what acts are to be
accounted Murder, Adultery, or Disobedience; as whether execution of
malefactors be prohibited Murder, whether marrying many Wives be Adultery,
whether not complying with the Religion of ones Parents be disobedience. These
things I mention, to make T. G. understand a little better, the nature of Moral
Acts, and that a general notion of Idolatry being antecedent to a prohibition,
is very consistent with the determining any particular acts, (as the worship of
Images, to be Idolatry,) to be consequent to that prohibition.

But I perceive a particular pleasure these men take, to make me seem to
contradict my self; and here T. G. is at it, as wisely as the rest; thus blind
men apprehend nothing but contradictions in the diversity of colors by the
different reflections of light; but the comfort is, that others know that it is
only their want of sight, that makes them cry out, contradictions. But wherein
lies this horrible self-contradiction? Why truly it seems I had said, that an
Image being made so far the object of divine worship that men do bow down
before it, does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden in the
second Commandment. Well! and what then? where lies the contradiction? Hold a
little, it will come presently: in the mean time mark those words, on that
Account: but I say, that the worship which God denies to receive, cannot be
terminated on him but on the Image. Is this the contradiction then? No, not yet
neither. The conceit had need be good, it is so long in delivering; but at last
it comes like a thunder-showre, full of sulphur and darkness, with a terrible
crack: either I mean that this worship cannot be terminated on God antecedently
to the Prohibition, because on that account the worship of an Image is
forbidden in the second Commandment; or if it cannot be terminated on the
account of the Prohibition, then it is not on that account forbidden. What a
needless invention was that of Gunpowder! T. G. can blow a man up with a train
of consequences from his own words, let him but have the laying of it. Could I
ever have thought, that such innocent words, as on that account, should have
had so much Nitre and Sulphur in them? For let any man read over those words,
and see if he can find any thing antecedent to the prohibition in them. For
having in that place showed that the words Idolum, sculptile, imago are
promiscuously used in Scripture, I presently add, By which it appears, that any
Image being made so far the object of divine worship that men do bow down
before it, does thereby become an Idol, and on that account is forbidden in
this Commandment. By which it appears (mark that) this T. G. pares off, as not
fit for his purpose; i. e. from the sense of the word in Scripture; that any
Image being made so far the object of divine worship that men do bow down
before it; i. e. if men do perform that act of worship to an Image which God
has forbidden the doing toward it; what then? then say I, it becomes an Idol,
for whatever has divine worship given to it, is so; and on that account, i. e.
of its having that act of divine worship done to it by bowing before it, it is
forbidden in this Commandment, i. e. it comes within the reach of that
prohibition; the meaning of all which is no more than to show, that adoration
of Images is Idolatry by virtue of that Commandment. But, thus are we put to
construe and paraphrase our own words, to free our selves either from the
ignorance, or malice of our Adversaries. But with this fetch T.G. stands and
laughs through his fingers, at the trick he has played me; and bids me, with a
secret pleasure at his notable invention, to extricate my self out of this
Labyrinth. But does not T. G. remember the old woman in Seneca, that thought
the Room was dark, when she lost her sight, and no doubt would have pleased her
self to think she left Children in the dark, when the Sun shined? I would
desire T. G. to look for the Labyrinth nearer home; for I cannot discern any,
unless it should be in the perplexity of his own thoughts; for I am unwilling
to believe that he does this with a design to play tricks; and to fly-blow my
words on purpose to make others distaste them. But what if after all this
Sophistry, T. G. very mercifully yields me the thing I pleaded for, viz. that
the worship which God has forbidden, cannot be terminated upon himself? For,
he says, that if God have forbidden himself to be worshipped after such a
manner, P. 29.
the giving him such worship will be a dishonouring of him, though the Giver
intend it never so much for his Honor. I see T.G. after all, is a good natured
man, and although he will show a thousand tricks, rather than be thought to
have it forced from him, yet let him alone, and he will give as much as a man
would desire. For what could I wish for more, than he here grants? Prohibited
worship, he grants, is dishonouring God, though a man intend it never so much
for his honor: and worship, he yields to be an external signification of
honor; then God is honored when he is worshipped; how then can he be
worshipped by the same act by which he is dishonored; for so he would be
honored by that by which he is dishonored; which comes much nearer to a
contradiction, than any thing he charges me with. But all this while he cannot
understand, that this is terminating the honor due to God on the Image: I ask
him then, where that honor rests? it must be some where; not on God, for, he
confesses God is dishonored, and therefore it can be no where else, but on the
Image, and consequently it is real Idolatry, and not merely Metaphorical, or by
extrinsecal denomination.

3. I now proceed to show,. 15.
that the Christian church has condemned those for Idolatry who have been
guilty only of applying some external appropriate acts of divine worship to
other things besides God. What made the Church of Alexandria be so severe with
Origin for but holding the incense in his hands, which those about him cast
from thence upon the Altar? yet for this, he was cast out of the Church, says
Epiphanius. Epiphan. haer. 64.
In the Acts of Marcellinus, which Baronius produces, Baron. A. 302. n. 90.
he is condemned for offering incense in the Temple of Vesta, out of compliance
with Dioclesian; yet he was only guilty of the external act of Idolatry, says
Bellarmin, Bellar. de R. Pont. l. 4. c. 8.
having no infidelity in his mind; and this was the common case of the
Thurificati, viz. of those who offered incense only out of fear; and not with
an intention to honor the Idol by it; yet these were looked on as lapsed
persons, and great severities of penance were prescribed them, as appears by
the Canons of Ancyra and many others. But if there be no external appropriate
acts of divine worship; if burning in^ense be an indifferent thing, and may be
used to God, or the Creature; if Idolatry depends on the intention of the mind;
I desire to know, what the fault of the Thurificati was? For if it were lawful
to burn incense to a creature, what harm was there in the doing it by
Marcellinus at the request of the Emperor, if he intended it for no more than
a civil respect to him? But it was in the Temple of Vesta, and therefore was
divine worship. Then, say I, an act in it self equivocal, becomes appropriate
to divine worship, being performed with the circumstances of Religion; which is
that I have been hitherto proving. But if external acts receive their
denomination from the inward intention of the mind, no doubt the Jesuits in
China, were far more in the Right than the primitive Church; and by this
doctrine of directing the intention in outward acts of worship, the lives of
many thousand Martyrs might have been saved. For in the Roman Martyrology
December. 25. we find in Nicomedia at one time, B^^on. not. in Martyrol. Romans
December. 25.
many thousand Martyrs destroyed by Dioclesian, being met together in a Church,
rather than they would escape by offering a little incense at their coming out:
the Greek Menology says, they were twenty thousand; too great a number to lose
their lives for so indifferent a ceremony, as T.G. accounts it; might not they,
when they were bid to offer incense to Jove, direct their intention to the
Supreme God? and then T. G. would assure them, the act must pass whither it was
directed; and it was mere ignorance of the nature of humane acts for men to
imagine otherwise. What great pity it is, so saving a doctrine (to the Lives at
least, though not to the Souls of Christians) had not been known in that age,
when so many poor Christians suffered Martyrdom for the want of it! How
admirably would T. G. upon his principles have persuaded those Christians of
Nicomedia to resolution and constancy in suffering! T. G. p. 420.
What is it the Emperor requires of you to save your Lives? [ O Sir say they,
it is to burn incense.] To burn incense! is that a thing for you to venture
your Lives for? I am ashamed of your ignorance; what do not you know, that
burning incense at least now in the New Law is an indifferent ceremony, and may
be used to God or to men? [O but we are required to burn incense to Jove.] What
have none of you looked over Aristotle's threshold, that you do not know, that
actions go whither they are intended? well, let me give you this advice; when
you burn the incense, direct your intention aright to God, and my life for
yours, the act will pass to him, and not to Jove, as surely as an Arrow well
levelled hits the mark that is aimed at. I see plainly, this threshold of
Aristotle would have done more service to have saved the Christians Lives, than
all the precepts of Christ or his Apostles. But I find none of the primitive
Christians had peeped through Aristotle's Keyhole, much less had they stepped over
his threshold, unless they were those Philosophical Christians, the Gnostics;
for they perfectly understood this principle, and ordered their actions
accordingly; for they had a mighty care of their intention, and kept a good
sound faith within, and for all the outward acts of worship among the Gentiles,
they could do them with the best of them, and only they did by them, as they do
with Pigeons in the East, they bound their intention fast about them, and with
them then they were sure they would fly to the place they intended them. But
why does S. Augustine find such fault with Seneca for complying with the
outward acts of worship among the Heathen Idolaters? De Civit. Dei, l. 6. c. 20.
and with the rest of the Philosophers for the same things? De Verae Relig. c.
5.
Why does Aquinas quote these passages with approbation? Did they know the
intention of Seneca, or the Philosophers? Why does Cajetan say, Aq. 2.2. q. 94.
art. 2.
that a man that commits only the external act of Idolatry, is as guilty as he
that commits the external act of theft? To both which, he says, no more is
necessary than a voluntary inclination to do that act; not any apprehension in
the mind that what he worships is God, nor any intention to direct that act
only to the Image. Nay, why does Gregory de Valentia himself say, Greg. de
Valent. de Idolol. l. 1. c. 1.
that outward acts of worship may be so proper to God either from their own
nature, or the consent of mankind, that whosoever does them, whatever his
inward intention be, ought to be understood to give the honor proper to God to
that for whose sake he does them? And this he calls an implicit, Tannerus an
indirect intention, Tanner. to. 3. disp. 5. q. 7. dub. 1.
but neither of them suppose it to be either an actual, or virtual intention of
the mind, but only that which may be gathered from the outward acts. Nay, T. G.
himself says, T. G. p. 99.
that on supposition the Philosophers did believe one God, and yet joined with
the people in the practice of their Idolatry, they were worthily condemned by
the Apostle, though but for the external profession of praying and offering
sacrifice to their Images. Say you so? and yet do outward acts certainly go
whither they are intended? Suppose then these Philosophers intended to worship
the true God by those Images? where this Idolatry or no? if not, why were they
so much to blame, for giving worship to the true God by an Image? which T. G.
commends, as a very good thing. Was it the figure of their Images displeased
him? that could not be, for the Statue of Jupiter Capitolinus might as fitly
represent God to them as that of an old man in their Churches; and young
Jupiter in the lap of Fortune, (an Image Cicero mentions) might put him in mind
of one of the most common Images in their Church; Cicero de Divin. l. 2. c. 41.
and by the help of a good intention might be carried to a right object. And
why might not intention do that, which their Church afterward did, when it
changed the Temple of Hercules to S. Alexius, because he was called (...);
Bellarm, de' Sanct. Beat. l. 1. c. 20.
and that of the two Brothers Romulus and Remus, or as Bellarmin says Castor
and Pollux, to Cosmas and Damianus; and the Pantheon to Omnium Sanctorum? If
there be no harm in the thing, there could be none in the intention. Or was it
the scandal of their practice? but to whom was the scandal given? it would have
been rather scandal among them not to have done it. So that if a secret
Intention does carry that act whither it is intended, and it be lawful to
worship God by Images, I do not see, wherein the Philosophers were to blame in
complying with those outward acts, whose good or evil according to T. G.
depends upon the intention of the doers of them. But if they were really to
blame, it was for doing those external acts of worship to creatures, which
belong only to the worship of God, and so the Apostle by condemning them, does
prove that which I intended, viz. that there are such peculiar external acts of
divine worship, that the doing of them for the worship of a Creature is
Idolatry.

But my Adversary,. 16.
thinks to clear the Church of Rome from the charge of Idolatry, by two general
answers which serve him and his Brethren on all occasions. viz. 1. That there
are two sorts of worship, one called Latria, or Sovereign worship which is
proper to God, and another called Dulia or inferior worship that may be given
to creatures on the account of excellencies communicated to them from God. 2.
That the worship they give to any inanimate creatures, that have no proper
excellencies of their own is not absolute, but a relative Latria, they
intending thereby only to worship God.

In the examining of these two, I shall clear the last part of this Discourse,
viz. 3. How the applying the acts of Religious worship to a creature does make
that worship Idolatry?

1. I shall consider the different sorts of worship which T. G. insists upon,
T. G. p. 353.
to clear the Church of Rome from the practice of Idolatry. The Question at
present, says T. G. between Dr. St. and the Church of Rome is not, whether
Divine worship be to be given to Saints (for this is abhorred of all faithful
Christians) but whether an inferior worship of like kind with that which is
given to Holy men upon earth for their Holiness and near relation to God, may
not be lawfully given to them, now they are in Heaven? Again, he says, P. 355.
if by Religious worship, I mean that honor which is due to God alone, it is
true what the Fathers say, that it is not to be given to the most excellent
created Beings, but nothing at all to the point in debate between us; if I mean
that honor of which a creature is capable for Religions sake, and that
relation which it setleth, he will, he says, show it to be false, that the
Fathers deny any such honor to be given to the Holy Angels or Saints: and if I
prove that this worship ought not to be called Religious, he tells me from S.
Austin, that it is but a mere wrangling about words, because Religion may be
used in other senses besides that of the worship due to God. And by the help of
this distinction between the Religious worship due to God, and that of which a
creature is capable for Religions sake, he says he can clearly dispell the
mist I have raised from the Testimony of the Fathers, and let the Reader see
that I have perverted their meaning, and yet said nothing to the purpose. Thus
he answers the testimonies of Justin Martyr, Theophilus, Origin, S. Ambrose,
(or the Writer under his name) Theodoret, S. Austin; and if they had been a
hundred more, it had been all one; they had been all sent packing with the same
answer; let them say what they would, they must be all understood of Divine
worship proper to God, and not of the inferior worship which creatures are
capable of, which from S. Austin he calls Dulia; P. 386.
as the former Latria. The whole strength of T. G's defense, as to the Worship
of Saints and Angels, lies in this single distinction; which I shall therefore
the more carefully consider, because it tends to clear the nature of Divine
worship, which is my present subject.

To proceed with all possible clearness in this debate, which T. G. has
endeavored to perplex, I shall 1. Give a true account of the State of the
Controversy. 2. Enquire into the sense of the Fathers about this distinction
about Sovereign and inferior worship, whether those acts of worship which are
practiced in the Roman Church, he only such as the Fathers allowed.

1. For the true state of the controversy; which was never more necessary to
be given, than in this place. For, any one that only reads T. G. and does not
understand the practice of the Roman Church, would imagine all the dispute
between him and me were, whether the Saints in Heaven be capable of receiving
any honor from men; and whether that honor being given upon the account of
Religion, might be called Religious Honor or no? This were indeed to wrangle
about words, which I perfectly hate. I will therefore freely tell, him how far
I yield in this matter, that he may better understand where the difficulty lies.

1. I yield, that the Saints in Heaven do deserve real honor and esteem from
us; and I do agree with Mr. Thorndike, whose words he cites, therein, that to
dispute whether we are bound to honor the Saints, were to dispute whether we
are to be Christians, or whether we believe them to be Saints in Heaven. For on
supposition that we believe, that the greatest excellencies of men's minds come
from the Grace of God, communicated to men through Jesus Christ; and we are
assured that such persons now in Heaven were possessed of those excellencies,
it is impossible we should do otherwise than esteem and honor them. For honor
in this sense, is nothing else, but the due apprehension of another
excellency; and therefore it must be greater, or lesser according to the nature
and degree of those excellencies. Since therefore we believe the Saints in
Heaven are possessed of them in a higher degree than they were on earth, our
esteem of them must increase according to the measure of their perfections.

2. That the honor we have for them may be called Religious honor, because it
is upon the account of those we may call Religious excellencies, as they are
distinguished from mere natural endowments and civil accomplishments. On which
account I will grant, that is not properly civil honor, because the motive or
reason of the one is really different from the other. And although the whole
Church of Christ in Heaven and Earth make up one Body, yet the nature of that
Society is so different from a Civil Society, that a different title and
denomination ought to be given to the honor which belongs to either of them;
and the honor of those of the triumphant Church may the better be called
Religious, because it is an honor which particularly descends from the object
of Religion, viz. God himself as the fountain of it; as civil honor does from
the Head of a Civil Society.

3. That this honor may be expressed in such outward acts, as are most
agreeable to the nature of it. And herein lies a considerable difference,
between the honor of men for natural and acquired excellencies, and divine
graces, that those having more of humane nature in them, the honor does more
directly redound to the possessor of them; but in Divine Graces which are more
immediately conveyed into the souls of men, through a supernatural assistance,
the Honor does properly belong to the Giver of them. Therefore the most
agreeable expression of the honor of Saints is solemn Thanksgiving to God for
them: for thereby we acknowledge the true fountain of all the good they did or
received. However, for the encouragement of men to follow their examples, and
to perpetuate their memories, the primitive Christians thought it very fitting
to meet at the places of their Martyrdom, there to praise God for them, and to
perform other offices of Religious worship to God, and to observe the
Anniversary of their sufferings, and to have Panegyricks made to set forth
their virtues, to excite others the more to their imitation. Thus far I freely
yield to T. G. to let him see what pitiful cavils those are, that if men
deserve honor for natural or supernatural endowments, surely the Saints in
Heaven much more do so: Who denies it? We give the Saints in Heaven the utmost
honor we dare give, without robbing God of that which belongs only to him.

Which is that of Religious worship, and consists in the acknowledgements we
make of Gods supreme excellency together with his Power and Dominion over us:
and so Religious worship consists in two things. 1. Such external acts of
Religion which God has appropriated to himself. 2. Such an inward submission
of our souls, as implies his Superiority over them: and that lies, as to
worship, 1. In prayer to him for what we want. 2. In dependence upon him for
help and assistance. 3. In Thankfulness to him for what we receive.

Prayer is a signification of want, and the expression of our desire of
obtaining that which we need: and whosoever beggs any thing of another, does in
so doing, not only acknowledge his own indigency, but the others power to
supply him: therefore Suarez truly observes from Aquinas, Suarez de Virtut.
Relig. To. 2. l. 1. c. 3.
that as command is toward inferiors, so is prayer toward Superiors: now to
this, says he, two things are requisite, 1. That a man apprehends it is in the
power of the Superior to give what we ask. 2. That he is willing to give it,
if it be asked of him. The expectation of the performance of our desire is that
we call dependence upon him for help and assistance; and our acknowledgement of
his doing it, is Thankfulness.

Now if we consider Prayer, as a part of Religious worship, we are to enquire
on what account it comes to be so; not, as though thereby we did discover any
thing to God which he did not know before, nor as though we hoped to change his
will upon our prayer; but that thereby we profess our subjection to him, and
our dependence on him for the supply of our necessities. For although prayer be
looked on by us as the means to obtain our requests, yet the consideration upon
which that becomes a means, is, that thereby we express our most humble
dependence upon God. It being the difference observed by Gul. Parisiensis
between humane and divine prayer; Gul. Paris. Rhet. Div. c. 2.
that prayer among men is supposed a means to change the Person to whom we
pray; but prayer to God does not change him, but fits us for receiving the
things prayed for. This one consideration is of greater importance toward the
resolution of our present question than has been hitherto imagined: for the
Question of invocation, does not depend so much upon the manner of obtaining
the thing we desire, i. e. whether we pray to the Saints to obtain things by
their merits and intercessions, which is allowed and contended for by all in
the Roman Church; or whether it be, that they do bestow the things themselves
upon us, which they deny: but the true State of the Question is this, whether
by the manner of Invocation of Saints which is allowed and practiced in the
Roman Church, they do not give that worship to Saints, which is only peculiar
to God? Now we are farther to consider, wherein that act of worship toward God
does lie; which is not in an act of the mind whereby we apprehend God to be the
first and independent cause of all good; but in an act of dependence upon him
for the obtaining that good we stand in need of. For a man may apprehend God to
be the first Author of all good, and yet make no prayer to him, nor use the
acts of Religious worship; because he may suppose that God may have committed
the care of humane affairs to inferior Deities, and therefore all our
addresses and acts of worship are to be performed to them: on this account the
worship proper to God must lie in dependence upon him as the Sole Author of all
Good to us; and this to be expressed by our Solemn Invocation of him. For
although the internal desire be sufficiently known to God; yet the necessity of
external Religious worship, and owning this dependence upon God to the world,
does require the expression of it, by outward duties and offices of Religion,
in such a manner, that our sole dependence upon God be understood thereby.

Now the Question between T. G. and me is this,. 17.
whether the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church in the Invocation of
Saints and Angels be consistent with the acknowledgement of our sole dependence
upon God for all our Blessings? The doctrine of their Church is thus delivered
by himself, in the words of the Council of Trent, It is good and profitable for
Christians humbly to invocate the Saints, T.G. p. 334.
and to have recourse to their prayers, aid, and assistance, whereby to obtain
benefits of God, by his Son our Lord Jesus Christ who is our only Redeemer and
Savior. Where we take notice of the phrase suppliciter invocare, to invocate
them after the manner of suppliants, and that not only voce, but mente, with
words, but mental prayers as the Council adds, which words seem to be put on
purpose to distinguish it from that office of Kindness in one man to another,
when he desires him to pray for him; for this is as much as they would use
concerning the Saints in Heaven praying to God, that they do suppliciter
invocare; this phrase then does not limit the signification of this invocation
to be no more than praying to the Saints to pray for us. For a man does, I
suppose, answer the signification of that phrase by praying to them to give,
rather than by praying to them to pray; for the one imports more the humility
of a suppliant, than the other does. And if there had been apprehended any
danger of praying to them as the givers of blessings, is is not to be imagined,
but so wary a Council would have expressed it, as it was most easy to have
done; and most necessary to avoid that danger, if they had any regard to the
good of men's souls. And that man must have an understanding indeed of a very
common size, that can apprehend that the Council of Trent disallowed the
praying to Saints as the Givers of Blessings, which was known to be practiced
in their Church, when they commend the humble invocation of Saints without the
least censure of that manner of praying to them. Nay farther, which puts the
matter out of dispute, with all who do not wilfully blind themselves, the
Council of Trent commends the making recourse, not only to the prayers of the
Saints, but to their aid and assistance: what does this aid and assistance
signify, as distinct from prayers, and expressing somewhat beyond them? (or
else those words were very weakly inserted in such a place, where they are so
liable to misconstruction) unless it be that which they pray for to them, viz.
that they would help, comfort, strengthen, and protect them. Of which sort of
prayers I produced several instances in their most Authentic Offices. And what
says T. G. to this? T.G. p. 399.
why truly, these Forms of prayer to Saints cannot be denied to be in use among
them, but yet the sense of them is no more than praying to them to pray for
them, and this is only varying the Phrase, to say to the Blessed Virgin Pray
for me, or Help me, and comfort me and strengthen me O Blessed Virgin. But I
asked him, whence must people take the sense of these prayers, if not from the
signification of the words? He answers, p. 407.
not merely from Lilly 's Grammar Rules, but from the doctrine of the Church
delivered in her Councils and Catechisms, and from the common use of such words
and expressions among Christians. I am content with this way of interpreting
the sense of these prayers, provided, that a generally received practice, never
condemned by their Councils, but rather justified by them, and a doctrine
agreeable to that practice, allowed and countenanced in that Church, be thought
a sufficient means to interpret the sense of these prayers. And to make the
matter more plain, besides the prayers already mentioned, I shall give only a
Taste of some few of those, which are recommended to the Use of the devout
Persons of their Church, in the Manuals and Offices which are now allowed them
in our own language: in which we may be sure, they would be careful to have
nothing they thought scandalous, or repugnant to the doctrine and practice of
their Church. In the Manual of Godly Prayers, which has been often printed,
(and once very lately) I find these words under the title of A Most Devout
Commendation to our most Blessed Lady, O most singular, most excellent, most
beautiful, most glorious, and most worthy Mother of God, most Noble Queen of
Heaven, and most entirely beloved, and most sweet Lady, and Virgin Mary; so
often from the bottom of my heart I do salute thee, as there be in number
Angels in Heaven, drops of water in the Sea, Stars in the Firmament, leaves on
the Trees, and grass on the earth. I do salute thee in the union of love, and
by the blessed and most sweet heart of thy most dear Son, and of all that love
thee, I do commend and assign my self unto thee, as to my dear Patroness, to be
thy proper and loving Child. And farther, I humbly beseech thee O blessed Lady,
that thou will vouchsafe to entertain and receive me, and obtain of thy dear
Son, that I may be wholly thine, and thou next unto God may be wholly mine,
that is, my Lady, my Joy, my Crown, and my most sweet and faithful Mother. Amen.

Lilly's Grammar I confess, will not help us out here; nor the Construing Book
neither: I do not think any Rules will do it. It must be a special gift of
interpreting, that can make any one think, that no more is meant by all this,
but to pray to the Blessed Virgin to pray for them. In the same Manual I find
another Recommendation to the Virgin Mary, in these words, O my Lady, Holy
Mary, I recommend my self into thy blessed trust, and singular custody, and
into the bosom of thy mercy, this night and evermore, and in the hour of my
death, as also my Soul and my Body; and I yield unto thee all my hope and
consolation, all my distress and miseries, my life and the end thereof; that by
thy most holy intercession, and by thy merits, all my works may be directed and
disposed, according to thine, and thy Sons Will. Amen.

I confess, intercession is here mentioned; but withal it is plain that is not
the only thing relied upon, for her merits are immediately added; and whatever
ground it be upon, it seems, it is not only lawful, but a devout thing to
commit Soul and Body to her trust and custody, both in Life and death. What
could have been said more to the Eternal Son of God, than is contained in this
Commendation to the Blessed Virgin in all the expressions of it? In another
prayer to her, which is not only in the Manual, but in the Primer, or Office of
the Blessed Virgin, and is too long to repeat, we have this beginning. I
beseech thee, O holy Lady Mary, Mother of God most full of pity, the daughter
of the Highest King, Mother most glorious, Mother of Orphans, the Consolation
of the Desolate, the way of them that go astray, the safety of all that trust
in thee, a Virgin before Childbearing, a Virgin in Childbearing, and a Virgin
after Childbearing, the fountain of mercy, the fountain of health and Grace,
the fountain of consolation and pardon, the fountain of piety and gladness, the
fountain of life and forgiveness.

I am now got from Lilly's Grammar to Aristotle's Threshold: and I desire to
know of T. G. whether these expressions are true or false? Is the Blessed
Virgin all these things, or not? If they be not true, they are horrible
blasphemies: if they be true, to what purpose is it to talk of praying to her
to pray for us? for why may not I go directly to the Fountain of Mercy, Grace,
and Pardon? what needless trouble were it to pray her, to pray for that which
is in her on hands to bestow? In another prayer following that, are these
expressions to the Blessed Virgin, Bow down thine ears O Mother of pity and
mercy, unto my poor prayers, and be to me wretched sinner, a pitious helper in
all things. And presently after to our Lady and S. John together. O ye two
Heavenly Gemms, Mary and John! O two divine Lamps ever shining before God!
drive away with your blessed beams, the dark clouds of my sins. -- To you, I
most wretched sinner, commend this day, my Body and Soul, that in every hour
and moment inwardly and outwardly, ye would vouchsafe to be my sure keepers and
pitiful Intercessors to God for me.

Here we have intercession again, but that is not all, nor the main thing; for
Custody is more than intercession; and that is first begged, and then
intercession. So that if ever any prayers were made to creatures for those
things, which God alone can give, these were; and so as to imply our dependence
on them for the obtaining of them. These may suffice for a taste of their
present and allowed devotions among them here at home, in Books of daily use.

And now I beseech T. G. to tell me, what there is in the Doctrine of the
Church of Rome, which makes it necessary for me to put so forced a sense upon
all these expressions, that they do mean no more than praying to the Blessed
Virgin to pray for them? As Lilly's Grammar will not explain the sense, so no
Rhetoric I ever saw, will make me understand the Figure. How often have we
been railed at, for understanding words in a figurative sense, which cannot be
literally understood, without overthrowing the plainest evidence of sense and
reason; and which by the customary modes of speaking among all Nations,
attributing the thing signified to the sign, and by other places of Scripture
and Fathers, we prove ought to be no otherwise understood? But here is a
strange figure invented against the plain and natural sense of the words, for
by praying to bestow must be understood only praying to pray: and that when
those titles are at the same time given, which suppose it in their power to
give; and when there is no imaginable necessity from any doctrine of their
Church to put this sense upon those words. For what article of their Creed,
what decree of their Church, what doctrine of their Divines does it contradict,
for any man to pray directly to the Virgin Mary, for the destruction of
heresies, support under troubles, Grace to withstand temptations, and reception
to Glory? And what can we beg for, more from God himself? Yet I challenge T. G.
to show, which of all these, such prayers are repugnant to? and if to none of
them, why should not the words be understood as they properly signify? nay, it
were easy to show, that such prayers are very agreeable not only to the
doctrine of the Council of Trent, but of their most eminent Divines both
before, and after it. But this were to go beyond the bounds of this general
Discourse; which is designed only to state the Nature of Divine Worship between
us and them. Yet I cannot but take notice of the way T. G. says, T.G. p. 407.
the people are instructed by, to make this to be the sense of praying to give,
i. e. praying to pray. 1. He says, the common doctrine of Christianity, by
which they are taught that God alone is the giver of all good things: and does
not the same common doctrine of Christianity, teach men to pray to him alone,
for what he only can give? and not to use such bold and absurd figures in
prayer, whose plain sense is contrary to this common doctrine of Christianity.
But I wonder that T. G. should think this an effectual way to make them
understand the prayers in this sense, when himself has showed them the way to
reconcile this common doctrine to their practice; and the form of the words.
For may not giving be distinguished as well as worship? It is true, God alone
is the Original Giver of all good things, and this is a Sovereign way of giving
peculiar to God; but there is an inferior and subordinate way of giving by a
power derived from God, and this is all, say they, we attribute to the Saints;
and how now does the common doctrine of Christianity teach people more
effectually, that God alone is the Giver of all things, than that God alone is
to be worshipped? I am sure the Scripture says one as often, and in as plain
terms, as it can do the other. But, 2. He says, their Sermons, Catechisms and
Explications both by word and writing do it; suppose some persons do it, I ask,
by what Authority? their Church having never declared against an inferior way
of giving in the Saints, and having expressly owned the making recourse to them
for their help and assistance, as well as their prayers. I desire T. G. in good
earnest to tell me, what makes him so concerned, to have all the prayers
understood in that sense, of praying to the Saints to pray for them, against
the express sense of the words? Is there any harm in the other sense or not? if
there be no harm, why may they not be so understood, without so much force and
violence offered to them? if there be any harm, what is it? Idolatry or not? if
only scandal, why were they not put in other words? if Idolatry, then T. G.
himself charges them with Idolatry that understand their prayers by Lilly's
Grammar, unless he thinks it much better for them, not to understand them at
all. But I shall beg the Favor of one of their Church-Dictionaries to
interpret this late Ode of Rapin to the Lady of Loretto, so as to make me
construe it to be only praying to her to pray for them.

Renat. Rapini Odarum liber p. 46. Paris. 1670.
Ad Divam Virginem Lauretanam.
Diva, quam rebus trepidis benignam
Rure Piceno veneratur Orbis,
Cui suos sternit facilis moveri
Adria fluctus:
Si qua Pastoris tibi Vaticani
Cura, vel Sacri superest Ovilis,
Italis Thracem procul inquietum
Finibus arce.
Si faves totis trepidabit undis
Bosphorus, rupes Scyticae pavebunt,
Turca pallebit, timidumque cornu
Luna recondet.
Namque te dudum pelagi potentem
Non semel verso tremuere ponto
Mersa Threissi, rate dissipata
Arma Tyranni.
Ne tibi fidam pavor ille gentem
Angat, aut saevis male turbet armis
Quos tuis laeti meditamur aris,
Ponere honores.
If this be not making a Goddess of her, surely the Heathen Poets never made
one of Minerva; and yet I hope Rapin, a Jesuit and a Scholar, did well enough
understand what was agreeable to the doctrine and practice of the Church of
Rome.

Yet supposing T. G's sense were all that were understood by the Church of Rome
in this matter,. 18.
it does not acquit them from giving that Religious Worship, which Invocation
imports, to something else besides God. For let us suppose that the Arrians
only looked on Christ as a powerful intercessor with God, and on that account
did in their public offices of Religion make their solemn Addresses to him to
intercede and pray for them to God; were this giving him any part of Divine
worship or no? Especially, when performed with all the external acts of
adoration which are proper to God. If this were not any part of Divine worship,
the Fathers were extremely out in their proofs that Christ could be no
creature, because the external act of adoration was given to him; if it were a
part of divine worship, then those in the Church of Rome do give it to a
creature, when with all the solemn Acts of Devotion they pray to Saints, which
they use to God himself, although it be only to be intercessors with God for
them, especially when they do not only pray thus to them, but rely upon them
for their help and assistance, and return thanks to them when they receive the
Blessings they prayed for. Would not the Fathers have called this bringing in
Polytheism, and reviving the ancient Idolatry of the Heathens? Since the great
principle of Christianity they said was, the reserving all parts of Religious
worship to God alone. Nay, some of the Writers of the Roman Church have been so
ingenuous in this matter to confess, that if the modern practice of Invocation
of Saints had been introduced in the Apostolical times, it would have looked
too like the introducing of Gentilism again. Franciscus Horantius in his Answer
to Calvin's Institutions, Franc. Horant. Loc. Catholic. l. 3. p. 127. Ed. Ven.
confesses, that Invocation of Saints was not expressly commanded under the
Gospel, ne gentiles conversi crederent se iterum ad cultum terrigenarum trahi,
lest the Gentile Converts should believe that they were again drawn to the
worship of Creatures: which words he had borrowed from Eccius, and the same are
repeated by Harpsfield. Martinus Peresius Ayala a learned Spanish Bishop
assigns this for the reason, Cop. Dialog. 3. Martin. Peers. Ayal. de Tradit.
part. 3. p. 105.
why he could meet with no footsteps either of the invocation or intercession
of Saints, before the time of Cornelius Bishop of Rome; viz. that the Apostles
would have been thought to have made themselves Gods, if they had delivered the
doctrine of invocation and intercession of Saints. By which we see, these
persons did truly apprehend a great affinity between their practice of
Invocation of Saints, and the Heathen Idolatry; or else there was no danger,
one should be mistaken for the other. And although T. G. tells us, T.G. p. 399.
he never met with any Catholic so ignorant, as not to understand the sense of
their prayers to be to desire the Saints to help them with their prayers; yet I
meet with some men, who understood Catholics as well as T. G. and yet do give
a quite different account of them. For the same Spanish Bishop, thinks the
people had great need to be better instructed in this matter of worship, lest,
says he, they make Gods of the Saints, nam multos inveni in hac part, non
satis Christian institutos; I have found many not well instructed in this
matter: it seems not only the people committed Idolatry, but their Teachers did
not instruct them well enough to avoid it. And Ludov. Vives was not so lucky a
man as T. G. for he says, that many Christians do most times offend in a good
thing (i. e. giving honor to Saints) for, Lud. Viv. in Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 8.
c. 27.
he says, they worship them no otherwise than they do God; neither do I find
in many things any difference between their opinion of the Saints, and the
Heathens of their Gods. T.G. takes notice of this passage of Vives, T.G. p. 436.
and blames me for leaving out in re bona, in a thing good in it self; let him
make as much of this, as he please, for it only shows that he was a through
Papist, although he charged the people with the downright practice of Idolatry:
and if it only implies an error and abuse in practice, yet he shows both these
were too common among them, and that the Catholics in his time were not so
wise as those T. G. has met with. But it may be he means no more, than that if
they be asked the Question in their Catechism, they answer it as he says;
which is as good a way to free them from the practice of Idolatry, as if a man
should be suspected of Adultery, and T. G. should answer for him, that cannot
be, for he understands better than so, for when I asked him the Commandments,
he said he ought not to commit Adultery. Polydore Virgil, was not so happy as
T. G. for speaking of the solemn Rite of Supplication when the Images of Saints
are carried in procession, he says, I fear, Polyd. Virg. de Invent. Rer. l. 6.
c. 1 1.
I fear we rather please the Heathen Gods than Christ by such practices; which
without all question, he says, was taken from the Heathen customs. And what he
says of the worship of Images, c. 13.
is as true of that of Saints, that the people were arrived to that degree of
madness, that their worship differed very little from Idolatry. Cassander
says, Cassand. consuit. art. 21.
that the people trusted so much to the Patronage and Intercession of the
Saints, whom they worshipped with dull, not to say profane Ceremonies, that
they hoped for the pardon of their sins, although they did not amend their
lives, on the account of their intercession for them; and that they trusted
more to them, especially to the Blessed Virgin, than to Christ himself. And
that what interpretations soever some men put upon those titles of the Queen of
Heaven, Mother of Mercy, etc. the common people did not understand them
according to their sense of them. Nay, Erasmus goes farther, Erasm. Eccles. l.
2.
saying, that their very Preachers worshipped the Blessed Virgin with more
Religion, or devotion, than they did Christ himself, or his Holy Spirit,
calling her the Mother of Grace. By all which we see, that the doctrine of
Divine worship is not so clearly stated by them, but that the more ingenuous
men, who have lived and dyed in the communion of that Church, have thought not
only the people, but the Teachers very much to blame in it.

. 19.
2. My business now is, to give an account of the sense of the Fathers in this
dispute about the notion of divine worship; not to handle particularly the
Testimonies of the Fathers in dispute between us, which belongs to the Question
of Invocation of Saints, but to show, that they went upon the same principles I
have here laid down, in the distinction between the Honor and the Worship of
them; and while they speak most for the Honor of the Saints, they deny any
Religious worship to be performed to them.

Origin in the beginning of his Book against Celsus, Orig. c. Cells. l. 1. p. 10.
makes that to be the property of the doctrine of Christ, that God only was to
be worshipped, but that other might be (...), worthy of honor, but not of
worship. And in another place he speaks as plainly as words can express his
meaning; although, says he, we should believe that L. 8. p. 416.
Angels were set over these things below, yet we only praise and magnify them;
but all our prayers are only to be made to God, and not to any Angel; and only
Jesus Christ is to offer up our prayers to God; L. 5. p. 233.
and lest any should imagine he meant only some kind of prayers, he says
expressly (...) all prayer, and supplication, and intercession; P. 238.
and says that we ought not to pray to them who pray for us. But now what
says T. G. to these places, which (excepting the first) I had objected against
the practice of invocation of Saints and Angels in my former discourse? Why
truly he says, T.G. p. 361.
that Origens meaning is partly, that we are not to pray to them in the same
manner that we do to God: but we may pray to them after another manner. But is
that inferior sort of prayer, prayer or not? when we desire them to pray for
us, is not that desiring their intercession for us? but Origin denies, that any
prayer is to be made to them, or any one to be prayed to, although it be only
to intercede with God for us, but only the Son of God. I remember an answer of
a devout servant of the Blessed Virgin much like this of T. G. For when it was
objected, that she could not be the Mother of Redemption for mankind, because
it is said, Isa. 63.3. I have trodden the winepress alone, and of the people
there was no man with me. True, says he, there is no man with thee, Ricard. de
Laud. Mariae l. 2. p. 2.
but there might be a woman for all that. So does T. G. deal with the
testimonies of the Fathers, let them be never so express against all sorts of
prayers and Invocations, they hold only of such a sort of prayer, but there may
be another and inferior sort notwithstanding. But is there any sort that is
not comprehended under all? And that Origin cannot be understood in these
passages of such prayer only as supposes the supreme excellency in God, most
evidently appears by the dispute between Celsus and him, which was not about
the worship of the Supreme God, but of Inferior Spirits and Ministers to him,
as has been fully proved already.

The Church of Philomelium in that noble Testimony concerning the Martyrdom of
Polycarp, Eusebius. hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 15.
makes the same distinction between honor and worship; for they utterly deny
giving any worship to a creature, as inconsistent with Christianity; but at the
same time, they confess the honor and esteem they had for the Martyrs, which
they expressed by meeting at the places of their Martyrdom, keeping their
Anniversary days, and recommending their examples to the imitation of others.

In the former Discourse I produced the Testimonies of Justin Martyr,
Theophilus Antiochenus, and mentioned many others to the same purpose, viz.
that all Religious worship was due only to God; and with this double caution to
prevent cavils, 1. That it was without making any distinctions of absolute and
relative worship, which they must have been driven to, in case they had given
Religious worship to any besides. 2. That when the Christians refused to give
adoration to the Emperor, it could not be understood of the adoration proper
to the Supreme God, for none can be so senseless to imagine they required that,
but such kind of Religious worship as they gave to the Images of their Gods. To
all this T. G. replies, T.G. p. 340.
(I.) That these Testimonies are impertinent, because they are to be understood
only of that divine worship which is due to God alone; and not of the Inferior
worship which belongs to Saints or Angels. Might he not as well have said, that
they prove that no man might be worshipped, but a woman might? For the force of
the Testimonies did not lie merely in this, that they attributed divine worship
only to God, but that they made use of the most general terms which signified
worship without any distinction of the nature and kind of that worship,
supposing it to be on a Religious account. For no men of common sense would
have written as they did, if they had believed that some sort of Religious
worship were lawful to be given, and another not. Does T. G. think that he
should ever escape censure in his Church, if he should say peremptorily that it
is unlawful to give any kind of Religious worship to a creature, when the very
Indices of the Fathers cannot escape the Index Expurgatorius for blabbing so
great a Truth? No; we should have T. G. presently out with his distinctions;
worship is of two sorts, Supreme called Latria, inferior called Dulia:
Religious may be taken in two senses. 1. That which proceeds from the virtue of
Religion, and that is proper to God. 2. That which tends to the honor of
Religion, and that may be given to creatures. And thus would the Fathers have
written, if they had ever looked over Aristotle's threshold, and been of T. G's
mind; and therefore my argument which proceeded upon the general terms of the
Fathers, without intimating any such distinction, does hold good, that either
they did not write like understanding men, or they knew no such distinctions as
these. 2. That although Justin Martyr and Theophilus deny divine worship to be
given to Emperors, yet they both imply, T.G. p. 341, 342.
that lawful worship and honor is to be given to them; and therefore he cannot
but wonder, what I meant by alleging those Testimonies, unless I intend not
any worship at all to be due to any besides God; or that I think it not
possible to worship a good man. And afterward he says, p. 347.
he would willingly understand yet farther, whether I allow any honor at all
to be due to Princes as Gods Vicegerents; for he does not remember hitherto any
passage in my Book, from whence he could gather that I hold it lawful to give
any worship either to Princes Statues or to themselves. Which words have such a
venomous insinuation in them, that I could hardly believe they could come from
a man of the least common ingenuity. Because I deny Religious worship to be
given to any besides God himself; must I therefore be represented as a man that
denies Civil worship to be given to Princes? I cannot tell, whether the folly
or malice of such an insinuation be the greater. I pray God help his
understanding, and forgive his ill will. I hope all acts do not go whither they
are intended; but that which he designs for my dishonor, may notwithstanding
his intention, terminate in his own. I do assure him, I am so much for the
utmost civil worship to be given to Princes as Gods Vicegerents, as not to
think it in the power of any Bishop in the World to depose them, or absolve
their subjects from obedience to them; and I hope T. G. thinks so too, although
he may not think it so fit to declare his mind. But what is all this to our
present business? The force of my argument lay in this, the Christians denied
giving Religious worship to Princes, although it were an inferior kind of
Religious worship, therefore they did not think an inferior kind of Religious
worship lawful. Was this argument too hot for his fingers, so that as soon as he
touched it, he runs away, and frets and fumes, and vents his spite against me
for it? However, I will urge it again and again, till I receive a better
answer. T. G. says, the Fathers speak only of the Sovereign worship that is
due only to God; and that is the worship they think unlawful to give to any
creature. I say it is impossible that should be their sense, for they deny it
to be lawful to give Religious worship to Princes, when they were required to
do it; but no men ever took Princes for the Supreme God. T. G. tells me, that
Tertullian explains Theophilus and Justin, saying, that the King is then to be
honored when he keeps himself within his own Sphere, and abstains from divine
honors. Very well! this is that I aim at: and he need not wonder what I
brought these testimonies for; for it was for this very thing which Tertullian
says, that the Christians did refuse to give divine honors to Princes: and
therefore they thought divine worship comprehended under it all sorts of
Religious worship. But says T. G. it is a thing notoriously known, that many
of the Heathen Emperors exacted to be worshipped as Gods, that is with divine
worship. I grant all this, and say that it still proves what I intend. For did
they mean by worshipping them as Gods, that they would have the people believe
them to be the Supreme God? that is madness and folly to suppose, for the
utmost they required, was to be worshipped with the same worship that Deified
men were; or to have the same worship living, which the Senate was wont to
decree to them when they were dead. And can T. G. possibly believe, that this
was to suppose them to be the sole Authors of all good to mankind? which is
that kind of divine worship, he says, the Fathers only condemned. I desire T.
G. to think again of this matter, and I dare say he will see more cause to
wonder at his own answer, than at my argument, which so evidently overthrows
all that he brings to evade the Testimonies of the Fathers. But says T. G. if
Kings may be honored as Gods Vicegerents, why may not Saints as the adopted
Children of God? Who denies this, for Gods sake? but I deny, that either Kings
or Saints are to have divine worship given to them. And since T. G. is in the
humor of asking me Questions, let me propose one to him; if Kings may be
honored as Gods Vicegerents, why not with divine honor upon his principles;
i. e. with a relative Latria, though not absolute? And if that be lawful, what
he thinks of the primitive Christians, who chose to dye, rather than to give
divine worship to them upon any account? By this time I hope T. G. is ashamed
of what he adds, that on the same principles that I deny any worship to be due
to Saints, a Quaker would prove, that it must be denied to Princes. The worship
I deny to Saints, is that which God has denied to them, viz. Divine worship;
the worship I say is due to Princes, is that which God has required to be
given them, viz. civil worship. And they that cannot find out a difference
between these two, are a fit match for the Quakers. I know not what a Quaker
might do in this matter; I am sure T. G. does nothing but trifle in it. Was
there ever a meaner argument came out of the mouth of a Quaker, that what he
urges against me, viz. that in such a Book printed in such a place, and just in
such a page, T.G. p. 341.
I call a Divine of our Nation Reverend and Learned: and what then? therefore
Saints are to be worshipped: very extraordinary I confess; and one of T. G's
nostrum's! if he please, let it be writ upon his Monument, Hic jacet auctor
hujus Argumenti, for I dare say, no body ever used it before him. If we give
men titles of respect according to their Age and Calling, or real worth,
therefore we are to give Religious worship to Saints: and why not as well to
Princes, because we call the Judges appointed by them, the Reverend Judges? but
surely this will prove not only a dulia, but an hyperdulia: because we not only
call the Clergy Reverend, but the Bishops Right Reverend, and Archbishops Most
Reverend. I am sorry T. G. did not so well consider the force of his argument,
to have pressed it home upon me, for he now sees how much more advantage might
have been made by it: but it is an easy thing to add to rare inventions. But
certainly T. G. (to use his own words) must believe his Readers to be all stark
blind, who cannot distinguish titles of respect from Religious worship. But is
there not a Reverence due to Persons for their Piety, as well as for their Age
and Dignity? who doubts it? but that Reverence lies in the due expressions of
honor and esteem toward them, which I hope may be done without encroaching
upon the Acts of Religious worship; and I think I have told him plainly enough,
what I mean by them, in the foregoing Discourse. But T. G. seems to understand
no difference between titles of respect, and acts of worship; between
expressions of esteem and devotion; between Religious and Civil worship; for he
blunders and confounds all these together, and whatever proves one, he thinks
proves all the rest: these are not the best ways of reasoning, but they are
the best the cause would bear. Well, but yet the matter seems not altogether so
clear, for the worship we are to give to Princes is as they are Gods
Vicegerents, and this is given on a Religious account, because God commands us
to give honor to whom honor is due; the place urged by T. G., T.G. p. 348.
Romans 13.7. To this a very easy answer will serve. Worship may be said to be
Religious two ways. 1. As it is required by the Rule of Religion: and so the
worship given to Magistrates is Religious. 2. In its nature and circumstances;
as it consists of those acts which God has appropriated to his worship; or is
attended with those circumstances which make it a Religious performance, and
then it is not to be given to Princes, or any Creatures, but only to God
himself. This will be made plain by a remarkable instance among the ancient
Christians; While Divine honors were challenged by the Emperors to
themselves, i. e. the honors belonging to consecrated men (for they meant no
other) the Christians refused giving to them those external acts of Reverence
which might be supposed to have any Religious worship in them; although they
expressed the greatest readiness at the same time to obey their Laws, that did
not require any thing against Christianity; and to pray for their safety and
prosperity. This being known to be the general practice of Christians, Pliny in
his Epistle to Trajan mentions this as one of the ways of trying Christians,
viz. whether they would Imagini Caesaris thure and vino supplicare, give
Religious worship to Caesar's Image, by burning incense, and pouring out wine
before it; which were the Divine honors required. This, Pliny says, Plin. l.
10. ep. 97.
all that were true Christians refused to do; and those who did it presently
renounced Christ. Thus, this matter stood as long as the Emperors continued
Gentiles, who were presumed to affect Divine honors; but when Constantine had
owned Christianity, and thereby declared, that no Religious worship was to be
given to him, the Christians not only erected public Statues to Emperors, but
were ready to express before them the highest degrees of Civil worship and
respect. This Julian thought to make his advantage of, Greg. Naz. orat. 1. in
Iul.
and therefore placed the Images of the Gods among those of the Emperors, that
either they might worship the Gods, or by denying Civil Worship to the
Emperors Statues, which the custom then was to give, they might be proceeded
against as disaffected to the Emperor. And when he sat on the Throne
distributing New-years-gifts, he had his Altar of Incense by him, that before
they received gifts, they might cast a little incense into the fire; which all
good Christians refused to do, because as Gothofred observes, Iac. Gothofred.
Julian orat. p. 66.
the burning of incense was the same trial of Christians, that eating of Swines
flesh was of Jews. But after the suspicion of Religious worship was removed in
the succeeding Emperors, the former customs of Civil worship obtained again;
till Theodosius observing how these customs of Civil adoration began to extend
too far, Cod. Theodos. 15. tit. 4. l. 1.
and border too much upon Divine honors, did wholly forbid it in a
Constitution extant to that purpose, and that for this reason, that all worship
which did exceed the dignity of men, should be entirely reserved to God. By
this true account of the behavior of Christians in this matter, T. G. may a
little better understand what that worship was, which the primitive Christians
refused to give to Emperors, and what difference they made between the same
external acts, when they were to be done on a Civil and on a Religious account;
which are easily discerned either by the nature of the acts themselves, as the
burning incense, or the circumstances that attend them, as in adoration.

. 20.
It were needless to produce any more Testimonies of Antiquity to prove that
Divine worship is proper only to God, since T. G. confesses it; but gives quite
another sense of Divine worship than they did, for under this, they
comprehended all acts of Religious worship, as appears by the worship they
denied to Emperors. It remains therefore to show, that those who spoke most
for the honor of the Saints, did not by that mean any Religious acts of
worship, but expressions barely of honor and esteem.

Julian objected this against the Christians (as it was common with the
Heathens to object many false and unreasonable things) that instead of the
Heathen Gods, they worshipped not one but many miserable men. To this S. Cyrill
answers, S. Cyrill. c. Julian. l. 6. p. 203.
that as to Christ, he confesses they worshipped him, but they did not make a
God of a man in him, but he was essentially God, and therefore fit to be
worshipped; but for the Martyrs, they neither believed them to be Gods, nor
gave them the worship which belongs to Gods. Which is unquestionably S.
Cyrill's meaning, or he does not answer to the purpose: For Julian never
charged the Christians with giving that worship to Martyrs, which is proper to
the Supreme God considered as such, but that they gave to them that Religious
worship which Julian pleaded to be due to the inferior Gods, as appears by the
State of the Question between them. This therefore S. Cyrill denies that they
gave to Saints and Martyrs, which he calls (...), i. e. to give them the
worship which the Heathens gave to their inferior Deities; what they gave to
the Martyrs was upon another account, it was only (...), respectively and by
way of honor. And lest any should suspect he meant any kind of Religious
worship by this, he presently explains himself, that what he said was only to
be understood of those honors they gave to them for their generous suffering
for the faith, despising all dangers, and thereby making themselves great
examples to other Christians; and after he let us understand what these honors
were, when he brings the instance of the Athenians meeting together at the
sepulchers of those who were slain at the Battle of Marathon for the liberty of
Greece, and there making Panegyricks upon them, and therefore he wonders why
Julian should exclaim so much against these honors done to the Martyrs, since
this was all the reward they could give them. c. Iul. l. 10.
And elsewhere he says, these honors consisted in preserving their Memories,
and praising their virtues; and brings the very same instance of the Athenians
again: p. 336.
but for any matter of worship toward them he utterly denies it; because they
were bound to give it to none but God. p. 338.
And that we might fully understand what he means when he says, that
Christians do not give to Saints the worship the Heathens gave to their
inferior Gods, in another place, he tells us, what that worship did consist
in, L. 4. p. 124.
which he there calls (...) (by which we are certain what he meant by (...)
before) and so he reckons up (...) in the first place, their prayers, or
supplications, and then vows, hymns, oblations and sacrifices: the giving of
any of these to Saints were to worship them (...); and not as the ignorant or
wilfully blind Writers of the Roman Church when they meet with this word, they
cry out presently, mark that, not with Latria, and presently imagine that what
sense a word has obtained among them, if they meet with it in the Fathers, it
must needs signify the same thing; when the sense of words has been so
strangely perverted by them; as will more particularly appear by this very
distinction of Latria and Dulia, which they make S. Augustine the Author of,
but have carried it far beyond his meaning.

I come therefore to consider S. Austins mind in this matter,. 21.
which I am the more obliged to do, since T. G. so unreasonably triumphs in S.
Austins opinion in this matter; and is not only content to drag me at his
Chariot wheels, but he makes a show of me, and calls people to see by my
example, to what miserable shifts and disingenuous arts they are put, T.G. p.
431.
who will shut their eyes, and fight against the light of a noonday truth:
when I first read these words, I began to rub my eyes, and to look about me,
and to wonder what the matter was; and I find my self as willing to see light
as another, and my conscience never yet accused me of using disingenuous arts
in dealing with them; if T. G. can clear himself as well, it is the better for
him; I am sure by standers have not thought so, as appears at large by Dr.
Whitby, especially in his last Chapter against him. But it is not my business
to recriminate; hopeing sufficiently to clear my self in this matter. It seems,
I had said that S. Augustine denies, that any Religious worship was performed
to the Martyrs; this T. G. again says, I could not affirm without shutting my
eyes: and yet I thank God, by the help of my eyes, I find S. Augustine saying
the same thing still. For is it not S. Augustine that says, non sit nobis
Religio cultus hominum mortuorum, Aug. de ver. Rel. c. 55.
let not the worship of dead men, be any part of our Religion: for if they have
lived piously, they do not desire such honors from us; but they would have us
to worship him, by whom we may become partakers of their happiness: honorandi
ergo sunt propter imitationem, non adorandi propter Religionem. Is it possible
for any man to speak plainer than S. Austin does, that they are not to have
Religious worship given to them, but such honor as may excite us to an
imitation of them? And this not by chance, or in some incoherent passage, but
in a set discourse on purpose, where he argues with strong reason against the
Religious worship of Angels, as well as Saints, to the end of that Book. And
says, the utmost they expect from us, is the honor of our love, and not of
our service; (and therefore S. Augustine did not by (...) understand the service
of Saints and Angels) which he there disputes against, from our happiness
coming only from God, our being the Temples of God, the Angels prohibiting S.
John to worship him, and bidding him to worship God; and that the very name of
Religion, is from tying our Souls to God alone. Whosoever of the Angels loves
God, says he, loves me for worshipping him, and he that has Gods favor, has
the favor of all that are good. Therefore let our Religion bind us faster to
one omnipotent God, between whom and us there is no creature interposed: with
much more to the same purpose. Is it not the same S. Austin that says, Tract.
23. in Evang. Ioh.
Haec est Religio Christiana ut colatur unus Deus; this is the Christian
Religion, to worship one God; and that for this reason, because God only can
make the Soul happy: for, says he, it is made happy only by the participation
of God, and not of a blessed Soul, or Angel. Not, as though this were intended
only against the expectation of our blessedness wholly from Saints or Angels;
but he makes use of this as an argument to prove, that we ought to worship God
alone, who only is able to make us happy. Is it not the same S. Austin, that
says, this is the character of the true Religion, De quantit. an. c. 34.
that it unites us only to one God, without giving worship to any other Being
how excellent soever? and he looks on this as a divine and singular part of the
Christian doctrine, nullam creaturam colendam esse animae, that no creature
have the worship of our Soul; what did he then think of praying to creatures
not only with our voice, but our mind too, as the Council of Trent says, it is
profitable for us to do, and not only for their prayers, but for their help and
assistance; but says good S. Austin, the most wise and perfect man, the most
accomplished and happy soul is only to be loved and imitated, and honor given
to it according to its desert and order: for thou shall worship the Lord thy
God, and him only shall thou serve. Could any man speak more plainly and fully
against giving any Religious worship to creatures, than he does? Is it not the
same S. Austin that tells Maximus Madaurensis, Aug. ep. 45.
that in the Christian Church, none that were dead were worshipped, and nothing
adored as God, that is made by God; but only one God, who created all things?
Here T. G. smiles, and thinks to avoid this presently; for S. Austin speaks of
any thing being adored as God; which they abhor to do: but his smiling will be
soon over, if he considers, what being adored as God there means: for no one
ever suspected, that the Christians believed the Martyrs to be the Supreme God;
but only that they worshipped them as Gods of a lower rank by participation
from the Supreme. And is not the very same thing said and defended in the Roman
Church, that the Saints are Gods by participation, and they have the care and
government of the Church committed to them; and on that account are worshipped?
and if this be not being adored as Gods in S. Austins sense, I know not what
is. Is it not the same S. Austin, that undertakes to prove against the
Platonists, De Civ. Dei l. 9.23.
that good Spirits are not to be worshipped per tale Religionis obsequium, by
such Religious worship? very right, says T. G., not by the worship of
Sacrifices; but S. Austin says, neither Sacris, nor Sacrificiis, which two
comprehend all the Rites of Religious worship which were then used. For he
makes use of several phrases to express the acts of Religious worship,
sometimes by joining those two together, sacris and sacrificiis; sometimes
Religione and Sacris; L. 10. c. 1.
sometimes Religionis ritibus; sometimes Religionis obsequio; c. 4.
by all which he understands the same thing, viz. the acts of Religious
worship, which for distinction sake he calls Latria; as that service or worship
that men owe to one another, he says is called by another name: and I confess
I cannot find S. Austin applying the term of Dulia to any service we owe to
Saints or Angels in Heaven; De ver. Rel. c. 55.
but he avoids the term of Service and denies it be due to them, and only calls
it by the name of Love and Fellowship with them; and therefore Martinus
Peresius had good reason to quarrel with the use of the word dulia, Mart.
Peers. de trad. p. 3. cons. 7.
because we are only fellow servants with them; and Bellarmin gives him no
sufficient answer, by bringing that place, Gal. 5. serving one another in love,
for that only relates to persons in equal conditions, where the mutual offices
may be alike, which cannot be supposed in this case. And therefore I had reason
to say, Q. in Exodus 61.
that Dulia is used by S. Austin, as a term expressing the service we owe to
God as our Lord; but T. G. thinks he has run me down, T.G. p. 386.
by producing the foregoing place, which, he says, I purposely concealed from
the Reader, for fear he might infer, that if some degree of the service called
Dulia might be given by servants to their Masters, surely a high degree of it
may be given to Holy Angels. Very finely argued! and as much against S. Austins
sense as is possible. For, he says, in plain terms, those Angels that require
service from us are Devils: for this he makes the character of them, that they
do invite us, ut sibi serviamus; but, says he, we honor good Angels by love,
and not by service. But T. G. is not more mistaken in S. Austins sense of
Dulia, than he is about Latria; for, he says, that he understands it of
sacrifices, and that when he says blessed Spirits are not willing we should
sacra facere, it ought not be rendered equivocally, as it is by me, to perform
any sacred offices, but to dedicate and sacrifice to them, or consecrate our
selves or any thing of ours to them by the Rites of Religion; by which, he
says, it is evident, that he speaks of the worship which is due to God alone,
that is, of such dedications and consecrations, as were performed by the
Heathens to their Demons as Gods. To this I answer, that I grant that S.
Austin speaks of the worship due to God alone, and of those rites of Religious
worship which were performed by the Heathens to their Gods: but the Question
is, what he understands by those Religious rites, whether only dedications, and
sacrifices, and consecrations, or other acts of Religious worship? For T. G.
cannot be so ignorant, as not to know, that adorations and prayers were as
constant, as solemn, as proper acts of Religious worship both by the Law of
God, and the Heathen customs, as those he mentions: thence orandi causa fanum
adire, in Cicero; Cicer. Verr. 6.
Deos immortales precari, venerari, atque implorare debetis, ut urbem
defendant; In Catil.
and scarce any Greek or Latin Writer that mentions their Religious rites, but
under them they take notice of adoration, and prayers; and not only so, but
some of them give an account of the Forms of them, and the manner and order of
Invocation in their Litanies (for the word is as old as Homer) wherein they
invocated their Gods in order, that they would be favorable and propitious to
them; and Pliny says in general, Plin. hist. not. l. 28. c. 2.
that no sacrifice was offered without prayers; and Macrobius, Macrob. Saturn.
l. 1. c. 9.
Servius, Serve. in Aeneid. 7.
and Arnobius say, Arnob. c. gent. l. 3.
they began their invocations with Janus, not because they looked on him as
chief, but as a Mediator who was to carry up their prayers to the superior
powers; and they ended in Vesta for the same reason: and that these were
comprehended under the Sacra, is not only manifest from their conjunction with
sacrifices; but from the old form of obsecration, in which they used ob vos
sacro for obsecro. I would now understand from T. G. why he thinks that S.
Austin should purposely leave out in these words Adoration and Invocation,
which were by all Nations looked on as some of the proper acts of Religious
worship, especially when he mentions both these before and after? For the
occasion of the dispute, was about the intercession of created Spirits, and
men's addresses to them; and afterward he joins adoration together with
sacrifice as a thing peculiar to God: De Civ. Dei, l. 19.
putaverunt quidam deferendum Angelis honorem vel adorando vel sacrificando,
etc. in a place already cited. If this be not shutting ones eyes against
noonday light; it is a drawing a curtain before it, lest it grow too hot.

But for all this T. G. is very confident, T.G. p. 431.
that S. Austin was for the performing Religious worship to Martyrs, because he
says expressly, that it was the custom of the Christian people in his time, to
celebrate with Religious solemnity the Memories of the Martyrs; and very kindly
after his mode, he charges me with corrupting the words of S. Austin, by
translating them thus, that it was the custom of the Christians in his time to
have their Religious Assemblies at the Sepulchers or Memories of the Martyrs: I
did not pretend to translate, as T. G. knew well enough by the character; but
ill will never speaks well; but I still say, and stand to it, that this is his
sense; as will appear by considering the design of his words. Faustus the
Manichean had charged the African Christians with Idolatry in the honor they
gave to the Memories of the Martyrs. C. Faust. Manich. l. 20. c. 21.
S. Austin answers, that they did so celebrate the Memories of the Martyrs;
that they erected no Altars to any Martyr, but to the God of Martyrs, although
it was for their memories. For who of the Bishops or Priests that officiates at
the Altar, in the places of their Sepulchers, ever said, We offer to thee
Peter, or Paul, or Cyprian; but that which is offered, is offered to God who
crowned the Martyrs, but it is done at their Sepulchers, whom he has crowned,
that by the very places our affections may be raised, and our love quickened,
both to those whom we may imitate, and to him by whom we are enabled to do it.
Now I desire to know, what part of Religious worship was here performed to the
Martyrs? If the Christian Sacrifice, that were Idolatry according to T. G. and
would have justified Faustus to purpose; but S. Austin utterly denies this to
be performed to them. All that the Martyrs are concerned in as to the Religious
Solemnity, was no more than that the offices of Religion were performed at
their Sepulchers: this was an Honor to them I grant, but no part of Religious
worship. And although the design of the worship was only to honor God, yet the
place of doing it was out of honor to the Martyrs. But S. Austin says
afterward, we worship therefore the Saints with that worship of love and
society, etc. What means this etc. here? let us have all or nothing: with which
holy men in this life are worshipped, whose heart is prepared to suffer as much
for the truth of the Gospel: he that has but an eye open, says T. G. must see
that S. Austin speaks here of the worship which the Christians of his time gave
to the Martyrs themselves. And he that has but one corner open cannot but see,
that he does not speak of Religious worship, which Faustus objected; but having
denied that to be given to Martyrs, he now shows what they did give them, viz.
such a kind of worship as we give to holy men alive: and is that the Religious
worship either Faustus or S. Austin meant? S. Austin calls it worship, but he
means no more by it, than when he said before, that they are to be loved for
their goodness, and honored for their examples; but what is all this to
Religious worship or Invocation of them, when S. Austin in another place
expressly denies, that the Saints are invocated by him that offers the
sacrifices at the Altar; De Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 10.
nay, although that Altar were in the place of their sufferings? And here,
says T. G. I think I have done their work for them; and he is not mistaken;
whatever he cites from Bishop Forbs, that S. Austin was only to be understood
of Invocation at the Altar; I shall make it appear that the argument holds
good, and that those who speak against it, it is because they do not understand
the strength of it. Bishop Forbs in this place, Forbs considerat. Mod. p. 317.
and several others, takes occasion without reason to find fault with Bishop
Andrews, a man of far greater Learning than himself, and of better judgment in
these matters; and it is he, and not Bishop Montague (as T.G. mistakes) whom
Bishop Forbs introduces John Barclay charging with leading King James aside.
But I still say the argument clearly proves, that S. Austin denied Invocation
of Saints; and I am sorry to see Bishop Forbs so weakly led aside by Bellarmin
and others upon this ground, because in the Canon of the Mass the Saints are
not directly prayed to in the Roman Church; but they are in the Missa
Catechumenorum, and in the Litanies; therefore thus it was in the African
Church in S. Austins time. Who knows not what great alterations have been in
the Liturgies of the Church since that time? Yet thus wisely does T. G. speak
upon this subject: T.G. p. 448.
if I speak of that part of the Mass, which was anciently called the Mass of
the Catechumeni, the Priest indeed before he ascends to the Altar desires the
Blessed Virgin, and the rest of the Saints, etc. to pray for him: but in the
Missa Fidelium there is no Invocation of them. If there had been none any where
else, there had been a far greater conformity between the Church of Rome, and
the Church in S. Austins time: we plainly prove, there was no Invocation at the
Altar, let T. G. show any other part of public worship at that time, wherein
they were invocated. But all these mistakes arise from not considering the
mighty difference of the Liturgy in S. Austins time, in the African Church,
from what has since obtained in the Roman Church. But to give T. G. some
better light in this matter, and withal to show the invincible strength of this
argument, I shall prove these two things. 1. That the Prayers of the Church did
not begin in S. Austins time till the Catechumens were dismissed: 2. That the
prayers after their dismission were performed at the Altar.

1. That the prayers of the Church in S. Austins time did not begin till the
Catechumens were dismissed. For which we have a plain Testimony from S. Austin,
Ecce post sermonem fit Missa Catechumenis, Aug. sermon. de Temp. 237.
manebunt fideles, venietur ad locum orationis; whereby he shows not only, that
prayers did not begin, till the dismission of the Catechumens; but that the
Altar was then accounted the proper place of prayer: De diverse. sermon. 48.
and elsewhere he says, that Invocation did begin after the Creed; ideo non
accepistis prius orationem, postea symbolum; sed prius symbolum, ubi sciretis
quid crederetis; and postea orationem, ubi nossetis quem invocaretis: which
words could have no sense, if any solemn invocation were then made before the
Creed. So S. Ambrose describes the service of the Church of Millan in his time,
Ambr. l. 5. epist. 33.
Post lectiones atque tractatum dimissis Catechumenis, Symbolum aliquibus
Competentibus in baptisteriis tradebam Basilicae: by which it seems, the
Service began with the Lessons, then followed the Sermon, after that the Creed,
and then when the Catechumens were dismissed, the prayers of the Church begun:
so S. Ambrose presently after says, when he had instructed the Competentes,
Missam facere coepi, i. e. the Missa Fidelium, or the Prayers of the Church,
when the Missa Catechumenorum was dispatched, or they sent out of the
Congregation. So Justin Martyr describes the Service of the first Christians,
Just. Apol. 2. p. 98.
that it began with the Lessons of the Prophets and Apostles, then followed the
Sermon; and after that the Prayers began: and then followed the Eucharist:
which was then constantly received in the public Service. The Council of
Laodicea mentions prayers beginning after the Sermon: Council. Laodic. c. 19.
( i. e. the public prayers of the Church) of which that Council mentions, the
prayers for the Catechumens before their dismission (which in the Greek Church
were performed by the Deacon in the Ambo making the (...) to the people, to
which they joined their (...)) after these, followed the prayers for the
Penitents, and then the Prayers of the Faithful, or the proper Liturgy of the
Church began. The Author of the Constitutions called Apostolical, Constit.
Apost. l. 2. c. 57.
appoints the Service to begin with the Lessons of the Old Testament, the
Psalms, the Epistles and Gospel, after which the Sermon was to follow, then the
Catechumens and Penitents being dismissed, they must all rise and go to their
prayers for the Catholic Church; as it is there described: in the eighth Book
he mentions the occasional prayers that were made for the Catechumens and
Penitents, before their dismission, and then follow the forms of Solemn
Invocation, L. 8. c. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
which were not to be used till the other were dismissed the Assembly. To the
same purpose the counterfeit Dionysius describes the practice of the Church,
Dionys. Hierarch. c. 3. Sect. 6.
that the Catechumens and Penitents were admitted to the Lessons and Psalms,
and then were excluded the Congregation. And none were allowed to be present at
the Prayers of the Faithful, but such as were allowed to be present at the
Eucharist, as the fourth degree of Penitents, which is called communicating in
Prayers, by the Council of Nice; Council. Nicen. c. 11, 12, 13.
by which we may see T. G.'s skill in Antiquity, T.G. p. 442.
when he puts the forms of invocation used by those who were to partake of the
Eucharist, into the Missa Catechumenorum; whereas they were allowed to be
present at no prayers of the Church, but only that which was made for them; and
Cardinal Bona could inform him, Bona de rebus Liturg. l. 1. c. 16.
that the Catechumens were not allowed to join so much as in the Lords Prayer,
nor in any solemn invocation of God in behalf of others, as he proves from S.
Chrysostom, and others. Chrysostom. hom. 79. ad pop. Antioch.


2. That the prayers that were made after the dismission of the Catechumens
were said at the Altar. For which we are to consider that in S. Austins time,
the custom of communicating every day was still observed in the African Church,
as is evident from his own express Testimony, where he says, that some
understand our daily Bread of the Sacrament of Christ's body, quod quotidie
sumimus, Aug. de ser. Domini in Monte l. 2. c. 12.
which we receive every day; and finds fault with those in the Greek Church who
had begun to discontinue that custom; accipe quotidie, says he, quod quotidie
tibi profit. De verb. Dom. in Evang. secundum Luc. ser. 28.
So that as soon as the Catechumens were dismissed, they immediately began the
Communion Service, which was all the Service I can find in the Use of that
Church in those times. Nay, the very prayer for the Catechumens was said at the
Altar in the African Church, which in the Greek Church was indicted by the
Deacon in the Ambo, or Piew for that purpose in the Body of the Church: Et
quando audis sacerdotem Dei ad altar exhortantem populum Dei, orare pro
incredulis, Aug. ep. 107.
ut eos Deus convertat ad Fidem, and pro Catechumenis menis ut eis desiderium
regenerationis inspiret, and pro fidelibus ut in eo quod esse coeperunt ejus
munere perseverent. Where we see the prayers for the Catechumens, as well as
the other prayers of the Church were performed at the Altar. And it appears by
a passage in his retractations, Aug. Retract. l. 2. c. 11.
that the very Hymns out of the Psalms which were sung either before the
oblation, or in time of distribution were sung at the Altar; which custom being
found fault with at Carthage by one Hilarious, it gave him an occasion to write
in vindication of it. And in another place he reduces all the prayers of the
Church to the Communion Service; and interprets the Apostles words of prayers,
supplications, Ep. 59.
intercessions and giving of thanks, of what was done at the celebration of the
Eucharist. And that which very much confirms this, is, that when the African
Fathers made a Decree, that no prayers should be used in the public service,
Codex Eccles. Afric. c. 106.
but such as were first seen and approved; the Title of it is, Of Prayers to be
made at the Altar. And the African Writers make praying and going to the Altar
to have the same sense; Tertull. de orat. c. 10. c. 14. de exhort. cast. c. 11.
so Tertullian calls it ascendere ad altar; and ad aram Dei stare; and
orationem deducere ad altar. All which put together, make it very clear, that
if there was no invocation of Saints at the Altar in S. Austins time, there was
none at all in the Service of the Church; which I have the more insisted upon,
because it is so pregnant a Testimony against Invocation of Saints, and the
force of it has not been fully understood by any I have seen, from the not
considering the Liturgy of the Church in S. Austins time. Which men have
fancied to have been according to the practice of following Ages, when the
laying aside the Discipline of the Primitive Church, made a great alteration in
the public Offices, (as might be easily discovered, were this a proper place
for it,) both in the Greek and Latin Churches. But that is not my present
business. But this ought farther to be considered, the most proper season for
invocation of Saints was at the Altar, for then the commemoration of Saints was
made out of the Diptychs of the Church, as appears by multitudes of places in
S. Austin; and the Martyrs were then put in a rank by themselves; and whereas
they prayed for all others, they did not for them; but they rather believed
they received benefit by their prayers for them. For, says S. Austin, In
Evang. Ioh. tract. 84.
We do not commemorate the Martyrs at the holy Table as we do others, who rest
in peace, so as to pray for them, but rather that they may pray for us: and
this was all the Office of the Church then toward Martyrs, viz. commemoration
of them at the Altar, although S. Austin believed that the Martyrs at such
times, especially when the commemorations were made at their own Sepulchers,
did join their prayers together with the Churches, in behalf of those who there
put up their supplications to God, and not to them. And this is the meaning of
that place, which T. G. objects to prove Invocation, viz. that when Christians
are met at the Religious Solemnity at their Sepulchers, they become partakers
of their merits, and obtain help by their prayers: yet he wonders I could not
find Invocation here, and imagines I shut my eyes again; but surely T. G.
fancies I play at Blindmansbuff with him, for he thinks I never have my eyes
open.

I should now come to examine the distinction of an absolute and relative
Latria, but of that I shall have occasion to speak so largely in the following
Dispute about the worship of Images, that I here put an end to this General
Discourse.

THE SECOND PART OF THE ANSWER TO T. G.

BEING A DEFENSE of the Charge of IDOLATRY practiced in the ROMAN CHURCH, in
the Worship of IMAGES.

By ED. STILLINGFLEET, D.D. Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by Robert White, for Henry Mortlock at the Sign of the Phoenix
in St. Paul's Churchyard, and at the White-Hart in Westminster Hall, 1676.

PART II. Being a particular Defense of the Charge of Idolatry against the
Church of Rome in the Worship of Images.
CHAP. I. The State of the Controversy about the Worship of Images, between
Christians and Heathens.
HAving in the precedent Discourse given a general account of the Nature of
Idolatry,. 1.
I now come to the particulars in dispute between us. The first whereof is,
concerning the worship of Images; in which nothing is more necessary, than to
give a true account of the State of the Controversy; which that I may do with
the greatest clearness,

1. I shall consider wherein the State of this Controversy lay, as it was
managed between the Christians and Heathens.

2. I shall give a just account of the Rise, and progress of this Controversy
in the Christian Church. And when by this means, the State of the Controversy
is well understood, the difficulty will not be great in giving answers to all
the Sophistical Cavils of T. G.

1. For the State of the Controversy about the Worship of Images between the
Christians and Heathens. To this purpose I had used these expressions in my
former Discourse, Disc. of Idol. chapter 1. sect. 7.
That S. Paul dealing with the Athenians, did prove the unreasonableness of
their worshipping God by Images, because he was the God that made the world,
Acts 17.24, 25, 29.
and is Lord of heaven and earth, and that we are his offspring, therefore we
ought not to think that the Godhead is like unto gold or silver, or stone
graven by art or man's device; where I observed, that the Apostle does not speak
merely against their other objects of worship besides the true God, nor their
supposing their Gods to be present in their Images, nor taking their Images for
Gods, but against their supposition, that there was any resemblance between God
and their Images, or that he was capable of receiving any honor by them. The
same argument, I added, S. Paul uses to the Romans, Romans 1.19
speaking of those in whom that which may be known of God is manifest, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead, yet these persons who knew God, v. 21.
did not glorify him as God, but changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into an Image made like to corruptible man, etc. where changing his glory into
Images, is, I said, v. 23.
immediately opposed to the glorifying him as God, in respect of his Eternal
Power and Godhead, so that these two are inconsistent with each other, to
glorify God by an Image, and to glorify him as God. For here the Apostle does
not discourse against the most gross and sottish Idolaters of the Heathens, but
as S. Chrysostom well observes, against the Philosophers, and the Wisest among
them, who, although they differed in their opinions of Religion extremely from
the Vulgar, yet they concurred with them in all the external practices of
Idolatry. And therefore the Apostle does not charge them with false notions of
a Deity, for he says, that they held the Truth in unrighteousness, v. 18, 21.
and that they did know God: but they showed their vanity and folly in thinking
they had found out subtiller ways of defending the common Idolatries among
them; and instead of opposing them, made use of their Wits to excuse them. To
which I added this material observation, That the most intelligent Heathens did
never look on their Images as any other, than Symbols or representations of
that Being to which they gave divine worship; for which purpose I produced
several Testimonies of Celsus, Porphyrie, Athanasius, Arnobius, S. Augustine,
Max. Tyrius, Julian and Eusebius, from whence I desired to know whether these
men, who worshipped Images on those grounds, did amiss or no in it? I do not
ask, as my words are expressly, whether they were mistaken as to the objects of
their worship; but on supposition they were not, whether they were to blame in
the manner of serving God by Images, in such a way as they describe? if not,
wherefore does S. Paul pitch upon that, to condemn them for, which they were at
not all to blame in? He ought, I said, to have done, as the Jesuits in China
did, who never condemned the people for worshipping Images, Trigant. de Christ.
Exped. apud Sinas l. 5. c. 16. p. 588
but for worshipping false Gods by them, and persuaded them not to lay them
aside, but to convert them to the honor of the true God; and so melted down
their former Images, and made new ones of them. Can we imagine S. Paul meant
the same thing, when he blames men, not for believing them to be Gods, but that
God could be worshipped by the work of men's hands, and for changing thereby the
glory due to God in regard of his infinite and incorruptible Being, into mean
and unworthy Images, thinking thereby to give honor to him? And upon these
grounds, I there show, that the Primitive Fathers disputed against the Heathen
Idolatry: Chapter 1. Sect. 8.
for the making use of corporeal representations makes the Deity contemptible,
says Clemens of Alexandria. Clem. Strom. 5. p. 559.
Origin says, Orig. c. Cells. l. 7. p. 375.
that Christians have nothing to do with Images, because of the second
Commandment; and on that account will rather dye, than defile themselves with
them; and that it is impossible any one that knows God, should pray to them:
That it is no sufficient excuse to say, they do not take them for Gods, but
only for Symbols or representations of them, for they must be ignorant, mean,
and unlearned persons, who can imagine the work of an Artificer can be any
representation of a Deity. I showed further, Chapter 1. Sect. 6.
that many of the wiser Heathens themselves condemned the worship of God by
Images, as incongruous to a divine nature, and a disparagement to the Deity, as
Zeno, Xenophanes, Antisthenes, Xenophon, Numa, Varro, and many others.

. 2.
Having thus laid down so much of my former Discourse together, as was necessary
to understand the State of the Controversy, I come now to consider what T. G.
does answer to it.

1. To the places of S. Paul, Acts 17.24. and Romans 1.19. he says, that no one
ever denied the unsuitableness of the worship of such Images to the Divine
Nature, T.G. p. 96.
as are conceived to be proper likenesses, or representations of the Divinity,
of which S. Paul speaks in the first place; or of the Images of the false Gods
of the Heathens, of which he speaks in the latter.

In reply to this, I begin with the first place, Acts 17.24. where, he says,
it is plain from S. Paul's words, that they thought the Divinity to be like to
the Images they made of gold and silver: and this was a mighty argument from
the mouth of S. Paul to drive that erroneous conceit out of the minds of the
Athenians, who believed the Divinity to be like the Images they made; but none
at all from my pen against Catholics, who detest the thoughts of having or
making any such Image. This then is the question between us, whether S. Paul's
discourse against the Athenians did proceed only on the supposition of the
Divinity being like to their Images, or whether the dissimilitude between them
be not made use of by the Apostle as an argument to show that Images are not a
proper suitable means whereby to worship God? For which we are to consider the
Apostles scope and design; which certainly was to convince them of their
Idolatry. For it is said, ver. 16. that his Spirit was stirred within him, when
he saw the City wholly given to Idolatry; and in the beginning of his speech he
takes notice of their Bigoterie in the Heathen worship, ver. 22. and 23. that
among their (...), i. e. Idols, says Theophylact, he had espied an Altar with
this Inscription, To the unknown God: and upon this he takes an occasion more
fully to discover him whom they ignorantly worshipped, and withal to show the
unreasonableness of their worshipping God at all by Images. If the Apostles
design had been, as T. G. imagines, to drive that erroneous conceit out of the
minds of the Athenians, that the Divinity was like to their Images; his Spirit
should not have been moved, at the sight of their Images, but at their
discourses about them when he heard them own the Divinity to be like them. For,
in case they only looked on their Images as helps to their devotion; or as
Analogical representations of some divine perfections, although they did
worship God by them, T. G. must think then S. Paul a little too hasty to be so
soon angry at the sight of them; for upon this ground his Spirit might be
stirred within him, at the sight of the Altars and devotions in Rome, as well
as Athens. But S. Paul did not wait for any decree of the Areopagus in this
matter; he saw enough to inflame his zeal, in their practices, and public
worship, without looking after any distinctions of their Sophisters and
School-Divines; although there were many upon the place ready to justify every
rite of their worship, and that would not let go one tittle of their grossest
superstitions for all the truth and Reason in the world. They could find out as
many Analogies and Metaphorical significations as other men; and thought it as
little disparagement to the Deity to worship him under the several
representations of Minerva, Ceres or Bacchus, when by these they understood the
several effects of Gods Wisdom and Goodness in giving the fruits of the earth,
as others can in representing him as an Old man with a Popes Crown on his head;
or with one Head and three Faces, as some that are no Athenians have done. For
Gods sake, which of the two are more apt to beget in men's minds such
apprehensions of God, that he is like to men; those who make and expose such
Images of the God they worship, or such who made an Inscription upon an Altar
to the Unknown God? And if he were Unknown, how came they to know him to be so
like themselves? What need S. Paul take such pains to drive a conceit out of
their heads, which for all that we see, never entered into them? If indeed S.
Paul had seen over that Altar a grave Image of a man in Pontifical Robes, with
an hoary head, a long beard, and a Triple Crown; he would probably have asked
them, how the Athenians, that were witty men, could be guilty of such an
absurdity, to call that an Altar to the Unknown God, when they were so
familiarly acquainted with him as to know the very cut of his beard, and
fashion of his Crown? But, as Superstitious as the Athenians were, they were
not so ridiculous; but yet because they supposed this God might be pleased with
the worship of the Idols, that were not only in the Temples, but in the Streets
and Forum of Athens (where Thucydides says, Thucydid. l. 6.
there were twelve Altars) therefore S. Paul discourses of this God after such
a manner, as to show how unsuitable such a way of worship was to his Nature,
and Perfections,

1. From his Infinite Power, v. 24, 25. God that made the world and all things
in it, seeing that he is Lord of heaven and earth, dwells not in Temples made
with hands, neither is worshipped with men's hands. Can any thing be plainer,
than that here S. Paul disputes against their worship, and not their opinion?
He finds no fault with their opinion about the true God, but only that it was
not clear and distinct enough, in that he was too much the Unknown God among
them; he takes it for granted, that one Supreme God, Creator of the world was
acknowledged by them; and from the consideration of that Infinite Power of his,
he shows how unreasonable it was for them to circumscribe him within their
Temples, or to worship him by their Images: For what are all these Images of
yours, which you are so fond of, and so unwilling to part with? although they
were the Statues of Phidias or Polycletus, or the Pictures of Xeuxes, or
Apelles, yet still they are but the Work of men's Hands: and what are these to
the Heavens and the Earth, which he has made? If any Image deserve worship, it
is one of Gods making, and not of your own; but since no Image can represent
the infinite Perfections of the great Creator, never think to honor him by
your foolish Puppets, and Babies of Dirt and Clay. This is the design of the
Apostles argument; but what does this signify to their thinking the Divinity
to be like themselves? For whether God were like or unlike to their Images, yet
still they were the work of men's hands: as a picture is still the work of the
Painter, although never so unlike the person for whom it is intended; but S.
Paul condemns them for worshipping God with the work of men's hands, i. e. with
Images and Statues; as being infinitely below the greatness of that Divine
Power, for the sake of which we give divine worship to him.

2. From his infinite perfection; manifested by his Self-sufficiency, Needing
nothing, v. 25. and from his communicating to his creatures what is needful for
them, Seeing he gives to all life and breath and all things. Now what can
there be more unsuitable to the honor of such a Being, than to be worshipped
by such dull, senseless, contemptible pieces of earth, which have not in them
the perfection of the meanest animal, to whom God has given life and breath;
that are so far from representing the perfection and self-sufficiency of the
Divine Nature, that they are not in the least able to help themselves? But when
by the help of Wedges and Beetles an Image is cleft out of the Trunk of some
well grown Tree, (that little dreamt of the honor which was like to come to
the dullest part about it, after it should pass through the several refinings
of the Carpenters Ax, whose blows it endured with admirable patience, and of
the Painters Pencil, whose Miniature adds much beauty and glory to it) yet
after all the skill of Artificers to set forth such a Divine Block, it cannot
one moment secure it self from being eaten by Worms, or defiled by Birds, or
cut in pieces by Axes; or, if any of these sail, from decaying through mere
standing. Or suppose, this Worshipful Idol be made of a harder substance, and
after its being dug out of the earth, and sawed, and carved, and polished,
and with much ado brought into the resemblance of a man, and a rude symbol of
the Deity, and set up for the adoration of mankind; yet still it wants the
things which are above the utmost power of man, but are given to the least
mite, viz. life, and sense, and motion, and an admirable contrivance of the
instruments of these; yet such mean and pitiful things as these, will the
folly of mankind find out to represent the greatest and the most perfect Being
in the world. Judge now whether things that want life, and breath, and all
things, are fit means whereby to worship him who gives all these things to his
creatures? or whether those things, which need the art of man to make them, and
his continual care to preserve them, are fit to represent that Being, which
stands in need of nothing?

3. From his Infinite Presence, v. 27, 28. That they should seek the Lord, if
happily they might feel after him and find him, though he be not far from every
one of us: For in him we live and move and have our Being. One of the most
plausible arguments of Idolaters in all Ages was, that by the help of Images
they did represent the object of their worship as present to them, so as
thereby to be put more in mind of him, and to excite their reverence and
Devotion; but S. Paul tells the Athenians, there was no need of any such
representations of Gods presence, for he is not far from every one of us, for
in him we live and move and have our beings: and that man who will not find God
in those admirable effects of his Power, Wisdom, and Goodness we carry
continually about us, will hardly find him in the senseless representations of
Wood and Stone: and he that will not stand in awe of him, as he governs the
World, will hardly fear him, when he is set forth in shape of a man, although
he have a Thunderbolt in his hand.

4. From the disparity between God and Images, v. 29. For as much then, as we
are the offspring of God, we ought not to think that the Godhead is like to
gold, or silver, or stone graven by art or man's device. Upon which words,
Lorinus a Jesuit makes this paraphrase, forasmuch as the Athenians following
their own Poets, do confess, that we are the living Image of God, they ought to
think that material Idols made by the art of men, Ioh. Lorin. in Act. Ap. c.
17. v. 29.
which fall far short of the perfection of Nature, are infinitely distant from
the Divine Power, by which we obtain a dignity far above these material things;
and since we cannot express this Image of God in us by any lines, much less can
we the Divine Original, so that it is the grossest ignorance to affirm, that
God can dwell, or be included or worshipped in or by their Altars, or Images,
(for so delubra must be understood by him if he speaks pertinently, for
although sometime it signifies a Temple with more Images than one, yet Servius
withal says, Serve. in 4. Aen.
it signifies a wooden Image, and so Festus understands it; which things I am
forced to explain, to prevent cavilling; for otherwise T. G. would have
complained of my perverting the sense of Authors, as he has done very
unjustly, as will appear in this Chapter.) But Lorinus, after having brought
the several places of Scripture against making any Image of God, thinks to
salve all by saying, they are to be understood of such Images, as represent him
to the life, (as though it were possible for any to do it) or such which they
worshipped for Gods, which the Heathens utterly denied, that they did.
Cornelius a Lapide, Corn. a Lap. in loc.
after several vain attempts, to make out the force of the Apostles argument,
at last concludes this to be it; that since our Soul according to which we are
the offspring of God, cannot be painted, or represented in gold, silver, or
stone, being incorporeal and spiritual; much less can the Divinity be painted
or represented by them, being a pure Spirit, and the fountain of Spirits.
Estius agrees, Est. in difficil. loc. ad loc.
that this is the force of the Apostles argument, from whence, he says, he
does not infer, that we ought not to think gold, silver, or stone, to be God;
although he might have done it (but to little purpose) because, says he, he
spoke to the Athenians, among whom were many Philosophers, learned and wise
men, who did not with the Vulgar, think their Images to be Gods, although they
worshipped them together with them; but they believed their Gods to be
represented by them, as by their Images. If he speaks of the Epicureans, there
is some ground for it; for what Deity they acknowledged, they supposed to be
as-if-coporeal, and of humane shape; but he is much mistaken, that does not
account them rather Atheists than Idolaters; Cicer. de Not. Deor. l. 1.

Lactant. de Ira Dei, c. 4.


and as to the other Athenian Philosophers, I shall make it appear to be a
gross mistake, to suppose that they thought their Gods to be of humane shape;
but of that hereafter.

The thing I now insist upon is, that the Apostle's showing the disparity
between God and Images, is not merely to drive out the opinion of
Anthropomorphitism, but from hence to show farther the folly of Idolatry; for
if Images fall so much short of the infinite perfections of God, there can be
but this plea left, that they are like to him, and therefore we may worship God
by them, for the sake of their resemblance of him; now this the Apostle shows
to be as vain and idle a pretense as any of the rest, there being no manner of
resemblance between the workmanship of gold, silver, and stone, and an Infinite
and Spiritual Being.

5. From the necessity of repentance, and the consideration of a future
judgment, v. 30, 31. If all the Apostle had aimed at, was only to rectify an
erroneous conceit of the Athenians about the Divinity being like to their
Images, he had taken away the force of his exhortation to repentance, from the
consideration of a judgment to come: because such an erroneous conceit may
possess men of innocent minds and free from Idolatry, as it was the case of the
Monks in Egypt, of whom Epiphanius, Epiph. haet. 70.
and S. Austin speak; Aug. de haet. c. 50.
and whom Epiphanius supposes to have been very harmless men, saving only
their separation from the Church: nay, he does not seem to apprehend any
dangerous consequence of their opinion: which we need not wonder at, if that
which Nicephorus says be true, Neceph. hist. l. 13. c. 12.
viz. that Epiphanius was an Anthropomorphite himself. And yet Epiphanius is
well known to have been as great an enemy to Image Worship, and all kind of
Idolatry, as any Person that lived in his Age. The same is observable of
Tertullian and Lactantius, whereof the one attributed corporeity to God, and
the other shape and figure, Pamel. de Paradox. Tertull. c. 15.

Petav. dogm. Theol. To. 1. l. 2. c. 1. sect. 7.


as our Adversaries confess; and yet both these were vehement disputers against
the Heathen Idolatry. From whence we see, that there is no necessary connection
between this opinion, and the practice of Idolatry, or the worship of Images:
and yet there is altogether as good reason why God should be worshipped by an
Image, on that supposition, as why Christ should be by a Crucifix since his
Incarnation; which is T. G's great argument on all occasions. But those who
supposed God to be like to men, might yet think it unreasonable to worship God
by the work of men's hands; and if arbitrary representation be a sufficient
ground of worship, then natural would be much more so, and consequently it
would be more reasonable for men to worship one another, than to worship
Images: and all the same distinctions and pleasant evasions would serve for
one, as well as they do for the other.

I desire now to know of T. G. whether the Athenians were to blame only for
this erroneous conceit of theirs,. 3.
in thinking the Divinity to be like their Images? If this were all their
fault, (1.) I dare undertake to prove, that many among them were wholly
innocent, viz. those who followed the Schools of Plato and Zeno, besides those
of the people who took their Images for Symbols of the Divinity. (2.) S. Paul
takes very needless pains to make use of such arguments against Image Worship,
which do not suppose any opinion of similitude between God and the Image; as
the incongruity of Images to the Divine Power, Perfection, and Presence. (3.)
Why does he call upon them so earnestly to repent? was it only of an erroneus
conceit? and that of such a nature, that the argument made use of by him, to
move them to repentance, was rather apt to confirm them in that opinion, viz.
that God would judge the world by that Man whom he has appointed. If a Man be
appointed to judge the world, the management of which must imply infinite
Wisdom and Power, what absurdity, might they say, is it in us to suppose the
Images of men to represent God, as he is the object of worship? For if the
humane nature be capable of union to the Divinity, why might it not be so
united always, as well as at the end of the world? and if it be united, then
that humane nature might be represented in an Image, and the Divine Nature
honored by worshipping that representation. Which being supposed to be lawful,
the Apostles argument loses its force; for the subtle Athenians might easily
have answered S. Paul, that there was no more repugnancy in supposing God to
have assumed a humane body from eternity, than that he should do it so lately
in Judea; which being supposed, their defense naturally follows, for they could
not be so foolish to imagine their Images to be like the Divine Nature in it
self, but to that humane body which was assumed by the Divine Nature. And that
this is no extravagant supposition, will appear by this, that several of the
ancient Christian Writers had an opinion very like this, viz. that when God is
said to have made man after his own Image, it is to be understood of that
humane figure and shape, which God had then assumed, which was the exemplar
according to which man was created: thus Prudentius and the Audiani are
understood by Petavius; Petav. i^. sect. 9.
and some passages of Tertullian look much this way: Tertull. de resur. carn.
c. 6.
and Augustinus Steuchus Eugubinus a learned but zealous Papist, Aug. Steuc.
Eugub. Cosmop. p. 46.
contends for the necessity of this opinion, because man saw God walking, and
heard him speaking in Paradise, and because of the frequent appearances of God
in humane shape, mentioned in the old Testament. And to confirm this, he brings
that Verse of Ovid, Et Deus humana lustro sub imagine terras. and those of
Catullus, Praesentes namque ante, domos invisere castas
Saepius and sese mortali ostendere coetu,
Coelicolae, nondum spreta pietate solebant.
and he shows that the Fictions of Homer and the rest of the Poets, as to the
Appearances of the Gods in humane shape, had their true Original from hence,
that God did at first assume the Nature of Man, according to which man was said
to be framed after the Image and Similitude of God. But S. Paul, although he
asserts the Incarnation of Christ, yet deriving the argument against the
worship of God by Images, from the consideration proper to the Divinity, we
ought not to think, that the Godhead is like to gold, etc. does thereby teach
us, that that which is disagreeing to the divine nature which is the proper
object of worship, cannot be a proper means for us to worship God by: so that
although the Images made by men only represent the humane nature assumed by the
Divine, yet because the Godhead is not like unto them, we ought not to worship
God by them. For otherwise the Athenians were mere Blockheads (if it were
lawful to worship the divine nature of Christ before an Image of his humane,
and to give the same worship to one which belongs to the other) that they did
not deny S. Paul's consequence; For what if the Godhead be not like to our
Images, it does not follow, that we may not give them divine worship as long as
God has often appeared in humane shape among us, and we may give worship to
the representation of that Nature wherein he appeared, and the same that
belongs to the Divine Nature, which did assume it. And I confess, I cannot see
how T. G. could have defended S. Paul upon his supposition; for according to T.
G.'s principles, T. G. p. 75.
although before the Incarnation of Christ, the worship which people gave to
the Images of Gold, was incongruous to the Divine Nature, and a Disparagement
to the Deity; yet to those to whom the Mystery of God made man is revealed, it
is no disparagement to him to be represented in the likeness of man, and to be
worshipped by such an Image. Very well; say the Athenians, and so say we too.
To worship God by any Image, as representing his infinite and invisible Nature
is folly and madness; but to make Images of him according to his several
appearances for the good of mankind in the likeness of men, is no disparagement
to the Deity; nor to be worshipped by such an Image. Let T.G. therefore either
say, that S. Paul argues inconsequently, or acknowledge that the force of his
argument does hold against the worship of any representations of God. For it is
plain to any man that has any use of his senses, that S. Paul does not argue
against any mere erroneous conceit of the Athenians, but against their
Idolatrous worship, which he first shows to be unreasonable by many arguments,
and then tells them, God now commanded them to repent, and adds the most
forcible motive to persuade them to it, from the proceedings of the future
judgment.

But I have not yet done with T.G. about this place. T.G. p. 348.
Is it not T. G. that, when he fixed his foot, as he says, and deliberately
enquired what the Supreme God of the Heathens was, tells us in plain terms it
was the Devil, p. 390.
and an Arch-Devil; and this he does, he says, for Gods sake? says he so
indeed? And was this unknown God at Athens whom they ignorantly worshipped, and
S. Paul declared, the Devil and an Arch-Devil? No: for here he grants, that the
Athenians thought the Divinity to be like their Images; what Divinity does he
mean? Surely, not the Divinity of an Arch-Devil. But I see, those that believe
Transubstantiation, are capable of speaking as well as believing
contradictions. Yet, it is possible T. G. may imagine that the Athenians meant
one Divinity, and S. Paul another. So some say S. Paul played the Sophister with
the Athenians, and when the true inscription was to the Unknown Gods; he,
because it served better to his purpose, reads it in the singular number, to
the Unknown God. But as Cajetan wisely answers, Cajet. in loc.
the Authority of S. Paul affirming there was such an Inscription, ought to be
valued above those who deny it; and says he, if there had not been any such,
the Athenians who were by, might presently have charged S. Paul with falsehood,
in saying he met with an Inscription to the Unknown God, when there was none
such among them. Lorinus shows from several Testimonies of S. Austin that the
Athenians did worship the true God: and that in case the inscription had run
only in the plural number S. Paul had drawn a conclusion out of false premises,
whereas Isidore Pelusiota admires the irresistible force of S. Paul's reasoning,
Lorin. in loc.

Aug. 1. c. Cresc. c. 29. in ep. ad Romans c. 1. Isid. Pelus. l. 3. ep. 346.


being built upon premises, which are confessed by the Adversaries; as he
disputed with the Jews out of the Scriptures, so he did with the men of Athens
from the inscription on one of their own Altars. This being then taken for
granted by S. Paul, that the Athenians did acknowledge and worship the true
God, how come they to be charged with Idolatry in worshipping Images, if it be
lawful to worship the true God* by an Image? especially since their intention
was, as Ferus says expressly, Ioh. Ferus in Act. 17. p. 203.
by their Idols to worship the true God. I beseech T. G. to reconcile this, if
he can, with making Idolatry to consist in taking Images for Gods, or for the
representations of false Gods; for here was neither, and yet the Athenians were
condemned for Idolatry; and Ferus confesses, that those were Idols, whereby
they designed to worship the true God; how can that be, if actions pass whither
they are intended; for how can that worship be terminated on an Image,
according to T. G's Divinity, which is designed to pass through it to God? And
that the true God was meant by the Athenians, Corn. a Lapide says, Corn. a
Lap. in Act. 17.23.
is manifest from hence, that S. Paul was otherwise bound to show, that it was
not the true God which they worshipped, and to tell them who was the true;
whereas here S. Paul says, he declared to them the same God whom they
ignorantly worshipped; which had been very unbecoming the sincerity and
faithfulness of so great an Apostle, in case he knew, they did not worship the
true God when he told them they did: for this was at once to deceive, to
flatter, to betray them; and that in a matter, upon which the salvation of
their souls did depend: which of all persons was most unworthy of the Apostle
of the Gentiles, whose business it was to turn men from Idols to God, to serve
the true and living God. 1 Thessalonians. 1.9.


But T. G. asks, T. G. p. 97.
to what purpose this place was brought by me? (if he did not understand it
before, I hope, he will do it now:) Except I intended, he says, the Reader to
believe the Papists to be no wiser than the Athenians. I wish in this matter
they were as wise; for it were better for them to erect Altars to an Unknown
God, than to make those absurd, scandalous, and horrible representations of the
Mystery of the Trinity: from whence some of the Antitrinitarians have taken
occasion to expose that sacred Mystery to scorn and contempt, and have
published a Book on purpose, to set forth the Images of the Trinity, which are
publicly seen and allowed in the Roman Church. But the Athenians, he tells us
from S. Chrysostom, were so possessed with a wrong apprehension of the Nature
of God, that when they heard S. Paul speak of Anastasis, they thought her to be
some new Goddess. If they had gone much farther, and worshipped this Anastasis,
I think the Athenians had done no worse, than those who worship with solemn
devotion Saints that never were in the world; and after so long a time of
worship of S. Christopher, and S. George, the wisest among them cannot to this
day tell, whether they were Saints, or Allegories: and if T. G. please, he
shall take Baronius his Saint Synoris, to join with the Athenian Goddess
Anastasis; or if this will not content him, let him take other three Saints
which he may find in some old Litanies, Horae secundum usum Roman. in Litaniis.
of their Church, as I have done, viz. S. Faith, S. Hope, and S. Charity; all
three daughters of a grave Matron, called S. Sapientia; but which far outgoes
the Athenian devotion, every one of these has an Ora pro nobis added to it;
but what work would T. G. have made with the poor Athenians, if they had cried
Sancta Anastasis ora pro nobis? yet he may find as gross absurdities nearer
home.

. 4.
I now come to the second place, Romans 1.21, 23. in which T. G. says, nothing
can be more clear, than that the Apostle speaks there of the Idols or Images
of the Heathens; for after he had laid down the matter of fact which he
condemned, viz. that although they knew God, yet they did not glorify him as
God, but changed the Glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible man, he adds also, And to Birds, and fourfooted Beasts, and
creeping things, (which words, he says, were clapped under deck by me with an
etc. because they plainly declare what kind of Images the Apostle meant) and
then v. 25. tells us, that by so doing, they changed the Truth of God into a
lie, and worshipped and served the Creature rather than the Creator: which
words, he says, are so plain, that I had no way to evade them, but by saying
that the Apostle discoursed against the Philosophers, and the Wiser Heathens:
whom he proves from S. Chrysostom, to have been guilty of the same Idolatry
with the people; and instances in the Egyptians, and Plato, and Socrates, who
commanded a Cock to be offered to Aesculapius. For the clearing the sense of
this place, we are to consider, 1. Who the persons were that S. Paul speaks
off. 2. What he affirms concerning them.

1. T. G. says, the words are so plain, that I could find no evasion, but to
say. that the Apostle does not discourse against the most gross and sottish
Idolaters, but the Philosophers and the wisest among them; but does T. G. in
good earnest call this an evasion? Was it an evasion in Cajetan, Cajet. in loc.
when he says, S. Paul here reproved the sin of the Philosophers; and that the
Philosophers were they who detained the truth in unrighteousness: that the
Philosophers did either make, or worship Images, therefore they changed the
glory due to God? Was it nothing but mere evasion in Vasquez, Vasquez in loc.
when he says, the Apostle designs to prove, that the Philosophers, both had
the true knowledge of God, and held it in unrighteousness? or in Estius, Esti.
in loc.
when he says in plain terms, the Apostle speaks of the Philosophers? and
instanceth in Pythagoras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Trismegist, and Seneca,
who although they did know the true God, yet none of them worshipped him as
they ought to do. I need not mention S. Austin, who in many places applies this
to the Philosophers, as appears by Beda's Commentary, Bed. in loc.
when even the words of S. Chrysostom show this to be far enough from an
evasion; what is that to the Philosophers? Marry, I answer, as T.G. translates
him, that what has been said most of all concerns them; but this does not
fully express his meaning, for his words are, (...), or as some Copies read it
(...), all that has been said does most of all concern them, or altogether;
and the Greek Scholiast, says, that it is plain S. Paul strikes at the Wise
men among the Greeks, and those who were like them. Origin says, he speaks of
some of the Wise men of Greece. By these and many more Testimonies, if it were
needful to heap them in so clear a case, it appears sufficiently, that this was
no evasion of mine, but the natural sense, which their own Commentators, and
the Fathers agree in.

2. As to what the Apostle affirms of them, viz. that they held the truth in
unrighteousness, v. 18. i. e. says the Greek Scholiast, that they gave the
worship of God to Idols; for the knowledge of God is truth, and the
deceitfulness of Idols is unrighteousness. Hear, says Theophylact, what it is
to detain the truth in unrighteousness, The Truth or the Knowledge of God is
naturally put into all men's minds from the beginning; this knowledge or truth
the Greeks held in unrighteousness, i. e. they did all the injury to it they
could, by giving the glory of God to Idols; and both herein follow S.
Chrysostom, who says, they did it, by giving the glory of God to Wood and
Stone. This the Apostle afterward inlarges upon, when he says, that knowing
God they did not glorify him as God, neither were thankful, but became vain in
their imagination, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing themselves
to be wise, they became Fools, and changed the glory of the incorruptible God
into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to Birds and fourfooted Beasts,
and creeping things. And for the sense of this charge I am content to appeal to
the judgments of the most allowed Interpreters on both sides, that hat have
not been parties in the quarrel. They thought themselves wise, says S. Hierom
or the Author of the Commentaries under his name, as those that had found out,
quomodo invisibilis Deus, per simulachrum visibile coleretur; how an invisible
God might be worshipped by a visible representation: which is the sense of
simulachrum there; for he supposes the worship to be directed to the invisible
God through the Image, and therefore the Image could not be taken either for
God, or a representation of a false God; so that nothing can be more clear (to
use T. G's words) according to S. Hierom, than that T. G. professing to be
wise, does thereby discover his folly, when he says, that S. Paul speaks of
those who took the Images themselves for Gods; or worshipped the Images of
false Gods. And the Philosophers professing to be Wise, did become Fools,
because says S. Hierom, they did not understand that what is mortal and
corruptible, could have no resemblance to what is immortal and eternal. The
Greek Scholiast says, they became vain in their imaginations, when they would
represent him in a Figure that had none, and comprehend him in corporeal
Images, that was wholly spiritual; not as though they were such Fools to think
to shut up Infinity within the bounds of an Image; but to comprehend, there is
taken with relation to that representation which conveys a thing to the mind;
and so he uses it a little after, they thought themselves wise, because they
thought they could comprehend every thing: and so the Image was supposed to be
such a species as did convey an intellectual Being to the mind. The same words
are used by Theophylact; which they both borrowed from S. Chrysostom, who
condemns the Greeks for their folly, not for comprehending, but for seeking a
spiritual and incorporeal Being, in corporeal Images. And what can be more
foolish, says the Scholiast and Theophylact, than to fall down before Stocks
and Stones? And Origin does express the meaning of the Apostle in this place as
fully as I can desire, when he applies all these expressions to those that had
a right notion and conception of God in their minds, but gave divine worship to
all sorts of Images, as well of beasts, Orig. c. Cells. l. 6. p. 277.
as of men, (...) for the honor of the Deity. And in truth, the Apostles
supposition being allowed, that these Philosophers did know the true God, and
his Eternal Power and Godhead, we must suppose them to be turned stark staring
Fools, that should take the Images either of men or beasts to be Gods: but it
is very agreeable to the Philosophers practice and opinions to give external
worship to these Images, when they in the mean time did direct that external
worship to the honor of the invisible Deity.

But the sense of this and the former place will be made more evident by a
diligent enquiry into the State of the Controversy about the worship of Images
between the Christians and Heathens.. 5.
(1.) Whether it was that the Heathens took their Images for proper likenesses
of the Deity? Or, (2.) That they worshipped only the Images of false Gods, or
that they took their Images themselves for Gods? And if the Controversy did
not wholly relate to these things, then it will follow, that it was of the same
nature with that between us and the Church of Rome. I shall therefore show,

1. That the Wiser Heathens concerning whom the dispute is, did not suppose
their Images to be proper likenesses of their Gods. Which I prove, 1. From the
nature and kinds of their Images. 2. From the notions they had of their Gods.

1. From the nature and kinds of their Images. There are three sorts of Images
which were worshipped among the Heathens, 1. Such as had no artificial shape or
figure. 2. Such as had an artificial shape, but it was of no real being. 3.
Such as had the shape either of men or beasts. Of the two first, and those of
Beasts, I suppose, no man professing himself to be wise, will show himself such
a Fool to say, that the Heathens thought their Gods to be like them. My
business therefore as to them, is to show that there were such among them to
which they did give divine worship.

1. For Images without any artificial shape, or figure. By Images here I mean
some external visible things which are designed to represent some other thing
to our minds. So Tully calls characters, verborum Imagines, and the
countenance, Imaginem animi; in which no exact resemblance can be understood,
but some thing which is intended to represent another thing to us, which does
not depend on the nature of things, but the arbitrary institution of men; as
may be seen by the notes and characters of Tyro and Seneca; of which no account
can be given, why they represent one thing rather than another, but only the
Will of the Maker of them. Thus if men agreed that a Spear, a Cymiter, a Trunk,
a Mountain, a rude Stone, or a Pyramid should be set up to represent the Deity
to them which they worshipped, every one of these did thereby become the Image
of that Deity. Herodotus, Solinus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Arnobius, and Ammianus
Marcellinus, Herod. Melp. p. 276 Solin. Polyhist.

Clem. Alex. in Prot. p. 29, 43.

Arnob. l. 6.

Am. Marcell. l. 31.


all agree that the ancient Scythians had no other Image of a Deity among them,
but only a Scythian Sword, which Herodotus calls the Image of Mars, and he
says, they sprinkled the blood of the Sacrifice upon it. Clemens Alexandrinus
and Arnobius tell us from Varro, that the ancient Romans worshipped a Spear for
Mars, which is also affirmed by Justin; Just. l. 43.
and the Thespians a Bough for Cinxia or Juno; the Icarians an unhewn piece of
Wood for Diana; the Samii a frame of Wood for Juno; the Pessinuntii a Flint for
the Mother of the Gods; which was carried by the Roman Ambassadors from
Phrygia to Rome, says Livy; called Religiosa silex by Claudian. Live. l. 29.
Claud. de Raptu Proserp.
The Arabians, an unpolished stone; which was square, says Maximus Tyrius, Max
Tyr. diss. 38.
of a black color, says Suidas, Suid. in ver. (...)
without any shape or figure upon it, four foot high and two broad, to which
they sacrifice, and sprinkle the blood upon it. Euthymius charges the
Mahumetans with Idolatry for kissing the stone Bracthan; Euthym. in Saracen.
Sylburgii, p. 15.
concerning which, they have several fabulous traditions, of its being one of
the stones of Paradise, and coming down from thence with Adam, etc. which is
placed in one of the corners of the Caaba, or Temple at Mecca, above two cubits
above ground, and was stolen from thence by the Karmatiani, hoping to draw away
the Pilgrims; but finding it would not do, they restored it to the inhabitants
of Mecca twenty years after, who knew it to be the genuine stone, as they said,
by its swimming above water; which our learned Dr. Pocock conjectures to have
been one of the Idols of the old Arabs, Pocock not. ad spec.

Histor. Arab. p. 119.


as the Temple at Mecca was one of their Idol-Temples; but the Mahumetans say
they worship it out of a respect to Abraham; as they do another stone, wherein
they say are the footsteps of Abraham to be seen, at which they say their
prayers; as others do at Loretto, before a Madonna of the same complexion with
the stone Bracthan; of which color I suppose the same reason may be given
which the Mahumetans do of the stone Bracthan, viz. that it came purely white
out of heaven, but was turned black by the sins of the people. Such another
Idol was Manah or Meneth, which was of old worshipped between Mecca and Medina;
which the Arabic Writers call a rock or a stone; p. 9^, 92.
and was probably as the same Author conjectures, the Meni mentioned Isa.
65.11. and Saad, which he describes to be an oblong stone lying on the shore.
p. 99.
The Paphians, Max. Tyrius says, Max. Tyr. ib.
worshipped Venus under the representation of a white Pyramid: and the
Lacedaemonians says Pausanias, Paus. Laconic. p. 103. ed. Sylburg. Achaic. p.
228.
erected after the ancient custom, seven pillars to the seven planets; and the
same Author affirms it to have been the ancient custom of all the Greeks to
set up unpolished stones instead of Images, to the honor of the Gods; which
Testimony is very considerable, not only because it makes it the most ancient,
but an Universal Custom among the Greeks; and near the Statue of Mercury, he
says, there were thirty square stones, which the Pharii worshipped, and gave
to every one the name of a God. Pausanias mentions many other such Images
remaining in Greece after the ancient Mode, Paus. Boeot.
as of Hercules in Boeotia, p. 300.
of Cupid among the Thespienses, p. 302.
of the Graces among the Orchomenii, where he says, p. 311.
the people worship the stones which they believed to have dropped down from
heaven. They were wont, says Hesychius, Hesych. v. (...)
to have Altars before the Doors in the fashion of a pillar, which was called
(...); some, says Harpocration, Harpocr. p. 5.
make these proper to Apollo, others to Bacchus, others to both; these were
common at Athens, as appears by the Testimonies of Cratinus, Menander and
Sophocles quoted by Harpocration; and Sophocles, he says, applied that
Athenian custom to Troy, in his Laocoon, (...) etc. whom Suidas follows. Suid.
in v.
Stephanus Byzant. says, Steph. v. (...)
the (...) were Obelisks erected to the honor of the Gods; for which he quotes
Eupolis. It seems both Pyramids and Altars were called by this name among them,
being both designed for the worship of their Gods: and it is not improbable
those rude Pyramids in Yorkshire, mentioned by Cambden, Cambden in Brit. p. 570.
called the Devils bolts, and many such in Denmark, by Olaus Wormius, Ola.
Worm. Monum. Danic.
might be first erected for the same purpose, this custom having been so
general. Peter della Valle, in his late Travels in the Indies, says, that at
Ahmedabad, there was a famous Temple of Mahadeu, wherein there was no other
Image but a little column of Stone, after a Pyramidal form, Viaggi. p. 3. Let.
1. s. 15. p. 107.
but ending at the top in a round figure; which Mahadeu, he says, in their
language signifies the great God, and after this fashion, he says, it is the
custom of the Brachmans to represent Mahadeu; p. 116.
the like he observes at Manel. let. 6. n. 17. p. 382.
Although that Author takes the liberty to call this an Idol, I do not see with
what conscience T. G. could do it; T.G. p. 48, 49.
for an Idol according to him does signify either a representation of some
imaginary being, or in the utmost sense, something which is falsely esteemed
and worshipped as God; but this Pyramid to represent Mahadeu or the great God,
was neither a representation of an imaginary Being, nor was it self taken for
God, and therefore was no Idol, nor the worship given to God by it Idolatry:
and upon his principles, the worship of the Gioghi is very justifiable by the
Law of God, p. 61.
for this is not a representation by which men are in danger of being
Anthropomorphites; but only has some analogical and metaphorical
signification; and therefore it is no disparagement to the Deity to be thus
represented. Thus it falls out, as I foresaw, that T. G. could not justify the
practice of their own Church, but he must unavoidably justify that which is
condemned by it, viz. the Heathen Idolatry. But to proceed, Herodian describing
the Worship of Alagabalus at Emesa in Phoenicia, Herod. l. 5. p. 563.
says, that he had no kind of Image after the Greek, or Roman fashion made by
men's hands; but a great stone round at the bottom, lessening by degrees, after
the fashion of a Cone; and of a black Color, (like the stone Bracthan,) which
they say, was not made by men's hands, but fell down from heaven. It is great
pity Gretser had not put it into his Book, de Imaginibus non manufactis;
together with that of the Pessinuntii in Herodian; Herod. l. 1. sect. 35.
and of Diana of Ephesus; and of the Graces among the Orchomenii; which were
all believed to have come from heaven, as well as those mentioned by Gretser;
and the evidence is much alike for them all; and for the miracles wrought by
them, Peter della Valle says, that the Image of Mahadeu was in great
reputation among the Indians for working miracles; and in another place he
says, Viaggi p. 108.
there were persons who believed themselves cured of sore eyes by the Idols,
and made their presents of silver and golden eyes, p. 46.
and some Jewels (as they do in other places on occasion of the like miracles)
And notwithstanding what Della Valle intimates of the honesty of Roman Priests
in comparison of the Gioghi, in this matter of miracles, a man might venture a
great deal on their heads, that they come behind none of them in any thing that
tends to deceive the people. And I do not at all wonder, that this Gentleman
seeing their solemn processions in mighty numbers, in pilgrimage to certain
places of devotion, should so naturally think of the carrying of the Images of
Saints by a Fraternity in procession to Loretto or Rome in the Holy year; Id.
p. 242.
any more than that seeing the tricks of Hamant or the holy Apes in the Indies,
should bring to his mind those he had seen played by some creatures much of the
same kind in Europe. But leaving the consideration of Gretsers divine Images to
another place, I return to the stone of Alagabalus, whereof there were more
than one according to Lampridius, Lamprid. vit. Anton. Heliogab.
who says, Lapides qui Divi dicuntur ex proprio Templo, etc. he took out of
the Temple of Alagabalus the stones which were called Gods: where the great
Critics are strangely confounded by joining this clause with that which
follows of the Image of Diana from Laodicea, and are very hard put to it, to
tell what Image, and what Laodicea this was; Caroli Putini Numismata p. 331.
a late Author supposes them to be the same with those stones mentioned in
Pausanias, and that it was Laodicea of Achaia which he meant; but Tristan has
shown the true sense by dividing the clauses; Tristan Comment. histor. p. 324.
for the stones mentioned before, had no relation to Laodicea, but to the
proper Temple of the Deity from whom Heliogabalus took his name. Salmasius
instead of the lapides qui Divi dicuntur, Salmas. in Histor. Aug. Script. p.
181. Eusebius. Praep. Ev. l. 1. c. 10.
would have it read lapides qui vivi dicuntur, alluding to the Boetulia, which
Philo Byblius calls (...), the animated stones, of which he speaks in his
translation of Sanchoniathons account of the Phoenician Idolatry: and the place
agrees well enough with it; and they did suppose a more than ordinary presence
of God in those stones, Pocock. not. ad Specim. p. 89.
for which reason they attributed Life to them; and the Arabians called them
the Daughters of God, being as it were inspired with life by him, and believed
that they could intercede with God for them; and therefore they gave them
Divine Honor; of which sort, Allat, Alozza, and Manah, are mentioned in the
Alcoran; although some think Alozza to have been the Trunk of a Tree, which was
worshipped among the Arabians. Hotting. hist. Orient. l. 1. c. 7. p. 231, 232,
233.
Bern. de Breitenbach says, that they had two stones, one black which they
called Camos, and the other white which they called Mercury; which two they
went twice a year to worship; and the proper rites of their worship, were for
the first, the casting of stones behind them, and for the other, burning
incense, naked and shaven; and not only the Arabs, but the Ammonites and
Moabites joined in this worship. Afterward Mahomet finding this worship among
them, which was before designed to the Honor of Saturn and Mars, continues the
customs but turns the worship another way, and placed one of the stones in the
Corner of the Temple, and the other he pitched in the ground in the middle, and
required of all persons that came to Mecca to kiss these stones, with their
heads shaven and their backs naked, casting stones backward. Petrus Alphonsus
translated out of Arabic a Conference between a Christian and a Saracen; which
is extant in Vincentius Bellovacensis, Vinc. Bellovac. spec. Histor. l. 23. c.
60.
wherein we have the same account of the worship of the two stones; but, he
says, the custom came first from the Nations of the Indies which were called
Xechiam, and Albarachuma, i.e. says Scaliger, Scal. de Emend. Temp. l. 5. ^.
519.
Brachmani, who were wont to worship their Gods after that manner, by kissing
the corners of stones, and casting them behind them. Maimonides says, Maim. de
Idol. c. 3. sect. 7. Pocock. Not. p. 316.
that Markolis was worshipped by the casting of stones, and Cemosh by shaving
the head, etc. By Markolis many understand Mercury, but Elias Levita says,
Elias in Thisbi p. 106.
he could find no such worship of him among the Romans, but, he says, it was
the name of an Idol whose peculiar worship that was, and was believed to be an
intercessour between them, and the Planet Mercury from whom the name was
derived. Buxtorf gives this account of the figure of Markolis, Buxtorf. Lex.
Talmud. in v. Markolis.
that it was after this fashion; viz. two huge stones standing one against
another; and a third lying cross over them, covering the other two with one
half of his bigness; which, he says, the Rabbis called (...) domum Kolis;
thence, he says, that the Rabbis in Avoda Zara say, that three stones being
placed after that manner are forbidden, because that was the figure of the Idol
Markolis. (What if our Stonehenge were some such thing? for the stones lie
transversely upon each other after this figure, which neither belonged to a
Roman Temple, nor the Danish Monuments?) Toward these stones they were wont to
cast stones, which was the proper rite of worship belonging to Markolis; and is
still performed by the Pilgrims to Mecca, but directing their intention another
way. This is done, says Scaliger on the Mount Arraphoth without Mecca; Scalig.
de Emend. Templ. l. 2. and 5.
they cast them into the Valley of Mena, or Akabah, says Dr. Pocock from the
Arabic Writers; Pocock. not. in spec. p. 315.
but they pretend to do it upon quite other grounds than the ancient Idolaters
did; viz. in imitation of Abraham, who they say, in that place sent the Devil
packing with a stone in his forehead when he came to interrupt him in the
sacrificing of his Jon; others say, they do it out of opposition to Idolatry,
and in contempt of the Idols formerly worshipped there. But the Jews say, that
he that uses a rite proper to Idolatrous worship, Maim. de Idol. c. 3. sect. 7.
though by way of contempt, is guilty; and they instance particularly in this
very thing; however the Mahumetans, having looked over Aristotle 's threshold,
do know that acts go whither they are intended, and for their parts, since they
intend to knock the Devil in the head with the stones they cast backward, the
Devil is like to suffer most by this custom; especially, if it be true which
some of the Arabic Writers say, that those stones do break the Devils back.
And what harm can there be in kissing and worshipping the stone Bracthan, as
long as they pretend to honor Abraham by doing it? For this is their pretense
for it in Damascen; Damasc. de haeres. p. 941.
if relative worship be lawful, I do not see, why the Mahumetans directing
their intention to the God of Abraham, are in any greater fault, than those who
worshipping an Image, direct their worship finally to God, but after a relative
and inferior manner, suffer it to fall upon the Image for his sake. But
Damascen says something farther, viz. that they who look more narrowly into
this stone (as some may see farther into a stone than others) do find the Image
of Venus, p. 942.
which they called Chabar in it; to which Dr. Pocock answers from the Arabic
Writers, Pocock. not. in spec. p. 120.
that this is both a mistake of one stone for another; and that all the
impression in that stone is as like the face of Venus, as a man's heels are like
his head; unless, says he, the Mahumetans be so blind with superstition, as
not to be able to distinguish the head and feet from each other; for so
Abulfeda says, it has only the impression of Abraham's feet; but granting they
were mistaken, and that they could not tell Abraham's footstep from an ordinary
Pilgrims, yet methinks they should know some difference between the foot of a
man, and the face of Venus. And what reason is there to search for the figure
of a face upon a stone, when I have already so fully proved it was the custom
to worship rude and unpolished stones; especially in those Eastern parts, where
the Boetulia were in so much request, Scallg. not. in Fragm. Vet. p. 39. Id. in
Eusebius. Chron. n. 2050. Grot. in Genesis 2818. Vossius, Seldom. aliique. Bochart.
Canaan. l. 2. c. 2.
which many learned men do suppose to have come at first from the stone, which
Jacob anointed in Bethel, and set up for a pillar there, to which the Jews say,
the Canaanites afterward gave divine worship; and that from hence came the
custom of worshipping such stones, and the name of them. Which makes the
conjecture of Bochartus very probable, that Sanchoniathon had written (...),
which the interpreter mistaking but one letter read (...), and so rendered it
(...) animated stones, which was no more than anointed stones: which custom of
anointing stones for worship, among the Heathens, is mentioned by Clemens
Alexandrinus, Minutius, Apuleius and others. Clem. Alex. Str. l. 7.

Minut. Felix. p. 2. Arnob. l. 1. p. 22.

Apul. Florid. l. 1. Theophrast. char. de Superstit. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 16. c.
38.


S. Augustine has a passage very observable to our purpose concerning Jacob,
viz. that he did not anoint the stone at Bethel after the custom of Idolaters,
as if he made it a God; for, says he, he did not worship the stone nor
sacrifice to it; where we not only find this custom of Idolaters, but the
meaning of that phrase in the Fathers of taking their Images for Gods, by which
they meant no more than what S. Augustine here explains it by, viz. giving
divine worship to them. Damascius in Photius, Phot. Cod. 242. p. 1047.
mentions many of these Boetulia, that were seen by Asclepiades on Mount
Libanus near Heliopolis in Syria; of which, he says, some were consecrated to
Saturn, others to Jupiter, others to the Sun.

Maximus Tyrius shows at large, Max. Tyr. diss. 38.
that similitude to the Deity was not regarded in the things they gave divine
worship to, and looked on as symbols of the God they worshipped; thus they gave
divine honor to fountains, trees, tops of Mountains, and Mountains themselves;
Tristan. Comment. histor. Tom. 2. p. 316.
as the inhabitants of West-Barbary worshipped Mount Atlas; and the
Cappadocians the Mount Argaeus, and others Mount Casius; and so Carmel is
called in Suetonius the God Carmel: Sueton. in Vespas. c. 9.
and that Philosopher makes it an arbitrary thing, what kind of representations
of the Deity men make use of, as long as they are designed to put them in mind
of God, and are worshipped with a respect to him. The ancient Celtae, he says,
had no other Image of Jupiter but a great Oak. The Lacedemoans had some ancient
Images of the Dioscuri, which they called (...), which, says Plutarch, Plut.
de frat. amore p. 478.
were nothing else, but two pieces of timber lying at an equal distance, with
two others laid cross over them; from whom Eustathius repeats it. Eustath. ad
Iliad. ^.
And Tacitus says, Tacit. de Morib. Germ. c. 9.
the old Germans had no Images of their Deities of any humane figure; and that
they attributed the names of their Gods to their Groves: for they had as
Claudian expresses it Robora, numinis Instar. T. G. says, T. G. p. 75.
it is evident from Tacitus himself, that they had other Figures and Symbols in
their consecrated Groves; although they had not any in the likeness of men,
because they thought them unsuitable to the Celestial Deities; but I desire to
be informed by him, 1. How other figures come to be a less disparagement to the
Deity, than humane figures? Did they indeed think it less dishonor to God to
be like a bruit, or a plant, or a cockboat than to be like a man? Did they who
thought the Images of men so much below their Gods, take the others to be more
agreeable to them? 2. How does Tacitus make it appear, that they had other
Symbols and Figures in the consecrated Groves? It is true that he says, part
of the Suevi did sacrifice to Isis; but, he says, this was a foreign Religion,
and he knows not how it came there, but he is sure by the Figure it was
foreign? and does this prove, that the Religion of the Germans did allow of
Images, because a Religion was known to be foreign, by its Image? But this is
the very quintessence of ingenuity, when he has had no more to say against
this Testimony, and not a word against any of the rest, to conclude after this
fashion, His other citations I took upon his word without examining them (which
I hardly take upon his word, finding him so ready to cavil upon the slightest
occasion) and the Reader may guess by this out of Tacitus, whether it be not
likely I did him a kindness in it; which I am content to leave to the Readers
Ingenuity.

We are certain it was the custom both of the Germans and Gauls,. 6.
as well as other Nations, to worship not only stones and fountains, but Trees.
Pliny says in general, Plin. l. 12. c. 1.
that Trees were looked on as Temples of the Gods; and that the people did not
more worship the Images of Gold and Ivory, than they did the Groves; and the
same Quintilian says, Quint. l. 10.
especially of Aged Oaks. Curtius says, Curt. l. 8.
the Indians accounted all things Gods which they worshipped, especially Trees.
The Council of Carthage mentions the remainders of Idolatry in Groves and Trees
as well as Images. Codex Afric. c. 84.
And there was no one custom of Idolatry which the Northern Nations
especially, were more hardly drawn from, after they had received Christianity:
which was therefore strictly forbidden in the Capitular of Carolus M. and the
Priests were severely punished if they did not discover those who did aut
arbores, Capit. Caroli l. 1. tit. c. 4. l. 7. tit. 236.
aut fontes, aut saxa venerari, which are the words there used. In the Lombard
Laws, Leg. Longobard. l. 2. tit. 38. n. 1.
there is a constitution of Luitprandus, against those that did worship ad
arborem atque ad fontanas, before a certain tree, and at Springs. Othlonus in
the Life of Boniface, Canis. Antiq. Lect. To. 4. p. 421.
not only mentions this custom, but that Boniface did cut down a very great
tree, which was called Arbor Iovis in a placed called Gesmere; which is in the
lower Hassia says Serrarius. Serrar. Rer. Mog. l. 3. not. 19.
Agathias says, Agath. histor. l. 1. p. 18.
that the Germans worshipped Trees and Rivers, and Hills and Groves. In S.
Augustins time, S. Aug. Dom. 21. post Trin. ser. 2.
we find this custom continued among many called Christians, to pay their vows
before certain trees, and to say their prayers at Fountains; for which he
charges them with Idolatry; which trees, he says, if they fell, they would not
take a stick of them to burn, whereby they give honor to a dead Tree, and
contemn the precepts of the living God. The twelfth Council of Toledo produces
the second Commandment, Council. To let. 12. c. 11.
and the other severe prohibitions of Idolatry against this practice. The
second Council of Arles has a Canon against the Bishops, Conc. Arelot. 2. c.
23.
who suffer any such Trees or Stones to remain in their Dioceses: the same has
the Council of Braga against Presbyters. Conc. Bracar. 3. c. 22.
The second Council of Tours charges the Priests to excommunicate those who did
these things: Annals Ecclesiast. Franc. A. D. 566. n. 51.
Le Cointe by the Stones understands the Boundaries, at which the Heathens did
celebrate the Terminalia, but without any bloody sacrifice, as he proves from
Dionys. Halicarnassaeus, and Plutarch. The Synod of Auxerre forbids Christians
paying their vows either before holy Trees, Synod. Autissiod. A. D. 586. c. 3.
or at Fountains. The Council of Nantes commands the cutting down all such
Trees, Council. Nanuet. A. D. 656. c. 20.
and casting away the stones; and that all people be told what a dreadful sin
Idolatry is, and that he that worships Trees and Stones, denies God and
renounces his Christianity; with a great deal more to that purpose; and yet all
this while these men pretended to be Christians, and to direct the intention of
their worship aright; which I beseech T. G. to observe; for all the fault the
Council found with them was, that they did those things before Trees and Stones
which ought to be done only in the Church, viz. making their oblations and
saying their prayers. And in the Canons of Eligius, Annals Eccles. Franc. A.
D. 659. n. 36.
this is one, Nullus Christianus ad fana, vel ad Petras, vel ad Fontes, vel ad
Arbores, aut ad Cellos, vel per trivia, luminaria faciat, aut vota reddere
praesumat. Where we see these Canons did respect Christians and not Infidels;
and several of them are inserted in the Collection of Canons by Burchardus and
Regino: Burchard. l. 10. c. 9, 10, 32.

Regino de Eccles. discipl. l. 1. c. 300. l. 2. c. 5. n. 43. c. 3^8.


now I desire to be resolved by T. G. why it is not as lawful to say ones
prayers in a consecrated Grove, or at a Fountain, or before a Stone or Pillar,
as before a consecrated Image? Has God only forbidden Groves and Statues to be
worshipped, and not Images at all? Nay, one would think, that at the same time
he had forbidden the one, he had commanded the other; when we see how
scrupulous these Fathers were in the former, and how much the practice of
devotion in the Roman Church, where it is openly and publicly allowed,
consists in the other. Surely a man is not more apt to think God to be like a
Tree, or a Stone, than to the Image of a man; and if this argument of
similitude signifies any thing, it tends to justify these practices, condemned
by so many Councils; and to condemn the worship of Images in the likeness of
men, which T. G. endeavors to justify. And to let us see, how general this
kind of worship was among the Heathen Idolaters, I shall conclude this
discourse with a double Testimony to this purpose. The one of Dio Chrysostom,
Dio Chrysostom. orat. 12.
who says, the generality of the barbarous Nations, called Mountains, Trees,
and Stones by the name of Gods, i. e. as the Greeks and Romans did their
Images, to which they gave divine worship. The other of Acosta; Acosta Nature.
and Moral History of the Indies l. 5. c. 5.
who says, the Indians worshipped Rivers, Fountains, Rocks, or great stones,
Hills and the tops of Mountains, which they called Apachita's, and all things
in Nature which seemed to have something extraordinary in them.

2. The Heathens worshipped such Images, as had some shape and Figure,. 7.
but it was not of any real being, but only Imaginary. This I have so little
reason to go about to prove against T. G. that he desires me, T. G. p. 48.
to take notice, that the Heathens (as Origin, Hom. 8. in Exodus 20. and
Theodoret q. 38. in Exodus tells us, when they expound the second Commandment)
had two sorts of Images; some of which were purely figments or fictions of
their own brain, made to represent what had no existence but in their own
imaginations, as Sphinxes, Tritons, Centaures, and the like; and others which
were made to represent such things, as had a real, and substantial Being in the
World, as the Sun, Moon and Stars, etc. which they esteemed and worshipped as
Gods. I shall not now dispute, whether the Idols forbidden in the second
Commandment, be only such representations; nor whether. Sphinxes, and Centaures
be such imaginary Beings, (for about the latter S. Hierom is uncertain; S.
Hieron. vit. Pauli. p. 238. ed. Froben.
and a Sphinx is nothing but an Ethiopian Ape, such as Philostorgius says
himself saw; Philostorg. hist. l. 3. c. 2.
) but that which I insist upon, in this place, is, that this sort of Images was
not certainly unlawful on the account of similitude to the Deity; and those who
thought so were not Idolaters, but Atheists; for then they thought that to be
like God, which was like to Nothing. And if the Athenians had any such as
these, (as they were as good at Chimaera's as other people) S. Paul's argument
would not reach to them; and it seems S. Paul mistook his point: for he, good
man, thought he had been talking against Idolatry at Athens; but it was no such
matter; for says T. G. he talked against such Images as were proper likenesses
and representations of the Divinity; now the Divinity certainly is a Real
Being; and Idolatry is the worship of Idols; but an Idol, says T. G. is a
representation of an imaginary Being; therefore those Images S. Paul spoke
against at Athens were no Idols; and consequently S. Paul does not prove the
Athenians guilty of Idolatry. But of these things more at large when I come to
the second Commandment.

3. They had artificial Images of real Beings; in the Likeness of Men.. 8.
And I shall now show, that even these Images were not set up or worshipped
among the Heathens, because they supposed the Gods to be like them. For which,
in the first place I shall produce this remarkable Testimony of Cicero, where
he answers the Epicurean argument for the Gods being of humane form, because
men are wont to represent them so; Quis tam caecus, says he, De Nar. Deor. ^
1. c. 27.
in contemplandis rebus unquam fuit, ut non videret species istas hominum
collatas in Deos, aut consilio quodam sapientum, quo facilius animos
imperitorum ad Deorum cultum a vitae pravitate converterent; aut Superstitione,
ut essent simulachra, quae venerantes, Deos ipsos se adire crederent? Who was
there ever so blind in the judgment of things, as not to see that the Figures
of men are attributed to the Gods, either by the advice of wise men, the easier
to draw rude and wicked people to the worship of them; or out of superstition,
that when they worshipped their Images, they might believe they approached to
the Gods themselves? Where we observe, that these words are brought to disprove
the Epicurean opinion of the Gods being like to men; and he undertakes to give
an account how they came to be represented in humane shape, although they were
not like to it; viz. 1. To make the notion of God more familiar and easy to
rude and barbarous people, that knew not how to conceive of him, and therefore
neglected his worship, which is all one with making them Books for the ignorant
Laity. 2. To excite their devotion, that when they made their addresses to
these Images, they might believe they made them to the Gods themselves. And
according to T. G. what harm was there in all this? provided that these were
declared not to be proper likenesses of the Deity; and so we see they were, by
their best and wisest men. But the people might imagine the Gods to be like
them; and what then? may they not do the same in the Roman Church, and with as
good reason? when they see God painted like a Pope, with his Crown and
Pontifical Vestments; may they not as reasonably think, that as the Pope is
Gods Vicar on earth, God himself is the Pope in Heaven. If they say they take
care the people be better informed: not too much of that neither; but did not
Cicero and others do the like by the Heathens? who argued against the folly of
supposing the Gods to be like men, and derided the Epicureans for asserting it;
as men that neither understood the nature of Gods, or Men. And Cicero in the
same place is so far from looking on this practice of worshipping the Gods in
Images of humane shape as Universal, C. 29.
that he confesses it to be almost peculiar to the Greeks and Romans; and
says, De Not. Deor. l. 3. c. 1.
that the Epicureans who did assert the Gods, to have the members of men's
bodies, but made no use of them, did only droll, and in words assert a Deity,
which in Truth they denied. Maximus Tyrius debates the case about the several
ways of representing God; Max. Tyr. diss. 38.
and although he makes the manner as indifferent, as whether our words be
expressed in Phoenician, or Ionian, or Attick, or Egyptian Characters, they
being all intended only as helps to our understandings and Memories, and as far
distant from the Deity as Heaven from Earth; yet, he says, they are useful to
the duller part of mankind, who like Children are taught to read and
understand, by these broader characters; which are intended only as a
Manuduction to them; yet, he prefers that which he calls the Greek way, of
representing the Gods with the most exquisite art in humane Figures; but he
does it so timorously, that he only says, it is not unreasonable; not that he
imagined the Gods to be like them; but only because the Soul of man comes
nearest to God; and that habitation which God had chosen for a divine Soul
seemed the fittest to be a Symbol of the invisible Deity. But he does not blame
the other Nations which made use of other ways of representing the Deity;
which he must have done, if he had thought the Greek Images the proper
likenesses of God; for although he disputes against the Persians and
Egyptians, yet he concludes all at last with this saying, whether men worship
God by the art of Phidias, as the Greeks; or by the worship of living
Creatures, as the Egyptians; or by the worship of Rivers, or of Fire, as other
Nations, I condemn not the variety; let them only understand and love, and
remember him whom they worship. (...), i. e. in T. G.'s Translation, let a man
only direct his intention toward God, and then without doubt the actions go
whither they are intended. And upon these grounds none of the Heathens were to
blame in the worship of Images, provided they looked on them only as Symbols,
or Analogical representations of the Deity, as Maximus Tyrius says they did,
and directed their worship toward the Supreme Being, as he advises them all
to do. For, says he, God who is the Father and Maker of all things, elder than
the Sun and Heaven, better than Time, and Age, and all Fluid things, a Lawgiver
without name, that cannot be expressed with words, or seen with eyes; whose
essence being incomprehensible by us, we make use of all helps from sounds and
words, and living Creatures, and Images of Gold, and Ivory, and Silver, and
Plants, and Rivers, and Mountains, to bring us to the Conception of him; and
because of our Weakness, those things we account good we attribute to him, as
lovers use to do, who delight in any representation of him they love; and
behold with great pleasure, the harp, or the dart, or the seat he sat upon, or
the place he ran in, and whatever brings him to mind* What need I say any more
concerning Images? Let God only be in the mind. Is not this a Vindication of
Heathen Idolatry, to T. G.'s hearts desire? T.G. p. 17.
For, says T. G. Is it not an honor to the King to kiss his Picture? And the
very light of nature teaches that the honor or dishonor done to a picture, or
Image, reflects upon the person represented by it. Now, says Max. Tyrius, we
look upon Images, and Trees, and Rivers, and Mountains but as so many imperfect
pictures and representations of the Deity; but although they do not come near
his beauty, yet we honor them for the sake of him whom they represent; wherein
we do but as great lovers do, we kiss the footsteps where he trod, we embrace,
admire, and value things as they represent him, and bring him to our minds. And
is there any thing more natural than this? For is it not an honor to the King
to kiss his picture? or, as the Emperor Julian more elegantly expresses it,
Julian. oper. p. 539.
(...), etc. He that loves the King, takes pleasure in seeing the picture of
the King, he that loves his Child, loves any representation of him, and so does
he that loves his Father; even so, says the devout Emperor Julian by the mere
light of Nature, every one that is (...), a Lover of God, loves the
representations of the Gods, and beholding their Images does secretly fear and
reverence them, which although invisible themselves do behold him. Wherein we
see how admirably Julian and T. G. have hit not only on the same principle of
nature, but the very instance, and almost the very same expressions: It seems,
this great man did not corrupt himself in those things he knew naturally, but
pursued the light of Nature toward the Defense of Pagan Idolatry; making the
Worship of Images a part of Natural Religion, as T. G. does. But what spite is
this, for me to mention Julian and T. G. together? whereas it is well known
that Julian was against Invocation of Saints, and called that as great Idolatry
as the Heathens, as T. G. notably observes against Dr. St. But for all this
Julian, though an Apostate, and great enemy to Christianity was a shrewd
understanding man, and found out the very fundamental principle of the worship
of Images, and resolved it into the Light of Nature, as T. G. does. But Julian
supposed these Images to be proper Likenesses of the Gods, and consequently the
worship of them as such is condemned: no such matter I assure you, Julian was a
more Orthodox man than so, he was no follower of that damnable heretic called
Anthropomorphus (for so I find him in an ancient Catalogue of Heretics;)
Julian detests that opinion, Gennad. de dogm. Eccles. c. 4.
and calls the Gods (...), without any corporeal figure, or shape; and
therefore he proposes the objection of a Christian against him, how it could
then be proper to make any corporeal Images of them? Why, to that, p. 537.
says Julian, I answer, the Images of the Gods are placed by our Ancestors, as
Signs and Symbols of their presence, not that we should believe them to be
Gods, but that we should worship the Gods by giving Reverence to them. For, we
living in the body ought to give them a worship suitable to our corporeal
state, (...); but they are incorporeal. So that Julian did not look on Images
as the proper likenesses of the Gods, but as ancient and venerable Symbols of
their presence; in which, he says, all Nations of the world were agreed, and
in all Ages. Wherein he lashes too far; but that is at least but a venial sin,
to stretch a little for the sake of so good a Cause. And Julian was not
singular in this opinion of his, of the fitness of corporeal Images, although
the Gods were not like them; for Varro was of the same mind; who gives this
account of the first design of making the Images of the Gods like to men, Aug.
de Civ. Dei, l. 7. c. 5.
Quorum qui simulachra specie hominis fecerunt, hoc videri secutos, quod
mortalium animus, qui est in corpore humano, simillimus est immortalis animi,
etc. that the soul of man was most like the Deity; and men made Images like to
their Bodies, just as if a Wine-vessel were put in the Temple of Bacchus to
represent him, intending thereby to represent first the Wine, which should be
in the Vessel, and by the Wine him that is the God of Wine: so, says he, by
Images of men's shape they signified the Soul contained within the body; and by
the Soul they represented God as of the same nature, viz. the Soul of the
World. Porphyrie, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 7.
such another good Catholic as Julian was, in this point of the worship of
Images, does not in the least suppose any similitude between the Shape of a
Man, and the Nature of God, but he gives this account of representing the Gods
in Figures like to men, (...), They made the Gods like to men, because the
Divinity is a rational Being; and withal, he says, that many were wont to
represent him by a black stone, to show that he is invisible. Dio Chrysostom
at large debates the case about Images, in his Olympic Oration; Dio Chrysostom.
Orat. 12. p. 199.
wherein he first shows, that all men have a natural apprehension of one
supreme God the Father of all things; that this God was represented by the
Statue made by Phidias of Jupiter Olympius, for so he said, (...), before whom
we now are; and then describes him to be the King, Ruler and Father of all both
Gods and men; this Image he calls, the most blessed, the most excellent, the
most beautiful, the most beloved Image of God. p. 206.
He says, there are four ways of coming to the knowledge of God, By nature,
by the instructions of the Poets, by the Laws, and by Images: but neither
Poets, p. 207.
nor Lawgivers, nor Artificers were the best Interpreters of the Deity, but
only the Philosophers who both understood and explained the Divine Nature most
truly and perfectly. After this, he supposes Phidias to be called to account
for making such an Image of God, p. 209.
as unworthy of him; when Iphitus, Lycurgus, and the old Eleans, made none at
all of him, p. 210.
as being out of the power of man to express his nature; to this Phidias
replies, that no man can express mind and understanding by figures, p. 211.
or colors, and therefore they are forced to fly to that in which the soul
inhabits, and from thence they attribute the seat of Wisdom and Reason to God,
having nothing better to represent him by: and by that means joining power and
art together, they endeavor by something which may be seen and painted, to
represent that which is invisible and inexpressible. But it may be said, we had
better then have no Image or representation of him at all; no says he, for
mankind does not love to worship God at a distance, but to come near and feel
him, and with assurance to sacrifice to him and crown him. Like Children newly
weaned from their Parents, who put out their hands toward them in their dreams
as if they were still present: so do men out of the sense of Gods goodness and
their relation to him, love to have him represented as present with them, and
so to converse with him: thence have come all the representations of God among
the barbarous Nations in Mountains, and Trees, and Stones. But if the quarrel
be, that I have given a humane shape to him; for that, says he, the Poets are
much more to blame who began those things, especially Homer who compared
Agamemnon to God in his head and eyes: but for my statue, no man that is not
mad would compare it to a mortal man, much less to the perfection of the Deity:
and so Dio proceeds with a great deal of eloquence to show, how the
representation of God by his Image was more decent and becoming God, than that
which the Poets had made of him: and how he had endeavored by the utmost of
his skill to represent the perfections of the Divine Nature in the admirable
workmanship of his Statue, as to his power, Greatness, and Good Will to
Mankind; and concludes all with saying, that as to his workmanship he thinks he
has gone beyond all others; but yet no workmanship can be compared to the God
that made the whole World. Thus we see from the Testimony of these very
considerable Authors, the Wiser Heathens had no such foolish Imagination as T.
G. supposes them to be possessed with, viz. that the Images of the Deity which
they worshipped were the proper likenesses of him; and if T. G's Light of
Nature and Common sense do sufficiently decide this Controversy, it is very
plain on which side the balance inclines, viz. toward Paganism against
Christianity. Macrobius says, Macrob. in Somn. Scipion. l. 1. c. 2.
that anciently they made no Image at all of the Supreme God, as being above
any representation; but they made Images of the inferior Gods although they
were formarum talium prorsus alieni, in nothing like to them. The former Clause
in Macrobius must be understood of the most ancient times before the Age of
Phidias as appears by the foregoing passages; and yet Porphyrie says, Eusebius.
Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 11.
that the Egyptians were wont to represent the Creator whom they called Cneph
in the figure of a man of a dark blew Color, holding a girdle and a Scepter in
his hand; out of whole mouth came an Egg, by which they represented the world
as his production. Not much unlike to this, is the Image of the Creator in the
Temple of Meaco in Iapan, which is all over black, with a Scepter in his hand,
and they likewise represent the world by an Egg; as Arnoldus Montanus observes.
Montanus. p. 279.
In the Itinerary of Alexander Geraldinus to those parts of Africa under the
Aequinoctial (which was written by him to the Pope, when he was Bishop of S.
Domingo) in the account he gives of the Religion of those parts (which is far
more particular than is to be met with elsewhere) he describes several Images
of the Great God which were in mighty veneration among them: as in Bassiana the
King with all his people do worship the God of Nature in an Image of Marble,
set upon a high Throne, Alex. Geraldini Itinerar. l. 4. p. 68.
holding the Sun in his right hand, and the Moon in his left, and the other
Stars on either side of him; and wherever the King travels, he carries such an
Image along with him, and prays five times a day prostrate before it. In
Demnasea upon the top of a wall is placed the Image of God holding all things,
l. 11. p. 171.
before which the people are bound to pray every morning. l. 10. p. 168.
In Ammosenna, they represent the God of Heaven by four Heads coming out of the
body of a Lynx looking toward the four quarters of the world to represent his
omnisciency and omnipresence, whom they call Orissa. l. 8. p. 131.
In Logonsennea, the God of Nature is painted in the Image of a man and all
other Images of him condemned Now if T. G. were sent on a Mission into any of
those parts where God was worshipped after such a manner, I have a great desire
to understand, what his opinion would be concerning this kind of worship;
whether it were Idolatry or no? If not, they might still continue in it and be
saved; as far as men can be saved by the mere light of Nature, which herein T.
G. thinks they follow exactly; for they honor God by worshipping his Image. If
it be Idolatry, how comes it to be so? for this is neither the representation
of some Pigment, but of a real Being; nor is it of some real thing falsely
taken to be God, which is his larger notion of an Idol; but it is looked on
only as the Image of the True God; and that not as a proper Likeness, but by
Analogical representation, and consequently according to T. G. is no
disparagement to the Deity. T.G. p. 49.


But whatever T. G's opinion in this case is,. 9.
the Fathers when they discoursed against the Heathen Idolatry, made use of
such arguments which held against such Images and representations as these; and
that upon these two weighty considerations.

1. Because such a representation of God, was unsuitable to his Nature.

2. Because it was repugnant to his Will.

1. Because such a representation of God was unsuitable to his Nature. (...),
says Clemens Alexandrinus. Clem. Strom. 9. p. 559.
A visible representation of the Deity lessens his Majesty; and it is a
disparagement to an intellectual Being to worship him by sensible matter:
therefore, says he, p. 584.
Moses forbad any Image to be made of God, that we might ascend above sensible
things; and thereby declaring God to be invisible, and incomprehensible. And
from hence Zeno the Stoic said, no workmanship of man could be worthy of God.
And in another place, he says, Str. 1. p. 304.
the reason why Numa forbad any Image of God like to man, or any living
creature, was, because the most excellent Being could be represented only to
our Minds; and that Antisthenes learnt that from Socrates, that God was like to
no representation we could make of him; Protrept. p. 46.
and therefore no man could learn any thing of him from an Image; and Xenophon,
that it is apparent that God is great and powerful, but we know not how to make
any thing like him. Is it possible then, that such Athenians as these, should
look on any Images as the proper likenesses of God? These wiser Heathens, T. G.
confesses, T. G. p. 74.
did mean, that the nature of God being spiritual and invisible, it could not
be represented by any thing like unto it; and yet these were Athenian
Philosophers, as well as those whom, he says, S. Paul condemned for supposing
their Images to be proper Likenesses and representations of the Divinity. p. 96.
But T. G. supposes, that the reason why the worship of Images is a
disparagement to the Deity, and incongruous to the Divine Nature, is, because
the people gave worship to them as Gods, or like unto the Gods they worshipped;
whereas I have now plainly showed, that those who contended for the Worship of
Images among them, did neither look upon them as Gods, nor like to their Gods,
but only as Symbolical representations of the Divine Nature. And the Fathers
make use of this acknowledgement of theirs of the incongruity of Images to the
Deity, from thence to prove the incongruity of the worship of them. So that it
is not, the supposing the Images to be like God, which they condemn in them,
for none of their wiser men were such Fools; but the making of such Images and
worshipping of them, which in their own nature were so infinitely beneath the
divine Being, did tend to the begetting in men's minds mean and unworthy
thoughts of God. And therefore they frequently insist upon this, that men's
imaginations are easily tainted and corrupted by the daily representations of
things, especially when they are proposed as objects of worship: and however,
the very manner of worshipping an infinite, and immaterial Being by a gross and
material representation is that which the Fathers condemn as most unsuitable to
the Divine Nature. For this, Justin Martyr says, is not only unreasonable, but
it is done (...) with the reproach of God, Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 57.
whose glory and form is inexpressible. Athenagoras says, Athenag. p. 14.
if God and matter be all one, it is then reasonable to worship God by giving
worship to sensible matter; but if there be an infinite distance between them,
why are we accused for not doing it? And if we refuse to worship the
workmanship of God, viz. the Heaven and Elements; p. 16.
why should we do it to the workmanship of men? Origin looks on this, Orig. c.
Cells.

l. 2. p. 91. l. 5. p. 255. l. 3. p. 120.


as one of the most peculiar characters of the Christian doctrine, that it
raises men's minds above Images and all worship of Creatures to the Creator of
all things, and that it is one of the first things the Catechumens are
instructed in, to despise Idols, l. 5. p. 375.
and all Images; He says, it is not only a foolish thing to pray to Images, as
Heraclitus said; but to seem to do it as the Philosophers did. If they are
worshipped, it must be either as Gods, which Celsus denied, p. 376.
or as representations of God, which cannot be, because God is invisible and
incorporeal: and therefore, he says, p. 374.
that the Christians would not endure the worship of God by Images; and
although other Nations did refuse the worship of Images, (with whom Celsus
parallels the Christians) yet it was not upon the same ground that the
Christians did, viz. because they would not debase and draw down the worship of
God toward matter so fashioned and formed. Lactantius shows, Lact. l. 2, c. 2.
how unreasonable it is to worship God by an Image; since Images are intended
to represent the absent; but God is every where present. But if there ought to
be any Image of God (which he calls simulachrum Dei, and surely does not
signify an Idol in T. G's sense; and I hope here he will not charge me with
want of fidelity in translating it Image) it ought to be living and sensible,
because God lives for ever: therefore that cannot be the Image of God that is
made by the Work of men's hands, but Man himself, who gives all the art and
beauty to them which they have; but poor silly men as they are, they do not
consider, that if their Images had sense and motion, they would worship the Men
that made them; and brought them into such a curious figure out of rude and
unpolished matter. Who can be so foolish to imagine, there can be any thing of
God in that Image, in which there is nothing of man, but the mere shadow? But
their minds have the deepest tincture of folly; for those who have sense,
worship things that have none; they who think themselves wise, things that are
incapable of Reason; they that live, things that cannot stir, and they that
came from heaven, things that are made of earth. What is this, says he, but to
invert the order of Nature, to adore that which we tread upon? Worship him that
lives, if ye would live; for he must dye, that gives up his Soul to things that
are dead. And after he has fully shown his Rhetoric in exposing the folly of
worshipping Images, he concludes very severely; c. 18.
quare nonest dubium quin Religio nulla sit, ubicunque simulachrum est.
Wherefore there can be no true Religion, where there is the worship of Images;
no, although it be simulachrum Dei, the worship of God by an Image; for his
reason holds against all; Religion, says he, is a divine thing, and whatever
is divine is heavenly, but whatever is in Images is earthy, and therefore there
can be no Religion in the worship of Images. What sport do Tertullian,
Minucius, and Arnobius make with the Images which were consecrated to divine
worship? Tertul. Apol. Minuc. Octav. Arnob. l. 6.
from the meanness of the matter they are made of, the pains, and art that is
used to bring them into their shape, the casualties of fire and rottenness, and
defilements they are subject to, and many other Topics on purpose to represent
the ridiculousness of worshipping such things; or God by them. O, says
Arnobius, that I could but enter into the bowels of an Image, and lay before
you all the worthy materials they are made up of; that I could but dissect
before you a Jupiter Olympius, and Capitolinus. Yet these were dedicated to the
worship of the Supreme God. Would men ever have been such Fools to have exposed
themselves rather than such Images to laughter and scorn, if they had used any
such themselves, or thought them capable of relative divine worship? How easily
would a Heathen of common understanding have stopped the mouths of these powerful
Orators, with saying but a few such words to any one of them. Fair and soft,
good Sir; while you declaim so much against our Images, think of your own; what
if our Jupiter Olympius, or Capitolinus be made of Ivory, or Brass, or Marble;
what if the Artificer has taken so much pains about them; what if they are
exposed to Weather, and Birds, and Fire, and a thousand casualties: are not the
Images of S. Peter, and S. Paul, or the several Madonna's of such and such
Oratories liable to the very same accusations? If ours are unfit for worship,
are not yours so too? if we be ridiculous, are not you so? and so much the
more, because you laugh at others, for what you do your selves. So that we must
either think the first Christians prodigious Fools, or they must utterly
condemn all Images for Religious Worship; and not merely the Heathens on
considerations peculiar to them. And that we may not think this a mere heat of
Eloquence in these men, we find the same thing asserted by the most grave and
sober Writers of the Christian Church, when they had to deal not with the
rabble, but their most understanding Adversaries. We have no material Images at
all, says Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem. Protrept. p. 34.
we have only one intellectual Image, who is the only true God; We worship but
one Image which is of the Invisible and Omnipotent God, says S. Hierome.
Hierom. in c. 16.
No Image of God ought to be worshipped, but that which is what he is, neither
is that to be worshipped in his stead, but together with him, says S. Augustine.
Ezekiel. c. 4. prope fin. Aug. ep. 119. c. 11.
Where it is observable that the reason of worship given to this Eternal Image
of God, is not communicable to any Image made of him, as to his humane Nature;
for it cannot be said of the humane nature it self, that it is God, much less
of any Image or representation of it. Therefore let T. G. judge whether the
worshipping Christ by an Image, be not equally condemned by the Fathers with
the worship of God by an Image; but of that hereafter. Eusebius answering
Porphyrie about the Image of God, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 10.
says, What agreement is there between the Image of a man and the Divine
understanding? I think it has very little to a man's mind, since that is
incorporeal, simple, indivisible; the other quite contrary, and only a dull
representation of a man's shape; The only resemblance of God lies in the soul,
which cannot be expressed in Colors or Figures; and if that cannot which is
infinitely short of the Divine Nature, what madness is it to make the Image of
a man to represent the Figure and form of God? For the Divine Nature must be
conceived with a clear and pure understanding free from all corruptible matter;
but that Image of God in the likeness of man, contains only the Image of a
mortal man, and that not of all of him, but of the worst part only, without the
least shadow of Life or Soul. How then can the God over all, and the Mind which
framed the World be the same that is represented in Brass or Ivory? S.
Augustine, S. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 7. c. 5.
relating the saying of Varro, about representing God by the Image of a man's
body, which contains his Soul which resembles God, says, that herein he lost
that prudence and sobriety he discovered in saying, that those who first
brought in Images among the Romans, abated their Reverence (to the Deity) and
added to their error; L. 4. c. 31.
and that the Gods were more purely worshipped without Images: wherein, says
S. Augustine, he came very near to the Truth. And if he durst speak openly
against so ancient an error, he would say, that one God ought to be
worshipped, and that without an Image: the folly of Images being apt to bring
the Deity into contempt. Is it possible to condemn the worship of God by an
Image in more express words than S. Austin here does?

2. Because the worship of God by Images is repugnant to his Will.. 10.
Clemens Alexandrinus mentions the Law given by Moses, Clem. Alex. Str. 5. p.
559.
against the making any Image of God in the place before mentioned; and which
he there asserts to be still obligatory to Christians. But although he there
repeats the Command at large against all sorts of Images, yet it is observable
that when he goes about to set down all the Commandments, this by some
artificial hand is conveyed out of the way; and the second Commandment is,
Strom. 6. p. 682.
Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord, etc. which made me not a little
wonder, finding Clemens so often in other places expressing his zeal against
Images. But it is not hard to guess what hands his Greek Copies have passed
through, since the second Nicene Council; yet we are beholding to them for
leaving so much evidence of their foul dealing behind them; for within few
Pages, P. 688.
he says, the tenth Commandment takes in all sorts of Concupiscence, and
therefore the precept against Images must be a distinct Command to make up the
number: so that Sylburgius justly complains that the place is mutilated. If
Clemens did not think this precept concerned Christians, he would never have
objected it as an absurdity against a sort of Gnostics, that thought
themselves bound to oppose the Law, why then, says he, when God said, Strom.
3. p. 441.
Thou shall not make any Graven Image, you were best go and worship Images. By
all which we see, that he thought the precept to be still in force, and that it
was intended against the worship of Images, and those Images, such as respect
God, and not merely the Heathen Idols. Origin says, Orig. c. Cel. l. 7. p. 375.
that for the sake of that Law, Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven
Image, the Christians would rather die than defile their Faith with such
impieties as the worship of Images: and therefore their case was very different
from that of the Scythians, Numidians, Seres and Persians, with whom Celsus
joined them in the contempt of Images. When Symmachus pleaded with Valentinian
for the toleration of the Pagan Religion, Symmach. Ep. l. 11. Ep. 54.
on this pretense, that the same God was worshipped by all, and that by several
ways men aimed at the same end; S. Ambrose answers, Ambros. c. relat.

Symmac. 2.


That God himself was fittest to teach what way he would be served in: You
worship the Work of men's hands, we account it an injury to God to call anything
by His Name that can be made by man; Non vult se Deus in Lapidibus coli, God
has declared, He will not be worshipped after such a manner. Whereby we see
the Primitive Christians fixed themselves on the Command of God, as upon an
immovable rock, against the Worship of Images.

Thus much may suffice to have shown in this place, that the Controversy
between the Christians and Heathens about the worship of Images, was not
whether they were proper Likenesses of God, from the apprehensions they had of
their Images. I proceed now to show it.

2. From the Notions they had of their Gods. And here, I must in the first
place,. 11.
exclude those who in Truth were Atheists and not Idolaters, I mean the
Epicurean Philosophers, who although they seemed to assert some pleasant
Beings, that lived in perfect ease, far from the noise and smoke of the World;
yet they utterly overthrew all foundations of worship in Prayers, or
Sacrifices, by denying the Gods to have any regard to the actions of men, for
fear of disturbing their sweet repose. These indeed made their Gods like men,
but so thin and airy, that they could not bear the least justle of Atoms, and
so quiet and still that the least thought of business would destroy their
happiness. These were only made for fine Idea's to amuse the people with, but
any one might see that they were never intended for the objects of worship; and
therefore Plutarch and Athenaeus say, Plut. advers. Colot. Athen. l. 4. c. 27.
That Epicurus took away all the worship of the Gods; however he complied with
the common practices of the people; and when he lift up his Hands to his Mouth,
in token of adoration, he could not but laugh through his Fingers at the Gods
they worshipped.

But we may see by the discourse of the Academick and Stoic, with the
Epicurean in Cicero, how much they abhorred this Epicurean doctrine of the Gods
being like to men; and Velleius the Epicurean does in effect confess, there
were no Philosophers of that mind besides themselves. For he reckons up all the
opinions of the other Philosophers concerning the Nature of the Gods after such
a manner, as to discover that this opinion was peculiar to their own Sect. He
acknowledges, that Thales asserted God to be an Eternal Mind, which framed all
things out of Water; Cicer. de Not. Deor. l. 1. c. 25.
even Anaximander and Anaximenes, who held only Material Gods, or first
principles (for even the Atheist were willing to have matter believed to be a
God by them, to avoid the odium of Atheism among the people) yet these rejected
a humane form; at which the Epicurean is displeased, as though they might have
flattered the people, (as they did) in the fashion, as well as in the name of a
Deity. Some have undertaken to clear Anaximenes; and to make him of the same
opinion with Thales, Lescaloper. ad Cicer. de Not. Deor. p. 40.
concerning an incorporeal Deity; saying that by Air, he meant only a Divine
Spirit; and therefore in Plutarch he compares it to the Soul of Man, Plut. de
Placit. l. 1. c. 3.
which being Air does animate the body; and Diogenes Apolloniates his disciple
held Air only for matter, De Civit. Dei l. 8. c. 2.
and Reason for the efficient cause: as St. Augustine tells us. However,
Anaxagoras another disciple of Anaximenes is confessed by Velleius to hold God
to be an infinite and active mind; free from all mixture of matter; as the
words of Anaxagoras in Simplicius do express his meaning: Simplic. in Phys.

Aristot. l. 1. p. 33. ed. Aldi.


and S. Augustine under takes his vindication against the Epicurean objections,
which suppose it impossible for us to understand any such thing as Mind without
the conjunction of sense and Matter. Pythagoras said, That God was a quickening
Spirit diffused through the World; which is best expressed by Virgil, in those
words after the sense of Pythagoras, Spiritus intus alit, totosque infusa per
artus
Men's agitat molem, and magno se corpore miscet. Aeneid. 6. v. 724, etc.



Xenophanes falls under the same condemnation with the rest for asserting God
to be a Mind; but he went somewhat farther, for in the Verses cited out of him
by the Fathers, Eusebius. de Praep.

Evang. l. 13 c. 13.

Theodoret. de cut.

Graec. sermon. 3.

Clem. Alex. Str. 5.


he said, That God was like to man neither in body, nor in mind: and for men to
make an Image of God like to themselves, was all one as if a Horse should paint
him with a long tail and four feet, if he had understanding enough to make a
representation of the Deity; or an Ox or a Lion should draw him by their own
Figures. Parmenides made God to be of a circular figure in the fashion of a
Crown or Orb of Light compassing about the Heavens. Whatever the opinions of
Alcmaeon, Empedocles, Protagoras, Diogenes Apolloniates were, it is certain the
Epicurean despises them all; because they either appeared too doubtful and
obscure in their opinion about a Deity, or at least seemed to make him of an
inconvenient form to deceive the people. Even Democritus himself does not
please him, for although he makes his Images to be Gods, yet he did not by them
understand such as T. G. does, but he means no other than his Atoms (which
Laertius calls (...)) and that first matter whence they arise; but, says
Velleius, while he destroys an Eternal Being, Democritus must needs overthrow
the very opinion of a Deity; however he would give the title of it to his
Images or matter, or the minds of men. He grants, that according to Plato, God
is an incorporeal mind; but then, he says, he must want sense, and prudence,
and pleasure (i. e. Epicurean pleasure), but withal he adds, that Plato
contradicts himself, making the world, and the Heavens and Stars, and Men to be
Gods, which are both false in themselves, and inconsistent with each other.
This charge against Plato seems to be the most material, and therefore deserves
to be more fully cleared, which shall be afterward done, when I come to the
Platonic doctrine about Divine Worship, where it will be made appear, that
Plato did assert one supreme and incorporeal Deity, and that the worship
allowed by him to inferior Gods was of the same nature with that which is
practiced in the Roman Church, and that he no more believed Images to be like
the true God than they do. I now proceed to the rest of the Philosophers
opinions in this matter: Xenophon is charged by the Epicurean, to be guilty of
the same fault with Plato, and that in the Memoires of Socrates written by him,
he says, that men ought not to enquire after the Form of God; and that it is
impossible for us to know it: for we only know, says he, Xenoph. Mem. 4.
that he is great and powerful, who makes all things to quake and tremble.
Antisthenes acknowledged but one God in Nature, although there were many of the
Peoples making; by which, says Velleius, he destroyed the force and nature of
the Gods: and upon the Epicurean supposition that they were like to men, he
thought it necessary for their pleasure, that there should be more than one to
keep up good fellowship among them. And because Speusippus said, That the
Divine Nature did imply a Governing Spirit, he thought this as bad as the
denying his Being; it being to his apprehension impossible to be happy and to
Govern. He grants, that Aristotle affirmed God to be an incorporeal Being;
however, he says, that he was not constant to himself, sometimes making
nothing to be God but only Mind; at other times attributing Divinity to the
Heavens and parts of the World; but as the late Commentator on that part of
Tully observes, Lescaloper. ad Cic. de N.D. p. 55.
the former was only the First, Eternal, Infinite God, the other a secondary,
limited, and participative Divinity, and rather an Image of the Divinity than
it self: as he proves from comparing several places in Aristotle together, De
Aristot. Theologia, p. 184, etc.
and concludes with that excellent description of God drawn out of Aristotle by
Du Vall, God is an Eternal substance, and Act, without potentiality and Matter,
without magnitude, parts, division, Du-Vall. Synops. Analyt. Doctr. Peripat. ad
Metaphyl. l. 14. c. 7.
passion, change, intelligible by himself, the principle of Motion, but
immovable, the Cause of Heaven, and, nature, and infinitely happy. Mirare
Lector, says Du Val, hominis Ethnici Theologiam. See how far Aristotle was
from thinking the Athenian Images to be proper Likenesses of the Deity. If to
these now we add the Stoics, who asserted God to be a Divine Reason and Spirit
actuating the World, we have a full Discovery, that by the confession of those
who were of another opinion, all the famous Sects of Philosophers agreed in
rejecting that principle that the Gods were of humane shape, and consequently
the Idolatry they were guilty of in the worship of Images could not lie in
this, that they thought their Images to be proper Likenesses of God. Of the
same mind with these were the freer Philosophers of following Ages: among whom
Cicero deserves a name, Cicer. Tuscul. 1.
were it only for that excellent description of God, which Lactantius and S.
Augustine quote out of him, Lact. l. 1. c. 5.

Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 20.


with great approbation, Neither can God himself be otherwise understood by us,
than as a Mind free, and disentangled from all corporeal mixtures, perceiving
and moving all thing. The same thing might be proved of Seneca, Epictetus,
Plutarch, Alcinous, Plotinus, Proclus, Sallustius, and others; but I purposely
forbear, both because these are sufficient for my purpose, and because it may
be said by those who have nothing else to say, in this matter that they came to
have truer apprehensions of God only by the means of the Christian Religion.
Nay, I might prove that many of the very Poets themselves had much nobler
conceptions of the Deity, than to imagine him to have any thing corporeal; but
I shall only mention these Verses out of the ancient Tragoedian, (...)
(...).
Think not that God is like to mortal flesh.
From whence we see, that if there were any so foolish among the Athenians to
imagine their Gods to be just like their Images, they did it not for want of
instruction to the contrary; and if the nature of their Idolatry did lie in
this, scarce any understanding man among the Heathens that did really believe a
Deity, was guilty of it.

2. But if they did not suppose their Images to be the proper Likenesses of
God,. 12.
yet they worshipped the Images of false Gods, or they worshipped their Images
themselves for Gods, and therefore, says T. G. the Apostle condemns them, T.G.
p. 99.
Romans 1. To make my Discourse come home to them I must show, says he, that the
Images by which they honor Christ and his Saints, are worshipped by them as
Gods, or as the Images of false Gods, as those were of which the Apostle speaks
in that place. That is it I aim at, to bring my discourse as home to them as
may be; and therefore to give him full satisfaction, I shall enquire whether
the Heathen Idolatry condemned by S. Paul, did consist in one of these two
things, either, 1. That they worshipped only the Images of false Gods. Or, 2.
That they took the Images themselves for Gods.

1. Whether their Idolatry lay in worshipping the Images of false Gods? If I
can prove, 1. That they did intend to worship the true God, either by an Image
purposely for him, or to direct the worship through the Gods and Images they
worshipped to him; And 2. That there is no greater repugnancy in the manner of
their worship, than is used in the Roman Church, I hope I shall bring my
Discourse home enough to T. G.

To do this more convincingly I shall give an account of the principles of
Divine worship among the Heathens from their own Writers (which I suppose will
be another way of bringing it home to them) and because T. G. particularly
charges Socrates and Plato, I shall make choice of the Platonic principles of
Divine worship, and see upon what grounds they become guilty of Idolatry, which
will not reach home to themselves. Card. Bessarion has written an elaborate
vindication of Plato against Trapezuntius, Bessarion advers. caluminat.

Platonis. l. 2. c. 3.


wherein he shows that Plato did assert the Unity, Power, and Goodness of God,
and the Creation of all things by him; and that he does this frequently and
constantly, in his Parmenides, Phaedrus, Phaedo, Philebus, Timaeus, Sophista,
Laws, Politics, Epistles, every where. l. 3. c. 5.
But Trapezuntius charges Plato, that although he did acknowledge God, he did
not worship him, and that he sacrificed only to the inferior Gods; to this
Bessarion answers, that in his Books of Laws, which were made for the People,
he does not expressly prescribe any worship to God under the name of One, or
First, or Ineffable, which were the Titles he had given him in his Dialogues,
and were not known to the People; but in his eighth book of Laws, he appoints
twelve solemn Feasts to the twelve Gods of whom Jupiter was chief; under which
name the Supreme God was known among the People, than which name in the proper
importance of it, none could have been more significant of the Nature of the
Supreme God; and that he retained the other common names of the Gods worshipped
among them (that he might not seem to innovate any thing in Religion) although
the Philosophers understood them in another sense than the common people did;
by Jove they meant the First Being or Supreme Deity, by Minerva Wisdom, by
Mercury Reason, by Saturn Eternity, by Neptune Form, by Juno Matter, by Venus
Nature, by Apollo the Sun, by Pan the Universe; but when they spoke to the
People about the worship of them, they did not mention Wisdom, or Reason, or
Eternity, but Minerva, Mercury, Saturn; and he says, it would have been folly
in them to have done otherwise, the People being accustomed to worship the Gods
under these names, and nothing more was requisite but to make them understand
them aright. But for Plato himself, he says, he worshipped the Supreme God
after the best manner, i. e. with inward Reverence and adoration; in Plato's
own expressions, by thinking the best and most worthy things of him, which
Bessarion interprets in Spirit, and in Truth; and he adds, that Plato looked on
Sacrifices, and Images as unworthy of him who was a pure mind, and could not be
represented by any Image to men. But Plato's Adversary charges him, with giving
the worship of Latria to inferior Gods, and Creatures: to which Bessarion
says, that Latria among the Heathens signified only a stricter kind of service
which some men paid to others that were above them; l. 3. c. 4.
and that the worship by sacrifice by a long custom from the time of Zamolxis
and Orpheus was looked on as common to all things worshipped by them; but,
says he, he referred all that worship which others gave to many and different
Gods, to the First and Chief Principle of all things; and again mentions that
saying in his Epinomis, that the most suitable worship of God is to think
honorably of him. Which I suppose Plato would have said, was the same thing
which those of the Church of Rome call Latria, and that he could by no means
understand how sacrifices come to be appropriated to it; and to this purpose
Bessarion quotes the saying of Porphyrius, that God is to be worshipped in
Silence, and with a pure mind; and with the sacrifice of a good life. And as to
other Deities which Plato allowed to be worshipped, he says, that he supposed
them to be inferior and subordinate to the Supreme, l. 2. c. 4.
and dependent upon him; and that he did not worship empty Statues, but one God
the principle of all. Which being compared with Plato's Law, and practice about
worshipping according to the Custom of the Country, does imply that he
worshipped Images with a respect to the True God. Let now the Reader judge
whether according to the judgment of this learned Cardinal, Plato was guilty
of worshipping only the Images of false Gods. But Trapezuntius still urges hard
upon Plato, l. 3. c. 6.
that if he allowed the worship of a second and third Order of Gods, which were
but creatures, he might on the same ground worship any creatures, because all
creatures are infinitely distant from the Creator. Bessarion like an
understanding man, tells him, that this argument would hold as well against the
Church of Rome, as against Plato, which worships Angels although they be
Creatures; but yet he does not think the argument will reach to the worship of
all creatures; because though all creatures be equally distant as to existence,
yet some come nearer than others as to perfection. This Trapezuntius takes off,
by saying that Plato worshipped Demons; c. 7.
which Bessarion grants, but by Demons he says, Plato and Aristotle, and
other Philosophers did not understand such evil Spirits as we do, but certain
aereal Beings, lower than Gods and above men, whom they looked on as Mediators
and intercessours between God and men; but for evil Spirits, he says, they
were not received into their Religion; and that Lucifer was looked on as
accursed by them under the name of Ate. c. 8.
And he shows farther from S. Augustine that all the Poetical Theology was
rejected by Plato. So that the whole dispute with Plato about worship must come
to these two points. 1. Whether it be lawful to worship the Supreme God, by
external and visible representations, supposing that a man direct his intention
aright toward the honor of God by them? 2. Whether it be lawful to give an
inferior worship to any Created Beings, whose excellencies are supposed to be
far above men's in order to their intercession between God and Us? And now let
T. G. judge whether I have not brought my Discourse home to their own doors. I
omit Marsilius Ficinus as a man that may be supposed too partial to Plato; but
I hope Augustinus Steuchus Eugubinus may pass for a sound Catholic; being an
Italian Bishop, and a Roman Courtier, that had so much zeal as to vindicate
Constantines Donation against Valla; and therefore his Testimony cannot be
rejected. Aug. Steuch. Eugub. de perenni Philos. l. 5. c. 1.
He undertakes at large to prove that Plato acknowledged one True and Supreme
God; and that all other Beings are created by him; and when he seems to
attribute Divinity to other things, it is only a Divinity by way of gift and
participation, such as Angels and holy men are said to have; which does not
hinder our believing them to be all at first created by one God. There were
three sorts of inferior Deities, he says, asserted by the Philosophers, c. 2.
viz. Demons, or Gods with aerial bodies, who have a particular care of humane
affairs; Intelligences or the Spirits which animate and move the Stars, and
Celestial Deities who converse with the Supreme God; now all these he makes
appear from many passages in Plato, especially the famous one in his Timaeus,
to have been made by God. And that when in his Books of Laws, c. 3.
and the Epinomis or Appendix to them, he so much sets forth the Divinity of
the Stars and the Heavens, he must either contradict himself, or attribute only
an inferior Divinity to them: and that he did not speak so clearly of the
worship of the Supreme God, because he looked on him as incomprehensible, and
that he could not so well know in what way it was fit to worship him. c. 5.
However he invocates him in several places; especially when he was to speak
concerning the Gods; and in his Epistle to Hermias, Erastus, and Coriscus,
which he writ when he was grown old; he calls to witness, the God over all,
Governor of all things and times, and Father of the Lord and Cause of things;
but as to the public manner of worship, he says, that no man ought to teach
unless God himself direct him. He farther shows, that notwithstanding Plato
spoke so much and so well concerning the true God, Plato. Epinomis p. 989. ed.
Serran.
c. 6.
yet he attributed the title of Divinity to several ranks of Spirits, to the
Heavens, the Sea, to the World, to Zamolxis, to Mercurius Trismegistus, and to
good men in general, to whom he commands sacrifices and other acts of worship
to be performed, Quod in Religione nostra justissime fit Sanctis and Divis:
which is with great reason done among us to Saints and Deified men. I now
appeal to T. G. whether Aug. Steuchus does not bring this matter very home to
them? when, he says, c. 11.
that they either worshipped Angels (so he says Philo renders their Demons)
or Saints, as they verily believed, and supposed the honor of these was very
well pleasing to the Supreme God, whom they constantly acknowledged; as he at
large proves not only concerning Plato, but Aristotle, and all the Philosophers
of any reputation; and he says, that Socrates in Plato not only confessed the
true God, c. 12.
but that he ought to be worshipped and observed by men, and that for his sake
men ought never to forsake the way of righteousness, and therefore he resolved
rather to follow God than the advice of his Friends, (...), which cannot be
better rendered than in the Apostles words, It is better to obey God than men.
It would be endless to repeat the places wherein he shows at large, that Plato
and the rest of the Philosophers, did acknowledge the Unity, Power, Wisdom,
Goodness and Providence of the Supreme God; And after all these
acknowledgements is it possible to conceive that they should never intend to
refer the honor they gave to inferior Deities and their Images to this
Supreme God? nay, it is not possible, say some, they should do otherwise, since
they believed all the other Deities they worshipped to be created and dependent
Beings.

But I need not make use of such a way of proving it, Paulus Benius Eugubinus
has made it appear, Platon. and Arist. Theolog. Decad. 2. l. 2. p. 213.
he says, that according to Plato the Supreme God is to be worshipped after a
singular and peculiar manner. And he gives this account of the Platonic
principles of divine worship as to inferior Deities. 1. That Plato's Gods were
no other than our Angels, and that he sets God the maker of them, at a mighty
distance from them. 2. That when he speaks so much of the worship of the
heavenly Bodies, he does not thereby intend the worship should be given so much
to the bodies, as to those Blessed Minds that moved them; yea, says he, to
them properly and precisely, and so that they being removed, no honor or
worship is to be given to the bodies themselves. Which certainly is no more
Idolatry on this supposition, than adoration of the Host is, upon one far more
extravagant. But, he says, by one place in Plato's Epinomis, it may be
questioned whether he intended the stars should be worshipped otherwise than as
Images of the Gods; and therefore, says he, very ingenuously, p. 217.
Plato did scarce at all differ, unless in words, from the doctrine of the
Roman Church in this matter. 3. That Plato did put a difference in the nature
and kind of the worship which he gave to inferior Deities, and that which was
due to the Supreme God, and the same kind of difference as is made among them;
and that when he acknowledges them to be created by him, he could not give
Sovereign worship to them. 4. p. 219.
That when Plato gave worship to Demons the difference is only about words,
because by Demons he understood an inferior Order of Angels, whom he supposed
to be good and holy, and to have a care of mankind. The only difference then,
that this learned man could find, worth taking notice of between Plato's
worship and theirs was this, that they worshipped those for Saints and Deified
men, and the Images of such, who were not truly Saints (not being Canonized by
the Pope) but if they had been such, p. 220.
he then confesses, that they did nothing amiss in the worship they gave to
them, or their Images. Alioquin, says he, ea cultus venerationisque ratio cum
nostra magnopere congrueret. So that all the dispute comes to this, whether
Mercurius Trismegistus were not as good a Saint as Thomas Becket, and as much
deserved to be worshipped; or Socrates as Ignatius Loyola; not, whether we
account them so, but whether they upon their supposition of their excellencies
and virtues might not as innocently worship them, as the Papists do the other.
P. Lescalopier a late Jesuit, says, Comment. in Cic. de Not. D. p. 51.
that Plato makes so palpable a distinction between the Supreme God maker of
all things, and other Deities, that no one but an Epicurean Backbiter can deny,
that Plato did openly and constantly assert one God; and that he did not give
equal honor to any as he did to him; and delivers this as the substance of his
opinion, Unum Deum imprimis adorandum, cujus gratia caetera numina colenda
sunt. One God to have Sovereign worship given him, and others to have a
relative and inferior worship. And now I hope, I have brought this matter home
to T. G. and made it appear from their own Writers, that these Philosophers
went upon the same principles of Divine Worship that they do in the Roman
Church.

The only appearance of difference is about the worship of Deified men,. 13.
and that not as to the nature and kind of the worship, but only as to the
persons; and yet as to this it ought to be considered, 1. That it was only a
mistake, such a one as many may be guilty of in the Roman Church, who it is
possible may worship those for Saints in Heaven, who are in a worse place. 2.
Many of those worshipped by the Heathens are confessed to have been good men;
so Campanella confesses of Ianus, Campan. Triump. Atheism. c. 11. n. 18.
whom he took to be Noah, and he said, deserved to be worshipped, as well as
Moses, and Peter, and Paul and the Prophets: and he says farther, that many
Wise and Virtuous men were worshipped by the Heathens, who did not look on them
as essentially Gods. Thus many learned men have showed that the Veneration of
Adam and Eve, of Noah, Shem and Iaphet, of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, of Joseph,
Moses and Ioshuah, etc. has been preserved among the Gentiles under the names
of the several Deities of Saturn, Tuisto, Mannus, Mercury, Bacchus, Apollo,
Hercules, etc. in which case, the Heathens were innocent as to the Persons they
worshipped. 3. The Papists ought in reason to allow them all the excuses they
make use of for themselves; such as invincible Ignorance, Oral Tradition,
Authority of Teachers, and conditional worship, which alone would justify
them; for by that the intention of the worship, is to somewhat supposed to be
worthy of it, but if they be mistaken in the particular application of it, that
general intention is thought sufficient to render the worship lawful.

But what says T. G. all this while? T. G. p. 98.
Why, forsooth, S. Chrysostom says, that Plato gloried in the worship of
Images and Creatures (of which he speaks before) so he renders (...), which
signifies no more, than setting them off with the best advantage; of which I
have given an account already; and Socrates commanded a Cock to be sacrificed
to Aesculapius: who denies it? All the Question is what Socrates understood by
Aesculapius. For those who have had the greatest insight into the doctrine of
Socrates, and Plato, tell us, (such as Marsilius Ficinus, Ficin. in Platon.
Phaedon. Coel. Rhodig. Antiq. Lect. l. 16. c. 12.
and Coelius Rhodiginus) that by Aesculapius Socrates understood the Divine
Beneficence that cures all diseases, to which a Cock was sacrificed as the
forerunner of Day and the Sun, thereby acknowledging the Light of Life to be
derived from the Divine Bounty, the Daughter of Providence: and that now
especially they should do it in token of his deliverance from the diseases of
doubt and fear; and the ancient Oracles say, that Souls returning to Heaven
sing an Io Paean, the fittest Emblem of which was the offering up a Cock. But
besides this, Tacitus has a remarkable passage to explain this sacrificing to
Aesculapius, Tacit. histor. l. 4.
viz. that many called God by the name of Aesculapius as he healed the diseases
of Mankind; of which Seguinus takes notice in some ancient Coins, wherein the
Serpent the proper Symbol of Aesculapius is joined with the horn of Jupiter
Ammon, Saguin. select. Numismat. p. 2, 3, 4.
and the Rays of the Sun; to show, says that learned Antiquary, that the same
God was meant by all those several titles. So that hereby appears no
contradiction to what I have said as to the Platonic doctrine and principles
of Divine Worship.

However, T. G. is content to suppose that the Philosophers were as subtle as I
would make them (or rather as honest as their own Writers make them) yet, says
he, were they not worthily condemned by the Apostle, though but for the
external profession of praying and offering Sacrifice to the Statues of
Jupiter, Venus, Mercury, etc. as also to those of birds, and fourfooted beasts,
and creeping things as the Vulgar did? I answer, that upon the principles of
worship allowed in the Roman Church, they were not to blame in what they did,
supposing that to be their meaning, which their own Writers allow; as appears
by the foregoing discourse. But T. G. says, T.G. p. 108.
however they were to blame in two things. 1. Because the Images being
instituted by public Authority for the worship of false Gods, they concurred
as I acknowledge with the vulgar in all the external practices of their
Idolatry. 2. Because though in the Schools they denied them to be Gods, yet as
Origin charges Celsus, they worshipped them as Gods, and the people are
confirmed in their opinion. But all the question is, how this external worship
comes to be Idolatry, supposing they acknowledged one Supreme God, and gave
only a relative or inferior worship to other Beings created by him, or to the
Images of them. Wherein I pray did this Idolatry consist? not in worshipping
the true God by Images: that T. G. utterly denies to be Idolatry. Was it then
in giving Sovereign worship to inferior Gods? that their own Writers deny that
they did, but only a subordinate and relative worship. But it lay, says T. G.
in worshipping the Images of false Gods: these false Gods by the confession of
their own Writers, were either good Angels, or Deified men; and is it at last
confessed to be Idolatry to give divine worship to these? But they concurred
with the people in their worship; and why not upon their grounds? what scandal
did this give among them? but it was the external profession of Idolatry; of
what Idolatry? of the worship of false Gods. What! still in a round? I grant
they were false Gods, as they had divine worship given to them; and so whatever
creature it be, that is so worshipped, though never so real or excellent a
Being, becomes a false God; and so does the Image of that Being so worshipped.
But the people had other notions of these false Gods than the Philosophers had,
and yet they complied with the people in external acts of worship. This is just
the case of the Roman Church, their Learned men have complained that the people
worship the Images for Gods among them; but does T. G. think himself guilty of
external profession of Idolatry in using the same external acts of worship with
the people, though with another intention? if not, why shall not the same
excuse hold for Titius, which holds for Sempronius? Will they undertake to
defend the follies of the ignorant people? no, they do not think themselves
bound to do it, but blame them for their Ignorance and Superstition, and say
the Church is free because it has taken care to instruct them better. Might
not the Philosophers have said the very same thing? We are not bound to answer
for the madness of the rabble; we instruct them better, and our Schools are
open for them to learn: but since the nature of such actions depends upon the
intention of the Doers; we declare our intentions to be to honor the Supreme
God in the first place; then the Celestial Deities, with a worship inferior
to his, but above all other Beings; next to them we worship the Heavens on the
account of the Intelligences that animate and move them; then the aereal
Demons or Lower Angels which have the nearest intercourse with men; and last
of all the Souls of Deified men, whom some extraordinary excellency has
advanced above the condition of other souls: and according to the worship we
give to the Beings represented, we give worship to the Images or
representations. And if you allow the distinctions of Divine Worship, into
Sovereign and subordinate, into absolute and relative, what harm is there in
all that we do? Indeed, if it be unlawful to worship God by any Image; if it be
unlawful to give any divine worship to any Creature; we are then to blame, and
are justly condemned, otherwise we think we stand upon equal terms, with those
who make use of the same distinctions, and only change the names of some, and
the persons of others. Thus T. G. may see the parallel is not so extravagant as
he would make it to be: and while S. Paul condemned the Philosophers for
changing the glory of the incorruptible God, into Images of men or beasts,
while they still retained God in their minds, he does effectually condemn all
those who worship the true God by any Images either of himself, or of any of
his Creatures.

But besides this opinion of the Platonic Philos. there was another current
among the Heathens, viz. that one and the same God was worshipped under
different names and titles; and Simon Majolus an Italian Bishop, and of great
reputation as appears by the character given of him by Ferd. Ughellus, Ferd.
Ughelli Italia sacra Tom. 8. p. 559.
is of opinion, that they who began the Poetic Theology among the Heathens
were wiser than Pythagoras, Socrates, or any of the Philosophers; for their
design was, says he, under the representation of a multitude of Gods, Majoli
Dies Canicul. par. 2. coll. 1. p. 435.
to show to the people that God did see and know all things; because the common
people were incapable of understanding how one God should be present in all
places; therefore they called that Divine power which Governed the Heavens
Jove, the air Juno, the Sea Neptune, etc. And we may observe, says he, that
all the Gods of the Ancients were nearly related to Jove, by which it appears
that their design was to signify but one God that ruled and governed all
things, whose power was diffused over the whole World. To which that saying of
Plotinus agrees, speaking of God that made the world, bringing the rest of the
Gods with him, or rather, says he, Plotin. Ennead. 5. l. 8. c. 9.
(...). Who is one and all; and every one is all agreeing in one; in powers
different, yet in that various power they are all one, or rather one is all.
Plutarch says, Plutarch. de Isid. and Ofirid. p. 377. ed. Francs.
that there were not different Gods among the Greeks and Barbarians, in the
Northern and Southern parts: but as the Sun, Moon, Heavens, Earth, and Sea are
common to all Nations, but called by different names; so that One Reason and
Providence which orders, disposes, and manages all things has different
honors, and Titles and Symbols, some more plain and easy, others more
difficult and obscure. So Apuleius says, Apul. Metam. l. 11.
the same Deity was worshipped through the whole world, under different names,
and Images, and customs. Which Hypothesis makes it yet more difficult for T.
G. to charge the Heathens with the worshipping the Images of false Gods; for if
the same God were worshipped only under different titles and representations as
they say, if the worship of God by an Image be lawful, all the Heathens which
went upon this principle, must be freed from the charge of Idolatry.

2. But T. G. is a man of tricks,. 14.
and he has one fetch yet behind; which is, that the Heathens took the Images
themselves for Gods, and therein were guilty of Idolatry. S. Paul, says he,
speaks of such Images, T.G. p. 99.106.
as were worshipped for Gods, or for Images of false Gods. This is the very
last reserve, and if this does not help him, nothing can. Who would not commend
the various artifices of my Antagonist, that does with so much slight of hand
convey one distinction after another, to blind the Spectators eye? If Idolatry
be forbidden, and the command be too plain to be denied; Yes, says he,
Idolatry is a very naughty thing; but what is Idolatry? Idolatry is the worship
of an Idol, is it not? Yea verily. Now pray tell me, what is an Idol? an Idol
is an Idol, in the self-evident and scientifical way. But to be serious,

Methinks Sir, says a Disciple of T. G. to him, my conscience is a little
unquiet when I worship an Image of a Madonna, for fear that should be an Idol.

Now see what a Fool you are; is not the B. Virgin in Being? Yes without doubt
in Heaven.

Then her Image can be no Idol.

Say you so? but I pray how does that appear?

Why, says T. G. to his Scholar, an Idol is a representation of nothing that
seems to be something; as if you imagine a Centaur, or a Triton, or any
Chimera. And so farewell the Commandment.

But does not S. Paul condemn the Athenians for Idolatry in worshipping the
work of men's hands? And although Chimera's be the work of men's brains, yet
surely Images are the work of men's hands.

It is true, says T. G. but then he condemns not all Images, but such as are
the proper likenesses of the Deity.

Hold Sir a little, you are too quick for me; Were these Athenians Idolaters or
no?

Why do you ask me that Question?

I will tell you, Sir, an Idol you told me was a Chimera, but the proper
likeness of the Deity is no Chimera, unless you suppose the Deity it self to be
one; so that, methinks you free them from that which S. Paul condemns them for,
viz. Idolatry. But I pray, Sir, what think you of those S. Paul condemns, Romans
1. did they believe their Images to be proper likenesses of their Gods? had
they any four-footed and creeping Gods, as they had Images like to such things?

No, says T. G. these were another kind of Images from those at Athens.

"Of what kind were these?

These were the Images of false Gods.

"You mean they were Idols, do you not?

Yes, they were Idols.

Very well; then I have them right; they were Images of Centaures, Tritons,
Sphinxes, Chimera's; but he does not speak against such Images, but the
representations of living and real Beings, as men, or beasts, etc. which are no
Chimera's. Therefore it seems, whatever S. Paul says, these were not guilty of
Idolatry; and so methinks we have done a very good act of charity, for we have
freed almost all the Heathens from Idolatry.

Hold a little, says T. G. they were guilty for all this.

Of what? of Idolatry? when S. Paul says, They knew God, but did not glorify
him as God, because they worshipped such Images; then it should seem to be
Idolatry to worship God by an Image.

You run too fast; I said they were guilty; but, do you mark me, I did not say
of Idolatry, but of complying with the people in the external practice of
Idolatry.

Very well; the people then were guilty of Idolatry, and they only of
compliance; but why does not S. Paul lay this only to their charge, which was
their only fault, as he does when he blames the Corinthians for eating in the
Temple of Idols? I remember, Sir, a good principle of yours, that actions go
whither they are intended: now if these men intended to worship the true God by
the public Images, this action of worship must be free from Idolatry in them,
whatever it were in others who had not such intention.

But what do you mean by the exterior practice of Idolatry? If all external
actions be aequivocal, and the nature of Idolatry depends on the intention of
the mind, how comes the guilt of Idolatry to be charged upon external acts when
you do not know the inward intention? Suppose among us, a person falls to his
prayers before the Image of the Blessed Virgin; here is all the external
profession of Idolatry that may be, for I can see no difference in any outward
act between what he does to the Image, and what he would do to the Person of
Christ, if he appeared to him. If this be Idolatry, Woe be to us all; if it be
not Idolatry in us, how came it to be so in the Philosophers, who, I have
heard, owned the same true God, and had the same distinctions of the degrees of
worship that we have?

But these were false Gods that they worshipped.

I hope the true God is not a false God, but I said they worshipped the true
God.

Suppose that, yet they joined false Gods with him.

Not in the same degree with him, for they supposed him to be far above them
all which were created by him, and dependent upon him: and do not we do the
very same in the worship of Angels and Saints?

True, but theirs were false Gods, and ours are Saints and Angels.

Upon the whole matter then, I find the fault of the Wiser Heathens, did not
lie either in the general principles or practices of Divine Worship; but only
that they called these Gods whom we call Angels (which I have heard S. Cyrill
and S. Augustine thought not worth disputing) and that they did not worship such
good Saints as we do, and of whom we have so good assurance that they were (as
S. Christopher, Longinus, the eleven thousand Virgins, the seven Sleepers)
whereas the poor Heathens were bred up with Fables; and we have such eminent
proofs of their Sanctity, as S. Dominick's butchering Heretics, and S.
Ignatius Loyola's founding the Order of Jesuits. I am now very well satisfied,
how justly the Philosophers were condemned, and how innocently we give the same
kind of worship to those that far better deserve it.

Yet, says T. G. there is another thing behind, which makes the difference so
apparent that nothing but malice and blindness can hinder men from seeing it.

What is that, good Sir? for hitherto I have been forced to use my Spectacles;
the difference was so fine and subtle.

Why, says T. G. the Heathens took their Images themselves for Gods, which you
know we do not.

This I confess is a very notable thing; but I pray, Sir, tell me, how they did
it, and how we do it not? Did they really believe that the Wood and Stone of
their Images did make and Govern the World? Or that a man by Houghs and an Axe
could cut a God out of a Tree? That were as great a Miracle, as our Priests
turning a Wafer into God, by saying five words; but I hope such Miracles are
peculiar to the Roman Catholic Church. What was it then they meant, when they
took their Images for Gods? I suppose it was only, that they believed a more
special presence of their Gods in them; and that by their means Miracles were
wrought at them, and that they sometimes spoke, and sometimes bowed, and moved
themselves. But do not all good Catholics believe the very same things of our
Images? Do not we know that our Lady is more present in one Image than in
another? and that she works Miracles at some Images more than at others, and
that she moves and speaks, and travels too; Witness the Holy House of Loretto,
and the Madonna there; where was there ever such a thing done in Old Rome? The
bringing the Stone from Phrygia, of the Matter Deorum, or the Serpent from
Epidaurus, or the tattling of the Image of Juno Moneta at Veii were not to be
compared to this. Therefore, Sir, give me leave to advise you in this point;
have a care of disparaging our wonder-working Images, while you would charge
the Heathens with Idolatry, and free our Church from the guilt of it.

I had thought I had said enough in my former Discourse,. 15.
to make it appear, That the Wiser Heathens did not look on their Images as
Gods, but as Symbols and Representations of that Being to which they did give
Divine Worship: For I showed that Celsus said, none but Fools think otherwise
of them: that Porphyrie and the Heathens in Athanasius said they were only
Books for the Ignorant: that in Arnobius thy denied that they ever thought
their Images to be Gods, or to have any Divinity in them, but what only comes
from their consecration to such an Use; and in S. Augustine, that they
worshipped not the Images themselves, but through them they worshipped the
Deity; that Maximus Tyrius at large proves, that Images were but signs of
Divine honor, and helps to remembrance: that Julian says, they do not think
their Images to be Gods, but that through them they may worship the Deity; and
that Eusebius in general testifies of the Heathens, that they did not look on
their Images as Gods. All this put together I thought had signified something
to the proving that the Heathen Idolatry did not lie in taking their Images to
be Gods: and so it seems it did. For T. G. runs quite off from the business,
T.G. p. 100.
saying, That all these quotations do only prove (what I brought them for) that
they did not look on their Images as Gods; but he says, it appears from some
of them that they looked on them nevertheless as Images or Symbols of false
Gods. And did not I say, that I would prove by them, that they looked on them
as Symbols or representations of that Being to which they gave Divine worship?
I never said or thought, that the Heathens looked on all their Images as
representations of the supreme God; For I very well considered that they
worshipped inferior Gods by Images made for them. And therefore after the
producing these Testimonies I state the Question thus, I desire to know whether
these men, who worshipped Images upon those grounds did amiss or no in it? I do
not ask whether they were mistaken as to the objects of their Worship, but on
supposition they were not, whether they were to blame in the manner of serving
God by Images in such a way as they describe? And to this T. G. says not one
wise word; but only talks of scandal and compliance with exterior practice of
Idolatry, and what I have already answered: but he charges me, with
misrepresenting the Testimonies, because, forsooth, Celsus adds, that they were
Statues erected to the Gods; and Divinity and Deity are not in the Testimonies
of Arnobius and S. Augustine; p. 101.
and then bids the Reader learn what credit he is to give hereafter to my
citing of Authors; and at the same time receive a farther Testimony of his
kindness to me in taking the rest upon my word. Very artificially done, I
confess, to pass those by to which no answer was to be returned, and to spend
some Pages in most disingenuous cavils about the two Testimonies he insists
upon. I desire only the Reader to consider, what I was proving, viz. That the
Heathens did not take their Images themselves for Gods, which he yet asserts
several times in that Chapter, after I had produced these Testimonies expressly
to the contrary. Had it not become him either to have answered these
Testimonies, or not to have asserted that, which these Testimonies most fully
and clearly denied? But he is content to take them upon my word; I thank him
for his kindness in it. But does he take them as true or false? If as true,
then the Heathens did not worship their Images as Gods, which he yet says,
they did: if he took them as false when I quoted them as true, the kindness was
very extraordinary, and ought to be acknowledged. If he had produced the
Testimonies of Bellarmin, Vasquez, Suarez, Valentia, and others, to show that
the Papists do not take their Images for Gods, and I should say, I took the
Testimonies upon his word, and yet asserted the direct contrary to them,
without so much as the least answering to what they said, would not any
indifferent Reader account me either impudent or ridiculous?

Yet this is exactly the case of T. G. for he says several times in this
Chapter, that the Heathens did worship their Images as Gods, whereas those
Testimonies say as plainly as words can express it, that they did not; and yet
these Testimonies he takes upon my word, i. e. in common construction he
believes them to be true, and yet the matter contained in them to be false:
which is an admirable piece of T. G.'s art and ingenuity. But to add yet more
to his kindness, at the same time he takes these Testimonies on my word, he
will let the Reader see, what credit he is to give to my citing of Authors. But
why then will he take any upon my word, if I have so little credit with him?
Herein* he shows himself either very weak, if he will take my word, when he
thinks I deserve no credit; or very malicious, if he knows I deserve credit,
and yet goes about to blast it, as much as in him lies.

But wherein is it, I have exposed my reputation so much in the two
Testimonies,. 16.
he has fastened his Talons upon? The first is that of Arnobius, wherein I say,
the Heathens deny, that they ever thought their Images to be Gods, or to have
any Divinity in them, but what only comes from their consecration to such an
Use. That which he charges me with is, that by cogging in the word Divinity in
the singular number, I would represent it to the Reader, as though the wiser
Heathens intended to worship the true Divinity by those Images, whereas all
that they say in Arnobius, is that they did not look on their Images as Gods
per se of themselves, but they worshipped the Gods which by dedication were
made to dwell in them; i.e. says he, by Magical Incantation, by which the
Souls of Wicked men were evocated and as it were tied to dwell in those Images,
T. G. p. 102, 103.
as S. Austin relates l. 8. de Civ. Dei. c. 23. and 26. Hereupon he charges me
very severely, with soul dealing; in putting Divinity in the singular number,
when the Infernal Spirits were meant by it; as if they intended to worship the
true God by these Images, when they declared they worshipped false Gods by
them. A very heavy charge; to which I shall give a distinct answer: 1. To that
of translating Divinity in the singular number, T. G. may if he please take it
upon my word (or if not, let him search the place once more) that I translated
these very words of Arnobius, Nihil Numinis in esse simulachris, that the
Images have no Divinity in them, and if these words be not in that very place,
and but two lines before those quoted by him. Erras and laberis, etc. I will
venture my credit in citing Authors upon T. G.'s ingenuity: but if they be
there, as most certainly they are, what does such a man deserve for so
notorious fair dealing? 2. My design was not to represent by this means that
the Heathens only intended to worship the true God by Images, but that the
worship of Images was unlawful, although men did not take the Images themselves
for Gods: so I said in the very beginning of those quotations, that I would
prove that the Heathens did look on their Images as Symbols or representations
of that Being to which they gave divine worship. Do I say of the True God? Are
not the words so general on purpose to imply that, whatever Being they
worshipped, they looked on the Images as symbols or representations of it? And
after, to prevent all such cavils, I purposely added, I do not ask whether they
were mistaken as to the objects of their worship? But what can a man do to
prevent the cavils of a disingenuous Sophister? 3. As to what he says, that
what they plead in Arnobius is only that their Images were not Gods per se of
themselves, but by virtue of the Spirits dwelling in them, I answer, that T. G.
charges the Heathen Idolaters with worshipping the Images themselves; T.G. p.
106.
and says, that I deal very disingenuously in affirming that the Wiser
Heathens did not worship the Images themselves. Now what could be more
pertinent to my purpose, than to produce those very words of Arnobius, You err
and are mistaken O T. G. in what you affirm, for we do not think the matter of
Brass, Silver and Gold to be Gods or adorable Deities per se of themselves.
Whereby we see T. G's own words as he renders them out of Arnobius do
sufficiently vindicate me and contradict him. He says, they did worship the
Images themselves, and they say they did not. What does he mean else, when he
says in other places, T. G. p. 99.106.
that the Heathens worshipped their Images as Gods; what is this but to take
the Images themselves for Gods? For he never once supposes it unlawful to
worship Images on the account of a Divine Spirit being present in the Images,
supposing that spirit of it self to deserve adoration: as suppose upon
consecration of an Image of the B. Virgin, she should manifest her self in and
by that Image, in speaking, or moving, or working miracles, does T. G. think it
the more unlawful to worship such an Image? no certainly, but that men ought to
show more devotion toward it. Therefore T. G. could not condemn the Heathens
for the worshipping the Images, supposing good Spirits did dwell in them.
Setting aside then, the dispute about the nature of the Spirits, all that he
could imagine the Fathers had to condemn in those that worshipped Images, was,
that they worshipped the Images themselves for Gods; which the Heathens in
Arnobius deny, and which was the thing I produced that Testimony to prove.
Bellarmin, whom my Adversary follows, says, that the Heathens did take the
Images themselves for Gods, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 13.
for which he gives some very substantial Reasons. 1. Because their Priests
told them so. 2. Because almost all the world believed it. This one would think
were enough to justify the belief of it, having the Authority of their
Teachers, and Consent of Nations for it. 3. The motion, speech, and oracles
that came from them. 4. The humane shape it self, which he says, is a very
notable argument to make men think that Images live, because men do;
especially, he says, if it be said so by Wise men. But whatever the reasons
be, he says, he would prove that the Heathens believed ipsa idola esse Deos,
the very Images themselves to be Gods. Now what could be more contradictory to
this assertion, than those words of the Heathens in Arnobius are? So that the
Per se which T. G. charges me with leaving out, adds rather more weight and
Emphasis to the Testimony. 4. After all this, I say, that Arnobius does reject
the worship of Images on such grounds as do hold against the worship of the
true God by an Image. For he brings that as the objection of the Heathens
against the Christians, that supposing they had never so right apprehensions of
the nature of those Beings which the Heathens worshipped for Gods, yet they
were to blame for not worshipping their Images, Nec eorum effigies adoramus,
says Arnobius of the Christians, Arnob. l. 6. p. 190.
which I beseech T. G. to remember are the words I translate, for fear he
should take the next words, Templa illis extruimus nulla; and then cry out,
there is no such thing as Images in the words, that I have cogged in the word
to serve my turn; that this is setting up a flag in a Fireship -- Dolus an
Virtus -- with such kind of laudable plain-dealing. Nay, Arnobius goes yet
farther, For, says he, what greater honor can we attribute to them, than that
we place them there, where the Head and Lord, and King of all is to whom they
owe the same acknowledgements that we do? But do we honor him, delubris aut
Templorum constructionibus, with Images and Temples? So I render it without the
fear of T. G's new charge of disingenuity; for, besides that the delubra were,
says Festus, wooden Images; it is certain that afterward, according to Varro,
the most learned of the Romans, when delubrum was applied to a place, it
signified such a one, Macrob. l. 3. c. 4.
in quo Dei simulachrum dedicatum est: and in the old Glossaries it is rendered
into Greek by (...), therefore to honor God sine delubris, must be to worship
him without Images; and this was the reason why the Christians denied they had
any Temples because the Heathens supposed there could be no proper Temples
without Images; therefore in S. Hierom, Hier. ad Ripar. adv. Vigilant.
Sanctorum Basilicas in Templa convertere, is all one as turn Churches into
Idol Temples: and both in Origin and Minucius, the Heathens join those
accusations together, that the Christians had no Altars, nor Images, nor
Temples; and Vitruvius in the building of a Temple, Vitruv. l. 4. c. 5.
takes the greatest care of placing the Images, that they may stand so, that
the Images may look on those who come up to the Altars. And it appears by the
discourse in Arnobius, that they valued no Temples, where there were no Images;
thence came the suspicion that Hadrian intended to worship Christ, because he
commanded Temples to be built in all Cities without any Images; as Lampridius
says in the Life of Alexander Severus. Lamprid. vit. Alex. Sever.
It is all one to our purpose whether Hadrian had any such intention, or no;
for its being believed that he had from this Reason, because the Temples were
without Images, is a most undeniable evidence that the Christians then did not
worship God or Christ, by any Images in their Churches. After this, Arnobius
argues against the use of Images for this Reason; Arnob. l. 6. p. 195.
if you believe your Gods to be in Heaven, to what purpose do you make Images
of them to worship? cannot you as well pray to the Gods themselves? But it may
be you will say, because you cannot see the Gods themselves, you represent them
as present by those Images? But, says he, he that thinks he must have Gods to
be seen, does not believe any at all. However, say they, we worship them
through these Images. And what, says he, can be more injurious, or reproachful
than to know God to be one thing, and yet to pray to another? to expect help
from the Deity, and yet to fall down before a senseless Image? which is like a
man that should pretend to take advice from men, and to ask it of Asses and
Swine. Is not that, says he, p. 200.
not mere mistake but madness, supplicare tremebundum factitatae abs te rei, to
fall down trembling before a thing made by your selves? Besides this, he argues
from the matter, form, and design of them, how ridiculous it is to worship
Images; and after exposing the other pretenses of the Heathen Idolaters, in the
last place he considers this, that the ancients understood well enough, p. 208.
Nihil habere Numinis signa; that there was no Divinity in Images, (T. G. sees
I am for the singular number still, and I think Numen is so too) but that
Images were set up to keep the rude people in awe; which, he says, they were
so far from, that they only made their Gods contemptible, and thereby
encouraged them more in their Wickedness. I desire now the Reader to reflect,
whether these arguments are peculiar to the worship of false Gods; and whether
they do not with as much force hold against the worship of the true God by
Images? And if it be possible to suppose that a man, that has not the
stupidity of an Image, should object those things against their worship, which
would be returned upon his own, and never provide in the least for any defense
of it? So that after all the loud clamours, and insolent charges of T. G. we
find that Arnobius himself does fully prove, that the Divinity cannot be
worshipped by Images; and that what the Heathens plead for themselves in him,
does show, that they believed there was no Divinity in Images; but what only
comes from their consecration to such an Use.

The next Testimony he charges me with foul-dealing in, is that of S. Austin,.
17.
wherein I say the Wiser Heathens deny, Aug. in Ps. 113.
that they worshipped the Images themselves, but they add, that through them
they worship the Deity. After this T. G. sets down those words of S. Austin,
Videntur sibi purgatiores esse Religionis, etc. And because in the following
expressions, mention is made of the Corporeal Creatures, or the Spirits that
rule over them as worshipped by their Images, therefore he charges me with
great disingenuity in saying, that the Heathens in S. Austin affirmed that
through their Images they did worship the Deity: and yet as it falls out, these
are the very words I translated in S. Austin, Non hoc visibile colo, sed Numen
quod illic invisibiliter habitat; and I now appeal to men of any common
ingenuity, what usage I have met with from this Adversary, who passes by the
very words I translated, as near to the signification as possible; and produces
other passages; and then Hectors, and Triumphs, and cries out of my
disingenuity; when scarce ever any man discovered greater than in so doing, and
I fear against his own conscience. The true state of the case in S. Austin
about the worship of Images is this, 1. He exposes the worship of Images in
general as a silly and ridiculous thing; being of things much inferior to the
meanest Brutes; and if men are ashamed to worship Beasts, that hear and see,
and live and move, they ought to be much more ashamed to worship a dumb,
stupid, senseless Image; and they might with greater reason worship the Mice and
Serpents which are not afraid of their Images, but shelter themselves within
them. Now it is plain this discourse of S. Austin does reach to all sorts of
Images for whomsoever they are intended. For an Image made for the true God
has no more sense, or life, or motion in it, than one of T. G's Idols, or an
Image made for a Chimera. But because the Christian Church knew nothing at that
time of the worship of Images, therefore he directs his discourse against the
Heathens, to consider the pleas and excuses they made for it. 2. He reckons up
their several pleas for their Images; 1. Some said that there was a secret
Deity which lay hid in the Image, and which they worshipped through it. 2.
Others, that thought themselves of a more refined Religion, said, they neither
worshipped Images, nor Demons, but only beheld in the corporeal Image, the
Symbol of that which they ought to worship. Which is the place cited by T. G.
Now I appeal to the Reader, whether this very place does not prove what I
intended, viz. that the Heathens did look on their Images as Symbols or
representations of that Being to which they gave divine worship. Whereby I see
T. G. has done me a kindness indeed, which I thank him for, i.e. he has
proved that which I did intend, and confuted that which I did not.

But there remains yet another charge of disingenuity to be answered,. 18.
which concerns the quotation of Trigantius; the occasion whereof was this, I
had said, if S. Paul had not thought men to blame in the worship of God by an
Image, he would never have condemned them for it; as he does Romans 1. But he
ought to have done as the Jesuits in China did, who never condemned the people
for worshipping Images, Trigaut. l. 5. c. 16. p. 588.
but for worshipping false Gods by them; and persuaded them not to lay them
aside, but to convert them to the honor of the true God, and so melted down
the former Images and made new ones of them. Can we imagine S. Paul meant the
same thing, when he blames men not for believing them to be Gods, but that God
could be worshipped by the Work of men's hands; and for changing thereby the
glory due to God in regard of his infinite and incorruptible Being into mean
and unworthy Images, thinking thereby to give honor to him. These are my
words. Now observe T. G's ingenuity; T.G. p. 110, 111, 112, 113.
instead of answering the argument he falls to the exercise of his best Talent,
cavilling: the force of the argument lay in this, S. Paul condemns the very
manner of worshipping God by Images; the Jesuits in China do not that, but bid
them lay aside their old Images, and worship new ones: what is the reason, that
the Jesuits vary from S. Paul's method, but only because they differ in
judgment, i. e. S. Paul thought the worship of Images in general unlawful, the
Jesuits do not, but only the Images of false Gods. This was the thing designed
by me, to which he gives no manner of answer; but only for several pages he
tells a sad story how hard it was for him to come by the Book of Trigautius;
and when he had it, he thought he had gotten a mighty advantage against me;
because, forsooth, I render simulachra Images; for the whole charge comes to
this at last; for whereas Trigautius distinguished the Heathen simulachra from
the Images of Christ because I did not in the account of the thing; (for I
designed no verbal translation, as T. G. knew well enough by the character)
therefore this is charged to be the effect of some very bad design; and an
instance of my want of fidelity, sincerity, honesty, ingenuity, and what not? I
am sorry Trigautius was so hard to come by, for it is possible, if he had not
been put to so much trouble in procuring him, I might have escaped better. But
is it in good earnest, such a horrible fault to translate simulachra Images? I
see what a good thing it is to have a good Catholic Dictionary, for a hundred
to one, but others would have rendered it, as I have done. I had thought Tully's
using the words Statuae, Imagines, Signa and simulachra promiscuously might
have been sufficient ground for my translating it by Images: Cicer. pro Archia
c. 12.

Pro domo sua.

Isid. Origin. l. 8. c. 11.


But it seems the Ecclesiastical use of the word is otherwise. I had thought
Isidore a good Judge of the Ecclesiastical use of a word; and he uses it
promiscuously with Imagines and effigies; but I confess Ecclesiastical uses
have been much changed since Isidores time. And it seems simulachra is only
applied to Heathen Images, by no means to those among Christians. But why so?
do they not vultum simulare, as Horace expresses it; Horat. ep. l. 2. ep. 1.
bear a resemblance to what they represent? Do they not pariles line as
principali ab ore deducere, which is Arnobius his description of the proper
notion of simulachrum? Arnob. l. 6.
But for all this, their Images are not simulachra, and shall not be
simulachra. It seems when Images were baptized Christian, they lost their
former name, and have gotten a new one: and very much good may it do them, and
all those that worship them, if the change of name would excuse their guilt.
Yet Agobardus was of another opinion when he says, Agobard. de Imag. sect. 19.
that if those who forsook the worship of Devils had been bidden to worship the
Images of Saints, puto quod videretur eis non tam Idola reliquisse, quam
simulachra mutasse: I think, says he, that it would have seemed to them, that
they had not left their Idols, but only changed their Images. Where we see
Agobardus is my Author for making simulachra common to the Images of Heathens
and Christians. And S. Augustine calls the Image of the true God simulachrum.
Aug. de Fide and Symbolo c. 7.
But to set aside Authorities, I hope the Images used in China before the
Gentiles conversion, and those after did agree in something common to them
both: although they were before the Images of false Gods, and after of Christ
or the B. Virgin, yet they were all Images still. Might I not be allowed to
say, that the Jesuits did not persuade the Converts to lay aside the use of
Images; but to convert them to the honor of the true God; and so melted down
the former Images and made new ones of them? No, by no means, For them and
them, coming after one another, and the first being the Images of false Gods,
it was scarce possible for an ordinary Protestant Reader not to avoid being
mistaken. In what? in thinking they did not worship Images after, as well as
before their conversion? no, but in supposing, that they made use of the same
Images afterward, which they did before? and what if they did? what harm was
there in it on T. G's principles, supposing the intention be directed aright?
Nay, T. G. after all his clamor yields the thing, for says he, St. Gregory
turned the Pagan Festivals into Christian Assemblies, Greg. l. 9. ep. 72.
and Heathen Temples to Christian Churches without ever pulling them down to
build them up again; and supposing the worship of Images lawful, why not those
to be used as well as Temples? And yet, I no where say, that they made use of
the very same, but they melted them down and made new ones of them; which is
plainly to say, that though they did not allow those particular Images, yet
they did not condemn the Use of Images for divine worship; but of the materials
of the former Images they made new ones to be used by them as Christians, after
that manner of worship which the Jesuits delivered to them; which was all that
was necessary to my purpose. And now I leave the Reader to Judge whether in all
this charge about these citations, T. G. has not showed himself to be a man of
admirable ingenuity; and whether he be not well accomplished in the most
laudable virtue of a Writer of Controversies, viz. sincerity, and fair dealing?

CHAP. II. The State of the Controversy about Images in the Christian Church.
HAving thus far endeavored to State the Dispute about Image Worship,. 1.
as it was managed between Christians and Heathens, I now come to the Rise and
Progress of this Controversy in the Christian Church. Wherein I shall proceed
according to these following Periods, 1. When Images were not used or allowed
in the Christian Church. 2. When they were used, but no worship allowed to be
given to them. 3. When inferior worship was given to them, and that worship
publicly defended. 4. When the doctrine and practice of Image Worship was
settled upon the principles allowed and defended in the Roman Church; and from
thence to show, wherein lie the main points of difference between us and the
Church of Rome, as to this Controversy about the Worship of Images.

1. As to the First Period I had said in my former Discourse, That the
Primitive Christians were declared enemies to all worship of God by Images, but
I need the less to go about to prove it now, since it is at last confessed by
one of the most learned Jesuits they ever had, that for the four first
Centuries and farther, there was little or no use of Images in the Temples,
Petav. Dogmat. Theolog. Tom. 5. l. 15. c. 1^. sec^. 3. c. ^4. sect. 8.
or Oratories of Christians: but we need not their favor in so plain a Cause
as this; as shall be evidently proved if occasion be farther given. This T. G.
had no mind to; T.G. p. 171.
and therefore says, Not to Dispute the matter of fact, of which he confesses
there was some little use (much as if I should say, that T. G. has shown
little or no ingenuity in his Book, and he to his great comfort should infer
there was some little ingenuity in it) but Petavius his words, are supprimi
omittique satius visum est, it was thought better to suppress them and let them
alone; was it all one in T. G's sense to use them, and to omit the use of them?
And for the little reason, he says, he had to doubt my sincerity in relating
Petavius his words, from what I did with Trigautius; in truth there was as
little as might be; but I have great reason to believe from his usage of me
about other citations, that if he could have found any words before or after,
that he could have interpreted to another sense, he would have made little or
no conscience of saying, those were the words I translated thus and thus. But
instead of debating the matter of fact as to the Primitive Church, he says, he
will give me the answer of Mr. Thorndike, that at that time there might be
jealousy of Offense in having Images in Churches, before Idolatry was quite
rooted out, of which afterward there might be no appearance; and therefore
they were afterward admitted all over, for it is manifest, the Church is tied
no farther, than there can appear danger of Idolatry. This, he calls Mr.
Thorndikes answer, but it is truly the answer of Petavius, from whose words it
seems to be translated; dum periculum erat, says Petavius, ne offensionis
aliquid traheret externa quorundam rituum species, cum iis que ab Ethnicis
celebrabantur, similitudine ipsa congruens, etc. Therefore I shall consider it
as the answer of Petavius, and here examine, whether this were the ground on
which the Primitive Church did forbear the use and worship of Images? I shall
prove that it was not from these two Arguments. 1. Because the Reasons given by
them against the worship of Images will equally hold against the worship of
Images among Christians. 2. Because the notion of Idolatry, which they charged
the Heathens with, may be common to Christians with them.

1. This supposes the Primitive Christians to look on the worship of Images as
in it self indifferent, and to be made good or evil according to the nature of
the object represented by them: which is a supposition as remote from the sense
of the Primitive Church as any thing we can easily imagine. For then all the
arguments used by them against the worship of Images must have been deduced
only from the objects represented, or the nature of the worship given to them;
whereas they frequently argue from the unsuitableness of Images as a Means of
worship, and the prohibition of the Divine Law. Would any man of common sense
that had thought the worship of Images in it self indifferent, have said as
Origin does; Orig. c. Cells. l. 7. p. 375.
that the Christians as well as the Jews abstain from the worship of Images for
the sake of the Law of God, which requires rather that we should dye than
defile our selves with such impieties? Yes, it may be said, this is
acknowledged that the Law of God did forbid the worship of the Heathen Images;
but they who make this answer never looked into Origin, or have forgotten what
they read there; for Origin does not there give an account why the Christians
did not comply with the Heathen Idolatry; but why the Christians had no Images
in their own worship. For Celsus charges this upon the Christians, that they
thought it such a mighty matter, that they had no Images, whereas herein, says
he, they were but like the barbarous Scythians, Numidians, and Seres, and other
Nations that had neither Religion, nor civility. To this Origin answers, that
we are not only to look at the bare action, but at the reason and ground of it,
for those that agree in the same thing, may yet have very different principles;
and they that do it on a good principle do well, and not otherwise; as for
instance, the Stoics forbear adultery, and so may the Epicureans; but the
former do it, because it is a thing repugnant to Nature, and civil Society; the
latter, because allowing themselves this single pleasure may debar them of many
more: so, says he, in this matter those barbarous Nations forbear Images on
other accounts than Jews and Christians do, who dare not make use of this way
of worshipping God. Observe, that he does not say this of the way of
worshipping false Gods, or Images for Gods, but of worshippin (...) the Deity.
And he gives three principal reasons wherein they differed from those Nations.
1. Because this way of worship did disparage the Deity; ((...) again) by
drawing it down to matter so fashioned. 2. Because the evil spirits were apt to
harbor in those Images, and to take pleasure in the sacrifices there offered:
which reason as far as it respects the blood of Sacrifices does relate to the
Heathen Images, standing over the Altars at which the Sacrifices were offered.
But then Celsus might say, what is all this to the purpose? my question is, why
you have no Images in your own way of worship; therefore he adds his third
reason, which made it utterly unlawful for Christians as well as Jews to
worship them, which is the Law of God mentioned before: now I say, if Origin
answered pertinently, he must give this as the Reason why Christians used no
Images in their own way of worship; and consequently was so far from thinking
the worship of Images indifferent, that he thought Christians ought rather to
suffer Martyrdom than to worship them. But to put this beyond possibility of
contradiction; Origin mentions a saying of Heraclitus objected by Celsus, that
it is a foolish thing to pray to Images, unless a man know the Gods and Heroes
worshipped by them; which saying Celsus approves, and says, the Christians
were Fools, because they utterly contemned Images, ( in totum, the Latin
interpreter renders it) To which Origin thus answers, we acknowledge that God
may be known, and his only Son, and those whom he has honored with the Title
of Gods, who partake of his Divinity, and are different from the Heathen
Deities which the Scripture calls Devils (i.e. causally if not essentially, as
Cajetan distinguishes) but, says he, it is impossible for him that knows God
to worship Images. Mark that, he does not say, it is impossible for him that
knows the Idols of the Heathens to worship them; or the evil spirits that lurk
in their Images: but for him, that knows the true God, and his Son Christ
Jesus, and the holy Angels to do it. Is it possible after this, to believe that
Origin supposed the worship of Images to be indifferent in it self, and that
God and Christ and Angels might be lawfully worshipped by them? Was all this
only periculum offensionis, jealousy of offense, before the Heathen Idolatry
was rooted out? Which supposition makes the primitive Christians in plain terms
jugglers and impostors, to pretend that to be utterly unlawful even for
themselves to do; and to mean no more by it, but this; yes, it is unlawful to
do it, while there is any danger of Heathenism, but when once that is
overthrown, then we may worship Images as well as the best of them. For my
part, I believe the primitive Christians to have been men of so much honesty
and integrity, that they would never have talked at this rate against the
worship of Images, (as not only Origin, but the rest of them, the best, and
wisest among them did, as I have showed in the foregoing Chapter) if they had
this secret reserve in their minds, that when Heathenism was sunk past
recovery, then they might do the same things, which they utterly condemned now.
Which would be just like some that we have heard of, who while there was any
likelihood of the Royal Authority of this Nation recovering itself, then they
cried out upon Kingly Government as illegal, Tyrannical and Antichristian; but
when the King was murdered, and the power came into their own hands, then it
was lawful for the Saints to exercise that power, which was not fit to be
enjoyed by the Wicked of the World: So these men make the most excellent
Christians to be like a pack of Hypocrites. The Heathens every where asked
them, as may be seen in Lactantius, Arnobius, Minucius and others, as well as
Origin; what is the matter with you Christians, that you have no Images in your
Churches? what if you dare not join with us in our worship, why do not you make
use of them in your own? Is it only humor, singularity, and affectation of
Novelty in You? If it be, you show what manner of men you are. No truly; say
they, gravely and seriously, we do it not, because we dare not do it; for we
are afraid of displeasing and dishonouring God by it, and we will on that
account rather choose to dye than do it. Upon such an answer, the Heathens
might think them honest and simple men, that did not know what to do with their
lives, who were so willing to part with them on such easy terms. But if they
had heard, the bottom of all this was, only a cunning and sly trick to
undermine Paganism, and that they meant no such thing, as though it were
unlawful in it self, but only unlawful till they had gotten the better of them;
what would they have thought of such men? no otherwise, than that they were a
company of base Hypocrites, that pretended one thing and meant another; and
that the Wicked of the World might not worship Images, but the Saints might,
when they had the Power in their hands, although before they declaimed against
it, as the most vile, mean, and unworthy way of worship, that ever came into
the heads of men; that there could be no Religion, where it obtained; that it
was worse than the worship of Beasts; that it was more reasonable to worship
the artificers themselves than the Images made by them; that rats and mice had
less folly than mankind, for they had no fears of what men fell down before,
with trembling and great shows of devotion. These, and many such things as
these, the Fathers speak freely, openly, frequently, on all occasions, in all
places against the worship of Images; and after all this, was no more meant by
it but only this, Thou O Heathen must not worship Images, but I may? And why
not as well (might the Heathen reply) Thou must not commit adultery, but I may?
Does the nature of the commands you boast so much of alter with men's persons?
Is that indeed lawful for you that is not for us? Where does the Law of Moses
say, Thou shall not worship the Images that we worship, but thou may worship
the Images that Christians worship? And if the Law makes no difference, either
leave off your foolish babbling against our Images, or condemn your own. For to
our understanding, yours are as much against the Law as ours are.

And so the primitive Christians thought, who very honestly and sincerely
declared as much in their words and actions;. 2.
witness not only the opinions of all the Writers in behalf of Christianity,
(not one excepted) that ever had occasion to mention this matter; but the
Decree of as good a Council as was to be had at that time; I mean the
Eliberitan, in the famous Canon to that purpose, Can. 36. It pleases us to
have no pictures in Churches, lest that which is worshipped be painted upon
walls. It is a pleasant thing to see what work our Adversaries make with this
innocent Canon; sometimes, it is a mere forgery of heretics (I wonder such men
do not say the same of the second Commandment) sometimes, the Bishops that met
there were not so wise as they should have been; (no nor Moses and the
Prophets, nor Christ and the primitive Christians in this matter) sometimes,
that they spoke only against pictures upon walls (because the Saltpeter of the
walls would be apt to deface them; or because in case of persecution, they
could not do as Rachel did, carry their Teraphim along with them); but that
which Petavius sticks to, Petav. de Incarn. l. 15. c. 14. sect. 8.
is, that the Memory of Heathen Idolatry was yet fresh, and therefore it was
not thought expedient to have Images in the Oratories or Temples of Christians.
So that, after all the tricks and shifts of our Adversaries, the thing it self
is yielded to us, viz. that this Canon is against such Images, as are now used
and worshipped in the Roman Church. But, says he, the reason does not hold
still, for then the memory of Heathen Idolatry was not out of men's minds. It is
a wonderful thing to me, that these Spanish Bishops should be able to tell
their own reason no better than so. You say, you will have no Images in
Churches: why so I beseech you? Lest that, say they, which is worshipped be
painted upon walls: worshipped by whom? do you mean by Heathens? no, we speak
of the Churches of Christians. But why may not that which is worshipped be
painted? We think that reason enough to any man, that considers the Being
worshipped, and that which is painted, and the mighty disparagement to an
infinite invisible Being to be drawn in lines and colors with a design to
honor him thereby. This to me seems a reason that holds equally at all times.
For was the Being worshipped more unfit to be drawn so soon after Heathen
Idolatry, than he would be afterward? methinks it had been much better done
then, while the skilful Artificers were living. But those were Heathen
Idolaters; suppose they were, you must make use of them, or none, if that which
Tertullian and others say, hold true, that it is forbidden to Christians to
make Images; which surely they would never have said, if they had thought the
time would come, when the Heathen Idolatry should be forgotten, and then the
Christians might worship Images. Well; but all this is only against Pictures
upon walls, but for all that, says Bellarmin, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 9.
they might have Images in Frames, or upon Veils. It seems then that which is
adored, might be painted well enough, provided it be not upon a wall; but
methinks, it is more repugnant to an infinite Being to be confined within a
Frame, than to be drawn upon a wall: and the Decree is, to have no pictures in
Churches; but if they were in Frames, or upon Veils, would they not be in
Churches still? What made Epiphanius then so angry at seeing an Image upon a
Veil at Anablatha? S. Epiph. ep. ad Ioh. Hierosolym.
Was not Heathen Idolatry forgotten enough yet? It seems not, for it was coming
in again under other pretenses. But that good man's spirit was stirred within
him at the apprehension of it, and could not be quiet, till he had rent asunder
the Veil, and written to the Bishop of Jerusalem to prevent the like enormity.
One would have thought by this time the jealousy of Offense might have been
worn out, the Heathen Idolatry being suppressed; but yet it seems Epiphanius
did not understand his Christian Liberty in this matter. Nay so far from it,
that he plainly and positively affirms, that such an Image though upon a Veil
and not the Walls, was contra autoritatem Scripturarum, contra Religionem
nostram, against the Law of God, and the Christian Religion. But it may be,
this was some Heathen Idol, or Image of a False God; no, so far from it, that
Epiphanius could not tell whether it was an Image of Christ, or of some Saint;
but this he could tell, that he was sure it was against the Authority of the
Scriptures. And was Epiphanius so great a Dunce to imagine a thing indifferent
in it self, and applied to a due object of worship, should be directly opposite
to the Law of God? Men may talk of the Fathers, and magnify the Fathers, and
seem to make the Authority of the Fathers next to infallible; and yet there are
none who expose them more to contempt, than they who give such answers as
these, so directly against the plainest sense and meaning of their words. I
confess, those speak more consonantly to their principles, who reject the
Authority of this Epistle, at least of this part of it; but there is not the
least color or pretense for it, from any M S. and Petavius ingenuously
confesses, that he sees no ground to believe this part added to the former
epistle. God be thanked, there is some little ingenuity yet left in the World:
and which is the greater wonder, among the Jesuits too; for not only Petavius,
but Sirmondus owns the Epistle of Epiphanius to be genuine, Sirmond. in Council.
Narbon. p. 616.
quoting it to prove the Antiquity of Veils at the entrance of the Church. If
it be good for that purpose, it is I am sure as good for ours; and so it was
thought to be, by those who were no Iconoclasts, I mean the Author of the
Caroline Books, Carol. M. de Imag. l. 4. c. 25. Synod. Paris. c. 6.
and the Gallican Bishops who made use of this Testimony, although themselves
were against rending of painted Veils. But commend me to the plain honesty of
John Damascen, Damasc. tract. 1.
who says, one Swallow makes no Summer; and of Alphonsus a Castro, Alphons. a
a Castro v. Imago. p. 572.
who tells us, that Epiphanius was an Iconoclast, (i. e. a terrible heretic
with a hard name) materially so but not formally, because the Church had not
determined the contrary. It seems it was no matter, what the Law, or Christian
Religion had determined; for those were the things Epiphanius took for his
grounds. But he, good man, was a little too hot in this matter, and did not
consider, that when the Pagan Idolatry was sufficiently out of men's minds, then
it would be very lawful to have Christ or Saints not only drawn upon Veils, or
Screens, but to have just such Statues as the Pagans had; and to give them the
very same worship which the Prototypes deserve; provided, that the people have
forgotten Mercury, Apollo, and Hercules; and put S. Francis, or S. Ignatius, or
S. Christopher, or S. Thomas Beckett instead of them. O the Divine power of
names! for that which would have been Idolatry, downright Paganish Idolatry
under the former names, becomes good Catholic Worship under the latter. But I
do not see that any of the Primitive Christians did ever think, that the change
of names, or persons would have wrought such wonders; but that the worship of
Images would have continued the same thing, whatever names had been given to
them. And what pleasant stories soever Epiphanius the Deacon tells in the
second Council of Nice, concerning the disciples of the elder Epiphanius, VII.
Synod. Act. 6.
placing his Image in a Church dedicated to him in Cyprus, yet Petavius
confesses, that in his time there were no Images in the Churches of Cyprus,
which he takes to be the reason of his mighty zeal against them. Any thing
rather than that which himself gives, viz. the Authority of Scriptures, and the
Christian Religion.

In the Theodosian Code we find a Law of Theodosius M. against the several
parts of the Heathen Idolatry, Cod. Theodos. 16. tit. 10. n. 12.
the sacrifices, libations, incense, lights, etc. and after the rest, it comes
particularly to their worship of Images in these words, Si quis vero mortali
opere facta, and avum passura simulachra imposito ture venerabitur, (ac
ridioulo exemplo metuens subito quae pro se simulaverit) vel redimita vitis
arbore, vel erecta effossis ara cespitibus vanas imagines, humiliore licet
muneris praemio, tamen plena Religionis injuria honorare temptaverit, is utpote
violatae Religionis reus ea domo seu possessione multabitur in qua eum
Gentilitia constiterit Superstitione famulatum. The meaning whereof is, that it
was the forfeiture of house and land for any man to offer incense to Images
made by men, and that were of a perishing nature; or that hung their garlands
on Trees, or raised Altars of Turf before their Images; for although the cost
were less, yet the violation of Religion was the same. This Constitution I
grant does respect Heathen Images, but I say it proceeds upon such grounds
which are common to all Images, unless they be such as drop from heaven; such
as the Image of Edessa, and the rest mentioned by Gretser, or that of Diana of
Ephesus, or some few others that were pretended to have a divine Original; for
such as these the Constitution does not reach, being Divine and immortal, but
for all others I do not see how they can escape the Reason of this Law. And it
is altogether as ridiculous for Christians to worship the things they have
formed, as it was for the Heathens to do it: (where T. G. may learn the
signification and Etymology of simulachrum, a simulando; for simulare is the
same with effigiare, as the Scholiast on that Constitution tells him.) In the
same Constitution, they are called sensu carentia simulachra, which are words
put in on purpose to show how stupid and senseless the worship of them is; and
are not all Images among Christians so? Have they not eyes and see not, and
ears and hear not, as well as the Heathen Images? Or do they worship only
living and sensible Images? moving I grant sometimes they do; such as
Themistius upon Aristotle tells us that Daedaelus made, Themist. in Aristot. de
an. p. 68. col. 2.
that moved by the help of quicksilver; or springs, such as the Holy Rood of
Boxtel in Kent, Lambards peramb. of Kent in Boxtel. Herberts Hen. 8. p. 432.
whose secret engines for moving the eyes and lips were laid open, and an
Anatomy Lecture read upon them at Paul's Cross in Henry the Eighths time by
Bishop Fisher.

2. That Notion of Idolatry which the Heathens were charged with by the
primitive Christians,. 3.
may be common to Christians with them. Therefore if the fear of Idolatry kept
them from the worship of Images, and the same fear may justly continue where
ever Images are worshipped, then the Christians rejecting of Images, was not
upon any reason peculiar to that Age of the Church. If men by being Christians
were incapable of being Idolaters without renouncing Christianity, there were
some pretense for laying aside the fears and jealousies of Idolatry, when the
Christian Religion had prevailed in the world. But S. Paul supposes that
Christians continuing so might be Idolaters, Neither be ye Idolaters as were
some of them. 1 Cor. 10.7.
Yet these were the Persons who were baptized unto Moses in the cloud and the
Sea; v. 2, 3, 4.
and did all eat the same spiritual meat, and drink the same spiritual drink
(for they drank of that rock that followed them, and that Rock was Christ.)
Which water they drank of, both before and after their Idolatry (and since the
water followed them,) at the very time of committing it; so that those persons
are said to be partakers of Christ, who were charged with Idolatry, and
therefore S. Paul is far from supposing that Idolatry and the profession of
Christianity are inconsistent with each other. But it is said that there can be
no Idolatry to the Images of Christ, because the true object of worship is
honored by them; nor to the Images of Saints, so long as men take them for
Saints, that is, Gods Creatures; and give only an inferior worship to them. If
this be true, there appears to be little danger of Idolatry among those who do
not renounce Christianity. But against this plea I put in these exceptions.

1. That upon the same grounds all the Wiser Heathens must be cleared from
Idolatry. For, 1. They owned the true Object of Divine worship, viz. One
Supreme God, as I have at large proved in the former Discourses: both, those
that went on the Platonic hypothesis of one Supreme Deity, and others
inferior; and those who believed one God to be worshipped under different
representations. The former was the principle which Julian went upon, and the
latter Platonists, who opposed Christianity to the utmost: the other was the
principle of the Stoics and others; and particularly owned by Maximus
Madaurensis, who says, S. Aug. Epist. 43.
that the Heathens did worship one God under several names, thereby to express
his several powers diffused through the World. Now upon this supposition, that
where there is a true object of worship represented, there can be no Idolatry
in worshipping the representation, I challenge any man to show how the Heathens
that went on these principles were chargeable with Idolatry. For is Christ any
otherwise a right object of worship, than as he is believed to be the True God?
if then there can be no Idolatry toward an Image of Christ, neither can there
be toward any representation of the True God.

2. The Heathens did assert the difference between God and his Creatures, as I
have already proved, that they looked on their inferior Deities, as dependent
on the supreme Being Created and Governed by Him: so that if the
acknowledgement of Saints to be Gods Creatures, does hinder men from committing
Idolatry, it must do the same for all those who owned a subordination of
Deities; which takes in the far greatest part of the Heathen World.

3. They allowed the different degrees of worship suitable to the excellencies
of the objects; as Sovereign worship to the supreme God, inferior worship to
the Gods under Him, and so proportionably till they came to their Heroes, or
Deified persons to whom they allowed the lowest kind and degree of worship. For
it is a palpable mistake in any who think they did give the same degrees of
honor and worship to all. Plutarch says, Plut. de Iside and Osiride p. 361.
That Plato did put a difference between the worship of Celestial Gods and
Demons; and so did Xenocrates between the worship of Gods and good Demons,
and those sour and morose, and vindictive Spirits which lived in the Air.
Plato, he tells us, made it the office of good Demons to carry men's Prayers to
the Gods, and to bring from them Oracles, and other Divine Gifts: and so their
worship must be suitable to their employment, which is inferior to that of the
Celestial Deities, whose station and employment was more immediately under the
supreme God. Apuleius thus reckons up the order of Deities according to Plato.
1. The supreme God, the Author and Ruler of all. Apul. de Deo Socrat.
2. The Celestial Deities, spiritual, immortal, good, and infinitely happy; to
whom the Government of things is committed next under God; but because they
supposed no immediate communication between these Celestial Gods and men,
therefore they ranked between them and men, 3. Demons, as Intercessors between
the Gods and men, who were subservient to the Celestial Gods. 4. The lowest
sort of Demons, he says, are souls discharged of the body; which if they take
care of their posterity, are called Lares, or domestic Gods (Lar, in the old
Hetruscan Language, signifies a Prince, thence the Lares are the Gods of
Families) and those who were good had the Title of Gods for honors sake
conferred upon them, as he speaks. But he confesses, That there was a peculiar
honor belonging to the supreme God, Cum sit summi Deorum hic honor proprius;
and him they did solemnly invocate, as not only appears by frequent passages in
Plato, but by that of Boethius; Boeth. de Cons. Philos. l. 3. p. 139.
For, as Plato says, we ought to invocate the divine assistance in the least
affairs; therefore in so great a matter, invocandum rerum omnium Patrem, we
ought to call upon God the Father of all things. Next after him they prayed to
the Celestial Deities; which prayers, the inferior order of Spirits was to
carry up, and to bring down answers. So that the addresses were made to the
Celestial Deities, which the Aereal Demons carried to them, says Apuleius,
to keep a due distance between Gods and men. And although the other Platonists
differ from Apuleius in the manner of reckoning up the several orders of
inferior Deities, as may be seen in Alcinous, Proclus, Iamblichus, and others;
yet they all agree in making one Supreme God, the First Author and Cause of all
things, and therefore making an infinite distance between him and his
Creatures; and that there are several degrees of the Beings that are to be
worshipped under him; some as the Bestowers of Blessings but subordinate to the
supreme, and others only as Intercessors between the Gods and Men. Diogenes
Laertius says of Pythagoras, Diog. Laer. vit. Pytha.
That he charged his Disciples, not to give equal degrees of honor to the Gods
and Heroes. Herodotus says of the Greeks, Herod. in Euterpe.
That they worshipped Hercules two ways, one as an immortal Deity, and so they
sacrificed to him; and another as a Hero, and so they celebrated his memory.
Isocrates distinguishes between the Honors of Heroes and Gods, when he speaks
of Menelaus and Helena: Isocr. encom. Helen.
but the distinction is no where more fully expressed than in the Greek
inscription upon the Statue of Regilla, wife to Herodes Atticus, as Salmasius
thinks, Salmas. Not. ed. Inscript. p. 81.
which was set up in his Temple at Triopium, and taken from the Statue it self
by Sirmondus; where it is said, That she had neither the honor of a Mortal,
nor yet that which was proper to the Gods. (...). If any ask wherein the
difference of these honors lay; Lilius Gyraldus says, Lil. Gyrald. synt.
Deorum 17. p. 501.
That the Gods were worshipped to the East, the Heroes to the West. Vossius
thinks, Vossius de Idol. l. 1. c. 12.
That among the Greeks and Romans, it lay in having their Images carried in the
public Processions, but without Sacrifices; and their names put into the
Saliar Hymns at Rome; and inserted into the Peplus of Minerva at Athens.
Hesychius makes the honor of a Hero to lie in a Temple, Hesych. v. (...).
a Statue, and a Fountain; but Plutarch in the Life of Alexander says, That he
sent to the Oracle of Ammon to know whether Hephaestion should be made a God or
no; the Oracle answered, That they should honor him and sacrifice to him as to
a Hero; whence we observe that the material act of sacrifice, as T. G. speaks,
might be common to Gods and Heroes, but the inward intention of the mind made
the great difference between their worship, besides that which is expressed in
the Inscription of Regilla, viz. that the honor of one sort was looked on as a
voluntary Act, but the other was a necessary duty; they might sacrifice and
pray to the Heroes (who were the Beati amongst them) but no man was absolutely
bound to do it; but those who were devout and Religious would: as Salmasius
there explains the words of the Inscription. Salmas. not. p. 118.
And it is observed by the Critics, that among the Greeks (...) and (...) are
words of a different importance, i. e. in the Language of the Court of Rome, to
Beatify, and to Canonize. For I perceive the Heathen Heroes did stand upon
their preferment as well as the Roman Saints, and those who had been Beatified
a competent time, came to be Canonized at last: So Plutarch says, Plut. de
Isule and Osinide p. 361.

Plut. de praecl. fact. Mulier. p. 255.


of Isis and Osiris, Hercules and Bacchus, that for their Virtues, of good
Demons they were promoted to Deities; and of Lampsaca, That she had at first
only Heroical honor given her, and afterward came to Divine. It seems by the
Inscription of Herodes, and by the Testament of Epicteta extant in Greek in the
Collection of Inscriptions, Inscript. Antiq. p. 216.
that it was in the power of particular Families to keep Festival days in
honor of some of their own Family, and to give Heroical honors to them. In
that noble Inscription at Venice, we find three days appointed every year to
be kept, and a Confraternity established for that purpose with the Laws of it;
the first day to be observed in Honor of the Muses, and Sacrifices to be
offered to them as Deities; the second and third in honor of the Heroes of the
Family; between which honor, and that of Deities, they showed the difference
by the distance of time between them and the preference given to the other. But
wherein soever the difference lay, that there was a distinction acknowledged
among them appears, by this passage of Valerius in his excellent Oration extant
in Dionysius Halicarnass. Dionys. Halic. Antiq. Romans l. 11. p. 696.
I call, says he, the Gods to witness, whose Temples, and Altars, our Family
has worshipped with common Sacrifices; and next after them, I call the Genii
of our Ancestors, to whom we give (...) the second Honors next to the Gods (as
Celsus calls those (...) the due honors that belong to the lower Demons;
Orig. l. 8. c. Cells. p. 414.
which he contends ought to be given to them) From which we take notice, that
the Heathens did not confound all degrees of divine worship, giving to the
lowest object the same which they supposed to be due to the Celestial Deities,
or the supreme God: So that if the distinction of divine worship will excuse
from Idolatry, the Heathens were not to blame for it.

2. If this pretense does excuse from Idolatry, the Carpocratian Heretics were
unjustly charged by Irenaeus, Epiphanius, and S. Augustine; Iren. l. 1. c. 24.

Epiph. haer. 27.

Aug. de haeres. c. 7.


for they are said, To worship the Images of Christ together with the
Philosophers, Pythagoras, Plato, and Aristotle. Wherein lay the fault of these
Heretics? was it only in joining the Philosophers together with Christ? If
that had been all, it had been easy to have said, That they worshipped the
Philosophers together with Christ; but they take particular notice of it as a
thing unusual and blameworthy, that they worshipped the Images of Christ,
which they pretended to have had from Pilat: which had been no wonder, if there
had been as many Images of Christ then extant, as Feuardentius pretends, viz.
the Image of Christ taken by Nicodemus (not I suppose when he came by night to
our Savior) that at Edessa, besides those which S. Luke drew of Him; if there
had been so many Images abroad of Him in veneration among Christians, why
should this be pitched upon as a peculiar thing of these Gnostics, That they
had some Images painted, others made of other matters, which they crowned and
set forth, or worshipped as the Heathens did, among which was an Image of
Christ, as Irenaeus reports it? And supposing they had worshipped the Images of
Christ as the Gentiles did worship their Images, wherein were they to blame, if
the honor given to the Image be not the honor of the Image, but of that which
is represented by it? And since Christ deserves our highest worship, on this
pretense they deserved no blame at all in giving divine worship of the highest
degree to the Image of Christ.

3. The Primitive Christians did utterly refuse to worship the Images of
Emperors, although they were acknowledged to be Gods Creatures therefore I say,
according to their sense, acknowledging the Saints to be Gods Creatures, is not
a sufficient ground to excuse the worship of the Images of Saints from
Idolatry. As in Pliny's Epistle to Trajan (mentioned before) one of the trials
of Christians was, whether they would Imagini tuae thure ac vino supplicare;
use the Religious rites that were then customary, of Incense, Libation, and
Supplication before the Emperors Image; this Minucius calls ad Imagines
supplicare, to pray before their Images: which Pliny says, No true Christian
could ever be brought to: but would rather suffer Martyrdom than do it. S.
Hierome speaking of Nebuchadnezzars Image, says, Hieron. in c. 3. Daniel.
Statuam seu Imaginem cultores Dei adorare non debent; the worshippers of God
ought not to worship an Image; Let, says he, the Judges and Magistrates take
notice of this, that worship the Emperors Statues; that they do that which the
three Children pleased God by not doing. By which we see, it was not only the
Statues of Heathen Emperors, which the Christians refused to give Religious
worship to; but of the most pious and Christian; which out of the flattery of
Princes, those who expected, or received Honors, were willing to continue
under Christian Emperors; but it was at last absolutely forbidden by a
Constitution of Theodosius; of which I have spoken already, in the Discourse
about the Nature of divine worship. But upon what reason came this to be
accounted unlawful among Christians; if it were lawful to worship the Images of
Saints, supposing them to be Gods Creatures? Is it possible they should think
the Emperors to be otherwise? I do not think that the Soldiers who were
trepanned by Julian, to offer Incense to his Image at the receiving the
Donative (and after they understood what they did, were ready to run mad with
indignation at themselves, crying out in the Streets, We are Christians, and
ran to the Emperor, desiring they might suffer Martyrdom for the Christian
faith, which they were supposed to deny by that act of theirs, as Gregory
Nazianzen, and Theodoret relate the story) did imagine that Julian was any
other than one of Gods Creatures; Greg. Nazianz. invect. 1. in in Iul.

Theod. hist. l. 3. c. 16, 17.


or that they had any belief of his being a God; but the Christians looked on
the act it self of offering incense, as unlawful to be done to the Image of any
Creature; or to the Image it self, because it was a Creature, and that of the
meanest sort, viz. the Work of men's hands.

4. It is not enough for any of Gods Creatures to be worshipped under the
Notion of Saints; if any worship be given to them, which is above the rank of
Creatures, i. e. any of that worship which belongs to God. For none can have
greater confidence of the Saintship of any Persons whose Images they
worshipped, (those excepted which are revealed in Scripture) than many of the
Heathens had of the goodness of the Deities which they worshipped. And if we
observe the method, which Origin, S. Cyril, S. Augustine and other Christian
Writers took to prove them to be evil Spirits which they worshipped, we shall
find the great argument was from the Nature of the worship given to them. For,
say they, we find in Scripture that good Angels have refused that worship which
they seem so desirous of; and therefore there is just reason to suspect that
these are not good Angels; (although they firmly believed them to be so, and
Hierocles says, Hierocl. in aur. Carm.
God forbid we should worship any other; And the Heathens in S. Augustine, Aug.
in Psalm. 96.
say peremptorily, they did not worship Devils, but Angels and the servants of
the Great God.) So say I, as to those who are worshipped under the name of
Saints or Angels, if in, or at their Images such things are spoken or done,
which tend to the encouraging that worship which the Primitive Christians
refused as Idolatry, there is the same reason still to suspect those are not
good but evil Spirits; under whose name or representation soever they appear.
For it is as easy for them to play the same tricks among Christians, which
they did among Heathens; for then they pretended to be Good Spirits, and why
may they not do the same still? If we have a fuller discovery of their design
to impose upon the world, the folly of men is so much the greater to be abused
by them; and the Gentiles were in that respect far more excuseable than
Christians, because God had not discovered the Cheat and artifices of Evil
Spirits to them, so as he has done to us by the Christian Religion. Whatever
pretense of miracles, or visions, or appearances there be, if the design of
them be to advance a way of worship contrary to the Law of God, we have the
same reason to believe that evil Spirits are the Causes of them, as the
Primitive Christians had, that evil Spirits were worshipped by the Heathens
under the notion of Good.

5. The Arrians believed Christ to be a Creature, and yet were charged with
Idolatry by the Fathers. If it be said, that they did give a higher degree of
worship to Christ, than any do to Saints; I answer, that they did only give a
degree of worship proportionable to the degrees of excellency supposed to be in
him, far above any other Creatures whatsoever. But still that worship was
inferior to that which they gave to God the Father, according to the opinion
of those Persons I dispute against. For if it be impossible for a man that
believes the incomparable distance between God and the most excellent of his
Creatures, to attribute the honor due to God alone to any Creature; then, say
I, it is impossible for those who believed one God the Father, to give to the
Son whom they supposed to be a Creature, the honor which was peculiar to God.
It must be therefore on their own supposition, an inferior and subordinate
honor; and at the highest such as the Platonists gave to their Celestial
Deities. And although the Arrians did invocate Christ, and put their trust in
him; yet they still supposed him to be a Creature, and therefore believed that
all the Power and Authority he had, was given to him; so that the worship they
gave to Christ must be inferior to that honor they gave to the Supreme God,
whom they believed to be Supreme, Absolute, and Independent. But
notwithstanding all this, the Fathers by multitudes of Testimonies already
produced do condemn the Arrians as guilty of Idolatry: and therefore they could
not believe, that the owning of Saints to be Gods Creatures did alter the State
of the Controversy, and make such Christians incapable of Idolatry.

2. I come to the second Period,. 4.
wherein Images were brought into the Christian Church, but no worship allowed
to be given to them. And I am so far from thinking, that the forbearance of the
Use of Images, was from the fear of compliance with the Pagan Idolatry, that I
much rather believe the introducing of Images was out of Compliance with the
Gentile worship. For Eusebius in that memorable Testimony concerning the Statue
at Paneas, or Caesarea Philippi, which, he says, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 7. c.
18.
was said to be the Image of Christ and the Syrophoenician woman, does
attribute the preserving the Images of Christ and Peter and Paul to a Heathen
custom, which, he says, was done (...), i. e. says Valesius, inconsiderate
and imprudenter, contra veterem disciplinam, incaute: very unadvisedly, and
against the ancient Rules of the Church. And yet (to my great amazement) this
place of Eusebius is on all occasions produced to justify the antiquity and
worship of Images: if it had been only brought to prove, that Heathenish
Customs did by degrees creep into the Christian Church, after it obtained ease
and prosperity, it were a sufficient proof of it. Not that I think, this Image
was ever intended for Christ or the Syrophoenician Woman, but because Eusebius
says, the people had gotten such a Tradition among them; and were then willing
to turn their Images to the Stories of the Gospel. Where they finding a
Syrophoenician Woman making her address to our Savior; and a Tradition being
among them that she was of this place, and there finding two Images of Brass,
the one in a Form of a supplicant upon her Knees with her hands stretched out;
and the other over against her with a hand extended to receive her, the common
people seeing these figures to agree so luckily with the Story of the Gospel,
presently concluded these must be the very Images of Christ and the Woman; and
that the Woman, out of mere gratitude, upon her return home was at this great
expense of two brass statues; although the Gospel says, Mark 5.43.
she had spent all that she had on Physicians before her miraculous cure: and
it would have been another miracle, for such an Image of Christ to have stood
untouched in a Gentile City during so many persecutions of Christians,
especially when Asterius in Photius says, Phot. Cod. 271.
this very Statue was demolished by Maximinus. I confess it seems most probable
to me, to have been the Image of the City Paneas supplicating to the Emperor;
for I find the very same representations in the ancient Coins; particularly
those of Achaia, Bithynia, Macedonia, and Hispania; wherein the Provinces are
represented in the Form of a Woman supplicating, and the Emperor Hadrian in
the same habit and posture, as the Image at Paneas is described by Eusebius.
Imperatorum Numism. collect. a Duce Croyo edit. Gasp. Gevart. Tab. 39. n. 17,
18, 21, 22. Patini Numism. p. 194.

Eusebius. Chron. n. 2144.


And that which adds more probability to this conjecture, is, that Bithynia is
so represented, because of the kindness done by Hadrian to Nicomedia in the
restoring of it after its fall by an earthquake, and Caesarea is said by
Eusebius to have suffered by an earthquake at the same time; and after such a
Favor to the City, it was no wonder to have two such brass statues erected for
the Emperors honor. But supposing this tradition were true, it signifies no
more, than that this Gentile custom was observed by a Syrophoenician Woman in
a Gentile City; and what is this to the worship of Images in Christian
Churches? For Eusebius does plainly speak of Gentiles when he says, it is not
to be wondered that those Gentiles who received benefits by our Savior should
do these things; when, says he, we see the Images of his Apostles Paul and
Peter and Christ himself, preserved in Pictures being done in Colors, it being
their custom to honor their Benefactors after this manner. I appeal to any
man of common sense, whether Eusebius does not herein speak of a mere Gentile
custom; but Baronius in spite of the Greek will have it thus, quod majores
nostri ad Gentilis consuetudinis similitudinem quam proxime accedentes; Baron.
ad A. D. 57. n. 112.
at which place, Is. Casaubon sets this Marginal Note, Graeca lege and
miraberis; but, suppose this were the sense of Eusebius, what is to be gained
by it, save only, that the bringing of Images among Christians was a mere
imitation of Gentilism, and introducing the Heathen customs into the Christian
Church? Yet Baronius has something more to say for this Image, viz. that being
placed in the Diaconicon or Vestry of the Church of Paneas, it was there
worshipped by Christians, for which he quotes Nicephorus; Nicephor. l. 10. c.
30.
whom at other times he rejects as a fabulous Writer. And it is observable,
that Philostorgius (out of whom Nicephorus takes the other circumstances of his
relation) is so far from saying any thing of the worship of this Image,
Philostorg. Eccles. hist. l. 7. c. 3.
that he says expressly the contrary, (...) giving no manner of worship to it;
to which he adds the reason for it; because it is not lawful for Christians to
worship either Brass or any other matter; no not although this Image were
believed to represent Christ after his Incarnation. What shall be said to such
an Author who not only omits so considerable a passage, but puts in words of
his own directly contrary to his meaning? The Author of the Caroline Book,
says, that allowing this story to be true (which by comparing the relation of
Asterius in Photius with what Eusebius, Sozomen and the rest say, Caroli Lib.
de Imagine. l. 4. c. 15. Phot. Cod. 271.
there seems to be some reason to suspect) yet it signifies nothing to the
worship of Images; such a Statue being erected by a weak ignorant Woman, to
express her gratitude after the best fashion among the Gentiles; and what does
this signify to the Church of God? and supposing the miraculous cures to be
wrought by the Herb that grew at the foot of the Statue; yet that does not
prove any worship of Images, but that men ought to leave their former Idols,
and embrace the true Faith; for, says he, according to the Apostle signs are
not for Believers, but for Unbelievers. But if we allow the story as it is
reported by Sozomen, Sozom. l. 5. c. 21.
That the Christians gathered up the broken fragments of the Statue, and laid
them up in the Church, I grant it proves that those Christians did not abhor
the use of Images, although there be no proof of any worship they gave to them:
and this seems to be as much as Petavius thinks can be made of this story.
Petav. de Incarn. l. 15. c. 13. n. 4, 5.


But Baronius is not content with the Syrophoenician Woman's example in this
matter of Images, but he produces the Apostles Council at Antioch, Baron. ad A.
D. 57. n. 111.
and a venerable decree made by them there, which commands Christians to make
Images of Christ instead of Heathen Idols; but our comfort is, that Petavius
discards this as a mere forgery, Pet. l. 15. c. 14. n. 4.
as most of the things of the latter Greeks, he says, are; and yet Baronius
says, this Canon is made use of by the second Nicene Council; which shows what
excellent Authorities that Council relied upon. Nicolas de Clemangis is so far
from thinking there was any Apostolical decree in this matter, Nic. de
Clemangis de Novis celebrat. non instituend. p. 151.
that he says, the Universal Church did decree for the sake of the Gentile
Converts, that there should be no Images at all in Churches; which decree, he
says, was afterward repealed. I would he had told us by what Authority; and
why other Commandments and Decrees might not be repealed as well as that?

The first authentic Testimony of any thing like Images among Christians, is
that of the painted Chalices in Tertullian; Tertul. de Pudic. c. 7. and 10.
wherein Christ was represented under the Emblem of a Shepherd with a sheep on
his back; (as it was very usual among the Romans to have Emblematical Figures
on their Cups) but was ever any man so weak among them, not to distinguish
between the ornaments of their Cups and Glasses, and their Sacred Images? How
ridiculous would that man have been, that should have proved at that time that
Christians worshipped Images, because they made use of painted Glasses? If this
signifies any thing, why do they quarrel with us, that have painted glass
Windows in our Churches? All that can be inferred from hence is, that the
Church at that time did not think Emblematical figures unlawful Ornaments of
Cups or Chalices; and do we think otherwise? This I confess does sufficiently
prove that the Roman Church did think Ornamental Images lawful; but it does no
more prove the worship of Images, than the very same Emblem often used before
Protestant Books, does prove that those Books are worshipped by us.

I cannot find any thing more that looks like any evidence for Images for the
first three hundred years; afterward, there began to be some appearances of
some, in some places; but they met with different entertainment, according to
the several apprehensions of men. For although the whole Christian Church
agreed in refusing to worship Images; yet they were of several opinions as to
the Use of them. Some followed the strict opinion of Tertullian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Origin, who thought the very making of Images unlawful;
others thought it not unlawful to make them, but to use them in Churches, as
the Eliberitan Bishops, and Epiphanius; others thought it not unlawful to have
Images there, provided no worship were given to them. It is ridiculous to bring
S. Hierom's Saucomariae, for any other purpose, S. Hieron. in Ion. 4.
than to prove that the Apostles Images were then seen upon their common
drinking cups, of which he speaks; as any one may easily see that reads the
passage, and the sport he makes with Canthelius about it: which will prove as
much toward the worship of Images, as having the Apostles pictures on a pack
of Cards would do.

Whatever the custom was in Tertullians time (if at least he speaks of the
Sacred Chalices) we are sure in S. Augustines time there were no Images of
mankind on the Sacred Vessels. S. Aug. in Ps. 113.
For although these, says he, are consecrated to a sacred use, and are the
work of men's hands; yet they have not a mouth and speak not, nor eyes and see
not, as the Heathen Images had; and afterward says, that the humane figure
does more to deceive mankind, as to their worship, than the want of sense does
to correct their error; and the great cause of the madness of Idolatry is,
that the likeness to a living Being prevails more on the affections of
miserable men to worship them, than their knowledge that they are not living
does to the contempt of them. Is it possible such a man as S. Austin was, could
use such expressions as these, if in his time there had been any Images then
used or worshipped in Christian Churches? What need he have so much as
mentioned the Sacred Utensils, if there had been Sacred Images? and how could
he have urged those things against Heathen Images, which would altogether have
held as well against Christian? For it was not the opinion of the Heathens he
disputed against, so much as the proneness of men to be seduced to worship such
representations, which they find to be like themselves. To this Bellarmin
answers, Bellarm. de Imag. l. 2. c. 9.
that S. Augustine does not say there were no Images in Churches, but only that
the humane shape of Images did tend much to increase their error who
worshipped them for Gods. But would any man of common sense have used those
arguments against Images, which do not suppose them already worshipped for
Gods; but imply the danger of being seduced to that worship where ever they
are, in case there were such Images in Christian Churches? The Worship S.
Augustine speaks against, is adoring, or praying looking on an Image, (Quis
autem ador at vel orat intuens simulachrum) which whosoever does, says he, is
so affected as to think he is heard by that he prays before, and may receive
help by it; and yet these persons S. Augustine disputes against, declare that
they did not worship their Images for Gods, but only as the signs or
representations of that Being which they worshipped. Which S. Augustine shows to
be a most unlikely thing, because the manner of address, and the figure of
their Images did show that they did apprehend something more than mere signs in
them whatever they pretended. I do not deny that there were pictures abroad in
S. Augustins time, Aug. de consens. Evangel. l. 1. c. 10*
of Christ and Peter and Paul, for himself does mention them; but he declares
so little reverence for them, that he says they deserved to be deceived who
looked on them as Books to be instructed by; and it was no wonder to see
feigners of false doctrines to be led aside by painters. By which it is plain,
S. Augustine did not think Pictures and Images to be such good helps for the
Ignorant, as was afterward pretended. And for those, who worshipped Pictures,
S. Augustine does not deny that there were such in his time, but, he reckons
them among the ignorant and superstitious, Aug. de Moribus Eccles. Cath. c. 34.
who by their practices did dishonor their profession of Christianity. So that
although we grant in the time of S. Augustine there were several pictures of
Holy men mentioned in Scripture in several places, yet there is no clear
evidence that they were then brought into the African Churches any more than
into those of Cyprus or Palestine; but they were in the latter end of the
fourth Century in some of the more Eastern Churches, as appears by the
Testimonies of Gregory Nyssen, and Asterius produced by Petavius and others.
Petav. d^ Incar. l. 15. c. 13. n. 7. Dallae. de Imag. l. 3. c. 4.
And it is a very probable conjecture of Daille, that in those parts of Pontus
and Cappadocia, they were first introduced, out of a compliance with Gentilism;
and in imitation of the practice of Gregory Thaumaturgus, whom Nyssen commends
for changing the Heathen Festivals into Christian, Nyssen. vit. Greg. Thaumat.
the better to draw the Heathens to Christianity; which seemed a very plausible
pretense, but was attended with very bad success, when Christianity came to be
by this means, but Reformed Paganism, as to the matter of divine worship. This
same principle in all probability brought the Pictures of Martyrs and others
into the Churches of Italy, of which Prudentius and Paulinus speak; Prudent.
(...). hymn. 9. Paulin. ep. 12.
and this latter confesses, it was a rare custom in his time to have Pictures
in Churches, -- pingere sanctas
Raro more domos.
and thought it necessary to make an Apology for it, Poem. Not. 9. p. 614.
which he does by saying, he looked on this as a good means to draw the rude
and barbarous people from their Heathen Customs, changing the pleasure of
pictures for that of drinking at the Sepulchers of Martyrs; but there is not
the least intimation of any worship then given to them.

3. After that the Use of Images had prevailed both in the Eastern and Western
parts,. 5.
men came by degrees to the worship of them: which is the third Period
observable in this Controversy. As to which there are these things remarkable,

1. That it began first among the ignorant and superstitious people; of whom S.
Augustine speaks in his time, that they were the worshippers of pictures; and
afterward in the Epistle of Gregorius M. to Serenus Bishop of Marseilles it is
observable, Greg. Ep. l. 9. ep. 9.
that the people began to worship the Images in Churches in perfect opposition
to Serenus their Bishop; who was so much displeased at it, that he demolished
them, and brake them in pieces: which act of his so exasperated them, that they
separated from his Communion. The news of this coming to Rome (probably from
some of these Schismatics, who always loved to take Sanctuary in Rome, and
appeal thither against their Bishops,) the Pope writes to the Bishop about it
by one Cyriacus, he slights the Popes Letters, as if he could not believe they
were written by him; Gregory being nettled at this, writes again to him; and
reproves him for breaking down the Images, but commends him for not allowing
the worship of them. So that we find the first beginning of the worship of
Images in these Western parts to have been by the folly and superstition of the
People expressly against the Will of their own Bishop and the Bishop of Rome.
Bellarmin says, Bell. de. Imag. l. 2. c. 16.
that Gregory only reproved the Superstitious worship of Images, i. e. that by
which they are worshipped as Gods. Which is a desperate shift in a bad Cause:
For if Gregory had intended any kind of worship to be given to Images, could he
not have expressed it himself? He speaks plain enough about this matter in all
other things, why did he not in distinguishing what worship was to be given to
Images, and what not? We praised you; says he, that you forbad the worship of
Images (so adorari must be rendered, and not according to the modern sense of
Romish Authors who would against all sense and reason appropriate that word to
Sovereign Worship) but we reprehended you for breaking them. It is one thing to
worship an Image, and another thing to learn by it what is to be worshipped.
That ought not to be broken down which was set up in Churches not to be
worshipped, but Only to instruct the minds of the Ignorant. Would any man of
common sense have said this, that did allow any worship of Images? Would
Bellarmin, or T.G. or any that embrace the second Nicene and Tridentine Council
have said that Images are set up in Churches ad instruendas solummodo mentes
nescientium; only to instruct the ignorant? Nay Gregory goes yet farther, and
tells Serenus, he ought to call his People together, and show them from
Scripture that it is not lawful to worship the Work of men's hands, because it
is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve.
Which very place Anastasius Bishop of Theopolis, in his Epistle produced in the
second Nicene Council, Council. Nicen. 2. act. 4.
thus expounds; Mark, says he, only is joined to serve, and not to worship,
adorare quidem licet, servire nequaquam, says the Latin Translation there;
worship of other things is lawful but not the service, which is directly
contrary to what Gregory says, who makes the worship of any other thing
unlawful from these words; and to conclude all, Gregory says, forbid not those
who would make Images; adorare vero Imagines modis omnibus devita, but by all
means avoid the worship of them. What! no kind of worship to be allowed them?
no distinction of an inferior, honorary, relative worship? no, not the least
tittle tending that way. But our Adversaries run from this Epistle to another
to Secundinus to help them out, where they say Gregory approves the worship of
Images; to which no other answer is needful, than that all that passage is
wanting in the Ancient M S. as Dr. James has attested upon a diligent
examination of them: James Corrupt. of the Fathers, pa. 2. p. 76.
and however, ought to be interpreted according to his deliberate sentence in
the Epistle to Serenus, where he not only delivers his judgment, but backs it
with the strongest Reason.

2. That the worship of Images no sooner prevailed, but it was objected against
the Christians by the Jews and Gentiles. Thus it appears in the Apology of
Leontius Bishop of Neapolis in Cyprus, written against the Jews, and read in
the second Nicene Council (and if the Testimony of Constantinus Bishop of
Constantia in Cyprus there extant, Council. Nicen. 2. act. 4. p. 235.
may be taken, he flourished in the time of Mauricius) in which the Jew is
introduced, upbraiding the Christians with breaking the Commandment of God in
the worship of Images, and Leontius is put to miserable shifts to desend it.
And in the dispute between the Jew and the Christian in the fifth Action of
that Council; the Jew says, I am scandalized at You Christians, because you
worship Images, Act. 5. p. 355.
expressly against the Command of God. And in the discourse of John Bishop of
Thessalonica, the Gentile says, p. 354.
Do not You Christians not only paint the Images of Your Saints, and worship
them, but even the Image of your God too? so likewise think, that we do not
worship the Images themselves, but those incorporeal powers which are
worshipped through them. And this learned Bishop to make out the disparity
between the Heathens and them flies to this lamentable refuge, that they did
not believe the Angels to be incorporeal as the Gentiles did, and therefore
might better make Images of them. Which is not the thing I now observe; but
only, that as soon as the worship of Images began, the Christians were
sufficiently upbraided with it, by their enemies; and therefore it is most
unreasonable to suppose, that if the same worship had prevailed before, the
Jews and Gentiles would not have objected the same thing; when there were men
that wanted neither advantages, nor ill will to do it.

3. That when the Controversy about the Worship of Images grew hot, the
defenders of them made use of Treason and Rebellion to maintain their Cause. It
would make one wonder to see how a late pretended Author of the History of the
Iconoclasts in English has endeavored to accommodate that History to our
Reformation in England, History of the Iconoclasts pretended to be published
A.D. 1671. but written 1674. or rather extracted out of Mai^^ bourgs French
History.
making Henry 8. to be Leo Isauricus and Queen Mary to be Irene, (which is not
much for her honor.) But suppose Henry 8. to be Leo, on whose side lay the
charge of Rebellion, which it is most certain the Pope and his adherents were
guilty of toward Leo? For Gregory 2. confesses in his Epistle to Leo, Greg. 2.
epist. 1.
that the people rebelled against him, out of zeal to their Images; and
Onuphrius says, Onuphr. Annot. in vit. Greg. 2.
that by reason of Leo's opposition to Images, the Pope deprived him of the
remainder of the Empire in Italy. And this worthy Historian himself says, that
the Romans and others then subject to Leo did not only throw down his Statues
from the high places and pillars whereon they stood, but would no longer pay
him any Tribute or obey his Orders; History of Iconocl. p. 44.
and he confesses afterward, that upon the Popes instigation they began a
Defensive Conspiracy for Religion; (Just such another as the Irish Rebellion;
p. 47.
which that Author has heard of) only this was far more bloody and cruel than
the other. But P.T. is concerned for the Popes honor, saying, that what the
Pope intended only for a defensive Confederacy for Religion, (sore against the
Popes will) proved an offensive conspiracy against the Emperors temporal
Right; in so much that all Italy renounced his dominion. Was the forbidding the
paying Tribute to the Emperor only a defensive confederacy for Religion? Yet
this Anastasius Bibliothecarius, Zonaras, Cedrenus, Glycas, Theophanes,
Sigebert, Otto Frisingensis, Conradus Urspergensis, Sigonius, Rubeus and
Ciacconius all agree to have been done by the Pope, Anastas. histor. p. 134.

Zonar. Annal. To. 3. p. 85.

Cedren. hist. To. 1. p. 453.

Michel. Glyc. Annal. part. 4. p. 281.

Theophan. hist. p. 338.

Sigebert. ad A. 728.

Otto Frising. l. 5. c. 18.

Ursperg. ad A. 718.

Sigonius de Regno Ital. l. 3.

Rubei Hist. Raven. l. 4.

Ciaccon. vit. Greg.


upon the Emperors declaring against the Worship of Images. But I need go no
farther than this History of the Iconoclasts, p. 54.
Historian, who delivers this for the doctrine of this Pope in a Synod at Rome
on behalf of Images, viz. That it is against reason to believe, God would have
a multitude of men, or all mankind to be damned rather than resist with arms,
false doctrine favored by one or a few Sovereigns, seeing Christ dyed rather
to save Souls than to humor Sovereigns. Most primitive and Catholic doctrine!
and happily applied to the Worship of Images. But he goes on, as if he had been
giving instructions for another Rebellion; that the Rule whereby they ought to
judge of the time and lawfulness of their resistance, must not be their own
fancies, but a real danger of altering the Catholic Faith, and the Sovereigns
actual endeavors to do it. So that according to this blessed doctrine, a
Rebellion on the account of Religion, is a just and holy War; and is it not
easy to discern what such men would be at, who deliver this as the Doctrine of
their Head of the Church in a Council of Bishops? If Gregory 2. said such
things, he did but speak agreeably to his actings; if he did not, we know at
least the mind of this Historian; who seems to have calculated his history for
a Meridian nearer home.

4. It is observable, how great and apparent a change was made in the doctrine
and practice of the Roman Church in this matter of Images, between the time of
the two Gregory's, the first, and the second, i.e. between A. D. 604. wherein
the first Gregory died, and A.D. 714. wherein the second was made Pope. It
would afford a man some pleasure to compare the Epistle of Gregorius M. to
Serenus, with those of Gregory 2. to the Emperor Leo, and yet both these
according to the Roman pretense Infallible Heads of the Church. We have already
seen what the former Gregory's opinion was, let us now compare it with his
Name-sakes. He charges the Emperor Leo with using the very same words that his
predecessor had done in this matter, Greg. 2. epist. 1. ad Leon.
viz. that we are not to worship the Work of men's Hands; whereas, says he,
very wisely, those words were spoken in Scripture for the sake of such Paganish
Idolaters, who worshipped golden, and silver, and wooden Animals (the Pope
calls them (...)) and said, these are thy Gods, and there is no other God
besides: (as though there ever had been such Fools in the World!) and for the
sake of these Works of the Devils hands we are commanded not to worship them:
but whatever is made by men for the honor of God ought to be worshipped; in
spite of his Predecessors definition to the contrary in the very same case.
And then he tells a very worshipful story of the Pictures that were taken of
Christ and his Apostles by their Disciples; and of the Image Christ sent for a
present to the King of Edessa; it is great pity the Veronica was forgotten by
him; but that piece of Antiquity was not yet known. Then, he bids the Emperor
go among the boys at School, and if he should say among them that he was an
enemy to Images, they would throw their Table-books at his Head; because
Children always love Pictures; and a little after, he says, he was like Ozias
the King of the Jews that destroyed the brazen Serpent. It seems the Bible was
then a Book not much studied by the Head of the Church: for was it indeed Ozias
that demolished the brazen Serpent? and was this such a reproach to Leo to be
compared to good Hezekiah? And so very learnedly he falls to the commending the
brazen Serpent, and inveighing against that insolent King that broke it in
pieces? Was not this a hopeful piece of Infallibility! After this, our learned
Historian says, History of the Iconoclasts, p. 55.
the Pope declared him not only an Heretic, but an Heresiarch; for what I
beseech him? for being of the same opinion as to the worship of Images, that
his Predecessor Gregory had been of? But see how the case is altered in a
hundred years! In my mind, the Emperor Leo asked a very pertinent Question of
the Pope; How comes it to pass that the six General Councils never said a word
of Images, if they were such necessary things? And the Pope made as impertinent
an answer; And why, says the Pope, did they say nothing of eating and
drinking? Greg. 2. ep. 2.
it seems Images in his opinion were as necessary to Religion, as meat and
drink to our bodies; for, he says, the Fathers carried their Images to Council
with them, and traveled with them; and I suppose slept with them too, as
Children do with their Babies.

5. The artifices and methods ought to be observed whereby such a cause as the
worship of Images,. 6.
was advanced and defended. For being destitute of any color from Scripture,
Reason, or Antiquity, there was a necessity of making use of other means to
supply the want of these. Such as,

1. Representing their Adversaries to the greatest disadvantage; which is done
to purpose in the fifth Action of the second Nicene Council. Council. Nicen. 2.
p. 347. ed. Labb.
The demolishing of Images was condemned in Serenus by Gregory as an act only
of intemperate zeal and indiscretion; but now it was become heresy, worse than
heresy, Judaism, Samaritanism, Manichaism, nay worse than all these. This
Tarasius offers to prove in the beginning of that Action; from S. Cyril, he
compares them with Nebuchadnezzar, who destroyed the Cherubim; from Simeon
Stylites, to the Samaritans; and John the pretended Vicar of the Oriental
Bishops says, the Samaritans are worse than other heretics; therefore they
ought to be called Samaritans; and Constantinus Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus
says, they are worse than Samaritans. p. 349.
Afterward the same John says, see how clearly we have demonstrated that the
Accusers of Christians (in this matter of Images) are partakers with
Nebuchadonosor, and Samaritans, p. 370. p. 383.
and Jews and Gentiles and Manichees, and those who denied that Christ was come
in the Flesh. Why? what is the matter? what article of the Christian Faith have
they denied? what! have they renounced Christianity, and been circumcised! No:
but worse; being Christians they call the worship of Images Idolatry. O
dangerous heresy, and horrible blasphemy! But it may be worth our while to
consider a little the account which Tarasius desires John to give the Council
of the beginning of this most detestable heresy; p. 386.
viz. that after the death of Solomon Caliph of the Arabs, Homar succeeded him,
after whom followed Ezid or Jezid a vain man; in his time there was at Tiberias
one Sarantapechys a Leader of the Jews, and a Magician; who promised long life
to the Chaliph on condition he would do what he would have him; which he
presently undertook with great promises of rewards to him; then the Jew
required an Edict for the demolishing and defacing all the Images in the
Christian Churches; which was accordingly executed by the Jews and Arabs. The
news of which excited the Bishop of Nacolia, and those about him to do the same
thing; but Jezid lived not above two years and a half after; and his Son Ulid
destroyed this Jew, and the Images were again restored. This was the story told
and approved in the Council; but Zonaras says, Zonar. Annal. Tom. 3. p. 84.
they were two Jews who persuaded Jezid to publish his Edict against Images,
and that he dyed within the year; and that his Son seeking to punish them, they
were fled into Isauria, where they met with Leo then a young man to whom they
foretold the Empire, and made him promise them that when he came to is, he
would do one thing for them: which one thing proved to be the destruction of
Images; and they challenging their promise when he was now Emperor gave the
occasion to the terrible persecution of Images. Cedrenus says, Cedren. hist.
To. 1. p. 450.
that a few years before the Reign of Leo, some Jews of Laodicea in Phoenicia
went to Jezid, and obtained the Edict against Images, and then he tells the
rest of the story, as Zonaras did. Theophanes says, Theoph. Chronog. p. 336.
it was but one Jew of Laodicea, and that Jezid dyed before the Edict was
published in all parts of his Dominions, and says, this was in the seventh
year of the Empire of Leo. Constantinus Manasses, and Michael Glycas only
mention the Jews foretelling the Empire to him, Constable. Manass. p. 86. Mich.
Glyc. Annal. part. 4. p. 281.
and putting him upon the destruction of Images, without the other
circumstances. Let the Reader now judge whether this be not a probable story;
and purposely invented to cast the odium of rejecting the worship of Images on
the Jews and Saracens? as though it could never have come from any Christian.
It was one Jew, says the Vicar of the Oriental Bishops; they were two Jews or
more, say the Greek historians. It was a Jew of Tiberias, says John; no, says
Cedrenus, they were two Jews of Laodicea; but one says Theophanes. These Jews
met with Leo when he was a young man and foretold the Empire to him, say
Zonaras, Manasses and Glycas; but a few years before the Reign of Leo, says
Cedrenus; nay, says Theophanes, it was in the seventh year of Leo; in the
eighth, says Baronius, Baron. A. 723. n. 17, 21.
for Jozid did not reign before. Was there ever a more consistent story than
this? But the Author of the late history of the Iconoclasts, History of the
Iconoclasts, p 28, 33.
thinks he has found out a salvo for these contradictions. For he makes two
several Edicts under two Jezids that were Chaliphs; the former of the two Jews
about A. D. 686. who were the men that foretold the Empire to Leo, and the
other of Sarantapechys to Jezid the second in the time of Leo; this he has
borrowed from the French Author, as he has done all his quotations (and I much
question by his manner of citing them, whether he ever saw the Books he quotes
in his Life.) But this is said without the least shadow of proof; for no one of
all the Historians, ever mention two Edicts of the several Iezids; but all
pretend to tell the very same story. And is it probable that the two Jews who
foretold the Empire to Leo, A. D. 686. should come to Constantinople to Leo,
after A. D. 723. when Leo began to oppose Images; merely with a design to
extirpate Images, without proposing any other advantage to themselves by the
Emperor, as the Greek historians say? Credat Iudaeus. They are a sort of
people, that know how to improve such an advantage to better purposes; and
their zeal against Images was never so great, as the love of their own Profit.
But our English Historian is not content with the Fables of the Greeks; but he
makes more of his own. For, he says, these were Samaritan Sectaries, who were
more precise than the rest of the Jews, and were much troubled at the Cherubims
in the Temple, and more at the respect which the Christians tendered to the
Images of Christ and his Saints. I never saw a more pitiful pretender to
History than this Author; who, if he offers to add to, or vary from his
Original, he makes the matter worse than he found it. For not one of his
Authors in the Margin, say they were Samaritans but only Hebrews, as Zonaras,
and Cedrenus; his other Authors Elmacinus, and the Chronicon Orientale have not
one word about it, where they mention Iezid the Chaliph of Arabia. And yet
granting they were Samaritans, there is not the least ground for his saying,
they were more precise in this matter of Images than the rest of the Jews; for
Epiphanius himself, Epiphan. l. 1. here is. Samarit. p. 25.
whom he quotes, suspects them of secret Idolatry in Mount Gerizim, and the
Jews generally charge them with it: for they say, they worship the Image of a
Dove on Mount Gerizim; Exercit. Anti-Morin. Sect. 16.
which Maimonides affirms of them with great confidence, and Obadias Bartenora,
with several others. It was therefore very unhappy for this Historian to pitch
upon the Samaritan Sectaries of all others, as the Beginners of the heresy of
the Iconoclasts. And was it not luckily done to begin a History with so
palpable a falsehood! But this was a pretty artifice to possess his Reader at
the entrance, that none but Samaritan Sectaries could be enemies to the worship
of Images: which, he knew, to have been the method of the second Council of
Nice: only he pursued it with greater Ignorance than they.

2. By fabulous stories and lying Miracles. Of the former we have many
instances in the Actions of that famous Council; Council. Nicen. 2. act. 4. p.
251.
but I shall only mention that out of the Limonarion of the pretended
Sophronius about the Spirit of Fornication haunting a Monk who had an Image of
the Blessed Virgin; to whom the Devil said, If thou will not worship that
Image, I will trouble thee no more. But the Devil would not tell him this great
secret till he had solemnly promised him, he would reveal it to no body. The
Monk next day told it to the Abbot Theodore, who assured him he had better go
into all the Stews in the City, than leave off the worship of that Image; with
which the Monk went away much comforted. But the Devil soon after charged him
with perjury; the Monk replied, he had forsworn to God and not to him. Upon
which John Vicar of the Oriental Bishops, said, it was better to forswear ones
self, than to keep an oath for the destruction of Images. And concerning
miracles, it is observable, that Tarasius confesses, p. 223.
that their Images did work none in their days: because miracles were for
unbelievers; and yet Manzo a Bishop there present says, p. 258.
he was cured of a disease by laying an Image of Christ upon the part affected.
Bellarmin and Baronius say, Bell. de script. Eccles. in Athanas. Baron. ad
1.787. n. 29.
the miracle of the Image at Berytus was done in those times; and yet after the
reading the story (which made the good Fathers weep) Tharasius says those
words, which make this story, by comparing these circumstances together, appear
a mere Fabulous imposture. For in the Council of Nice, the story is reported as
written by S. Athanasius near four hundred years before; but not only those
Authors but Sigebert says it was done A. D. 765. and Lambecius undertakes to
prove that this story was never written by S. Athanasius. But most remarkable
is the passage which Eutychius the Patriarch of Alexandria relates concerning
the occasion of Theophilus the Emperors extirpating Images out of Churches.
Sigeb. Chron. ad A. 765. Lambec. Comment. de Biblioth. Vindobon. l. 1. p. 124.
etc. Eutychii An. To. 2. p. 448.
One of the Courtiers had told him there was an Image of the Blessed Virgin,
from whose breasts there dropped Milk upon her day; but search being made the
Cheat was discovered, the Church officers executed, and all Images prohibited.
If all the Impostors of this kind were dealt with after the same manner, there
would be fewer pretenses to miracles wrought by Images than there are.

3. By crying up those for Martyrs, who suffered for the worship of Images, and
opposing the Imperial Edicts for pulling them down. Thus Pope Gregory 2. in his
Epistle to Leo magnifies the zeal of the Women who killed the Emperors Officer
who was sent to demolish the Image of Christ called Antiphoneta, Greg. 2. ep.
1. ad Leon.
and afterward suffered themselves for the tumult they raised in the City. But
this was not the only Act of Zeal in the Women in this good Cause; for as
Baronius relates it, Baron. ad A. 726. n. 12.
out of the Acts of Stephanus extant in Damascens Works, when a new Patriarch
was set up in the room of Germanus, they shook off all Modesty, and ran into
the Church, and threw stones at the Patriarch, and called him Hireling, Wolf,
and what not? One need not wonder at the mighty zeal of the Women in this
Cause, for as Pope Gregory notably observes on behalf of Images, the Women were
wont to take the little Children in their arms, Greg. 2. ep. 2.
and show them this and the other Image; which contributed mightily to the
infallibility of Oral Tradition: when the Women and Nurses could point with
their Fingers to the Articles of Faith elegantly expressed in Pictures, which
the Children did delight to look upon. The great number of Martyrs in this
Cause, of which Baronius glories, consisted chiefly of Women and Monks, who
were the most zealous Champions in it. And the late Historian can hardly
abstain from making the Empress Irene a Martyr in this Cause; for in his
Epistle to the Queen (a Lady of so incomparably greater Virtue and Goodness,
History of the Iconoclasts Epistle Dedicat. p. 3.5.
that it is an affront to her Majesty to commend such an one to her protection)
he had the boldness to tell her that the only imputation which assaults those
Princesses repute (viz. Irene and Theodora) was their piety in restoring the
Religious use and veneration of holy Images to the Eastern Empire. What can be
expected from such an Historian, who durst in the face of the World tell her
Majesty so impudent a falsehood? For Zonaras, Cedrenus, Glycas, Theophanes,
Constantinus Manasses, Zonar. Annal. To. 4. p. 97.

Cedren. p. 473.

Glyc. p. 285.

Theoph. p. 398.

Manass. p. 90, 91.


although Friends to the worship of Images, yet all accuse Irene of Intolerable
Ambition and Cruelty to her Son, the Emperor Constantine, and to all his
Kindred. Nay, Baronius himself (who minceth the matter as much as may be)
says, Baron. ad A. 796. n. 8.
That if she used those cruelties to her Son, out of a desire of Empire, as the
Greek Historians say she did, she was worse than Agrippina: but Constable.
Manasses, as zealous as any for Images, makes her worse than a Tigre, or Lion,
or Bear, or Dragon for her cruelty; and he can think of no Parallel for her
among women but Medea. And was not this an excellent Confessor at least, if
not a Martyr in this Cause? a Person fit to be commended to her Majesty's
protection, as one that suffered only under the imputation of her zeal for
Images? But if any be given up to believe lies, some must be first given up to
tell them. And if this doughty Historian has any honor or Conscience left, he
ought to beg her Majesty's pardon, for offering such an affront to her. But
what had Queen Mary deserved at his hands, that in his Key to his History, he
should compare her to the Empress Irene? Pref. p. 21.


4. By pretending to Antiquity. This might justly be wondered at in so clear
evidence to the contrary, as I have made to appear in this matter: but however,
among the ignorant and superstitious multitude, the very pretending to it goes
a great way. Thus the Patriarch Germanus boasted of Fathers and Councils for
Image Worship to the Emperor Leo; Acta Steph. Iun. apud Damascen.
but what Fathers, or Councils did the aged Patriarch mean? why did he not name
and produce them to stop the Emperors proceedings against Images? Baronius
confesses, Baron. ad A. 726. n. 6.
there were no Councils which had approved the worship of Images by any Canon;
but because they never condemned it, being constantly practiced, it was
sufficient. All the mischief is, this constant practice is as far from being
proved, as the definition of Councils. If the picture Christ sent to Abgarus
King of Edessa, or those drawn by S. Luke, or the forged Canon of the Council
of Antioch; or the counterfeit Authority of S. Athanasius about the Image at
Berytus; if such evidences as these will do the business; they have abundance
of Autiquity on their side: but if we be not satisfied with these, they will
call us Heretics, or it may be, Samaritan Sectaries, and that is all we are to
expect in this matter.

5. The Council of Nice had a trick beyond this, viz. burning, or suppressing
all the Writings that were against them. The Popes Deputies in the fifth Action
made the motion, Council. Nic. 2. act. 5. p. 387.
which was received and consented to by the Council: Council. Nic. Can. 9.
and they made a Canon to that purpose, That all Writings against Images should
be brought into the Patriarch of Constantinople, under pain of Anathema if a
Laick, or Deposition, if in Orders (and this without any limitation as to
Authors or Time,) and there to be disposed of among heretical Books. So that it
is to be wondered, so much evidence should yet be left in the Monuments of
Antiquity against the worship of Images.

As to what concerns the matter of Argument for the worship of Images produced
in this Age,. 7.
I must leave that to its proper place; and proceed to the last Period, as to
this Controversy, which is necessary for discerning the History and the State
of it, viz.

4. When the Doctrine and Practice of Image Worship was settled upon the
principles allowed and defended in the Roman Church. Wherein I shall do these 2
things.

1. I shall show what additions have been to this doctrine and practice since
the Nicene Council.

2. Wherein the present practice of Image Worship in the Roman Church does
consist, and upon what principles it is defended.

1. For the additions that have been made in this matter since the Nicene
Council. And those lie especially in two things.

1. In making Images of God the Father, and the Holy Trinity. 2. In the manner
of worship given to Images.

1. In making Images of God the Father and the Trinity. It is easy to observe
how much the most earnest pleaders for Images did then abhor the making of any
Image of God. So Gregory 2. in his Epistle to Leo says expressly, Greg. 2. ep.
ad Leon. Aug.
They made no Images of God, because it is impossible to paint or describe him;
but if we had seen or known him, as we have done his Son, we might have painted
and represented him too, as well as his Son. We make no Image or Likeness of
the invisible Deity, says the Patriarch Germanus, whom the highest Orders of
Angels are not able to comprehend. If we cannot paint the Soul, says Damascen,
German. epist. ad Ioh. Synad. in act. 4. Council. Nic. p. 291.

Damascen. orat. 1. de ^mag. p. 747.


how much less can we represent God by an Image, who gave that Being to the
soul which cannot be painted? What Image can be made of him, who is invisible,
incorporeal, without quantity, magnitude, or form? We should err indeed, Orat.
2. p. 759.
says he, if we should make an Image of God who cannot be seen; and the same
he repeats in other places, Who is there, in his senses, Orat. 3. p. 767, 768
says Stephanus Junior, that would go about to paint the Divine Nature, which
is immaterial and incomprehensible? Acta Steph. Iun. apud Damas. p. 805.
For if we cannot represent him in our minds, how much less can we paint him in
colors? Now these four, Gregory, Germanus, Damascen, and Stephanus were the
most renowed Champions for the Defense of Images; and did certainly speak the
sense of the Church at that time: Conc. Nic. 2. act. 4, 5, 6, 7.
To the same purpose speak Ioh. Thessalonicensis, Leontius, and others in the
Nicene Council. The Greek Author of the Book of the use of Images according to
the sense of the second Council of Nice (published by Morellius and Fronto
Ducaeus) goes farther, for he says, Biblioth. Patrum Gr. Lat. To. 1. p. 737.
That no Images are to be made of God, and if any man go about it, he is to
suffer death as a Pagan. By which it appears that according to the sense of
this Council, the making any Images of God was looked on as a part of Heathen
Idolatry. But when a breach is once made, the waters do not stop just at the
mark, which the first makers of the breach designed: Other men thought they had
as much reason to go a little farther, as they had to go thus far. Thence by
degrees the Images of God the Father, and the Holy Trinity came into the Roman
Church, and the making of these Images defended upon reasons which seemed to
them as plausible, as those for the Images of Christ upon his appearing in our
Nature; for so God the Father might be represented not in his nature, but as he
is said to have appeared in the Scriptures. Baronius, Baron. ad A. D. 726. n.
in his Marginal Notes on the Epistle of Gregory, says, Afterward it came
into use to make Images of God the Father, and of the Trinity; not that they
fall under our view, but as they appeared in holy Writ; for what can be
described, Ad A. 765. n. 8.
may be painted; to the same purpose he speaks in another place. It seems then
by the confession of Baronius no Images of God the Father were in use then,
because they did not think them lawful; when they first came into use,
Christianus Lupus professes, Christian. Lup. not. in Canon. Conc. Sept.
dissert. c. 5. p. 1175.
that he knows not; but, he says, there were none such in the Roman Church in
the time of Nicolaus 1. But Bellarmin, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 8.
Suarez, and others, produce an argument for the lawfulness of them, from the
general practice of their Church, which, they say, would not have suffered such
an universal custom, if such Images had been unlawful. Bernardus Pujol
Professor of Divinity in Perpignan, says, Pujol de sacr. Adora. cultu disp.
3. sect. 4. p. 250, 252.
not only that the Images of the Trinity are universally received among
Catholics, but that they are allowed by the Council of Trent, and does suppose
the use of them as a thing certain and undoubted: and says, that such Images
are to be worshipped. For, says he, as the mind is excited by the Image of
Christ, or the Saints, so may devotion be raised by such an Image of the Deity.
Ysambertus says, Ysambert. de Myster. Inc. ad q. 25. disp. 3. art. 6.
that they who give caution concerning the doing of a thing, as the Council of
Trent does, about the Images of God, are to be understood to approve the thing
it self: and he says, the opinion about the lawfulness of such Images is so
certain, that to say otherwise is rashness; and the common practice of the
Church for a long time has been to have such Images in Churches, and they were
never reproved either by the Pope, or so much as a Provincial Synod. Vasquez
goes farther, Vasq. ad 3. Aq. disp. 103. c. 3.
saying, That the lawfulness of Images of the Trinity is proved by the most
frequent practice of the Church, which commonly at Rome and other places, does
set forth the Image of the Trinity to be worshipped by the People. Arriaga
says, That it is so certain that these Images are lawful, Arriaga ad 3. Th.
disp. 5. sect. 1.
that to say the contrary is not only rashness, but a plain error; for God
cannot be supposed to suffer his universal Church to err in a matter of such
moment. Tannerus asserts, Tann. To. 3. disp. 5. q. 2. dub. 3.
That it is not only lawful to make Images of God and the Trinity; but to
propose them as objects of Worship; which, he says, is the common opinion of
their Divines, and he proves it, as the rest do, from the practice of their
Church and the Council of Trent. Neither are such Images, says Cajetan, only
for show, as the Cherubims were in the Temple; but they are set up that they
may be worshipped, as the practice of the Church shows. In the processionale of
Sarum, Suar. in Aq. 3. p. To. 1. q. 25. disp. 54. sect. 2.

Cajet. in Aq. 3. q. 25. act. 3.

Procession. secund. usum Sarum 1555. fol. 16.


I find a Rubric for the incensing the Image of the Holy Trinity: which
clearly manifests the practice of worshipping the Image of the Trinity.

Now in this matter, I say, there is a plain innovation since the second Nicene
Council, which thought such Images utterly unlawful, as Petavius proves, Petav.
de Incar. l. 15. c. 14. n. 1.
from the Testimonies before mentioned.

But T. G. says, That Germanus and Damascen,. 8.
and consequently the rest, only spoke against such Images, T.G. p. 119.
as are supposed to represent the Divinity in it self; with whom they fully
agree in this matter, and think all such Images of the Divinity unlawful. To
which I answer, (1.) This is plainly contrary to their meaning; for they show
that it was unlawful to make any Image of God till the Incarnation of Christ,
as might be at large proved from all their Testimonies. Now this assertion
would signify nothing, if they thought it lawful to make any Image of God from
the manner of his appearances. For then it was as lawful to make Images of God
before as after the Incarnation of Christ. And one of the arguments of Damascen
and the rest for the Images of Christ, although he were God, was to show the
reality of his humane nature, against those who said he took only the
appearance of it. But if an appearance of God were sufficient ground for an
Image, then this argument did prove nothing at all. And yet the Council of Nice
lays so great weight upon it, as to conclude those who reject Images to deny
the reality of Christ's humane nature. They went therefore upon this principle,
that no mere appearance is a sufficient ground for the Image of a Person; for
in case it be a mere appearance, the representation that is made, is only of
the appearance it self, and not of the Person who never assumed that likeness,
which he appeared in, to any Personal union; but, say they, when the humane
nature was personally united to the God head, then it was lawful to make a
representation of that Person by an Image of his humane nature. How far this
will hold, at to an object of divine worship, must be discussed afterward, but
from hence it appears, that they did not speak only against such Images which
represent the Divinity in it self, but against such as were made of any
appearance of him. And it is observable that the ancient Schoolmen, such as
Alexander Hales, Aquinas, Bonaventure and Marsilius, Alex. Hales p. 3. q. 30.
m. 3. art. 3.

Aquin. p. 3. q. 25. a. 3. re^p. adj.

Bo^av. l 3. d. 9. q. 2.

Mars. l. 3. q. 8. a. 2.


do all agree that any representation of God was forbidden before the
Incarnation of Christ; from whence it follows, that they could not think any
representation of God from his appearances to have been lawful under the Law.
And there can be no reason given, why the representation of God from an
appearance should have been more unlawful then, than under the Gospel. (2.)
This would only hold then against Anthropomorphites, or those who supposed the
Divinity to be really like their Images; of which sort I have shown how very
few there were among the Heathens themselves; and if this had been their
meaning, they should not have made all Images of God unlawful, but have given
them cautions not to think the Divinity to be like them. But whatever the
conceptions of men were, they declare in general, all Images of God to be
unlawful; which the Church of Rome is so far from doing, that the Council of
Trent allows some kind of representations of God from his appearances; Conc.
Trident. sess. 25. de Imag.
and the constant practice of that Church shows, that they picture God the
Father as an Old Man, not only in their Books, but in places of worship, and
with a design to worship Him under that representation; which was a thing the
great Patrons of Images in the time of the second Council of Nice professed to
abhor. (3.) Those Images of God which are allowed in the Roman Church are
confessed by their own Authors to be apt to induce men to think God to be like
to them. Ioh. Hesselius, Hessel. in Catech.
a Divine of great reputation in the Council of Trent, confesses, That from the
Images of God in humane shape men may easily fall into the error of the
Anthropomorphites; especially the more ignorant, for whose sake especially
those Images are made. It being not so easy for them to understand
Metaphorical and Analogical representations; but it being very natural, for
them to judge of things according to the most common and sensible
representations of them. And if they were all Anthropomorphites in the Roman
Church, I wonder what other representation they could make of God the Father,
than that which is used, and allowed, and worshipped among them. If there be
then so much danger in that opinion as T. G. intimates, how can that Church
possibly be excused, that gives such occasions to the People to fall into it?
He that goes about to express the invisible nature of God by an artificial
Image, sins grievously and makes an Idol, says Sanders; Sander. de honor.
Imag. ador. c. 4.
but how is it possible for a man to express the invisible nature of God by an
Image, otherwise than it is done in the Church of Rome? How did the Heathens do
it otherwise according to T. G. than by making the Image of God in the Likeness
of Man? But, T. G. says, men may conceive the Deity otherwise than it is, and
so go about to make an Image to represent it, which is folly and madness; and
so it is to make such an answer: for then all the folly and madness in making
the grossest Images of God does not lie in the Images themselves, but in the
imagination of the Persons that make them. Is it not as great in those that
worship them with such an imagination? if it be, then whatever the Design of
the makers was, if they be apt to beget such imaginations in those who see and
worship them, they are in that respect as unlawful, as T. G. supposes any
Images of God among the Heathens to have been. (4.) What does T. G. mean, when
he makes those Images unlawful which represent the Divinity in it self, and not
those which represent God as he appeared? Can the mere essence of any thing be
represented by an Image? Is it possible to represent any being otherwise than
as it appears? But it may be T. G. has found out the way of painting Essences;
(if he has, he deserves to have the Patent for it, not only for himself, but
for his Heirs and Executors.) For he allows it to be the peculiar privilege of
an infinite Being that it cannot be represented as it is in it self; then all
other things may be represented as they are in themselves, in opposition to the
manner of their appearance; or else the distinction signifies nothing. Petrus
Thyraeus a man highly commended by Possevin for for his explication of this
matter, says, the meaning is, that an Image does not represent the Nature but
the Person that is visible; Possevin. biblioth. l. 8. c. 16.
for, says he, when we see the Image of a man, we do not say we see a
Reasonable Creature, but a Man. Very well! and so in the Image of the Deity we
do not see the Divine Nature, but the Divine Person, or in such a way as he
became visible. The Invisible Nature of God cannot be represented in an Image;
(and can the invisible Nature of Man?) Therefore, says he, it is no injury to
God to be painted by an Image: no more upon these principles than to a man.
Bellarmin proves the lawfulness of making Images of God, because man is said to
be the Image of God; Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 8.
and he may be painted, therefore the Image of God may be too; for that which
is the Image of the Image is likewise the Image of the Exemplar, those which
agree in a third agreeing among themselves. To this some answered that man was
not the Image of God as to his body, but as to his soul which could not be
painted; but Bellarmin takes off this answer, by saying, that then a man could
not not be painted, for he is not a man in regard of his outward lineaments;
but in regard of his substance, and especially his Soul; but notwithstanding
the soul cannot be painted, yet a man may truly and properly be said to be
painted, because the Figure and colors of an Image do represent the whole man;
otherwise, says he, a thing painted could never seem to be the true Thing, as
Zeuxis his grapes did which deceived the birds. Therefore according to
Bellarmines reasoning, that which represents a Being according to outward
appearance, although it have an invisible Nature; yet is a true and real
representation, and represents it as it is in it self; and as far as it is
possible for an Image to represent any thing. Wherein then lies the difference
between making the Picture of a man, and the Image of God? If it be said, that
the Image of God is very short, imperfect, and obscure; is not the same thing
to be said of the Picture of a man, which can only represent his outward
Features without any description of his inward substance or soul? If it be
farther said, that there is a real resemblance between a Picture of a man, and
his outward lineaments, but there is none, between God and the Image of a man;
then I ask, what Bellarmins argument does signify toward the proving the
lawfulness of making an Image of God? For if God may be painted because man
may, who is the Image of God; (for the Image of the Image is the Image of the
Exemplar;) then it follows that Man is the Image of God, as he may be painted,
and so God and man must agree in that common thing which is a capacity of being
represented, which cannot be supposed without as real a resemblance between God
and his Image, as between a Man and his Picture.

But T. G. tells us, T. G. p. 69.
that they abhor the very thoughts of making any such likeness of God, and all
that the Council of Trent allows is only making representations of some
apparition or action of God in a way proportionable to our Humane Conception. I
answer, (1.) It is no great sign of their abhorring the thoughts of any such
likeness of God, to see such arguments made use of to prove the lawfulness of
making Images of God which do imply it. (2.) Those Images of God which are the
most used and allowed in the Roman Church, have been thought by Wise men of
their own Church to imply such a Likeness. Molanus and Thyraeus mention four
sorts of Images of the Trinity, Molanus de Picturis, c. 3.

Thyre. apud Possevin. biblioth. l. 8. c. 16.


that have been used in the Roman Church. 1. That of an old man for God the
Father, and of Christ in humane nature, and of the Holy Ghost in the Form of a
Dove. 2. That of three Persons of equal Age and Stature. 3. That of an Image of
the Bl. Virgin in the belly of which was represented the Holy Trinity: this
Ioh. Gerson says, Gerson. sermon. in nativit. Dom. To. ^. p. 620.
he saw in the Carmelites Church; and says, there were others like it; and
Molanus says, he had seen such a one himself among the Carthusians. 4. That of
one Head with three faces, or one body and three Heads; which Molanus says, is
much more common than the other; and is wont to be set before the Office of the
Holy Trinity; these two latter those Authors do not allow; because the former
of them tends to a dangerous error, viz. that the whole Trinity was incarnate
of the B. Virgin, and the latter, Molanus says, was an invention of the Devil,
(it seems then, there was one invention of the Devil at least to be seen in the
Masse-Book;) for, says he, the Devil once appeared with three Heads to a Monk,
telling him he was the Trinity. But the two former, they allow and defend;
Waldensis, Waldens. To. 3. tit. 19. c. 155.
says Molanus, with a great deal of learning defends that of the three Persons
from the appearance of the Three to Abraham; and Thyraeus justifies the first,
and the most common from the Authority of the Church, the Consent of Fathers,
and the H. Scriptures. And yet Pope John 22. as Aventinus relates it, Avent.
Annal. Boior. l. 7. p. 751.
condemned some to the Fire as Anthropomorphites and enemies to Religion, for
making the very same representation of the Trinity, which he defends, being
only of God as an old man, and of the Son as a young man, and of the Holy Ghost
under the picture of a Dove. Ysambertus takes notice of this story; Ysambert.
de Mist. Incarn. ad q. 25. disp. 3. art. 7.
but, he says, they were such Images as were according to the mind of the
Anthropomorphites; whereas Aventinus says expressly, they were no other than
such as are used and allowed in the Roman Church; by which Ysambertus says,
there is no more danger of men's being led into a false opinion of God, than
there is by the expressions of Scripture. And upon this ground the danger does
not lie in making any representations of God, but in entertaining a false
opinion of those representations; and the Scripture instead of forbidding men
to make any similitude of God, should only have forbidden men to entertain any
erroneous conceit of any Image of him. But, if the Church take care to prevent
such an opinion, as he says she does, the other Image with three faces and one
Head, or one body and three Heads might be justified on the same reason that
the other is. Whereas the Roman Catechism says, Catech. Romans part. 3. n. 12.
that Moses did therefore wisely say, that they saw no similitude of God, lest
they should be led aside by error, and make an Image of the Divinity, and give
the honor due to God to a Creature. From whence it follows, that all Images
that tend to such an error are forbidden, and all worship given to such Images
is Idolatry. And it is farther observable, that the Image allowed in the Roman
Church for God the Father is just such a one as S. Augustine says, Aug. de fide
and symb. c. 7.
it is wickedness for Christians to make for God and to place in a Temple, and
I would desire of T. G. to tell me, what other Image of God the greatest
Anthropomorphites would make, than that which is most common among them? And if
there be such danger in men's conceptions of a Deity from any Images of God,
they give as much occasion for it, as ever any people did: So much, that all
men of any ingenuity have cried shame upon them; but to very little purpose.
Abulensis, Durandus and Peresius are cited by Bellarmin himself as condemning
any Images of God: and which is observable, they do not condemn such Images as
represent God in himself, as T. G. speaks, but such as were in use in the Roman
Church. Durandus says, Durand. in sent. l. 3. did. 9. q. 2. n. 15.
it is a foolish thing either to make or to worship such Images, viz. of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, after the former manner: and which is yet more, he
quotes Damascen against this sort of Images, saying, that it was impiety and
madness to make them: and so does Peresius too. Peers. de tradit. part 3. p.
118. ed. Colon.
Thuanus mentions this passage relating to this matter, Thuan. hist. l. 28.
that A. D. 1562. the Queen Mother of France by the advice of two Bishops and
these three Divines, Butillerius, Espencaeus and Picherellus declared, that all
Images of the Trinity should be taken out of Churches and other places, as
forbidden by Scripture, Councils and Fathers: and yet these were such Images
which T.G. pleads for; but this soon came to nothing, as all good purposes of
Reformation among them have ever done.

If it be said, as it is by Ysambertus, Ysamb. ad q. 25. disp. 3. art. 4.
that these are not properly Images of God, but of his appearance in a visible
form; I answer, (1.) This does not mend the matter, for we are speaking of an
Image of the Father as a Person in the Trinity; and whatever represents him as
such must represent him as he is in himself, and not barely in regard of a
temporary appearance; and as to such an Image of God the Father, T. G's
distinction will by no means reach. (2.) It is the common opinion of the
Divines in the Roman Church, that all the appearances of God in the old
Testament were not of God himself, but of Angels in his stead. And Clichtovaeus
gives that as a Reason why all representations of God were unlawful in the old
Testament; Vasquez ad q. 25. disp. 103. art. 3. c. 3.

Clichtov. in Damasc. l. 4. c. 17.


because all appearances were by Angels, and those Angels were no more united
to the Forms they assumed, than a man's body is to his Garments: from whence it
must follow that all representations of God by such appearances is still
unlawful. (3.) Suppose this be a representation only of some appearance of God,
and so not of what God is, but of what he did, I ask then on what account such
an effect of divine power is made the object of Divine adoration? For we have
seen already by the confession of their most eminent Divines, that the Images
of the Trinity are proposed among them as objects of adoration; now say I, how
comes a mere creature, such as that apparition was, to become the object of
Divine worship? Durandus well saw the consequence of this assertion; for when
he had said, that those corporeal Forms which are painted are no
representations of the Divine Person which never assumed them, but only of
those very Forms themselves in which he appeared; therefore, says he, no more
reverence is due to them than is due to the Forms themselves. When God appeared
in the burning bush, that Fire was then an effect of Divine Power, and deserved
no worship of it self; how then can the Image of the burning bush, be an object
of Divine worship? If God did appear to Daniel as the Ancient of days, Dan.
7.9.
it must be either by the impression of such an Idea upon his Imagination, or
by assuming the Form of an old man; but either way this was but a mere
Creature, and had no such personal Union to the Godhead to deserve adoration;
how much less then does the Image of this Appearance deserve it? So that I
cannot see how upon their own principles they can be excused from Idolatry, who
give proper Divine worship to such Images as these. He commits Idolatry, says
Sanders, Sander. de honor. Imag. adorat. c. 4.
that proposes any Image to be worshipped as the true Image of the Divine
Nature: if this be Idolatry, what is it then to give the highest sort of
worship to the mere representation of a Creature? for those Images, which only
set forth such appearances, are but the Creatures of Creatures, and so still
farther off from being the object of adoration. So that notwithstanding all T.
G's evasions and distinctions, we find that as to this matter of the Images of
God and the Trinity, the Church of Rome is not only gone off from Scripture,
Reason, and Antiquity, but from the doctrine and practice of the second Council
of Nice too.

2. I now come to the additions that have been made to the Council of Nice by
the Church of Rome as to the manner of worship given to Images.. 9.
For which I must consider,

1. What that worship was, which the Council of Nice did give to Images?

2. What additions have been made to it since that time?

1. What that worship was which the Council of Nice did give to Images? which
will appear by these two things. 1. That it defined true and real worship to be
given to Images. 2. That it was an inferior worship, and not Latria.

1. That it defined true and real worship to be given to Images; i. e. that
Images were not only to be Signs and helps to memory, to call to mind or
represent to us the object of worship; but that the acts of worship were to be
performed to the Images themselves. The former use of Images does suppose them
to be only of the nature of Books, which represent things to our minds without
any act of adoration performed to that which is only an instrument of
intellection; although the thing represented to the mind be a proper object of
adoration. As, if by reading a Book an Idea of God is represented to my mind
whom I ought to worship, yet no man can imagine that from hence I should fall
down upon my knees out of honor to the Book, or with a design to worship it.
When a man reads his prayers out of a Book, and makes use of that only as a
means or instrument to help his understanding, and direct his expressions; no
man can have any color of Reason to say that he worships the Book, which he
uses for a quite different purpose. It is the same case as to Images, when they
are used for no other end but barely to represent to the mind an object of
worship; as a Crucifix may do our Savior; then it is no more than an external
Note or Character, and has the same use that words have. But those who go no
farther than thus, stand condemned and Anathematized by the second Council of
Nice. Council. Nicen. 2. Act. 7. p. 555.
For that not only determines with a great deal of assurance that Images are to
be set up in Churches and houses, and ways, in order to the worship of them;
but very freely Anathematizes all sorts of dissenters either in judgment or
practice. p. 577.
Anathema be to all those who do not Salute the Holy and Venerable Images:
Anathema to all heretics: Anathema to those that follow the Council against
Images. Anathema to them that do not salute the Images of Christ and his
Saints. Epiphanius in the sixth Session declares this to be the sense of the
Council; Act. 6. p. 542.
Those who say that Images are to be had only for memory and not for worship or
salutation, are half-wicked, and partly true and partly false, they are so far
right as they are for Images, but they are in the wrong as they are against the
worship of them. O the folly of these men! says Epiphanius. But this is not
all, for as it was not sufficient to have Images for helps to memory, so
neither was it to give them some kind of honor or reverence; nothing but
worship would satisfy them. So the Patriarch Tarasius, says in plain terms,
they who pretend to honor Images, Act. 4. p. 247.
and not to worship them, are guilty of Hypocrisy, and self-contradiction. For
worship, says he, is a Symbol and signification of Honor, therefore they who
deny to worship them, do dishonor them. This was the Patriarchal way of
arguing in this famous Council. And this he proves from the saying of
Anastasius Bishop of Theopolis, Let no man be offended with the name of
adoration or worship, for we worship men and Angels, but do not serve them, and
worship is an expression of Honor. And it would do one good at heart, to see
how all the Reverend Fathers clap their hands for joy at the subtle Criticism
which it seems that Bishop had discovered, viz. that when our savior said,
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God and him Only shall thou serve, that Only
was not applied to Worship but to Service. Mark that, cries the Council, Only
belongs to Service, and not to worship, therefore although we may not serve
Images, yet we may Worship them. If the Devil had been so subtle, might not he
have said to our Savior, Mark that, you are forbidden Only to Serve any else
but God, but you may Worship me, notwithstanding that command? The Patriarch
Tarasius in his Epistle to Constantine and Irene expresses this worship by the
very same word which is used to God; for, when God says, Thou shall worship
the Lord thy God, Act. 7. p. 785.
and him only shall thou serve; he restrains Service to himself, but allows
Worship to other things; therefore, says he, (...), without the least doubt or
dispute it is a thing acceptable and well pleasing to God, for us to worship
and salute the Images of Christ and the B. Virgin, and of the Holy Angels and
Saints. If any man think otherwise, and have any doubt in his mind, or any
wavering, (...), about the Worship of the Venerable Images, the Holy and
Ecumenical Synod has Anathematized him; and what is an Anathema but a
Separation from God? And thus it becomes no less than damnation to doubt of the
Worship of Images. O blessed Change! from what it was in the primitive times,
when it was damnation to worship them. This worship he expresses in the same
Epistle by Kissing, by bowing, by prostration; all which he shows from the
signification of the word, and the use of it in Scripture. And in the
Definition of the Council, among the Acts of worship, Act. 7. p. 555.
are reckoned the oblation of Incense and Lights, because the honor of the
Image passes to the thing represented by it. So that all external acts of
adoration were by the Definition of this Council to be performed to Images; and
the same have been practiced by the approbation of the Roman Church; wherein
this Council of Nice is received as a General Council, and appealed to by the
Council of Trent, Council. Trident. sess. 25.
supposing the Decrees of that Council to be still in force. In the
Constitutions of Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury made in the
Convocation of the Bishops and Clergy begun at S. Paul's, 14 Ian. A. D. 1408. we
have a particular enumeration of the several Acts of worship which were
required to be performed to Images; and the places and Relics of the Saints,
viz. processions, Spelman. Council. To. 2. p. 653.666.
genuflections, bowing of the body, thurifications, deosculations, oblations,
burnings of Lights, and Pilgrimages, and all other forms and modes of worship
which have been practiced in the times of our predecessors or in our own; and
this not only the People were required to practice, but the Clergy to teach and
preach up the worship of the Cross and other Images with these acts of
adoration. And this Constitution is extant in Lyndwood as part of the Canon Law
then in force; Lyndwood Provinc. l. 5. tit. de heret. p. 160.2.
who in his Notes upon it, observes, that offering incense was a sacrifice, as
it was burnt upon the Altar, and a part of Latria, and therefore he says, the
same incense was not used to the Clergy and people with that burnt upon the
Altar, but of another sort which was not consecrated. In the Records of the
Tower is extant the Form of Renunciation imposed on the Lollards, Claus. 19. R.
2.
wherein are these words concerning the worship of Images, Spelman. p. 655.
I do swear to God and to all his Seynts upon this Holy Gospel, that fro this
day forward I shall Worship Images, with praying and offering unto them in the
worschop of the Seynts that they be made after. And yet after all this plain
evidence, some have had the confidence to tell us, that they hardly worship
Images in the Roman Church, but praying to them they abhor and detest. What
conscientious men were those then who made the poor Lollards swear to do that,
which they forbid them to do? But surely the Bishops and Clergy then understood
the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church as well as T. G. and his Brethren
do at this day; and having Authority in their hands were not so cautious and
reserved in this matter, as some think it for their interest to be at present.

And it is observable, 10.
that those learned men in the Roman Church who have been most nice and
scrupulous in this matter of the worship of Images, have yet agreed with the
rest in the practice of the outward acts of worship toward them. So Vasquez
observes concerning Durandus, Vasquez disp. 106. c. 1.
Holcot, and Picus Mirandula, who speak the most suspiciously among them about
the Worship of Images, that they agreed with the Catholic Church in performing
all external acts of adoration to Images, and that they differed only in the
manner of speaking from the rest: and that the main thing the Council of Nice
determined was the real acts of worship to be performed to Images, leaving the
several ways of explaining the manner of giving them, and the names of this
worship at greater liberty. The same, Card. Lugo says, that these men differed
from Heretics, Lugo de Myster. Incarn. disp. 36. Sect. 2.
because these utterly refuse giving external acts of adoration to Images,
which they allowed. Suarez confesses that some of the Heretics condemned by
the Council of Nice did maintain the Use of Images for Memory, which, he says,
appears by the Acts of the Council; Suarez in 3. p. q. 25. disp. 54. sect. 1.
and that all Catholics agree in this proposition, Imagines esse adorandas,
that Imagines are to be worshipped, although some, he says, do so explain that
worship as to differ little or nothing from heretics. So Durandus, Durand. in
sent. 3. did. 9. q. 2.
says he, openly teaches that Images are not to be worshipped, but only
improprie and abusive, improperly and abusively, because at their presence we
call to mind those objects represented by them, which are worshipped before the
Images, as if they were present, and on this account the Images are said to be
worshipped.

It will contribute much to the understanding the State of this Controversy,
to show a little more particularly, what the opinion of these men was, and how
it is condemned by the rest as savouring of Heresy, and repugnant to the
Council of Nice, and the sense of the Catholic Church. Durandus goes upon
these grounds, 1. That worship properly belongs to him in whom the cause of
that worship is, and by accident may be given to that which has only a
relation to that which is the cause. 2. In him to whom proper worship is given
we are to consider both the Person to whom it is given, and the Cause for
which; worship is only properly given to the Person, and not to any part of
him; the Cause is that from whence the excellency of the Person arises. 3. That
Supreme worship or Latria is due only to God for it self, by reason of his
Deity, because the cause of this honor is only in God; but by accident the
honor of Latria may belong to other things; Now, says he, a thing may have
relation to God two ways, 1. When it goes to make up the same Person, as the
Humanity of Christ. 2. When it has only an extrinsecal relation to Him, as
Christ's Mother, or His Image. 4. That the humane nature of Christ has only by
accident the honor of Latria given to it, as being part of that Person who is
worshipped, who is the Son of God; but the Humanity it self is not properly
that which is worshipped, nor is the Cause or reason of that worship, but only
of an inferior. 5. Of those things which have only an extrinsecal relation to
God, this is to be held in general; that either they deserve no worship at all
of themselves, as the Cross, and Images, or other inanimate things: or if they
do, as the B. Virgin, it is an inferior worship; of the first he determines
that no manner of worship does belong to them, no not to the Cross it self,
upon the account of any excellency, n. 14.
or contact of Christ, for which he gives this reason, That which is no subject
capable of holiness or virtue, cannot in it self be the term of adoration, but
the Cross on which Christ did hang, was not a subject capable of holiness, etc.
Nunquam ergo cruci Christi debetur aliquis honor nisi in quantum reducit in
rememorationem Christi; no kind of honor is due to the Cross, but as it calls
Christ to our remembrance. 6. That although the conception of the mind be of
the thing represented upon sight of an Image; there is still a real difference
in the thing, and in the conception, between the Image and the thing
represented; and therefore properly speaking the same worship is never due to
the Image that is to the object represented by it. But, says he, because we
must speak as the most do, the Image may be said to be worshipped with the same
worship with the thing represented, because at the presence of the Image we
worship the object represented by it as if he were actually present.

Holkot in his Lectures on the Book of Wisdom, Holkot in Sap. c. 13 Lect. 138.
p. 424.
says, That in a large sense we may be said to worship the Image, because by
the Image we call Christ to mind, and worship him before the Image: and
therefore, says he, I think it fitter to say, that I do not worship the Image
of Christ, because it is Wood, nor because it is the Image of Christ, but that
I worship Christ before his Image: but he by no means allows, that Latria in
any sense be given to an Image of Christ. 1. Because Latria is the worship due
only to God, but no Image is God: and therefore it is a contradiction to say,
that Latria is due only to God, and yet that it is due to the Image of Christ,
and to Christ. 2. Then the same worship would be due to Christ and to a Stone,
or to Christ and to a creature. 3. He that gives to any thing the worship of
Latria, confesses that to be God; therefore a man may as lawfully say the
Image is God, as that it may be worshipped with Latria; and consequently that
something which is not God is God. Ioh. Picus Mirandula gave this for one of
his conclusions, Ioh. Pit. Mirand. Apolog. p. 103.
That neither the Cross, nor any other Image is to be worshipped with Latria
after the way of Thomas: this conclusion was condemned, and he forced to write
an Apology for it: where he says, That the way of Thomas is dangerous, for the
Image as an Image is distinct from the thing represented, therefore if as such
it terminates the worship of Latria, it seems to follow that something which is
not God is worshipped with Latria: and he declares, that he agrees with
Durandus and Holcot: but withal, he says, that this conclusion of his was
condemned as scandalous, and against the Custom of the Universal Church. Yet,
he concludes his Apology, with saying, That if he had universally condemned the
worship of Images, his proposition had been Heretical. From whence it appears,
that these persons who did agree in the practice, yet because they said the
Images were to be worshipped only improperly and abusively, were not thought to
believe, or do what the Church required. Therefore Suarez says, Suarez ^^.
(1.) That it is defide, or an article of Faith, imagines esse adorandas, that
Images are to be worshipped, and that to be owned not in any limited and
improper sense, but absolutely and simply; which article, he says, is founded
in the Tradition and Definitions of the Church, and he proves it by the
constant practice of the Church. (2.) That Images are to be worshipped not
abusively and improperly, but vere and proprie, truly and properly, and that
the contrary opinion of Durandus is dangerous, rash, and savouring of Heresy.
So, he says, Medina determines it, Barth. Medina 3. p. q. 25. a. 3.
who reports that Victoria said it was Heretical; and this conclusion, he
says, is commonly received among the modern Divines; and he proves it from the
Definitions of Councils; especially the second Council of Nice, which has
defined it under an Anathema. But, he adds, if Images were only to be
worshipped abusively and improperly, the worship of them was rather simply to
be denied than affirmed; for an improper and abusive worship is no worship at
all; and they were not to be condemned for Heretics, who allow the use of
Images for memory, and only deny their worship. To which he subjoyns this
Reason, either the Image truly and in it self, is at least the material object
of worship, total, or partial, or it is not; if it be, the thing is granted; if
not, then in plain terms, the Image is not worshipped. For it is neither the
formal nor the material object of worship; but only the occasion or sign
exciting men to worship the thing represented. And according to this opinion,
the Heretics would speak more properly than the Catholics. For he that at the
sight of a beautiful creature is excited to praise or love the Creator, cannot
be said to praise or love the creature, although the presence of the Creature
did raise that devotion. Therefore, says he, the Nicene Council did condemn
this opinion, when it condemned those who said that Images did only serve for
memory, which in truth is all the use that opinion allows them; and when the
Nicene Council declares the worship given to Images not to be Latria; for if no
more worship be allowed, but only worshipping the object in presence of the
Image, then the most perfect Latria may be given to Christ before the Image;
and consequently the worship in that abusive and improper sense may be Latria,
which the Council denies: and farther the same Council says, that not only the
exemplar may be worshipped in the Image, but that the Image is to be worshipped
for the sake of the exemplar, by which it determines the Image to be the object
of worship, although the Reason of it be the thing represented. (3.) Suarez.
says, That not only the external acts of adoration are to be performed toward
Images, but the very intention of worship to be directed toward them: For even
Durandus himself did allow the external acts to be done toward them, and
because the inward intention he said was directed to the exemplar, therefore he
said the Images were only said abusively to be worshipped. For which assertion
Suarez gives these reasons, (1.) The external act without the intention of the
mind is no proper worship, but only counterfeit. And Leontius, quoted in the
Council of Nice, says, In all worship the inward intention is required. (2.)
From many passages in that Council, implying that the intention of worship
ought to be about the Images, because they are said to deserve worship, and
from the sayings of Epiphanius, Basilius, Adrianus, Tarasius there extant, and
Elias Cretensis, who says he did perfectly worship them, which could not be
without the inward intention. And from the Council of Trent, which calls it due
honor and worship; but it cannot be any true honor without the inward
intention. (3.) To perform the external acts of worship before an Image, is
either to worship it, or not: if it be, then the inward intention is granted;
but since there may be a distinction between the intention of worship, and the
intention of performing the external acts of worship; in order to worship it is
not only necessary to perform the material acts, but to do them with the
intention of giving worship by them. Neither is it enough to say, that there is
an inward intention, but the outward acts are toward the Image, and the inward
intention to the exemplar, For, says Suarez, as true worship does essentially
require the intention of worship, so the worship of this or that particular
thing does require a proportionable intention toward that thing: and the
worship of one thing cannot be said to be the worship of another thing distinct
from it, unless it be some way participated by it; but the Image is a distinct
thing from the exemplar, therefore the worship of the exemplar cannot be said
to be the worship of the Image, unless the Image do partake of the worship, and
consequently there must be an intention of giving worship to the Image. This,
says he, may be illustrated by an example; If a man kiss the ground out of a
mere intention of giving worship to God thereby, he cannot truly and properly
be said to worship the ground about which the material action is conversant,
but only God to whom he directed his worship. And all this he confirms by more
passages out of the Nicene Council, which, he says, was not so regardless
about the manner and names of worship as Vasquez imagined, but took great care
to express it self so that true and proper worship be given to Images; which it
defines under an Anathema; and although it uses other words, of salutation,
honor, etc. yet it makes these aequivalent to that real worship which it does
expressly require. Ambros. Catharinus says, Cathar. de cultu and ador. Imag. p.
133.
that the opinion of those who say Images are not truly and properly to be
worshipped, but God to be worshipped before an Image, differs very little from
those who deny any worship of Images, and is repugnant to the practice of the
Church, because we direct our gestures, our words and signs of adoration to the
Images, to which likewise we burn incense: And we worship the Cross, saying, O
Crux ave, spes unica, etc. And he proves at large by the second Council of
Nice, that true and real worship was required to be given to Images; and
concludes that Images are not merely for instruction, p. 137, 138, 139.
or memory, or exciting devotion, but that they are set up properly for
worship. Therefore if any man asks another, Suntne adorandae Imagines?
intrepide respondeat, adorandae. Are Images to be worshipped? let him answer
without fear, they are. Because, says he, Images being set apart by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost for such a sacred use, do obtain such a degree of
Sanctification, that whoever violates them is guilty of Sacrilege and Treason
against the Divine Majesty. For, says he, God himself is most truly believed
to be present in them after a particular manner, and he shows his power and
presence by them, using them often for Oracles; that after this manner our
Saviors saying is fulfilled, I am with you to the end of the World. And for
the sake of this peculiar presence of God which we sensibly perceive (and if I
should deny that I had done it my self I should be a liar and ungrateful)
Images do deserve a peculiar adoration, but short of Latria, because they are
sanctified for such spiritual offices. Naclantus another Italian Bishop,
Naclant. enarr. in Ep. ad Romans c. ^ p. 171.
and an eminent Divine in the Council of Trent as well as Catharinus says,
That it is needless caution for any to say, that they worship before the Image,
sed and adorare imaginem sine quo volueris scrupulo, but they may say it
roundly, and without the least scruple that they worship the Image. Bellarmine
says, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 21.
That the Images of Christ and the Saints are to be worshipped, not only by
accident and improperly, but by themselves and properly, so that they terminate
the worship, as they are considered in themselves, and not barely as they
represent the exemplar: which he proves from the definition of the Council of
Nice, and the same reasons which are mentioned from Suarez before. Dominicus
Soto another great Divine of the Council of Trent, Soto de Instit. and jure l.
2. q. 3. art. 2. in fin.
determines positively, That Images are not intended by the Church only for
helps to memory; for we do not worship the Scriptures or names of Saints, which
call them to our minds; but as to Images we ought to think otherwise, for they
do not only raise our minds to worship those who are represented by them, sed
easdem ipsas debemus adorare, we ought to worship the Images themselves; for,
says he, the Church does not say, We worship thee, O Christ, but thy Cross,
and O Crux ave, spes unica, etc. whose words are repeated and approved by Ferd.
Velosillus. Bernardus Pujol lays down this assertion, Velosill.

Advertent. Theol. Scholast. in 2. Tom.

Aug. ad 9. quaest. p. 332 ad sin.

Pujol de sacro ador. cultu disp. 3. sect. 7. p. 2.


The Image truly and properly is the matter of adoration, and the worship truly
and properly is terminated upon it: which, he says, is plain from the seventh
Council and from several others, and those are Anathematized who deny it. And
the definitions of Councils being absolutely put, are properly to be
understood: therefore the worship is truly and properly to be terminated on the
Image: and not only the external but the internal worship is, he says, to be
terminated on the Image, which he proves likewise from the second Nicene
Council, wherein it is not only required that men do the outward acts of
worship, but that they do them with love and affection. And when, says he, the
Council of Trent mentions the external acts, p. 311.
it implies that the internal worship is terminated upon the Images; for the
external acts have not the nature of worship, but as they are signs of internal
worship. And to say that the worship is terminated improperly and abusively on
the Image, is to make the Councils to speak improperly and abusively; and those
who say that Images are improperly worshipped, do not only err in the manner of
speaking, p. 324.
but in the thing it self. Tannerus says, Tanner. To. 3. disp. ^ q. 2. dub. 3.
assert. 4.
Absque haesitatione satendum, imagines non solum venerandas and colendas, sed
etiam adorandas esse; that we should say it without hesitation, that Images are
not barely to be honored or reverenced, but to be adored; which he likewise
proves from several passages of the Nicene synod. Ysambertus delivers his sense
in these particulars, Ysamber. de Myster. Incarn. ad q. 25. disp. 4.
1. That the worship of the thing represented before the Image, is not properly
worship of the Image, nor agreeable to the Definitions of Councils. For that,
says he, is only properly worshipped, which terminates the worship, and the
Councils define such a worship of Images; which is terminated upon the Images;
which he proves from the Council of Trent as well as Nice, because it requires
such acts of worship, which are terminated on the Images. 2. Adoration may be
directed to the Image, as to the thing which terminates it; and to the exemplar
as the reason of it; for which, besides the reasons given by others, he gives
this, viz. when there are two things good and lawful, and there is no positive
Precept to do them together, then it is lawful to do one without the other: but
in the act of worshipping the Image with the exemplar, there are two good acts,
viz. the worship of the Image, and of the exemplar, and there is no precept of
the Church to join those together, therefore it is lawful to do one without the
other. Eligius Bassaeus desires it may be observed, Eligii Bassaei Flores
Theolog. Practic. v. Adorat. n. 10. ed. 1663.
That in the worship of the Image, not only the object is worshipped, which is
represented by it, but also the Image it self, seeing that is properly
worshipped, which is the term of adoration, or the matter to which it is
directed. This is the Catholic verity, says Sylvius, ^r. Sylvius in 3. p.

Th. q. 25. art. 3. q. 5.


that Images are truly and properly to be worshipped, so that the honor is
given not only to the exemplar, but for the sake of that to the Image, and this
is defined, he says, by the second Council of Nice. Arriaga lays down this as
a certain principle among Catholics, Arriag. de Incarn. disp. 56. sect. 1.
That Images are to be truly worshipped, which all the Definitions of Councils
do clearly manifest, which being in a dogmatical point, and against Heretics
cannot without danger of error be explained in an abusive and improper sense:
and he adds afterward, Sect. 2.
that the opinion of Durandus seems manifestly condemned by all those
definitions of Councils which require true worship to be given to Images: and
he produces several passages of the seventh Synod to that purpose. And it
signifies nothing to their excuse, that they perform the outward signs of
worship to Images; for, says he, since they allow no proper worship to them,
the Images do only serve to excite the memory; which he thus farther confirms.
It is not credible that any heretics (supposing the object represented to
deserve worship) should imagine it lawful to worship that object without an
Image, and unlawful to do it when the memory of that object is excited upon the
view of an Image, upon supposition that no worship is intended to be given to
the Image thereby. And it is not credible, that if this had been all the
Councils had determined, that they should never think of such an easy way of
satisfying dissenters, as the declaring this to have been their sense would
have been. But the controversy lay in another point, viz. that Images did not
deserve any immediate worship, so as to have any honor done to them, although
considered only as the material objects. For, says he, if all the dispute had
been only about a condition exciting men to adoration, it could not have come
into men's heads to have said, that because Images were dead and inanimate
things, they could not be a mere Physical condition of adoration; which is all
that Durandus allows them. Is any man so senseless to say, that because words
are inanimate things, therefore they ought not to be excited to the worship of
God at the hearing of them? and the case is the same of the representation made
by the eye or by the ear. But when they denied the lawfulness of the worship of
them, they spoke of true and real worship which is immediately carried to the
Images themselves, and for this they made use of an argument which has an
appearance of Truth, viz. that Images being dead things have no excellency to
deserve any real worship from us. From whence it follows, that when the Fathers
condemned these heretics; they did not determine that they might be used as a
condition of worship; but that true and real worship was to be given to them.

Cardinal Lugo says, Lugo de Myster. Incarn. disp. 36. sect. ^. n. 37.
that to the worship of Images, it is not only necessary that the external act
be performed to the Image, of kissing, or bowing, etc. but there must be an
inward affection too which implies submission. For, says he, worship as all
agree, is an expression of submission to the thing worshipped; and it would be
ridiculous to say that Peter is worshipped by that token of submission which I
show to Paul; therefore to the worship of the Image, the outward act must
express the inward submission of the mind to it, or else we must deny the
common definition of adoration, and make a new one. And this he afterward
proves to have been the definition of the second Council of Nice, who did
decree that true and real worship is to be given to Images as they are distinct
from the exemplar according to every thing that is required to the Nature of
Worship. Thus I have fully proved from the Acts of the Council, and the
judgment of so many of the most learned and eminent Divines of the Roman
Church, that by the Decree of the Nicene Council, such true and real worship is
to be given to Images as is terminated upon the Images themselves.

. 11.
2. We are now to equire what kind of worship that was, which the second Council
of Nice did give to Images: which will appear by showing these two things. 1.
That the worship required was higher than mere reverence. 2. That it was lower
than Latria. (1.) That it was higher than mere reverence. T. G. would
insinuate, T. G. p. 123, etc.
that all the worship required by the Nicene Council, was no more than the
Reverence showed to the Books of the Holy Gospels, or the sacred Utensils of
the Altar; for which he quotes the definition of the Council, wherein those
things are joined together. And so they are in Hadrians epistle extant in the
Council, in the Latin translation (for the Greek has another sense) and in
Damascens oration; Act. 2. p. 106.

Damasc. oral. 1. p. 749.


but to clear yet farther the State of the Question, I shall show, 1. The
difference between the Reverence of these things, and the Worship of Images. 2.
That the Council of Nice did put a difference between them.

1. For the difference between the Reverence of these things, and the worship
of Images. Although no irrational or inanimate being be capable of that real
excellency to deserve any honor from us for its own sake, as Aquinas
determines; Aquin. 2.2. q. 103. art. A. ad 3.
yet such things may have a relation to matters of so high a nature as to
deserve a different usage and regard from other things; as the Vessels of the
Church, or the Chalices are not to be used for common drinking; which
peculiarity of the use of such things is that degree of honor which belongs to
them on the account of their being dedicated to sacred purposes. So S. Augustine
says, Aug. in Ps. 113. conc. 2.
of the sacred Vessels, that they are consecrated and do become holy by their
Use, being separated from common service and devoted to the ministry of holy
things; but he does plainly distinguish the respect shown to them from the
worship of Images; for a little before he speaks of such who did worship or
pray looking upon an Image, and that those who did so did behave themselves as
if they expected to be heard by the Image; but do we pray to the sacred
Utensils because we make use of them in our prayers to God? Little did S.
Austin think, that praying looking upon Images and the Reverence showed to
sacred Vessels on the account of their use, should have been ranked together.
He that prays looking upon an Image, does either direct his adoration to the
Image, or to the Person represented by the Image as if he were actually
present, and this is the true reason of the worship of Images; but no man can
pretend this as to the Reverence of Holy things, because all their holiness
consists in a bare extrinsecal denomination, which affords no reason for any
more than such an esteem as belongs to sacred Things, and not for any act of
worship to be done to them. They who make the Images themselves to be the
material object or term of adoration, do yet say that the formal reason of that
worship is to be taken from the object represented: others say, that the thing
represented, and the Image are worshipped with the same act of adoration; but
both sorts do make the representation in an Image to be the ground and reason
of the worship given to it. Why then should those things, which do not
represent be worshipped as those that do? Are not Images appointed by the
Definition of the Nicene Council to be set up in Churches, and in High ways,
on purpose for worship? Are they not formed, and set forth with all advantages
to allure men to the worship of them? And after all this, is no more meant by
their worship than by the Reverence of Holy things; which are designed for a
peculiar use, and serve for other ends than to be worshipped by us? If Images
were set up in Churches only for memory and instruction, and were as much
appointed by God to inform us of his Will, as the Holy Scriptures are; there
were some color of showing a like regard to them as to the Holy Bible; but it
is quite otherwise, they were never appointed for that purpose, they are
incapable of doing it, and are set up for adoration; and yet can the same men
who commanded their worship, have any pretense for making the Reverence to the
Bible and the worship of Images to be alike? Besides all this, is there no
difference between a Religious respect (if I may so call it) to sacred places
and things, and all the most solemn Acts of adoration which were ever given to
Images by the greatest Idolaters? such as kneelings before them, prostrations,
praying with their eyes fixed upon them, as though they were speaking to them;
burning incense and lights before them: which are as great Testimonies of
Worship as were ever used by the grossest and most sottish Idolaters. I may
rather say, there is no great difference between them and their Images, that
can see no difference between such worship and the Reverence of Holy things.

2. That the Council of Nice did put a difference between these things. For
however, to blind the business as much as might be, they put them together in
the Definition, yet if we observe the ground on which it established the
worship of Images, was such as referred to the things represented by them, and
not any sacred use of them: and those expressed in the very same Definition.
Council. Nicen. 2. act. 7. p. 555.
For, say they, they honor of the Image passes to the Prototype, and he that
worships the Image does in that worship the thing represented. By which they
lay the foundation of the worship of Images upon a thing peculiar to them, and
that does not hold for the other things. And this reason here assigned runs
through all the several discourses in that Synod, of Hadrian, Theodorus,
Tarasius, Germanus, Leontius and Epiphanius; and the very same reason is
assigned by the Council of Trent. It is observed out of S. Augustine, Aug. de
Trin. l. 3. c. 10.
that the most sacred things are only capable of honor, honorem tanquam
Religiosa possunt habere, where he speaks of the elements of the Eucharist, but
Tarasius in this Council of Nice pronounces them all guilty of hypocrisy, who
would only give honor and not Worship to Images: Act. 4. p. 247.
by which it appears that the Council determined more than mere Reverence to be
given to Images.

2. That this worship which the Council of Nice determined was lower than
Latria, For so it follows in the definition of the Council, that they only
meant an honorary adoration and not true Latria, which is only due to God.
Tarasius upon reading Pope Hadrians Epistle declares his consent to the worship
of Images asserted in it, Act. 2. p. 127.
reserving Latria, and Faith to God alone. To the same purpose speaks
Constantinus Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus upon reading the Epistle of
Theodorus; Act. 3. p. 187.
whose words I grant were mistaken by the translatour of the Council into
Latin, as appears by what he is charged with in the Caroline Book, and his
words in the Acts of the Council; but it does not therefore follow, as T. G.
would have it, T. G. p. 142, 145.
that the Council of Francford did mistake the meaning of the Nicene Synod. For
the Author of the Caroline Book particularly observes, that in those words (as
translated) He did contradict the sayings of the rest, Lib. Carol. l. 3. c. 17.
but that unawares he had betrayed that, which the rest endeavored to conceal,
viz. that they gave the worship proper to God to Images: for however they
denied it in words, they did it in their actions. So Epiphanius the Deacon
says, Act. 6. p. 539.
that they often declared that they did not give Latria to Images. Thus we see
what the sense of the second Council of Nice was as to the worship of Images.

. 12.
2. I now come to the additions which have been made to this doctrine, in the
Roman Church; when it was delivered as good Catholic doctrine, that the
worship of Latria was to be given to the Images of Christ. So Thomas Aquinas
determines in several places, which are collected by Simon Majolus; and he goes
upon these grounds. Pro desensione sacra. Imagine.

Centur. 13. c. 14.


1. Because no irrational creature is capable of worship, but with a respect to
a rational Being. 2. Because Images are worshipped on the account of their
representation, therefore, says he, they are to be worshipped with the same
worship with the thing represented. 3. Because the motion of the mind toward
an Image, Aq. 3. p. q. 25. art. 3.

ad lib. sent. 3. did. 9. q. 2.


as an Image, is the same with the motion toward the thing represented. 4.
Because the Church in praying to the Cross, speaks to it as if it were Christ
himself. O Crux ave, spes unica. But how can this doctrine be reconciled to the
definition of the Council of Nice, Est. in sent. l. 3. did. 9. sect. 3.
which determines expressly contrary? Estius says, that S. Thomas never saw
this definition of the Council; the same is said by Catharinus, and Sylvius;
for says Catharinus, Cathar. de Imag. p. 137.

Sylv. in 3. p. q. 25. art. 3. q. 5.


if he had seen it he would have endeavored to have reconciled his opinion
with the decree of the Council; which shows that he thought it inconsistent
with it. From whence I argue that the Council of Nice was not then received in
the Western Church, for if it had been, is it conceivable that so great a
Doctor of the Church as Aquinas, should either not have seen it, or if he had
seen it, should have contradicted the Definition of it. But Aquinas was not the
first who asserted this doctrine in the Latin Church, for Alex. Hales, who was
his Master, says as much in effect, although he does not so openly apply the
term of Latria to it; Alex. Hales 3. p. q. 30. m. 3. art. 3. sect. 1^
yet putting this question, whether greater worship does belong to the Cross
than to any man? he determines it affirmatively; and distinguishes between the
dignity of a thing, and the dignity of an Image, and an Image having all its
excellency from the object represented, all the worship given to it is to be
referred to the Prototype; now, says he, man having a proper excellency can
deserve no more than Dulia, and therefore the Cross as it represents Christ
must have the worship of Latria. And it is considerable that Alex. Hales, as
Pitts says, Pitts de Scriptor. Aetat. 13. A. 1245.
writ his Sum by the Command of Pope Innocent 4. and in the time of Alex. 4.
it was examined by seventy Divines and approved, and recommended to be taught
in all Universities. Card. Bonaventure determines it roundly, Bonav. in sent.
3. did. 9. q. 2.
that as Christ himself from his union to the Divinity is worshipped with
Latria, so is the Image of Christ as it represents him; and concludes thus,
propterea Imagini Christi debet cultus Latriae exhiberi. Rich. de Media Villa
who lived in the same Century, Ric. de Media Villa in 3. sent. q. 9. art. 2.
asserted the same doctrine. And when Durandus opposed the doctrine of Thomas
on this ground, because the Image and Prototype were two distinct things, and
therefore what belonged to the exemplar could not be attributed to the Image,
however considered as an Image, and so the worship are to the exemplar could
not be given to the Image, yet he confesses the other was the common and
received opinion; Palud. in 3. d. 9. q. 1. Capreol. 3. d. 9. q. 1. art. 1.
concl. 2. and 3.

Marsil. l. 3. art. 2. q. 8. concl. 1. and 3.


which was defended against Durandus by Paludanus and Capreolus. Marsilius ab
Ingen speaks his mind freely in this matter, saying, that the Cross as a sign
representing the object of worship, and as a medium of it is to be adored with
Latria; and for this he appeals to the practice of the Church, O Crux ave spes
unica, Auge piis justitiam, reisque dona veniam: which three things, he says,
do properly belong to God, and therefore, says he, it is properly the worship
of Latria which the Church does give to the Cross as a sign. Iacobus Almain
declares, Almain. l. 3. did. 9. concl. 5.
that Images are to be worshipped with the same kind of worship that the things
represented are: because no Image is to be worshipped for any sanctity or
virtue in it self, but only for the sake of the object represented, otherwise
it would be Idolatry. Gabriel Biel likewise agrees, Biel in Canon. Missae lect.
49.
that the Images of Christ which represent him are to be worshipped with
Latria: but he found out the distinction of a twofold Latria, 1. Proper Latria,
which is the worship given to Christ as the object represented upon the sight
of an Image of him, and this is not terminated on the Image, but the exemplar.
2. Improper or analogical Latria, which is the worship of the Image as it
represents: so that to the same external act of worship he makes two internal
acts, whereof one is terminated on the Image, the other on the Prototype.
Thomas Waldensis says, Waldens. To. 3. tit. 19. c. 156. n. 6, 7.
that the Images considered in themselves deserve no worship at all, but
considered in relation to a higher Being and in regard of their representation,
so they deserve to be worshipped; and if the mind passes from the Image to the
thing represented, then he says, the Image and the Prototype are worshipped
with the same act; which must be Latria as to the Image of Christ; but the
Latria condemned by the Nicene Council, he would have to be the worshipping the
Images themselves for Gods: which the Heathens themselves, as appears by the
Acts of that Synod, utterly denied that they did in the discourse of John of
Thessalonica. Council. Nic. Act. 5. p. 354.

Summa Angelica. v. Adorat. n. 5, 6.


We worship not, says the Heathen, the Images, but through them the Spiritual
Powers. Angelus de Clavasio declares, that the Image of Christ is to be
worshipped with Latria as well as himself, and that the Cross whereon Christ
was Crucified was to be worshipped with Latria both on the account of
representation and contact; Barth. Fumi Armilla Aurea v. Adorat. n. 7.
therefore, says he, we speak and pray to the Cross as to Christ himself.
Carthusianus in sent. l. 3. did. 9.
The same is said by Bartholomaus Fumus, who was a Dominican, as the other a
Franciscan, Antonin. Sum. 3. p. tit. 12. c. 9. sect. 4.
(whereby we see it was no opinion peculiar to the Dominican order on the
account of the authority of Thomas) and by Dionysius the Carthusian, Franc.
Ferrar. in Th. c. Gentes l. 3. c. 120.
as well as Antoninus the Dominican. Franciscus Ferrariensis says, that when
Latria is appropriated to God, it is be understood primo and per se, primarily
and for its own sake; but if it be understood only secondarily and for another
sakes; then, says he, Latria may be given to an Image of Christ; for
considering the Image, as an Image, it is worshipped with the same act, by
which the Person represented is, and therefore since Latria is due to Christ,
it must be so to the Image of Christ; and he answers all the arguments of
Durandus, Holcot, and Mirandula by the help of the former distinction (as he
might have done a hundred more) and he asserts, that the Image and the object
represented make together one total object of adoration, whereof one part is
the Reason why the worship is terminated on the other: and that the act of
adoration whereby God and the Image are worshipped together, cannot be Latria
in respect of one, and an inferior worship in respect of the other, because
both the internal and external acts are such wherein the worship of Latria does
properly consist: and to show this to be the Catholic doctrine, he proves it,
from the practice of the Catholic Church which makes genuflections,
prostrations, supplications. and other acts of Latria to the Cross. Which was
the true Reason of introducing this doctrine of Latria to Images contrary to
the Definition of the Nicene Council, because they saw the constant practice of
the Church in the Worship of the Cross could not be justified upon other
grounds. The Church never owning any Prosopopoeia, but expressing its devotions
to the Cross, as really distinct from, although representing the Person of
Christ.

Card. Cajetan says, Cajet. in Aq. 3. p. q. 25. art. 3.
that the act of worship toward the Image of Christ, is truly and properly
terminated on the Image; not in regard either of its matter or Form, but as it
performs the Office of an Image. So that Christ himself is the Reason of the
worship of the Image, and his being in the Image, is the condition, by which
the Reason of worship does excite men to worship and terminate it. But since
Christ is not asserted to be really and Personally in the Image, but only by
representation, Cajetan ought to have shown, that an union by mere Imagination
between Christ and the Image, is a sufficient condition for performing those
acts of worship to the Image which properly belong to God alone which he has
not undertaken; but he shows against Durandus, that if the Image of Christ were
only worshipped, as it puts us in mind of Christ, then any other thing which
puts us in mind of him might be worshipped as well as an Image. And the
Practice of the Church shows, that it does not worship the Cross as a
memorative sign, but because the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with
Latria, therefore it worships it. Thus we see what the judgment of the most
eminent and learned Divines of the Roman Church was, concerning giving the
worship of Latria to Images before the Council of Trent, and upon what, that
judgment was founded, viz. the practice of the Roman Church, in the worship of
the Cross.

Let us now see whether this matter has been otherwise determined by the
Council of Trent,. 13.
and whether the contrary opinion has obtained since. That wary Council
knowing very well the practice of their Church and the opinion of Divines,
Council. Trident. sess. 25.
only determines due honor and veneration to be given to Images; not for the
sake of any Divinity, or power inherent in them, for which they are to be
worshipped, or that any thing is to be asked of them, or that Trust is to be
put in the Images, as it was of old by the Heathens, who placed their hope in
Idols; but because the honor which is done to them, is referred to the
Prototypes which they represent, so that by the Images which we kiss, and
before which we uncover our heads, and fall down, we adore Christ and worship
the Saints which they represent. Which has been already decreed by Councils
against the opposers of Images, especially the second Nicene Synod. Where we
observe these things, 1. That all external Acts of Adoration are allowed to be
done to Images; even the very same which were to be done to the Person of
Christ, if he were actually present, are to be done to his Image to adore him
thereby. 2. That there is not the least intimation against giving the same kind
and degree of worship to the Image, which is given to Christ himself. And since
the Council allows no proper virtue in the Image for which it should be
worshipped* but takes all from the representation, and supposes the honor to
pass to the Prototype, Vasquez thinks it is very evident, Vasq. in 3. p. disp.
108. c. 4.
that the sense of the Council was, that the Image and the Exemplar were to be
worshipped with the same Act of adoration, which as to the Image of Christ must
be no less than Latria. 3. After the Council of Trent, many of their most
Eminent Divines have asserted the worship of Latria to be given to Images.
Dominicus Soto a Divine of the Council of Trent determines, that every Image is
to be worshipped with the same worship, Soto de justit. and jure. l. 2. q. 3.
art. 2. in fin.
that belongs to the thing represented; as the Image of God and Christ with
Latria, and of the B. Virgin and other Saints with Dulia. Turrianus, Turrian.
pro Canon. Apost. l. 1. c. 25.
another of the Trent Divines says, that the same adoration belongs to the
Image, and the Prototype; as that which is called Latria to Christ and his
Image, but to Christ properly, and to the Image equivocally. Naclantus a third
Divine of that Council says, Naclant. in Romans 1. p. 171.
that if the object represented ought to be worshipped with Latria, so ought
the Image too. And what more reasonable way can we have to understand the sense
of the Council, than from the Divines who were present and managed the debates
of it? Gretser has a whole Chapter to prove, Gretser. de Cruce l. 1. c. 49.
that the Cross is to be worshipped with Latria. Card. Palaeotus says,
Palaeot. de sacr. and prof. Imag. l. 1. c. 32.
that the same worship which is given to the Prototype may be given to the
Image, but with the different degrees of Latria and Dulia, etc. When, says he,
the Person of Christ is worshipped without an Image, that adoration is
terminated upon his essence and Person as in themselves; but when he is
worshipped in an Image, then his essence and Person is worshipped as
represented and being in that Image; although he be not really there, but
according to his figure and similitude. Gregory de Valentia confesses it to be
the same Divine worship they give to the Image of Christ that they do to the
Prototype, Greg. de Valent. de Idolol. l. 2. c. 7.
because the Image is worshipped in the stead of Christ, but, he says, it is
given in a different respect to them both: but besides this, he allows an
inferior worship to the Image which is terminated on it self. And in both
these Petrus Thyraeus agrees with him. Pet. Thyrae. apud Possev. biblioth. l.
8. c. 17.
Cornelius Curtius an Augustinian, Cornel. Curtius de Clavis Domin. c. 12.
contends for Latria to be due to the very Nails of Christ's Cross, by reason of
their Contact of the Person of Christ, which worship, he says, was approved by
the Church, when Innocent 6. appointed the Festival of the Soldiers Lance and
the Nails of the Cross. Ludovicus de Paramo the Inquisitour of Sicily
determines, Lud. de Paramo de Orig. S. Inquis. l. 2. tit. 3. c. 8. n. 9.
that the Cross is to be worshipped with no other worship than that of Latria:
and if it be taken as joined with Christ in the mind, it is to be worshipped
with a perfect act of absolute Latria: which belongs to Christ perse and to the
Cross concomitanter and per accidens: but if it be taken as the material object
of adoration, then it is only a Relative Latria for the sake of Christ. And he
adds, that an Image is truly and properly to be adored or coadored with the
exemplar: which he proves from the Council of Trent. n. 19.
To which he subjoyns a remarkable story, viz. of one Ioh. Aegidius Canon of
Savil, who was forced to make a public retractation for denying the adoration
of the Cross, which was judged to be contrary to the practice of the Church,
when it says, O Crux ave spes unica, and in another place Crucem tuam
adoramus; and for saying that God was to be worshipped with Latria and the
Cross with Dulia: which propositions he rejected as heretical; and asserted
that the Cross was to be worshipped with the same worship of Latria that Christ
himself is. From whence Lud. de Paramo concludes, that this opinion is the most
agreeable to the Catholic Faith. Paulus Maria Quarti a Clericus Regularis, in
his late Commentaries on the Rubricks of the Missal agrees exactly with
Ludovicus a Paramo in the manner of adoration of the Cross: Rubrice Missal.
Romans Comment. illustr. p. 2. tit. 4. de Introit. sect. 2. dub. 2. and 4.
and for Images of Christ, he says, that their opinion is more probable who
make it to be absolute Latria, and not reductive and Analogical. Greg. Valent.
in Hymnod. Eccles. tr. 2. Hymn. 13. p. 268.
Gregorius Valentianus in his Commentaries on the Hymns declares his consent
with S. Thomas about worshipping the Cross with Latria. Layman says, Paul.
Layman. Theol. Moral. l. 4. tr. 7. c. 5. n. 10.
that we do not worship the Images of Christ with an absolute Latria, because
they have no Divinity or rational excellency in them; but with a relative
worship whereby we worship the Image and Exemplar together, we ought to
acknowledge that the Cross and Images of Christ are worshipped with Latria.
Eligius Bassaeus a Capuchine agrees with Layman, Elig. Bassae. Flores Theol.
Practi^. tit. Ador. suppl. n. 6, 7.
that this is not absolute, but a relative Latria, but he determines that the
Cross whatever matter it be made of, ought to be worshipped with Latria as a
sign; but that very Cross on which Christ did hang, not only as a sign, but in
regard of contact of his body; and so the Nail and Thorns, and Sponge, and
other things which touched his body, except only Judas his Lips, and the Ass he
rode on to Jerusalem, because they did not partake of his sanctity, as no
doubt the Nails and the Wood of the Cross did. But he has yet a farther
subtilty about this Latria, for, he says, that when the Image of Christ is the
material object of worship, and Christ as represented the Reason of that
worship, that is not absolute, but relative Latria; but when Christ and the
Image together make up the same material object of adoration, then it is
properly Latria; which he endeavors to prove both from the Councils of Nice
and Trent* Phil. Gamachaeus a late Professor of Divinity of the Sorbon
determins, Ph. Gamachae. in 3. p. Th. q. 25. con. 2.
that the Cross and Image of Christ as they represent him, and as they are
conceived together with Christ, ought to be worshipped with the supreme worship
of Latria: because Christ himself is the Reason of the adoration, and because
the Church does so worship the Cross. O Crux ave spes unica. The same is
asserted as to Relative Latria by N. Ysambertus another late Professor of the
Sorbon, Ysambert. ad q. 25. disp. 4. art. 1. and disp. 5. art. 1.
(whom I the rather mention, that this might not be thought the particular
opinion of any Orders among them, as of the Dominicans or Jesuits) who asserts,
that both the Cross and Images of Christ are to be worshipped therewith,
because the Image and the Exemplar make up one complex object, whose soul, as
it were, is the exemplar, and whose body is the Image, to which object the
adoration is directed, so, as that the worship to the Person of Christ is
absolute, and to the Image respective: but yet so, as that the Image is at
least the partial terminative object of such adoration. I might produce many
more Testimonies not only of Schoolmen, but of Casuists, as Filliucius, Iacobus
a Graffiis, Azorius and others; but I need not do it, since Azorius affirms,
Azor. I^^lit. Moral. l. 9. c. 6.
that this is the common opinion of their Divine^.

14.
All the difficulty is how to reconcile this doctrine with the Definition of the
Council of Nice: and about this they have fallen into parties and made a
pleasant Counter-scuffle among themselves. Catharinus says, Cathaer. de cultu
Imagine. p. 137.
that none of the Ancients did ever allow Images to be worshipped with Latria;
and if this proposition be true, that an Image as an Image is to be worshipped
with Latria, that likewise is true, that an Image is to be worshipped with
Latria, for all wise men understand an Image as an Image; but this is so far
from being in any ancient Writer that the contrary is expressly there, and
especially in the Decree of the Council of Nice; and therefore, he has no way
to excuse the doctrine of Thomas, but by saying he had never seen that Decree.
But it is plain Thomas Aq. had more regard to the practice of the Church, than
to the Definition of that Synod, which he thought could not otherwise be
defended. The main argument of Catharinus against this opinion, is, Latria is
due to none but God; but an Image however considered as an Image is not God.
And whatever the Imagination of the Person passes to upon the sight of an
Image, that can never make that to be God which is not God. If a man takes the
Image for God, that is an abominable error: if he says, it is not God and yet
worships it with Latria; this is plainly giving Latria to something else
besides God. If it be said, that it is the same act of the mind which passes
from the Image to the Prototype, and consequently the same adoration of both;
this, he says, will not hold, for if the Image be worshipped, that must be the
object of adoration, and the worship of the Image must be terminated on the
Image, otherwise it is not the worship of the Image, but of the thing
represented; neither can it be understood how there should be two objects and
but one adoration. Some answer that the Image and Prototype make one total
object of adoration, and so it is but one Act and that of Latria; but this,
says he, makes strange confusion that the act of worship should be equally
terminated on both. If they say it begins at the Image, and is terminated on
the Prototype, that is not, says he, proper worship of an Image which is not
terminated on it; and how can that be a partial object of adoration, if the
worship be no ways terminated on it? Others say, there is a twofold Latria per
se and per accidens, the former is only due to God, the latter may be given to
an Image: this, says he, contradicts the former, for then the same act of
worship would be both per se and per accidens, which is ridiculous; and that
which is per accidens ought not to be looked on as worship, for any thing may
be said to be worshipped with Latria per accidens. Others say, that the worship
of the Image is not terminated on the Image, but on the thing represented, and
yet say it is the worship of the Image as an Image, which as such is distinct
from the thing represented, which, says he, is not intelligible. To say the
Image is worshipped improperly, is a saying not fit for Philosophers or
Divines, but for Poets and Orators. For it is no more properly said the Image
is worshipped with Latria, than that the Image is the thing represented; which
no man in his senses would say properly. To Cajetans saying, that an Image as
performing the office of an Image is under that notion, the same with the thing
represented, he answers, that such a Metamorphosis is impossible by any act of
the Image, or of Imagination: but to defend, says he, that the Image as an
Image, or as representing is the same with the thing represented, and so as
that the Latria is any ways terminated on the Image, is to be mad ones self,
and to endeavor to make others so. Therefore others say, that the Images are
not truly and properly worshipped, but the things represented at them, before
them, or in them; but this, says he, destroys the worship of Images, and is
against the practice of the Church, which directs the posture, words, and signs
of adoration, (even incense) to the Images, as when we say to the Cross, O Crux
ave spes unica. This we see is the Burden of the Song, among them all; the
Church practices thus, and thus; this practice must be defended one way or
other, and happy the man that does it best; but still the practice must be
continued, for Catharinus inveighs bitterly against Erasmus, for saying, he
thought it safer and easier to take Images out of Churches than to fix the just
bounds of Worship and to prevent Superstition. And he grants at last, p. 136.
that by a fiction of the mind, supposing the Image to be the Person
represented, it may be said, that the Image is to be worshipped with Latria,
yet he concludes, that no one ancient Writer, that he could ever see, did
allow, that Images might any way be worshipped with Latria, but all of them did
abominate such an expression. And he adds, that the doctrine of Thomas does
rather take off from Images, that true and real worship, which, he says, from
the Nicene Council ought to be given to them, and terminated on themselves
though for the sake of the things represented by them. Martinus Peresius Ayala
says, Martin. Peers. Ayal. de tradit. 3. p. de imagine. p. 119.121.
that the doctrine of giving Latria to Images is repugnant to Fathers and
Councils, especially to the Definition of the Council of Nice; and he adds,
that there is no more connection between a sign and the thing signified, than
between two relatives, as between Father and Son, and although the Son
represent the Father, yet no man will say, that by the same act of knowledge,
whereby I know the Son as a Son, I do know his Father, for then the Relative
opposition would be taken away, and the different definitions of correlatives;
so, says he, although by the Image a conception does arise of the thing
represented, yet it is not the same act of knowledge whereby I apprehend the
Image and the thing represented: but suppose it were so, there is not the same
reason for worship as for knowledge. For it is not repugnant to an Image as an
Image to be apprehended by the same act with the thing represented: but it
seems repugnant to an Image as an Image to be worshipped with the same worship
with the thing represented; because an Image, however considered, is an
insensible Creature, to which they all grant no worship is due; and although it
represent never so much, it does not change its nature, but a block remains a
block still, and a Stone does not become rational by it. But, say they, Is not
the Kings Robe worshipped with the same worship that his Person is? I confess,
says he, the whole Person as clothed is worshipped, and his clothes are no
more separated, than any other habits or dispositions he has about him. But,
if the Kings Robe be separated from his Person, what reason is there to worship
that as the King himself is worshipped? and the Princes Image is neither
substantially nor accidentally the same with the Prince, and therefore is not
to be compared with his Robe; and although some honor be due to the Kings
Image, yet no man ever saw, unless by the compulsion of some Tyrant, a Princes
Image worshipped after the same manner that his Person is. And S. Augustine
gives no other reason for the worship of the humanity of Christ (which he
compares with the Princes Robe) but because it is united to the Divinity; which
reason cannot hold for such an Imaginary Union, between the Image and the thing
represented, and therefore it ought not to be worshipped with the same
adoration. Besides, says he, if this were allowed, we might sacrifice to an
Image, as well as do other acts of Latria to it, which cannot be said without
blasphemy; but he concludes, that he defines nothing, and submits all to the
judgment of the Church. Estius declares, Est. in sentent. l. 3. did. 9. sect.
3.
that although almost all the Schoolmen were for Latria to be given to the
Cross, yet that it is point blank against the definition of the Council of
Nice; and it is an unsatisfactory answer to say, they only were against Latria
to be given to Images for themselves or absolute Latria; for no man ever
doubted of that, that they were not to have divine worship for themselves; and
the Council puts a distinction between the worship of the Image and the
Exemplar; and joins Images with the Gospels and Vessels, which no man ever
thought were to be worshipped with any kind of Latria: and that, when S. Basil
says, the honor of the Image passes to the Prototype, he means no more than
that the Image is honored for the sake of the thing represented: and that, if
an Image may be worshipped with Latria, then sacrifice may be offered to it,
which was condemned in Carpocrates and the Collyridians: and then those things
which have a nearer conjunction than an Image may be better worshipped so, as
the B. Virgin which bore him in her womb. Neither is it enough to say, they
have proper excellencies of their own; for they might receive a double honor,
the one proper, the other relative; and supposing no danger of error, then it
might be done, and Medina, he says, yields it of the B. Virgin not absolutely,
but by reason of the conjunction between Christ and her while he was in her
womb. Thus far in the opinion of these men, the case seems desperate as to the
reconciling the doctrine of giving Latria to Images with Reason, or the Council
of Nice.

But we must not imagine a doctrine so generally allowed and so suitable to the
practice of their Church should be thus given up.. 15.
Therefore Vasquez undertakes the business, Vasquez disp. ^08. c. 3.
and like a generous Adversary, not only proves that this may be the sense of
the Councils, but that they could have no other; because, an Image cannot be
lawfully worshipped any other way, than as in and by that the exemplar is made
the term and next material object of adoration. This he shows, not only from
the common consent of their Divines, c. 4.
but from the Council of Trent it self, where it says, 1. That no worship is
to be given to Images for the sake of any Virtue inherent in them; but if
Images be worshipped as separated from the exemplar, they must be worshipped
for some virtue inherent in themselves; and whatever impression of Sanctity is
supposed to be in them, it is only an inanimate sign of such a sanctity as does
not make it an object of adoration: and if the excellency of the thing
represented be the reason moving to adoration, that excellency cannot be
conceived as distinct from the exemplar when it makes the Image capable of
adoration. If they say the excellency is derived from the exemplar to the
Image, then it follows, that there is an inherent virtue in the Images for
which they are worshipped, which is contrary to the Council of Trent. 2. That
Council makes this to be the only reason of worshipping Images, because the
honor passes to the exemplar, which shows plainly that according to the sense
of it, they are to be worshipped only as joined with the exemplar, and by no
means as separated from it. And the same he proves, c. 3.
by expressions to the like purpose, from the Council of Nice; and from the
former Testimony of Basil, which, he says, cannot be otherwise understood than
of the same adoration of the Image and exemplar, or else S. Basils Testimony
was very impertinently alleged in the Council of Nice, c. 6.
and does not serve the purpose for which he used those words himself; many
other Testimonies he produces, and at last concludes that the other opinion is
no older than Catharinus and Ayala, and that all those who were for the worship
of Images before, viz. Fathers and Schoolmen, were of his opinion. And he
proves his opinion from this reason because no inanimate thing is of it self
capable of worship; c. 9.
but an Image considered as an Image, but without the exemplar, is an inanimate
thing: the Major he proves, because worship is a token of submission to
something on the account of its excellency, and superiority; but to use such to
an inanimate thing, is to make our selves slaves to Images, which would be
Idolatry: and on the same account a man uses such a mark of submission, he may
as well pray to Images, or beg something of them, as a servant does of his
master, He says, that Alexander and Thomas, although they never saw the
seventh Synod, yet did speak the sense of it, as well as if they had seen it:
c. 13.
and when that Council denies Latria to Images, it is to be underderstood only
of the inward submission of the Soul, and not of the external acts of
adoration; and so he answers all the arguments from the Councils and Fathers:
and he says, Disp. 109. c. 1.
that it may be delivered absolutely, that Images are to be worshipped with
Latria, if by that be meant the same worship which is given to the exemplar;
and that the doctrine of inferior worship tends to folly and superstition, c.
2.
and that his own opinion is the most useful to be preached to the People.
Suarez is by no means satisfied with this way, Suarez disp. 54. sect. 4.
saying, the Author of it must necessarily fall into the abusive and improper
way of worship which is condemned in Durandus and Holcot, for he takes away all
proper worship of Images, and makes them only seem to be worshipped; for the
external acts of adoration, without the internal is but an appearance of
worship, and no real worship. Therefore he proceeds after another method, which
is this: 1. The Prototype may be worshipped in the Image, and the Image for the
sake of the Prototype, with one and the same act of adoration, both internal
and external: to explain this he distinguishes between the esse reale, and the
esse repraesentativum of the Prototype; and although the Image does not contain
the Prototype in the first, it does in the latter sense, i. e. in plain terms,
although the Person of Christ be not in the Image, yet we may fancy him to be
there; which being supposed, the mind of him that worships is carried primarily
to the exemplar, and by way of concomitancy to the Image; not believing the
Image to be Christ, (for that were a dangerous thing) but that it does
represent him as if he were there: and consequently this Imagination is a
sufficient ground to perform all acts of adoration to the Image, as if the
Person of Christ were actually present. Which is just like a Schoolmaster, whom
I knew, who being to come into an unusual presence, he goes into a pit, where
there were many Trees, and although every one of them had the esse reale of a
Tree, yet he supposed them to have a distinct esse repraesentativum of the
several Persons he was to make his Congies too; and having thus fastened the
esse repraesentativum of the Person to the proper Tree, he makes all his
approaches and with the same complements he intended to use to the Persons
themselves. If one should have surprised him in this act of civil worship to
the Trees, and asked him, whether he believed the Trees to be the Persons whose
names he called them by, he would no doubt, (if he had been versed in School
Divinity) have answered to this very subtly with Suarez, that he was not such
an Ass, not to distinguish the esse reale of the Tree, from the esse
repraesentativum of the Persons; and although he bowed and made Legs to the
Trees, he did not consider them in so doing as Trees, but as representing those
Persons to whom he was bound to show all that Reverence, which he showed to the
Trees upon the Imagination that they were those very Persons; so that the
Reverence was primarily and per se shown to those Persons, and but
concomitanter and per accidens, and after an inferior manner, to the Trees.
But says Suarez, the Image is not so properly adored, as co-adored, as the
Kings Robe is with his Person; and although the Image be really different from
the Person of Christ, yet he is worshipped in his true Being as represented by
the Image, and as it were vested with it, and so they both become one object,
and that Person is worshipped, and the Image together with him with the very
same act of adoration. I am glad to hear that, says the Schoolmaster, for I
hope by this means, I may do my Reverences to the Persons themselves, by
performing them to them as represented in their true Beings in these Trees; and
I pray Sir do not think me such a Fop that I would do all this to them
considered as Trees, in actu signato, for I consider them as Images in actu
exercito; and although you may think I do it to the Trees, you are mistaken; my
mind all that while unites the Person represented and the Tree together; and
although my Reverence be primarily designed to the Person for his own sake, and
to the Tree only for the sake of the person represented, yet this is only a
co-reverence, such as a man shows to the Person of another, by kissing the hem
of his garment, only there the Person is really Vested, and here it is only by
Imagination. 2. Suarez says, Disp. 54. sect. 5.
since it is agreed among Catholics; that the Reason of the worship of the
Image is the excellency of the exemplar; that may be considered two ways. 1.
As the objectum quod or the thing it self worshipped in and by the Image as
before. 2. As the objectum quo, i. e. as the Reason of giving worship to the
Image it self: and this is that worship which Vasquez charges with folly and
superstition; but Suarez undertakes to prove this to be a possible and lawful
Worship, when the Image is truly and properly worshipped non adorato direct ut
quod ipso exemplari; i. e. the worship not fixing immediately on the thing
represented but on the Image it self, although on the account of the exemplar:
for which he makes use of this notable argument; because in this act of worship
there is nothing omitted but a directing the intention to the exemplar, but
there is no precept that requires, that as often as we worship the Image, we
ought to direct our intention farther than the Image it self; and therefore
that worship is lawful. And although, an inanimate thing be not, as Vasquez
urges, adorabile propter se, yet it may, says Suarez, with wonderful subtilty,
be adorable in se propter aliud: and this second kind of worship he endeavors
to prove was established by the Councils of Nice and Trent, as well as the
first.

Bellar. undertakes to clear the whole matter by these propositions. Bellarm.
de cultu Imag. l. 2, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25.
1. That the Images of Christ and the Saints are to be worshipped not only per
accidens or improprie, but per se and proprie, so as they terminate the
worship, as considered in themselves, and not merely as they represent the
exemplar: which he proves, from the definition of the Nicene Council, which
decreed Images to be worshipped and not with Latria: but if the Image were to
be worshipped with a respect only to the exemplar, then it could not be denied
that an Image of Christ was to be worshipped with Latria. 2. He would not have
it said before the people that Images are to be worshipped with Latria, but
rather the contrary, because the distinctions necessary to defend it are too
subtle for their noddles, and the truth is, the men that make them do hardly
understand them themselves. 3. But if we speak among our selves and of the
plain Truth of the case, Images may be worshipped with Latria, but then it is
improperly and per accidens: as it is represented in the Image. 4. If we speak
of worship per se and proprie, so no Image is to be worshipped with Latria;
because this was condemned by the Nicene Council. 5. Yet, he says, that the
worship which ought to be given to Images per se and proprie, is analogically
and reductively the same that is given to the exemplar, i. e. the worship of an
Image of Christ is analogical Latria: So that it is, and it is not Latria; it
is so, but we must not say so; yet if we speak of the proper worship of Images,
that is not so and yet it is so, i. e. analogically and improperly; but if we
speak of the proper worship of Latria, then it is not so. But does not the
proper worship of Latria belong to Christ's Person? therefore if Christ's Person
be worshipped in the Image, it ought to be worshipped with Latria. True, says
Bellarmin, when he is worshipped in his own Person, but not as he is in an
Image by participation; but he that is worshipped in the Image is supposed to
be the true object of Latria, and therefore Christ as in the Image must be
worshipped with Latria. If representation be a sufficient ground of worship,
then his presence being supposed in the Image does require the same worship, as
they say is due to him under the Sacramental species: and the manner of his
being represented in the Image would take no more off from the nature of the
worship, than the Princes Robe does from the worship due to his Person. And
Bernardus Pujol from thence proves, Pujol de cultu ador. disp. 3. sect. 7.
assert. 5.
that it is lawful to worship the Image and exemplar with the same act of
adoration as one complex object, because the Church does worship the Sacrament
of the Eucharist with Latria, as it is one complex object made up of the
Species and Christ himself as there present. The same Author proves against
Bellarmin, assert. 7.
that the proper worship given to Images is not merely analogically and
reductively Latria, but properly, although more imperfect, like that which is
given to the humanity of Christ, and therefore, he says, the meaning of the
Council was only to exclude absolute Latria, and not relative; with whom
Ysambertus agrees, Ysambert. ad q. 25. disp. 4. art. 2.
who likewise says, that when the Image and Prototype are worshipped with
Latria, the Image is a terminative object of that adoration, at least as a part
to make one entire object of the exemplar and the Image. Card. Lugo says, Lugo
de Mist. Incarn. disp. 36. sect. 3.
that Vasquez has not spoken clearly to this point, about the aggregate
object, made up of the Image and the exemplar; for, says he, if internal
adoration were allowed to the Image as a partial object, it would go a great
way to the proving that the Image it self may be so worshipped in recto, i. e.
without the worship of the exemplar: and he thinks, that the same act of
adoration may be terminated in recto, both on the Image and the exemplar: and
that this aggregate object has a sufficient excellency to terminate inward
worship upon the Image as a part of that object. Arriaga disputes at large
against the opinion of Vasquez; Arriag. de Incarn. disp. 56. sect. 6. subs. 2.
n. 68.
but after all he concludes, that we may say absolutely, that Latria is due to
the Image of Christ, and he makes it the same case as to Images and the
humanity of Christ; and to the Nicene Council, he says, that they spoke not of
the Images of God, but of Angels and Saints, to which no doubt Latria is not
due; and he stretches the words of Epiphanius the Deacon, to this sense, that
no Images of Creatures are to be worshipped with Latria; therefore, says he,
l. 70.
they did worship the Image of God with Latria. Very subtle I confess! and like
Epiphanius his own self, who argues in that Council, much after that rate, and
with equal probability. Petavius concludes with the generality of their
Divines, Petav. de Incarn. l. 15. c. 15. n. 6.
that the design of the Council of Nice was only to exclude absolute Latria,
and not relative: for which he quotes the Greek excerpta, wherein it is said,
that the Image does not differ in Hypostasis from the Prototype but only in
nature: from whence he inferrs, that it is the same act of adoration to the
Image and the thing represented. But if all the danger lay in supposing Images
to be distinct hypostates; the Heathens in that Council declared, that they did
not look on them as such, but only as representations, and therefore in that
respect they were no more to blame than the Nicene Fathers in the Worship of
them.

From all this discourse we see, (1.) That some great Divines in the Roman
Church do assert proper and absolute Latria to be given to the Images of
Christ, as those who assert, the Image and Christ to make up one entire object
of adoration. (2.) That the doctrine of a Relative Latria to be given to
Images, and such as is given to the humanity of Christ, has almost universally
obtained in the Roman Church. (3.) That they all agree in this, that the
external acts of adoration are to be performed to Images, such as
genuflections, prostrations, burning of Lights and Incense, etc. (4.) That
those who assert an inferior adoration to be given to Images, do suppose that
adoration to terminate in the Images themselves, although it be given on the
account of the thing represented. (5.) That those who differ from each other in
this matter, do in effect charge one another with Idolatry: but of that
afterward.

Nothing now remains to the full stating of this Controversy,. 16.
but to consider the practice of the Roman Church in the worship of Images,
which may be gathered very much from the former discourse, but will receive
somewhat more light by these observations. 1. That the Church of Rome has
determined in her public Offices, that Latria is due to the Cross of Christ,
viz. in the Pontificale, where the Rubric determines the manner of procession
at the reception of the Emperor; Pontificale Romans Ordo ad recip. Imperat.
Rubr. 1.
and there it is said, that the Cross of the Legate ought to have the right
hand, quia debetur ei Latria, because Latria is due to it; not only that it may
lawfully be given to it, but that it is due to it, without any mention of the
exemplar, or any distinctions, or limitations about the nature of this Latria.
2. That solemn prayers are made for the consecration of the Images set up for
worship and for virtue to be given to them. Pontific. in Benedict. Novae Crucis.
In the Office of benediction of a new Cross there is this prayer, Rogamus te
Domine Sancte, Pater omnipotens, sempiterne Deus, ut digneris been dicere hoc
lignum Crucis tue, ut sit remedium Salutare generi humano; sit soliditas fidei,
profectus honorum operum, redemptio animarum; sit solamen, and protectio ac
tutela contra seba jacula inimicorum. Per Dominum Nostrum, etc.

Is this prayer made in faith or no? whereby they pray for such mighty benefits
by a new Cross; and to take away any suspicions of Metonymies and
Prosopopoeia's it is said expressly hoc lignum Crucis tuae, this Wood of thy
Cross, may be a wholesome remedy to mankind, a strengthener of faith, an
increaser of good works, the redemption of Souls, a Comfort, protection and
Defense against the cruelty of our enemies. And after such prayers, allowed and
used by public Authority in the Roman Church, with what conscience could the
Council of Trent say, that they believed no virtue in Images, nor hoped for any
thing from them? After this, the Bishop consecrates the incense, and prays for
many good things to come by that too, then the Cross is sprinkled with Holy
Water, and then he incenseth it, saying, Sanctificetur lignum istud, in nomine
Patris and Filii, and Spiritus Sancti; and benedictio illius ligni in quo
membra sancta salvatoris suspensa sunt, sit in isto ligno; ut orantes
inclinanresque se propter Deum ante istam cru^em inveniant corporis and anime
sanitatem. Per eundem, etc.

Then the Bishop kneels before the Cross, and devoutly adores, and kisses it;
and as many besides as please: after this follows a long prayer for the
sanctification of that new sign of the Cross; then the Bishop kneels, adores
and kisses again, and as many as will. Then follow particular Offices for the
consecration of an Image of the B. Virgin, and of other Images. In the
Ceremoniale Romanum, we find very strange prayers upon the Consecration of the
Agnus Dei's, Sacrar. Cerem. l. 1. c. de consecr. Agnus Dei.
which if there were any ground to hope for any of the advantages there prayed
for, by the worship and honor of them, no one that loved either his Soul or
Body would be without them. For the Pope himself, good man, prays thus, Tu eos
benedicere, sanctificare, and consecrare digneris, ut tua larga benedictione
sanctificati eandem virtutem accipiant contra omnes diabolicas versutias and
frauds maligni spiritus; ut illos devote super se ferentibus, nulla tempestas
eisdem prevaleat, nulla adversitas dominetur, nulla aura pestilens, neque aeris
corruption, nullusque morbus caducus, nulla maris procella and tempestas, nullum
incendium, neque ulla iniquitas dominetur eis, neque prebaleat: homo partus cum
matre incolumis conservetur per intercessionem unigeniti, etc.

What admirable virtue have these Agnus Dei's in them! they are, good against
the Devil, good against Storms, pestilence, falling sickness, and Sin; and what
could a man wish for more? But then it is to be observed that these virtues do
not depend merely on the carrying of these about one, but the worship of them
is required too: So in another prayer there extant, Been dicas, and benedicta
sanctifices, quatenus ipsorum veneratione and honor nobis famulis tuis crimina
diluantur, etc.

And there we find the Verses of Urban 5. which he sent to the Greek Emperor
with three Agnus Dei's. No Mountebank ever set forth the power of his Medicines
with more advantage, than the Pope does the virtue of his Agnus Dei's.

Balsamus, and munda cera cum Chrismatis unda,
Conficiunt Agnum; quod munus do tibi magnum:
Font velut natum per mystica sanctificatum.
Fulgura de sursum depellit, omne malignum
Peccatum frangit, ut Christi sanguis: and angit.
Pregnans servatur; simul and partus liberatur.
Dona defert dignis; virtutem destruit ignis,
Portatus munde de fluctibus eripi^ unde.
Quarant. in Sum. Bullar. p. 7.
Stephanus Quaranta having met with a more perfect Copy, adds some more verses
of the virtues of these little Images of Wax; and it is great pity any of them
should be lost.

Morte repentina servat, Sataneque ruina.
Si quis honoret eum, retinet super host Cropheum,
Parsque minor tantum tota valet integra quantum.
Agnus Dei, miserere mei,
Qui crimnia tollis, miserere nobis.
It is not to be questioned, says Azorius, but, the Pope himself having made
these prayers over them (to whom alone it belongs to consecrate them the first
year of his Popedom, Azor. Instit. Mor. l. 9. c. 9.
and every seventh year after) they will have the effects prayed for, if they
be used with that due reverence and devotion which is required. I find nothing
more ingenuously confessed to have been taken from Heathenism, than the wearing
of Agnus Dei's for such uses, by Cardinal Baronius, Baron. ad A. D. 58. n. 76,
77.
and Rasponi. Baronius says, the newly baptized used to have them hanged about
their Necks, instead of the little Amulets the Gentiles put upon their
Childrens necks against fascination. For, says he, it being impossible to
break off all the Gentile Customs, in those who were become Christians, they
were allowed the continuance of them, so they were turned to the worship of the
True God. And Card. Rasponi says, Raspon. de Basil. Lateran. l. 2. c. 8. p.
144.
that instead of the little Images of false Gods, these were invented to be
worn for the same purposes, viz. the driving away the mischiefs both of body
and soul. These were called Bullae, which were worn by Boys, and Pupae, by
Girls, being little round Images, that were first hung upon Children, and
after used by the greatest Persons, as by those that Triumphed, as Rasponi
observes, to prevent the power of enchantment. (Those that consider this and
the saliva lustralis, used upon the dies lustricus among the Heathens, Pers.
Satyr. 2.
Frontemque atque uda labella
Infami digito, and lustralibus ante salivis
Expiat --
with the great virtues attributed by them to salt, and oil, and holy Water,
may easily understand that part of the Roman Rituale, which concerns the
ceremonies they have added to Baptism.) But besides the Bullae, which the
Heathens used for Amulets, they had little Images, which they carried about
with them; in which they supposed there were great virtues, and to which they
gave divine worship. So Dio says, Dio l. 43.
Caesar carried a little Image of Venus; and Suetonius of Nero, Sueton. in
Neron. c. 56.
that he had Icunculam puellarem, and which he secretly worshipped three times
a day; and Asclepiades did carry always about with him a little Image of the
Dea Coelestis, says Ammianus Marcellinus; Ammian. Marcell. l. 22.
as Apuleius says, Apulei. Apolog.
he did himself, a little Mercury which he worshipped, which, he said, ought
not to be touched but with pure hands, being a consecrated thing; Azor. l. 9.
c. 9. q. 3.
just as Azorius determines, that no Laymen ought to touch an Agnus Dei, for
the very same reason, because they are consecrated: and the Council of Milan
under Carolus Borromaeus (since Canonized) declares, Acta Ecclesiae Mediolan.
sub S. Carolo Borrom. l. 2. n. 41, 42.
that when any Artificer makes a golden or Crystal case to put an Agnus Dei in,
he must not presume to touch it either with his Gloves, or with any instrument;
but he must send for one in holy Orders to put it into the case. And after all
this, is it possible for any to suppose, that the Heathens did attribute virtue
to their Images, and that they in the Church of Rome do not? when they pray for
virtues to be given to them; and believe great efficacy to be in them, and use
them with as much superstition as the Heathens did. Whatever then the Council
of Trent has determined to avoid calumny, the solemn Prayers, and Offices, and
Practice of their Church, do sufficiently manifest that they believe virtue to
be in Images, and consequently do trust in them for those effects which were
prayed to be given by their means.

(3.) We ought to compare the practice of the worship of Images in Heathen and
Christian Rome together; and if either exceed the other, the latter has done
it in some parts of folly and superstition. The solemn rites which concerned
the worship of Images in Heathen Rome lay in these things, 1. Consecration. 2.
Supplication. 3. Pompous Procession.

1. Consecration of Images for public worship; which was to be performed by
the Pontifices or Priests. Before Consecration, Quintil. declam. 323.
says Quintilian; they are only the Works of Men's hands, it is that which
brings God into them, and makes them fit to be set up for worship; this
therefore is not to be permitted to all, but only to those whose hands are
pure, and devoted to sacred things. This consecration was generally performed
with a certain form of Words, which is now lost with the old Pontifical Books;
but perhaps, says Gutherius, Guth. de Vet. jure Pontific. l. 4. c. 22.
they had none at all; no more than they had in the Consecration of Emperors;
which was done only by the solemnity of the action it self. Minucius Felix
makes the adorning, Minuc. p. 26.
consecration, and prayers, to be the necessary things, which make an Image to
become a God; i. e. when it is solemnly dedicated to divine worship. But they
had two sorts of consecrated Images, some that were only ornamental, which they
called (...); and others that were the proper Images of the Temple, which were
set up over the middle Altar, and to that God, whom that Image represented, the
Temple was dedicated, and the rest, as Servius tells us, Serve. in Georg. 3.
were only to beautify the Temple. Vitruvius says, Vitruv. l. 4. c. 8.
the Images were to be above the Altars, that they who came to pray and
sacrifice at the Altar, might look on the Divinity; as it is fully expressed in
one of the Coyns of Domitian mentioned by Gutherius and Gevartius. Guther. de
Vet. jure Pontif. l. 3. c. 6.

Gevart. Numis. Tab. 32. n. 4.


This was the High Altar, besides which, there were generally two other at
least; the one near the entrance, where the Beasts were sacrificed and burnt;
the other held the Vessels and Utensils and was called Anclabris says Festus:
Fest. v. Auclabris.
but the chief Altar was that, over which the Image was placed, and was called
altar ab altitudine, i. e. the high Altar. And it is very observable, although
it has been little taken notice of, that the Sacrifices were burnt at the
lower Altar; which the Priests having done, they then went up to the High
Altar, and there did adolere, i.e. offer incense and prayers; for as Arnobius
says, Arnob. l. 7. p. 232.
they did cast their incense into the Fire, ante ipsa Numinum signa, before the
Images of the Gods, which, he there says, they believed to be the chief part
of worship, and to have the greatest influence on propitiating the Gods. From
whence I observe, how unreasonably those of the Church of Rome, merely to
excuse themselves, have made Sacrifice the only external act of Latria, and
excluded Incense and Supplication from being peculiar to God; when among both
Jews and Gentiles, these were looked on as the more solemn and diviner parts of
Worship.

2. Supplication: which properly relates to the prayers made in great
distresses; but I take it as comprehending all their solemn prayers; which were
wont to be made among the old Romans, with great expressions of devotion,
before the Images of their Gods; which in Arnobius is expressed by Deorum ante
ora prostrati; Arnobl. 1. p. 29.
by Lucretius, Pandere palmas -- Ante Deum delubra; by Caesar, Lucret. l. 5.
Caesar de bellociv. l. 2
ante simulachra projecti victoriam a Diis exposcerent; by Lucan, Lucan. l. 2.
moestaeque tenent delubra catervae; by Ovid, Ovid. Fast. l. 4.
Summissoque genu vultus in imagine Divae Fixit. which, with many other
expressions to the same purpose in Latin Authors, do imply, that they made
their prayers before the Images of their Gods; and not that they took the
Images themselves for Gods, any otherwise than those do who suppose some
extraordinary presence after consecration; or by the power of Imagination
represented them as present to them in their Images; which the Romans properly
called Adoration: which was orare ad to pray to them as present; or ad os
orare, as Gutherius interprets it; thence Arnobius, Guth. de Vet. jure Pontif.
l. 4. c. 17. Arnob. l. 1.
quotidianis supplicationibus adorare. And this on great occasions, was
performed through all the Temples for two or three days, as the Senate thought
fit, as we find it often in Livy, with solemn processions of the People.

3. Another part of the Divine Honor they gave to Images, was the carrying
them in Pomp upon solemn Festivals (which is largely described by Dionysius:
Dionys. Halic. l. 7. p. 475.
) For then they carried their Gods from the Capitol through the Forum into the
great Cirque; and after the several Orders of men in the Procession, at last
came the Images of the Gods carried upon men's backs; and when this procession
was over, the prayers and sacrifices began. This was looked on as so peculiar
to the Gods, that Suetonius reckons it as one of the great instances of Caesar's
affecting Divine Honors, Suet. in Iul. l. 26.
that he would have his Image carried in this sacred Procession.

17.
Let us now see what the Practice of Rome Christian has been in these
particulars. 1. For consecration, we have already seen the set Forms appointed
for it in the Roman Pontifical; although the Nicene Council thought no other
consecration necessary, than the setting up the Images for public worship; yet
the Roman Church would not let People imagine them defective in any thing which
the Heathens did toward the more solemn worship of Images. 2. For supplication
before them; let the Images set up for worship over the high Altar speak for
them, whether in this point of adoration they come behind Heathen Rome. By the
Rubric of the Missal, in every solemn Mass, the Priest is to go up to the
middle of the Altar, Missal. de Intr. Part. 2. tit. 4. n. 4.
and there having kissed the Altar, he puts the incense into the Thuribulum,
which he is to do three times with his right hand, and his left hand on his
breast; having done this, he makes a profound Reverence to the Crucifix over
the Altar (as appears by the picture of the Altar in Gavantus) and three times
incenseth that; Gavant. in Miss. p. 103.
then bowing again to the Crucifix he incenseth the Altar; which is to be done
with so much niceness and ceremony, that Gavantus reckons up twenty nine times,
with their exact order, wherein the several parts of the Altar and Crucifix are
to be incensed by the Priest who celebrates Mass. If there be any Relics or
Images of Saints about the Altar, after the incensing and adoration of the
Crucifix, before the Priest goes from the middle of the Altar, he first
incenseth those on the righthand, and then making his Reverence to the Cross,
he does the same to those on the lefthand. Philander in his Notes on Vitruvius,
Philand. in Vitr. l. 4. c. 8.
in his Discourse to Paul 3. about the right placing of Images, says, That the
due placing of Images is over the Altars, as the Image of the Madonna at
Loreto, has a holy Altar before it of square stone, says Tursellinus; Tursel.
hist. Lauren. l. 1.
and accordingly Matthaeus Riccius says, Trigaud. de Christian. Exped. apud
Sinas l. 4. c. 11. p. 403.
That in China they placed the Image of the B. Virgin on the Altar, where they
every day did offer their Devotions. Aloysius Novarinus glories in the
invention of a new sort of worship, Novar. Elect. sanc. l. 4. c. 54.
viz. of the B. Virgin big-bellied, with Christ in her Womb; which was called,
LA MADONNA DELL' ALLEGREZZA, and he says, That he caused an Altar to be
erected, and an Image to be set up for this worship, first at Verona; and
desires it may be generally received, as the most excellent way of her worship,
to promote which, he says, he had written, (no doubt, an admirable Book) Of
the Life of Christ in the Womb of the Virgin.

And for praying to Images, it is done with as much ceremony and formality as
it ever was among the Heathens; with prostrations, genuflections, looking as
devoutly upon the Images, approaching to them, and touching them with as much
show of Reverence as ever was used among them; insomuch that if an old Roman
were revived and saw the modern practices of worship of Images at Rome, he
would say they had done by worship as the Stoics did by Philosophy, viz. only
changed the Names, when the things were the same. Nay scarce any superstition
can be mentioned so barbarous among the Heathen Idolaters toward Images, but
it is practiced in the Roman Church; witness the binding the Image of S.
Anthony to get a good Wind, which Peter Della Valle says, Della Valle Let. 9.
p. 6. Boulay Voyage l. 2. c. 25.
it much used, and not without success among the Portugals; and Boulaye le Gouz
mentions their putting the Images of S. Anthony and the B. Virgin, with their
Heads forward into Wells, drawing them up and down there, to procure rain, and
for other very useful purposes. But setting aside such barbarous superstition
of the People (which is not condemned by their spiritual Governors that we
find) we need insist on no more than what is either required, or commonly
allowed and practiced with Approbation. We have already seen by the confession
of their best Writers, That their Church does allow praying to the Cross in the
most express and formal terms of Prayer, O Crux Ave spes unica, Hymn. ad
Vesper. Dom. Passion. Pujol de ad orat. disp. 3. Sect. 6. p. 281.
Hoc passionis tempore, Piis adauge Gratiam, Reisque dele Crimina. Wherein
Bernardus Pujol confesses that not only the common people, but the Church it
self does speak to the Cross, as the Image of Christ; and what is this then,
but praying to the Image? Upon the third of May we find this Antiphona to the
Cross, O Crux splendidior cunctis astris, mundo celebris, Brev. Romans Fest. Maii
30. invent. S. Crucis.
hominibus multum amabilis, sanctior universis, quae sola fuisti digna portare
talentum mundi, dulce lignum, dulces clavos, dulcia ferens pondera; Salva
praesentem catervam in tuis hodie laudibus congregatam.

But the most solemn adoration of the Cross is performed upon Good Friday,
which according to the Rubricks of the Roman Missal is after this manner, Rubr.
Missal. de feria sexta in Parasceue.
Prayers being ended, the Priest goes to the Epistle side of the Altar, and
there takes the Cross from the Deacon; and then turns to the People, and by
degrees uncovers a little of it from the top, and begins the Antiphona, Ecce
lignum Crucis, in qua salus mundi pependit, Then the Choire sings, Venite
Adoremus; at which they all prostrate themselves (not to the earth says
Gavantus, but with kneeling, and a very lowly Reverence) Then he goes forward
to the Corner of the Altar, and opening the right hand of the Crucifix, and
lifting it up a little, he sings louder, Ecce lignum, etc. and the rest sing
and adore again; then he goes to the middle of the Altar, and uncovers the
whole Crucifix, and lifts it up and sings yet louder, and they adore, as
before. When this is done, the Priest carries it to a place prepared before the
Altar, and there kneeling he places it; then he pulls off his Shoes, and goes
to worship the Cross, three times kneeling, before he kisses it: and after him,
the rest do it in their Order. And the Pope himself on that day, lays aside
his Mitre, has his Shoes pulled off, Cerem. Sacr. l. 2. de sexta Feria, etc.
and goes between two Cardinals ad adorandum, to worship the Cross, before
which he kneels three times at a convenient distance, and prays, and then
kisses it: and so all the Cardinals two and two, and the rest after them.
Several other Ceremonies there are in the Missals of York and Salisbury; but
those which are in the Roman Missal are sufficient to prove that they in the
Roman Church are bound to give as solemn adoration to the Cross, as ever any
Heathens gave to any Images whatsoever. Besides this, they make solemn
supplication to other Images of Christ; as to that of the Veronica at Rome, in
those known Verses, Salve sancta Facies nostri Redemptoris, etc. wherein they
pray to the Image, to purge them from sin and bring them to heaven; which are
pretty reasonable requests to be made to an Image, especially so authentic a
one as that is* of which Bzovius says, Bzov. A. 1216. n. 16.
That it has supreme honor among Christians, and has an Altar on purpose for
it, which is called Altar sanctissimi sudarii, (as he shows from Grimaldus) in
S. Peter's Church at Rome, and was in the Oratory of Pope John 7. and the
Monuments of the consecration of that Altar are still preserved among other
Records of that Church: which had Priests belonging to it. This Image is showed
at solemn times, and then the people fall down and worship it; the manner
whereof is described by Pope Pius 2. relating the procession of the Pope at the
translation of the Head of S. Andrew; Aen. Sylv. Comment. l. 8.
The Pope coming in Romp with the Cardinals and Clergy to that part of the
Church where the Veronica was, commanded it to be shown. Forthwith the Cardinal
of S. Mark goes up the steps, and shows the venerable and sacred Image, the
people three times crying out Mercy. It was, says he, a wonderful thing at one
time to see our B. Savior (in this Image) and the Relics of the Apostle; and
the Pope and Cardinals and Clergy kneeling and praying with their heads
uncovered, viz. to this Image of Veronica? Gretser says, Gretser de Imag. non
manufactis c. 17.
That in some Missals there was a Missa de Veronica, with an Indulgence granted
by Innocent 4. to those who said that Mass, or but the Collect there mentioned;
after which follows the Sequence, viz. Salve sancta facies, etc. full of devout
affections, says Gretser; which Bollandus supposes to be the Psalm made by
Innocent 3. for the honor of the Veronica, Bolland. in 4. Febr. Sect. 3. n. 13
of which Matthew. Paris speaks. But we are not to imagine the Veronica to be
only thus worshipped at Rome; for the very same is pretended to be in Spain
too, in the Cathedral Church of Iaen in Boetica, where it is likewise showed
and worshipped with mighty Reverence and a kind of Sacred horror, says
Bollandus, twice a year. Lucius Marinaeus says, Luc. Marinae. Sic. de reb.
Hispan. l. 5.
There is so much Divinity in it, that no man can tell what color it is of;
and that the worship of it has mightily enriched the place; to which Clement
7. and Julius 3. granted large Indulgences, and Litanies are appointed to be
used by the people at the showing of it. There are others of them showed, and
worshipped in other places as both Bollandus and Gretser confess; at which they
seem a little troubled, but think to salve all by saying, that the rest are
copies, or that Veronica's handkerchief had three foldings, and every one had a
distinct Image, whereof one was kept at Rome, another at Jerusalem, and a third
in Spain; but whether Originals or Copies, whether true or false, they are all
worshipped, where ever they are, with mighty devotion, and miracles are said to
be done by them. Lucius Marinaeus mentions another Image of Christ which was
solemnly worshipped in Spain, Luc. Marin, ib.
viz. one made by Nicodemus, and was found by a Merchant in an Ark floating on
the Sea; Cujus Imaginis invocato Numine, says he, The Divinity of which Image
being prayed to, abundance of infirm persons were healed. And he says of
Ferdinand King of Spain, That he did most devoutly worship a certain Image of
God, which he carried about with him. Ab ea itaque quicquid and necessario and
honest petebat, facile semper assequebatur; he obtained easily and always,
what ever he duly prayed for to the Image. Another Divine Image of Christ
which has solemn supplications made to it is that imprinted on the sacred
Sindon, or Shroud at Besancon, which is showed twice a year upon a Mountain
near the City, where vast numbers of people meet to adore it; and the Devils
roar at the opening of it, and the Skies of a sudden clear, although it rained
before, when it is showed, and does such mighty wonders, that Chiffletius
says, Chifflet. de linteis sepulchr. Christi. c. 11, 15.
Presenti Divine Numine semper affulget; it has always a Divine Presence with
it; forty hours prayers, he says, are often made to it, and in extraordinary
necessities it is carried in procession like the Ark, (but more holy than the
Ark) and in a time of general Pestilence, c. 14.
he says, they finding no other remedy did fly in S. Sudarii asylum and
clientelam, into the Sanctuary and protection of this Divine Image, and
thereupon the City instituted a society and solemn procession to the honor of
it every year, on the third of May, to which other Cities of Burgundy, as Dole
and Salines, joined themselves; and Gregory 13. granted an Indulgence to the
Altar erected for the honor of this Image: which is called Altar S Sindonis.
The like might be showed concerning other Images, but these are sufficient to
my purpose, to prove the common and allowed practice of the worship of Images
in the Roman Church, as to the Rites of Supplication and adoration, to be as
extravagant, as ever were among the Heathens.

3. For Solemn Processions with Images, we have as great Instances as ever were
among them; witness the Procession with the Image of S. Roch by the grave
Fathers of the Council of Constance, Which was done, says Baronius, Baron.
Martyrol. Aug. 16.
by a decree of that Council; when upon the Plague raging there, his Image was
carried through the City in solemn Pomp, upon which the Plague stayed: from
this example, says he, his Images were every where set up, and Altars,
Chapels, and Temples erected to him. Witness, The Procession at Rome by Paul
2. wherein the Pope and Cardinals went barefoot, the Image of S. Maria de
Populo, and the Image of our Savior in the Lateran being solemnly carried to
gain a victory over the Turks. Cardinal Rasponi says, Claccon. in Paulo. 2.
Bzov. A. 1216. n. 16.

Rasponi de Basil. Later. l. 4. c. 19.


That is thought to be the most effectual way to obtain favor and mercy of
God, to carry the Image of our Savior from the Lateran Church in a solemn
Procession to S. Maria Major; for then they think their prayers are most sure
to be heard, when the Image of Christ stands by that of the B. Virgin, whose
Authority and Favor is so great with her Son. So Stephen 3. found when he
carried the Image on his own shoulders barefoot, the people following him, when
he was much distressed by Aistulphus. Upon the Feast of the Assumption of the
B. Virgin, the Pope and Cardinals keep the Vespers at S. Maria Major (as
Rasponi describes it from Benedictus Canon of S. Peter's) those being ended, the
Pope returns to the Lateran; the Cardinals take from the Chapel of S. Laurence
the Image of our Savior, but first, the Pope and Cardinals, barefoot, make
seven bowings, and then open the Image and kiss the feet of it, then this Image
is carried with great Pomp and Devotion, with Torches burning, and the People
singing through those Streets of the City that have been most troubled with
Serpents and Devils; for which cause Pope Sergius appointed this Procession.
But it seems so great wickedness was committed in this nocturnal Procession,
(although Rasponi says, That a miracle happened of not consuming the wax of
the Torches,) that Pius 5. forbad this Procession. Every year in Rogation Week
for three days the Image of the B. Virgin is carried in a solemn Procession
from Mount Gardia near Bononia, Gonon. Chronic. Deip. p. 346. A.D. 1433.
with public supplications; because one, in a time of great Rain, when no
other means would help them, Cardinal Albergati appointed such a Procession
against Rain for four days together, after which it seems the Rain ceased.
Upon Tuesday in Easter Week, Sedulius describes a most solemn Procession
carrying the Image of the B. Virgin, Sedul. de Virgin Mosae Traject. c. 2 1.
at Maestricht. First, The Image is taken out of the Chapel, and placed in the
middle of the Church for more solemn adoration; where the People continue at
their prayers all night, before the Image; at which times, he says, the
officers of the Church have given away seventeen thousand little Images of the
B. Virgin with Indulgences: where, says he, it is a pleasant sight to behold
children, Boys, Virgins, Matrons, Men, only covered with linen or flannen
shirts, and barefooted to approach, to worship, to kneel, and even to creep
about the Image of the B. Virgin; and watering the very ground with their
Tears: Many from the head to the knees having iron Armor next to their bodies;
going upon their bare knees the whole Procession; and drawing heavy chains of
Iron fastened to their Feet. The manner of which procession is thus set down,
After Mass performed to the honor of the B. Virgin, Marian. l. 2. c. 14.
and the chords of S. Francis are distributed among the great Persons, (which
they carry upon their garments that day like shoulder belts) the Procession
begins; first a Crucifix is carried by one of the Friars, whom a great number
follows of men, women, and Children; all barefoot, with only linen or flanen
shifts, with Torches in their hands, in the habit of penitents with great
silence praying and weeping as they go. In the year 1608. there were about a
thousand in this dress, among whom were not a few men who covered their Heads
with Iron Headpieces that they might not be known. Many women drew their
Children after them that could hardly go; and others carried them sucking at
their breasts; and an old Woman that could not go, was carried in her bed.
After these followed the Whippers under the peculiar care of the Jesuits, with
their faces covered and barefoot. Then followed another Cross; after them the
Franciscans singing to the Praise of the B. Virgin; then the chief Citizens,
then the Officers of her Chapel, then the Torch bearers immediately before the
sacred Image, which the choicest Virgins carried on their shoulders: then
followed a Company of armed men, who had vowed this service to the Virgin for
several years. In that year 1608. there were 86 persons stark naked (only where
nature would not allow it) that had iron armor on their bodies from head to
foot; and most of them drawing a heavy chain fastened to their right foot, that
they might go more uneasily; their linen drawers did show how the blood dropped
from their flesh by the pinching of the Armor; and the very way was sprinkled
with blood; after these, the Magistrates of the City followed, and the Consuls
and Senators all bearing torches before the Host, which was carried under a
silken Canopy, with a most profound Reverence; then came in the last place, the
Governor, the Nobility, and a vast multitude of all sorts of people; and for
eight days together many people walked the same round out of great devotion. I
do not think this Procession can be matched, by the supplications and the Pompa
Circensis of old Rome; or by any of the Processions with their Idols, which
Peter della Valle describes among the Heathen Indians, Pet. della Valle let.
5. n. 3.18.25.
which, he confesses, to be very like those used among Christians, when the
Images of Saints are carried in procession, when any Body or Fraternity go in
Pilgrimage to Loreto or Rome, in the Holy Year.

The Jesuits boast very much of their zeal in setting up the worship of the
Images of the B. Virgin in Flanders, and especially of these solemn processions
with her Images; Imago primisaec. soc. Jesus l. 6. p. 775, etc.
particularly at Courtray for nine days together, wherein there have been nine
thousand persons: In the year 1636. the plague raging there, a solemn
supplication was appointed with a Procession of the Image through the City,
with wonderful devotion; and at Bruges, A. D. 1633. with an incredible number
of people; and a thousand torches of Virgin wax; and the like solemnities were
set up by their means at Brussels, Antwerp, Mechlin and other places. Otho
Zylius a Jesuit sets down the order of the Procession, Otho Zyl. histor. B.
Mar. Sylvaeduc. l. 4. c. 28.
wherein the Image of the B. Virgin that was before worshipped at Boisleduc was
carried to Brussels, upon the shoulders of four Capucins, the Infanta Isabella
following it with all the Nobility, and infinite number of people, with the
highest expressions of Pomp and Devotion, and at last it was placed in the
middle of a Chapel just over the Altar, where it has solemn worship given to
it, and wonderful cures are said to be wrought by it. I cannot conclude this
Discourse, without giving some account of another notable Procession at
Brussels of an Image of the B. Virgin, the occasion whereof was this; a new
confraternity was instituted in Spain of the Slaves of the B. Virgin, by one
Simon Rojas; Barth. de los Rios hierarch. Marian. l. 2. c. 7.
whose custom was to salute one another with those words, Ave Maria, instead
of Your humble Servant, and this Sodality was established with large
Indulgences by Paul 5. and afterward was begun in Bruges, A. D. 1626. having
fetters as the badge of this Slavery, and new Indulgences from Urban 8.; c. 19.
for the establishing this Society it happened luckily, that an officer of the
King of Spain 's Fleet being sick at Dunkirk, pretended to discover a great
Secret to Barth. de los Rios then Preacher to Isabella Clara Eugenia, c. 10.
viz. that he had a most admirable Image of the B. Virgin, which had been
worshipped for 600 years in the Cathedral Church of Aberdene, and had spoken to
the last Catholic Bishop, and had miraculously escaped the Heretics hands;
and was designed for a present to Isabella; but he, (wretch that he was) upon a
promise made by the Franciscans of his own Country in Spain, of praying for
his Soul and his Families, had intended to have carried it thither, which he
found was displeasing to the B. Virgin by his dangerous sickness; and he hoped
upon this confession she would have mercy upon him; and therefore he desired
him to present this Image to her Highness in the name of the Catholics of
Aberdene; which was received by her with wonderful devotion, c. 11.
and she said her prayers before it morning and evening; but this did not
satisfy her, for she resolved to have this Image carried to Brussels with a
solemn procession, and for that purpose obtained an Indulgence from Urban 8.
for all those who should attend it; and a rich and magnificent Altar was
erected, over which the Image was to be placed: c. 13.
and banners were made with this inscription, In Nomine Mariae omne genu
flectatur, etc. after which on May 3. the Procession was performed with all
imaginable Pomp, and kept for eight days together: c. 14.
and yet after all this, one Maxwel, a learned Scotchman showed in a Discourse
presented to Isabella, that upon the best enquiry he could make, this famous
Image was a mere imposture, c. 16.
and a trick of a crafty merchant to procure some advantage to himself by it;
but the poor man was imprisoned for this discovery, and forced to make a
public Recantation: and the Worship of this Image was advanced, and a solemn
supplication, and procession with it observed every year; as the same Author
informs us, and the Confraternity of the slaves of the B. Virgin highly
promoted by it. Several other solemn processions are related by him, as of B.
Maria de Remediis, c. 19.
B. Maria de Victoria, with the Popes Bulls for establishing the Society of
slaves of the B. Virgin; but these are enough to show, that the Roman Church in
its constant, and allowed practices, does not come behind old Heathen Rome, in
this part of the Worship given to Images.

CHAP. III. Of the Sense of the second Commandment.
HAving endeavored, with so much care,. 1.
to give a just and true account of the Controversy between us, as to the
Worship of Images, and therein showed from the Doctrine and Practice of the
Roman Church; 1. That they set up Images in Churches over Altars, purposely for
worship. 2. That they consecrate those Images with solemn prayers for that
purpose. 3. That they use all the Rites of Worship to them which the Heathen
Idolaters used to their Images, such as bowings, prostrations, Lights, Incense,
and praying. 4. That they make solemn Processions in honor of Images, carrying
them with as much Pomp and Ceremony as ever the Heathens did their Idols; The
Question now is, whether these Acts of Worship toward Images were unlawful
only to Heathens and Jews; but are become lawful to Christians? But if these
Acts of Worship be now equally unlawful to us, as to them, then Christians
performing them, are liable to the same charge that the Jews and Heathens were;
and if the Scripture calls that Idolatry in them, it must be so in Christians
too, as much as Murder, or Theft, or Adultery is the same in all, for the words
of the Law of God makes no more difference as to one, than as to the other. We
are therefore to enquire on what account the Sense of this Law is supposed to
be consistent with the practice of the same things among Christians, which were
utterly forbidden by it to Jews and Heathens: The words of the Law are these,
Thou shall not make to thy self any Graven Image, nor the Likeness of any Thing
which is in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the Waters under the
Earth; Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them; for I the Lord thy
God am a Jealous God, etc.

My Adversary T. G. denies, that God herein did forbid himself to be worshipped
by a Crucifix, or such like sacred Image; and he asserts, that the design of
the Law is only to forbid the Worship of Idols. The first part, T. G. p. 38, 39.
he says, touches not the worship of Images, nor of God himself by them, but
only the making them; the second forbids indeed in express terms to bow our
selves down to the Images themselves, but speaks not one word of the lawfulness
or unlawfulness of worshipping God himself by them. To bow our selves down to
the Images themselves, without any relation to God, is by the concession of all
to worship them instead of God; The Jews we know did worship God by bowing down
before the Ark and the Cherubims, and yet they did not worship them instead of
God; therefore, p. 49.
he asserts, that by Image an Idol is to be understood, and that by Idol such
an Image as is made to represent for worship a figment that has no real Being;
and by similitude, an Image or resemblance of some real thing, but falsely
imagined to be a God. This is the sense which T. G. gives of the second
Commandment. But if I can make it appear,

1. That there is no reason to take the word he translates Idol here, for the
representation of a mere figment set up for worship, and that if it were so
taken, it would not excuse them.

2. That the worship of God before the Ark and the Cherubims was of a different
nature from the Worship of Images here forbidden, and that the sense of the Law
does exclude all worship of Images; then this interpretation of T. G. will
appear to be very false and groundless.

1. That there is no reason to understand,. ^,
what we render Image, of such an Idol as represents a mere figment set up for
worship. If there were any color of Reason for such an acception of the word
Idol here, it must either be, 1. From the natural importance of the word; or,
2. From the use of it in Scripture; or 3. From the consent of the Fathers, or
4. From some Definition of the Church. But I shall show that there is no ground
for affixing this sense to the Commandment from any one of these.

1. Not from the natural importance of the word. He that reads such an express
prohibition in a divine Law, of something so displeasing to God, that he
annexes a very severe sanction to it, had need be very well satisfied about the
sense he gives to the words of it, lest he incurr the wrath of God, and be
found a perverter of his Law. If a man should reject all humane Authority,
because the First Commandment says, Thou shall have no other Elohim besides
me; but in Scripture, Magistrates and Judges are called Elohim, therefore it is
unlawful to own any civil Magistrates; he would have much more to say than T.
G. and his Brethren have in restraining the sense of the Law about Images to
such Idols as are only representations of Imaginary Beings. For the Original
word has no manner of tendency that way, it signifying any thing that is
carved or cut out of wood or stone; and as I told T. G. before, it is no less
than forty several times rendered by the LXX. by (...), and but thrice by (...),
and which is very observable, although Exodus 20.4. they render it (...), yet in
the repetition of the Law, Deuteronomy. 5.8. the Alexandrian MS. has it (...), and
Deuteronomy. 4.16. in some copies of the LXX. the same word is translated (...), and
Isaiah 40.18. they translate it by (...), which is properly an Image, and the
Vulgar Latin it self uses Idolum, Sculptile, and Imago (Isa. 44.9, 10, 13.)
all to express the same thing. To this T. G. replies, T. G. p. 54, 55.
that the LXX. generally translating it (...), had some particular reason to
render it Idol here; and because this is a word of stricter signification, it
ought to regulate the larger; and in the other places, he says, there is still
some term or clause restraining the words to such a graven thing or Image, as
is made to be compared with God or to be the object of divine worship, that is,
to be an Idol. Then it seems a graven Image when it is made the object of
Divine worship becomes an Idol in T. G's sense; and yet an Idol in the
Commandment is the representation of a mere Figment; but might not that be the
sense of an Idol in this place, which he grants is meant in another? where the
words are express concerning the representation of God, as in Isaiah 40.18. And
if he allows this to be the meaning of an Idol in the Commandment, I will grant
that the LXX had a particular reason to render Pesel by (...) here. For Aquinas
well observes, Aq. 3. q. 25. art. 3. ad 1.
that this Commandment does not forbid the making any sculpture or similitude,
sed facere adorandam, to make it for worship; because it follows, thou shall
not fall down to them and worship them. And Montanus expresses the sense of the
Commandment after this manner; Montan. de Genesis and Regen. Adam. l. 4. c. 9.
simulathrum divinum nullo pacto conflato. Signa cultus causa ne facito; and
Nicolaus Faber (both learned men of the Roman Church.) Fa^ri opuscul. p. 97.
Sculptilibus ne flecte genu, pictaeve tabellae. and again, Non pictum
sculptumve puta venerabile quidquam. If this be T. G's sense of an Idol, I
freely yield to him that the LXX. had very good reason so to render Pesel in
this place, where it is supposed to be an object of divine worship. But how can
this agree with what T. G. says, that the Law speaks not one word of the
unlawfulness of worshipping God himself by an Image? For does not the Law
condemn the worship of an Idol? And does not T. G. say, that an Image when it
is made an object of Divine worship becomes an Idol? And does it not then
follow that the Law in express terms does condemn the Worship of God by such an
Image? Nay, is it not the selfsame T. G. that says, T.G. p. 96.
that the making such Images as are conceived to be proper Likenesses or
representations of the Divinity, is against the Nature and unalterable Law of
God? But what Law of God is there that does forbid such Images, if it be not
this? And if this Law does forbid such Images, then the signification of an
Idol is not here to be taken for the representation of a Figment, but of the
greatest and most real Being in the World. Have not I now far better reason to
return his own words upon him, T.G. p. 38.
such frequent self contradictions are the natural consequences of a Discourse
not grounded upon Truth; and although the Reader may think I take delight to
discover them in my Adversary, yet I can assure him it is a much greater grief
to me to see so subtle a Wit so often entangled in them? But it may be T. G.
thinks to escape by saying, that when he says an Image being made the object
of divine worship is an Idol, he does not understand it of an Image of God, but
when the Image it self is taken for God; which evasion can do him no service;
for, 1. He grants that Images which are made for Likenesses of God are
condemned by the Law of God, and that they are an infinite disparagement to the
Divine Nature. 2. I have at large showed that in the Roman Church, Images of
God and Christ are made the objects of Divine worship. And 3. That the very
Heathens did not take the Images themselves for Gods. T. G. p. ^1.
4. The place he answers, Isa. 40.18. does imply that the Images of the
Divinity are therefore condemned, because nothing can be made like unto God.
But of that afterward.

Let us then suppose that the LXX. had particular reason to render Pesel by
(...) in the Commandment,. 3.
yet what is this, to the representation of a mere figment for worship? Does
(...) so properly, so naturally, so necessarily signify a figment, that it
cannot be taken in any other sense? I see T. G. makes only use of good
Catholic Lexicons (such a one as that called Catholicon which Erasmus is so
pleasant with) that assure him what the sense of a word must be in spite of
all use of it by profane and heretical Authors: thus simulachrum must signify
only Heathen Images, and (...), a Sphinx, a Triton, or Centaure; and why so?
did it always signify so? did all Greek Authors use it only in that sense?
Does the Etymology of it imply it? no, none of all these: what then is the
reason that a word should be so restrained against the former and common
acception of it? The reason is very plain; for if it be taken for the
representation of real Beings, then for all that we know, the Image of the
Trinity, or of the B. Virgin, or of any other worshipped in the Roman Church
may prove Idols; and therefore this must be the sense, because the Church of
Rome cannot be guilty of Idolatry. This is the real Truth of the case, but it
is too great Truth to be owned. Only Bellarmin (who often speaks freelier than
the rest) confesses, Bellarm. de. Imag. l. 2. c. 5.
their design herein is to show that the Images worshipped in the Church of
Rome cannot be Idols, because they are representations of real Beings. A very
miserable shift! as will appear by the examination of it. Let us therefore see
whether there be any pretense from the use and importance of the Word, for
restraining the sense of an Idol, to an imaginary representation. And I am so
far from T. G's opinion, that by the best enquiry I can make, the proper
signification of (...) is, a representation of something that really is. So
Hesychius interprets it by (...) and (...); and the old Greek and Latin
Glossaries render (...) and simulachrum by each other (and notwithstanding T.
G's severity against me for translating simulachra Images, I can make it appear
from some of the most authentic Writers of the Roman Church, that they do not
scruple calling such Images as they worship simulacra, I leave T. G. then to
judge whether they be not Idols too) Isidore makes Idolum to be properly
Simulachrum quod humana effigy factum and consecratum est: an Image made and
consecrated in the figure of a man: as Plutarch calls the Image of Sylla (...);
Catech. Romans explic. praec. 1. n. 10 Onuphr. de 7 urb. Eccl. de Basil. Lateran.
Carol.

Borrom. in Council.

Mediol. 8. p. 1.

Isid. Orig. l. 8. c. 11.

Plut. vit. Syllae.


and Porphyrie in the beginning of the Life of Plotinus, when Amelius desired a
Picture of him, he answered, Is it not enough to carry such an Idolum about me,
but I must leave (...) an Image of an Image? So we find Idolum used in the
Chaldaick Oracles, (...), where Psellus observes, Psell. in. Orac.

Chaldaic. p. 53.


That according to the Platonists, the mind is said to be (...) the Image of
God; and the rational soul, the Image of the mind, and the irrational, the
Image of the rational; and nature of the irrational soul; and the body of the
Image of Nature; and Matter of the Body. But Isidore applying Idolum to an
Ecclesiastical sense, supposes not only representation, but consecration to be
necessary to it; wherein he follows Tertullian, Tertul. de Idol. c. 4.
who speaking of the created Beings that were worshipped, says, Eorum Imagines
Idola; imaginum consecratio Idololatria: Their Images were Idols, and the
consecration of them is Idolatry: and a little before, he says, That all
service of an Idol is Idolatry, c. 3.
and every representation is an Idol; Omnis forma vel formula Idolum se dici
exposcit; For, says he, (...) is from (...) which signifies a form or
representation of a thing. Or as the Greek Etymologist thinks it comes
immediately from (...) to resemble. Among the Philosophers it was taken for the
Image of things conveyed to our sight, so Diogenes Laertius says, That
Democritus held Vision to be performed (...) by the incursion of Images; (...)
says Plutarch; Diog. Vit. Democr. Cicer. ad Attic. l. 2. p. 3.

Plut. de placit.

Philos. l. 4. c. 13, 14.


Empedocles says he, joined rays to the Images, ((...):) and Democritus and
Epicurus said that reflection in a glass was performed (...) by the subsistence
of the Images. Cicero, Lucretius, and S. Augustine render these (...) by
Imagines; Catius the Epicurean called them Spectra; Macrobius Simulacra;
Lucret. l. 4. Cic. ep. l. 15. ep. 16.

August. ep. 56.

Macrob. Sat. l. 1. c. 14.


but all of them understood the most proper representations of things to our
sight; which Epicurus was so far from thinking that they represented things
that were not, that he made them infallible criteria of the truth of things.
The Poets, and some other Authors made use of (...) to signify Specter and
Apparitions; but still they supposed these to be the representations of some
real Beings; So Homer calls the soul of Elpenor that appeared to Ulysses (...);
Odyss. (...). v. 83.
but Eustathius there observes, That these (...) were exactly like the Persons
they represented as to Age, Stature, Habit, and every thing: and so Homer
himself expresses it, saying that Apollo made an (...) a representation of
Aeneas, Iliad. (...). v. 450.
(...). So in another place speaking of Minerva's making a representation of
Iphthima, Odyss. (...). v. 796.
(...).

By which we see that the very Poetical use of the word, for a Spectre, does
imply an exact resemblance to some real Being which it represents: from whence
then has this signification of an Idol come into the Roman Church, that it
must signify a representation of something that is not? but from whenceoever
it comes, we are sure it is neither from the natural importance, nor the use of
the word among Greek Authors.

2. Not from the use of it in Scripture.. 4.
The Author of the Book of wisdom gives this account of the beginning of the
worship of Idols, Wisd. c. 14. v. 15.
viz. That Fathers having lost their Children, made Images of them, and
appointed solemnities to be kept before them, as if they were Gods; then by
degrees, Princes passed these things into Laws, and made men to worship graven
Images: and thus either out of affection or flattery the worship of Idols
began: where it is observable, that he makes the representation of Persons,
that were really in Being, to have been the first Idols: and he distinguishes
the bringing in of Idols from the worship of the Elements, Chapter 13. v. 6, etc.
or heavenly bodies; and he thinks these much more excusable than those who
worship the Work of men's hands; the folly of which he there elegantly
describes; but he still supposes these Idols to have the resemblance either of
man or some living creature. v. 13, 14.
To the same purpose Diophantus the Lacedemonian in Fulgentius, Fulgent.
Mythol. l. 1.
says, That Syrophanes the Egyptian, being greatly afflicted for the loss of
his son made an Image of him, and all his servants to please him did what they
could to adorn this Image, and some when they had offended ran to it as a
Sanctuary; from hence, says he, came the worship of Idols. And Eutychius gives
the like account of the Original of Idols, Eutych. Annal. Tom. 1. p. 56.
That when a great man was dead, they set up his Image on his Sepulcher; from
whence the World was filled with Idols, i.e. with Images of Men, Women, and
Children: this he thinks began among the Chaldeans and Egyptians; but Herodotus
says the Egyptians were the first who made Images of their Gods: Herod. l. 2.
Lucian, Lucian. de Dea Sir.
that they borrowed this custom from the Assyrians. Epiphanius makes the
beginning of Idolatry to be in the time of Seruch; Epiph. l. 1. Sect. 8.
but he says, that it went no farther than to Pictures in his time; and came
to Images and Statues in the time of Nahor. Cedrenus says, Cedren. hist. Comp.
p. 45.
That Seruch and his Companions made Statues for the honor of those who had
done any famous action; which their posterity misunderstanding, worshipped them
as Gods. Thus far we find that the first Idols that are supposed to have been
in the world, were the representations of things that had real Beings. The only
people that could be suspected to be meant in Scripture as those who had such
Idols as were representations of what had no real Beings, must be the
Phoenicians and Egyptians: who besides the worship of Beasts, and the Images of
them, had many extravagant Images. Sanchoniathon says, Taautus made the Images
in Phoenicia with Wings, Saturn with four, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 1. p. 39.
and the rest of the Gods with two. And Dagon, and Atergatis or Derceto, is
supposed to be an Image, whereof the upper part is of humane shape, and the
lower of a Fish; among the Egyptians, one of their Images had the face of a
Ram, and another of a Dog, etc. If these be the Idols T.G. thinks are
prohibited in the Second Commandment, I desire him to consider, 1. Whether the
Images of humane shape were not prohibited by the Law equally with these? or
whether it were lawful to worship such Images as did represent real beings in
that manner, that it was unlawful to worship those Images that were only
Chimaera's and fancies of men's brains? If not, this distinction serves to no
purpose at all. To make this more plain, I ask T. G. whether it were unlawful
to worship God among the Egyptians under the representation of an Image with
the body of a man, and the Head of a Hawk, which was a representation of
something that had no real Being just like it; but it was lawful to worship Him
with the Image of a man, as Eusebius says, Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 3. c. 11.
that Oneph or the Creator of the world was worshipped under such a
representation among them? It is certain, that both these sorts of Images were
among the Egyptians, and according to T. G.'s notion, one of these was an Idol,
and the other not. But is it possible for men of common understandings, to
suppose that God by the words of the Law has forbidden the one, and not the
other; when both were intended to represent the same Being? But according to
this sense, the Inhabitants of Thebais, of whom Plutarch says, Plut. de Isid.
and Osiri. p. 357.
That they only worshipped Oneph the immortal God, or the Creator under the
Image of a man, were altogether as innocent, as those in the Roman Church, who
worship God under a like representation. And can it enter into T. G.'s head,
that God should, notwithstanding all the words of this Commandment, allow such
a kind of worship of Images as was received among the Egyptians? But if this
were condemned in them, then if the Second Commandment be in force, the like
worship must be condemned in the Church of Rome. 2. That there is a distinction
to be made between such Images as have no real resemblance in nature, and such
Images which represent that which has no real Being; for although the
Phoenician and Egyptian Images had nothing in nature which answered to their
figure, yet there might be something which answered their representation, i. e.
they were only Symbolical Images, and the Nature of those Symbols being
understood, there was no difference as to matter of worship between these and
other Images. As for instance, a Sphinx is one of those Images which T. G.
would have to be understood for an Idol in the Second Commandment; supposing
then that I allow him (as a Sphinx was painted among the Egyptians with wings,
and the face a man, and the body of a Lion) that it was the representation of
something that had no real Being agreeable to it; yet Clemens Alexandrinus
says, Clem. Alex. Str. 5.
That their design was to represent hereby that God was both to be loved and
feared; now this Image did Symbolically represent a real object of worship; and
therefore could be no Idol even in T. G.'s sense. So Kircher says, Pignor.
exposit. Mensae Isiacae. p. 34. Kircher. Sphinx. Mystagoga par. 2. c. 3.
one of the chief and most common Images of the Egyptians was a winged Globe
with a Serpent passing through the middle of it; by the Globe, says he, they
represented the Divine nature, by the Serpent, the spreading of life, and by
the wings, the Spirit of the World. Here is an Image that has no real Being
correspondent to it, and yet it represents the infinite nature, and power, and
goodness of God: Sometimes, says he, they represented Providence by a Scepter
with a Dogs head within a Semicircle; by which, and innumerable other ways
they represented the hidden Mysteries of the Divine Being: and they thought
this Symbolical way most pleasing to God; and was certainly farthest from that
danger which T. G. thinks to be most considerable in Images, viz. making men
Anthropomorphites. To avoid which, the Egyptians generally mixed the figures of
men and beasts together, not so much to show the communion of nature, as
Porphyrie imagines, Porphyr. ^e abstin. l. 4.
as that these were mere Symbolical Images, and not intended for any proper
Likenesses, and therefore according to T. G.'s principles, those which he calls
Idols, were more innocent, than those which he calls Images; for the one might
bring men to erroneous conceits of the Deity; but the other being Symbolical
were not apt to do it. Plutarch says, Plut. de Isid. and Osir. p. 355.
That when they represented Mercury by the Image of a man, with the head of a
Dog, they only intended thereby to represent Care, Watchfulness, and Wisdom:
and that they represented Osiris by a Scepter with an eye in it, by a Hawk, and
by the figure of a man; now by Osiris, p. 371.
he tells us, They meant the most powerful God, and so does Apuleius; and
Tacitus says, Apul. Metamor. l. 11. Tacit. hist. l. 4.
The same God which was called Jove among others, was called Osiris by them.
These Images, and many other of very strange shapes, with a mixture of very
different forms, are supposed, in the Mensa Isiaca, and the Egyptian Obelisks,
to represent the most true and perfect Being in regard of his nature and
production of things; Oedip. Egypt. Tom. 3.
as Athanas. Kircher has endeavored at large to show. If therefore the
Egyptians did make such Symbolical figures with respect to the most real Being;
and yet these Images were Idols properly so called: then it follows, that some
representations of the true God are Idols, and condemned in the Second
Commandment.

3. The Scripture uses the word Idol for the representation of all sorts of
things which are made the objects of worship. Thus in the first place the LXX.
makes use of the word (...), it is taken for the Teraphim of Laban, Genesis 31.19,
34, 35. which are supposed to be of humane shape; not only from the general
opinion of Jewish Writers; but because of the mistake of the Teraphim for
David, 1 Samuel 19.13. The Images of Baal are called Idols, 2 Chronicles. 17.3. Jer. 9
13. and what the LXX. render, 2 Kings 11.18. (...) the Images of Baal; in the
parallel place, 2 Chronicles. 23.17. they express by (...) the Idols of Baal.
Whether by Baal be understood the Assyrian Belus, or the Phoenician Beel Samen,
i. e. whether a representation of a man, or of the Sun, we are sure this was an
Image of a real Being, and yet the LXX. call it an Idol. Idols are joined with
Molten Gods by the LXX. Levit. 19.4. i. e. what ever Images are set up for
Divine worship: And all the Gods of the Heathen are said to be Idols, 1 Chronicles.
16.26. but they were not all mere figments of men's brains, being either dead
men that were worshipped (as S. Hierome says, Hieron. in Isai. c. 37. l. 11.
by the Idols of the Heathens we understand imagines Mortuorum the
representations of dead men) or the works of the Creation, especially the
heavenly bodies, which was the most early and the most common Idolatry of the
Eastern parts, and most frequently condemned in Scripture.

If it be said, That although they had real Beings, yet their Deities were
fictitious, I answer, 1. That is not to the purpose; for the question is,
whether the proper signification of an Idol be the representation of mere
imaginary Beings, Sphinxes, Tritons, Centaures? but what a ridiculous answer is
this to that question, to say that although their being real, yet their Deity
is fictitious? for this is to grant, that Idols are not representations of
imaginary Beings, but of imaginary Deities: which I readily grant. 2. This will
equally hold against all representations of created Beings that have divine
worship given to them; for by giving them any part of divine worship they are
so far made Gods; but since they are not truly so, they are still but the
representations of imaginary Deities, although they be of real Saints, or
Angels. In which sense the Scripture calls them (...) and (...) nothings, and
vanities, and S. Paul says, That an Idol is nothing in the world; not because
it represented that which was not; but because neither the Image nor the thing
represented were any real Deity.

4. The far greatest part of the Idols expressly mentioned in Scripture were
the representations of real Beings: not only that the things had Subsistence
which were represented by them, but that the very Images were of some creatures
existing in the world. Lyra says, Lyra in Lev. 18.
That Moloch was in the fashion of a man; and so Benjamin Tudelensis supposes,
Benjam. Itiner. p. 33. ed L' Emper.
when he says, That two femal Images stood of either side of him. Kircher
shows, Kirch. Pantheon Hebraeorum.
from Baal Aruch, that Asima was worshipped in the form of a Goat: and from
other Jewish Authors, That Nibcas had the figure of a Dog, Thartak of an Ass,
Adramelech of a Mule, and Anamelech of a Horse; Bell and Nebo of Serpents and
Beasts; Succoth Benoth of a Hen and Chickens; Astaroth of Sheep. Will T. G. say
that these were not Idols, because they were Images of real Beings? If he does,
he must excuse the grossest Idolatry condemned in Scripture; if he does not, he
must then confess, that this is not the notion of an Idol in the sense of
Scripture, viz. a representation of what has no existence, but in the
imagination, as Sphinxes, Tritons, Centaures, and the like.

3. But T. G. would have us believe, that this is the sense of the Fathers;. 4.
for he quotes Origin and Theodoret for this interpretation of the second
Commandment. It is well known that Origin had a great many of T. G.'s Idols in
his head, viz. imaginations of things that were not; and therefore it is ill
fixing upon an interpretation of Scripture of which he was the first Author.
But I have proved at large from the unanimous consent of the Fathers in
charging the Arians with Idolatry, and the Gnostics in worshipping the Images
of Christ with divine honors, that this could not be their sense. For if this
were the notion of an Idol, to represent what has no existence, neither the
Arians nor the Gnostics could be accused of worshipping an Idol; but the
Fathers do in express terms call Christ an Idol, if he had divine worship given
him, and yet were not God. And it is farther observable, (1.) That the second
Council of Nice confesses, Council. Nicaen. 2. Act. 6. p. 411.
that the Arrians were justly condemned for Idolatry, not only by one or two
Fathers, but by the Catholic Church; from whence it is evident, that the
Catholic Church did declare that T. G.'s sense of an Idol is false. (2.) That
when the Fathers repeat the second Commandment, instead of (...), they use
other words, which they would never have done, if they had thought there had
been any peculiar importance of the word Idol in that place different from
Image. Justin Martyr in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, Just. Martyr. dial
cum Tryph. p. 321.
repeats the words of the Law thus, (...), Thou shall not make any Image or
similitude. Clemens Alex. Clem. Alex. Str. l. 3. p. 441.
makes the thing forbidden to be (...), to worship graven Images; and the thing
required to be, not to make (...), either a graven or a molten Image. And even
Origin himself, lays so little weight on his observation about (...), that
when he gives an account of this Law in his Books against Celsus, Orig. c.
Cells. l. 4. p. 182. Tertull. de spect. c. 23.
he never mentions it, but uses (...); and says, the meaning of the Law was
to forbid any kind of Images. Tertullian says, that God hereby did forbid all
kind of similitude, quanto magis Imaginis suae, how much more any Image of
himself: and elsewhere he makes an Idol and an Image the same thing; De Idol.
c. 3, 4.
and in another place, that God did prohibit all similitudes to prevent any
occasion of Idolatry; for, he adds, thou shall not bow down to them nor worship
them. C. Marcion. l. 2. c. 22.
Therefore, says he, the brazen Serpent was not against the Law, being not for
worship, but for a Remedy; nor the Cherubim, being merely Ornaments, and
therefore not falling under the Reason of the Law, and afterward he reckons up
the several terms of the Law, by Images, Statues and Similitudes. c. Marcion.
l. 4. c. 22.
S. Cyprian interprets the meaning of the word Idols in the Commandment,
Cyprian. de exh. Martyr. c. 1.
when he says, they are such as the Psalmist speaks of, that have mouths and
speak not, etc. which is certainly meant of Images of humane shape; and in
another place, he says, the Heathen Idols were made, De Idol. vanit. c. 1.
ad defunctorum vultus per imaginem detinendos: to preserve the countenances of
the dead by Images: which are almost the same words with those of Minucius
Felix speaking of the same subject, Minuc. Fell. p. 21.
while they desired, says he, defunctos Reges in imaginibus videre, to see
their Princes Images and to retain their memories in their Statues, that which
at first was intended for their comfort, became an object of worship. So
Lactantius says, Lact. l. 2. c. 2, 3.
that their Simulachra, their Idols, in T. G's sense, were either the monuments
of the dead, or of the absent; and he makes the sense of the Law to be nihil
colendum esse quod oculis mortalibus cernitur, nothing to be worshipped that
can be seen. S. Augustine giving the sense of this commandment says, S. Aug.
ep. 119. c. 11.
that therein any similitude of God is forbidden to be worshipped; and
therefore surely not the mere figments of men's brains, or representations of
Sphinxes, and Tritons, and Centaurs.

(3.) That those very persons who put that sense upon the word Idol, do yet
make the sense of the Commandment to be against the practice of the Roman
Church. For both Origin and Theodoret make it unlawful by the force of this
commandment, Orig. in. Exodus hom. 8. Theod. in Exodus q. 38.
to perform any external act of worship toward any representation whatsoever:
and the difference they both put between worship and service is, Orig. Exhort.
ad Martyr. ed. Wetsten. p. 167.
that the latter is that of the mind, and the former of the body; but both,
they say, are here forbidden; and therefore I cannot imagine what comfort T. G.
can have in supposing their Images are not forbidden under the name of Idols,
if they be forbidden under the name of similitudes, and it be as unlawful to
worship them under one name as under the other? Our quarrel is not with them,
merely on the account of the word Idolatry; but it is on the account of their
worships being contrary to the express Law of God; and whether it be forbidden
under the name of Idol, or similitude, it is all one to us, as long as the
worship they practice, is as plainly against the sense of this Commandment, as
Perjury, Adultery, or Theft is against the other Commandments: and that even in
the opinion of Origin and Theodoret themselves. Besides, if we look into the
sense of these two Authors, we shall find their meaning was not, as T. G.
imagines, to make those only Idols that were made to represent fictions of the
brain; but to show that God had forbidden all sorts of Images, Symbolical as
well as others. For, says Origin, Moses being skilled in all the Wisdom of the
Egyptians; did forbid those things which are used in their secret and hidden
Mysteries; i. e. their Symbolical and Hieroglyphical representations: and
Theodoret particularly mentions the Egyptian Images, with the face of a Dog,
and the Head of an Ox; whereby it is plain that they thought Moses by this Law
intended to forbid all manner of representations of things in order to worship,
whether it were by Hieroglyphics, or by proper similitudes. So that, neither
Origin, nor Theodoret by this interpretation do give the least countenance to
the practice of the Roman Church.

4. I shall in the last place show,. 5.
that this interpretation of the term Idol is overthrown by the most learned
persons of the Roman Church; who do confess that the Images of real Beings may
become Idols. And that in these following cases, 1. When proper Latria is given
to an Image; that is truly Idolatry, says Bellarmin, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c.
24.
when proper Latria is given to any thing besides God; and it is not only
Idolatry when an Idol is worshipped without God, but when an Idol is worshipped
together with God; and from hence he concludes, that no Image ought to be
worshipped with proper Latria; which conclusion cannot be of any force, unless
such an Image becomes an Idol: but he goes farther, and says, that those who
worshipped an Image of Christ with divine honors, although it be for the sake
of Christ, and not of the Image, did commit Idolatry; for, says he, although a
man pretends to give these honors for the sake of God or Christ, yet in as
much as he gives divine honors to them, he does really give it for themselves,
although he denies it in words, (which is a very fair confession) and from
hence those were condemned as heretics, who gave divine worship to the Image
of Christ; as appears by Irenaeus, Epiphanius, S. Augustine, and Damascen.
According to which concession, the dispute cannot any longer be, whether the
Images of Christ or the Saints be Idols or no, if we can prove that divine
honors are given to them by the doctrine and practice of the Roman Church. And
even T. G. himself says, T.G. p. 162.
Is not the giving Divine Worship to a Creature the same as to make it a false
God? And is it not Heathen Idolatry to worship a false God? From whence it
follows, that it is the Worship makes any thing an Idol, and not the
representation of an Imaginary Being. 2. When Images are worshipped as true
representations of the Divine Nature. So Sanders expressly; Sander. de honor.
Imag. adorat. c. 4. init.
He that goes about to represent the invisible Nature of God by an Image, sins
grievously and makes an Idol; and he that proposes such an Image for worship
commits Idolatry: but such an Image is no representation of a mere figment of
men's brains; but a vain endeavor to set forth the most perfect Being. If he
had only said it had been a foolish and vain attempt, he had only expressed the
impossibility of the thing; but when he makes such an Image an Idol when it is
proposed for worship, he does imply, that an imperfect representation of an
infinite Nature when it is worshipped becomes an Idol. This is not to be
avoided by saying, that such an Image is a false representation: for it is no
otherwise false than every Image of a man is so; for no Image can represent the
invisible Nature of a Man. And it adds much force to this, that the Author of
the Greek Excerpta about the use of Images, Biblioth. Patr. To. 4. p. 734.
from the Nicene Council and the Writers of that time, says, that the design
of the second Commandment is against making any Images of God; which he looks
on not only as an absurd but a very wicked practice; and which, he says, was
then common among the Egyptians. 3. When an Image is worshipped for the sake
of any sanctity, virtue, or Divinity abiding in it. Whosoever does so, says
Iacobus Almain, Jacob. Almain. in sentent. l. 3. did. 9. prope sin.
is an Idolater; and so much is employed in the Council of Trent it self; when
it declares, that no worship is to be given to an Image on any such account; if
so, then the doing it is a thing forbidden and unlawful; and not only so, but
they looked on this as the certain way of putting a difference between Idolatry
and their worship; but men may suppose sanctity, virtue, and Divinity to be in
an Image of a real Being; and therefore such an Image may be properly an Idol:
and so Vasquez confesses that this is Idolatry to give worship, Vasq. q. 108.
c. 9. art. 3.
although it be inferior, to any inanimate being (as an Image is) for the sake
of any thing belonging to it, or inherent in it. Thus I have showed that there
is no pretense to excuse the worship of Images from being Idolatry and a breach
of the second Commandment, because an Idol is only a representation, of only
imaginary beings, as T. G. says, such as Sphinxes, Tritons, Centaurs or the
like.

2. I now come to show more particularly what the sense of the Law is, 6.
by considering what T. G. says in answer to what I had formerly said about
it: the original Question between us, was, whether God by this Law has
forbidden the giving any worship to himself by an Image? No, says T. G. he
has not; but what he forbids there is only giving his worship to Idols. To
resolve this Question, being about the sense of a Law, I proposed three ways.
1. From the Terms in which the Law is expressed. 2. From the Reason annexed to
it. 3. From the judgment of the Lawgiver himself. But before T. G. comes to
the handling of these, T. G. p. 39, 40,
he lays down some arguments of his own to show, that God did not intend by
this Law, to forbid the worshipping of himself by an Image, but only the
worship of Idols. 1. Because the Jews did worship God by bowing down before the
Ark and the Cherubim. 2. Because S. Austin makes this Commandment to be only an
explication of the first. To these I shall give a distinct answer.

1. T. G. on all occasions, T. G. p. 40, 49, 50, 52, 53, 56, 77, 79, 81, 103,
206, 207.
lays great weight on the worshipping of God before the Ark and the Cherubims:
which he makes to be the parallel of their worshipping God by bowing or
kneeling before a Crucifix; to which instance I had given this Answer, 1. That
the Jews only directed their worship toward the place where God had promised
to be signally present among them; which signifies no more to the worship of
Images, than our lifting our eyes to heaven does when we pray; because God is
more especially present there. 2. That though the Cherubims were there, yet
they were always hid from the sight of the people, the High Priest himself
going into the Holy of Holies but once a year; and that the Cherubims were no
representations of God, but his Throne was between them on the Mercy Seat; but
that they were Hieroglyphical Figures of Gods own appointing, which the Jews
know no more than we do: which are plain arguments they were never intended for
objects of worship, for then they must not have been mere appendices to another
thing, but would have been publicly exposed as the Images are in the Roman
Churches, and their form as well known as any of the B. Virgin. But T. G. still
insists upon it, T. G. p. 206.
that the Reverence which the Jews showed to the Ark and Cherubims, was of the
same nature with the worship they give to Images; and he thinks, I have not
answered the argument he brought for it. Therefore to give him all reasonable
satisfaction, I shall 1. Compare their worship of Images and these together. 2.
Examine all the color of argument he produces for the worship of these among
the Jews.

1. For comparing their worship of Images, with the Jews worshipping God before
the Ark and the Cherubims. As to their worship of Images, I need only repeat;
1. That they are publicly set up and exposed for worship in their Churches,
and over their Altars. 2. That they are consecrated for this end. 3. That the
people in their devotions bow to them, kneel and pray before them with all
expressions of Reverence. 4. That the Councils of Nice and Trent have decreed
that worship is to be given to them on the account of their representation;
because the honor given to them passes to the exemplar 5. That the Images
themselves on the account of their representation are a proper object of
inferior worship, and that considered together with the exemplar they make up
one entire object of supreme worship; in these their Divines generally agree,
and condemn the opinion of those who say, That they are only to worship the
exemplar before the Image; as contrary to the Decrees of Councils. But if the
Ark and Cherubims were neither set up, nor exposed, nor consecrated as objects
of worship; if the People of the Jews never thought them to be so, nor
worshipped them as such; if the utmost were only that, which the Divines of the
Roman Church condemn, viz. making them only a circumstance and not an object of
worship, then I hope the difference will appear so great that T. G. himself may
be ashamed of insisting so much on so weak a parallel.

. 7.
In external Acts of worship these two things are to be distinguished, (1.) The
Object of worship, or the thing to which that worship is given. (2.) The local
circumstance of expressing that worship toward that object. That there is a
real difference between the object and local circumstance of worship, by our
lifting up our hands and eyes toward heaven when we worship God; but no man
that understands our Religion can say, that we worship the heavens, but only
God as present in them; wherefore God is the object, and looking up to heaven,
barely the circumstance. When we praise any person for some excellency in him,
if he be present, we naturally turn our face toward him, to let others by that
circumstance understand, of whom we speak; but which way soever we looked, the
same person would be the object of our praise; when we do this at another
mentioning his name, no man of common understanding will say, that the praise
is directed to the very name of the Person; and if a man makes a Panegyric
upon another, and reads it out of a Book, no one suspects that his praise is
therefore directed to his Book. Thus it is in the acts of worship, the Object
is that Being to which the worship is directed; but because external Acts must
have some local circumstances, by the position of our countenances, and the
tendency of our posture either toward Heaven, or toward some place as the
more immediate Symbol of a divine presence, the difference is apparent between
such a direction of the act toward a place, and the direction of it toward an
Object, in case it can be made appear that may be a place of worship, which is
not an object of it. For which we must consider, (1.) That the object of
worship is that to which the worship is given either for its own sake, or for
the sake of that which it represents; but a local circumstance does only
circumscribe the material act of worship within certain bounds. And the proper
object of worship is a Person, either really present, or represented as
present. The Idolaters who worshipped their Images as Gods (if at least any
considerable number of them ever did so) it was upon this account, that they
supposed some Spirit to be incorporated in the Image, and so to make together
with it a Person fit to receive worship. Those who worshipped the Elements, or
heavenly bodies, did it not on the account of the matter whereof they were
made; but of those spirits which they believed to rule over those things they
worshipped, as I have already showed in the general discourse. But it is not
necessary in order to an object of worship, that the Person be really present;
for if men by imagination do suppose him present as represented by an Image,
that makes those who worship that Image perform the very same acts, as if he
were actually present; and in the Church of Rome they do make this
representation by an Image, a sufficient ground for making that an object of
worship; which we say is the very thing forbidden in the Second Commandment,
viz. that any Image should be worshipped on the account of what it represents;
and therefore it forbids all kind of representations to be worshipped by men:
because an Image seems to have such a relation to the thing it represents, that
they may pretend they give worship to it on another account than merely its
matter and form, viz. the thing represented by it. Thus when the Reason of the
worship of Images is drawn from the exemplar, as it is both in the Councils of
Nice and Trent, they thereby show, that they do make the Image a true object of
worship, although the reason of it be drawn from the Person represented. But
suppose men worship God toward the West, as the Jews did, or toward the East,
as the Christians did; what is there in this that does represent God to us?
what is there that we fix our worship upon, but only himself; God has no where
forbidden men to worship Him toward the place of His presence; for even our
Savior has bid us pray, Our Father which art in Heaven; and supposing God had
promised a more peculiar presence in His Holy Temple, it was as lawful to
worship God toward that, as toward Heaven; but that which God has strictly
forbidden, is the worshipping of any thing on the account of the representation
either of himself, or of His creatures; for this does suppose that Image to be
made the object of worship, although it be on the account of what it
represents. 2. Supposing the same external acts to be performed toward an
Image, and toward a place of Gods particular presence; yet the case is not
alike in both these, if those who do them, declare they do them not with a
design to worship that place. For to the making any thing an object of worship,
there must be some ground to believe that they intend to worship it, either
from the nature of their actions, or the doctrine and practice of the Church
they live in; but in case it be expressly declared, that what they do, is only
intended as a local circumstance, there is no ground to charge them with making
it an object of worship. Thus those in the Church of Rome, who declare that
they do not worship the Image, but only worship God before an Image, although
they perform the same external acts of worship, yet are condemed of Heresy,
because hereby they declare they do not give worship to Images, which is
contrary to the decrees of their Councils: Much more certainly will those be
condemned by them who declare it unlawful to worship any thing on the account
of representation; and that they do only determine the acts of outward worship
toward a particular place, without any intention to worship that place, but
only to worship God that way. And this was the case of the Jews as to the
worshipping of Images, and of God toward the Holy of Holies; they declared it
utterly unlawful to do one because God had strictly forbidden it; and they
though it as lawful to do the other, because he allowed the practice of it: and
it was sufficiently known among the people of the Jews, that they had no
intention to worship either the Ark or the Cherubims. 3. Where there is only a
local circumstance of worship, the same thing would be worshipped, supposing
that circumstance changed; but where any thing is an object of worship, that
being changed, the same thing is not worshipped. This makes the difference
between these two easy, and intelligible by all. If a Jew should worship
toward the East, or Christians toward the West, the same object of their
worship continues still; for they worship the same God both ways; but if the
Image of Christ or the B. Virgin be taken away from the Altar, a Papist cannot
be said to worship the same thing there, that he did before. Which plainly
shows, that there is a real difference between these two; which is of great
moment to clear the Jewish worship of God toward his holy place, and to show
how different it was from the worship of Images.

. 8.
2. But T. G. pretends to bring clear Scripture for the Jews worshipping the
Ark; Adore ye the footstool of God, for it is holy, Psalm. 98.5. so all the
ancient Fathers, T.G. p. 206.
he says, read it without scruple; and S. Hierome, he says, confirms it. And
why was it placed in the Holy of Holies, and why were the people commanded to
adore, or bow down before it, but to testify their reverence to it? To this I
answer, 1. One might venture odds against T. G. that when he quotes all the
Fathers for him, he has very few of his side: Nothing less will content him
here than all the Fathers reading it without scruple, for It is holy, when
Lorinus says, Lorin. in Psalm. 99.5.
That all the Greek Fathers, not one dissenting that he had seen, read it, For
He is holy: and among the Latins he confesses, That S. Hierome and S. Augustine
both read it so; for, says S. Augustine, Quis sanctus est in cujus honor ador
as scabellum pedum ejus? Genebrard acknowledges likewise, that S. Hierome
translates it so, and Suarez yields that not only the Greek, Genebr. in loc.

Suarez in 3 ep. q. 54. art. 3.


but S. Augustine and S. Hierome read it, For He is holy. 2. Those words do not
imply, that the Jews did make the Ark the object of their worship; for the
Chaldee Paraphrast renders them, Worship Him in His Sanctuary; and the last
verse of the Psalm, where the same sense is repeated, interprets this, Worship
at his holy hill, for the Lord our God is holy: where, the holy Mountain is the
same with the Foot stool before mentioned: and so Muis confesses, Sim. de Muis
in loc.
who says withal, That by the phrase of worshipping His Footstool, no more is
meant than worshipping God at His Footstool: and the Sanctuary, he says, is
called Gods Footstool, not only by the Chaldee Paraphrast and Kimchi, but
Lament. 2.1. And so Lyra interprets it, Ante scabellum pedum ejus: worship
before His Footstool: or worship at His Footstool, as it is Psalm 182.7. And it
would be very strange, if the Psalmist should here propose the footstool for an
object of worship to them, when the design of the whole Psalm is to call all
Nations to the worship of God, as sitting between the Cherubims, Psalm. 99.1. i.
e. in His Throne which is surely different from His Footstool. I will not
contend with Suarez about the sense of the Footstool of God here mentioned,
(although he confesses that Basil and Vatablus understand the Temple by it:)
but I will yield him that the Ark is most probably understood by it, because of
his sitting between the Cherubims being mentioned before; in which respect the
Ark may properly be called his Footstool. For the Cherubims were the Mercabah,
or the Divine Chariot, and so called, 1 Chronicles. 28.18. where the Vulgar Latin
renders it Quadriga Cherubim: Jacob. Leon. de Cherubinis.
in such a Chariot Pyrrhus Ligorius, Pyrrh. Ligor. de Vehic.
the famous Italian Antiquary, Antiq. c. 19. Live. l. 5. c. 23.
says, The Deities were wont to be drawn: and Livy, and Plutarch take notice
of it in Camillus as an extraordinary thing that he made use of such a
Triumphal Chariot which had been before looked on as proper to Jove the Father
of Gods and Men. Plut. in Camill. p. 132.
Such a Triumphal Chariot, I suppose that to have been in the Holy of Holies,
but without any representation of the Divine Majesty, and this Chariot is that
we call the Cherubim, and the Ark was a kind of Footstool to the invisible
Majesty that sat between the Cherubims, and there delivered his Oracles. Now I
appeal to the understanding of any reasonable man, whether God being
represented as sitting upon His Triumphal Chariot, without any visible Image of
Him, the worship was there to be performed to the invisible Deity, or to the
visible Chariot and Footstool? which is all one as to ask whether persons
approaching to a Prince on his Throne, are to worship the Prince or his
Footstool, or Chair of State? But Lorinus and Suarez say, The Hebrew particle
being added to a word implying worship, does not denote the place but the
object of worship; which is sufficiently refuted by those two places before
mentioned, viz. the last verse of this Psalm, and Psalm 132.7.3. Those of the
Fathers, who understood this expression of the object of worship, do declare by
their interpretation that it was not lawful to worship the Ark after that
manner. Therefore Lorinus says, most of the Fathers understood it of the
humanity of Christ, as S. Ambrose, S. Hierome, S. Augustine and others
generally after him; and among the Greeks, he reckons S. Athanasius, and S.
Chrysostom. But what need all this running so far from the literal sense, in
case they had thought the Ark a lawful object of worship? Let S. Augustine
speak for the rest, Aug. in Psalm. 98.5,
The Scripture, says he, elsewhere calls the Earth Gods Footstool; and does he
bid us worship the Earth? This puts me in a great perplexity; I dare not
worship the Earth, lest He damn me who made the Heaven and the Earth; and I
dare not but worship His Footstool, because He bids me do it. In this doubt I
turn my self to Christ, and from Him find the resolution of it; for His Flesh
was Earth; and so he runs into a discourse about the adoration due to the flesh
of Christ, and the sense in which it is to be understood. And elsewhere says,
That the humane nature of Christ is no otherwise to be adored than as it is
united to the Divinity. Aug. de Verbis Dom. secunda Ioh. Ser. 58.
Which plainly shows that he did not think the Ark literally understood to be a
proper object of worship.

But T. G. adds, that S. Hierome says, That the Jews did worship or reverence
the Holy of Holies, because there were the Cherubims, the Ark, etc. It is well
he puts in Reverence as well as worship, for Venerabantur signifies no more
than that they had it in great veneration; and that not only for the sake of
the Ark and Cherubims, but for the pot of Manna, and Aarons Rod; and does T. G.
think in his conscience, that the Jews worshipped these too? But S. Hierom
explains himself, when he says immediately after, That the Sepulcher of Christ
is more venerable than that; which he interprets by saying, It was a place to
be honored by all. And are these the doughty proofs which T. G. blames me for
not vouchsafing an Answer to them? I think he ought to have taken it as a
kindness from me. Let him now judge whether I have neither Scripture, nor
Father, nor Reason to abet me, in saying, That the Jews only directed their
worship toward the place where God had promised to be signally present among
them.

As to the worship of the Cherubims, all his attempts come only to this, They
might be worshipped although they were not seen; and if it were lawful for the
High Priest to worship them once a year, T.G. p. 207
it was always lawful; but I deny that the High Priest ever worshipped them;
for he only worshipped the God that sat upon His Triumphal Chariot; and their
being hid from the sight of the People, was an argument they were not exposed
as objects of worship, as Images are in the Roman Church. Their being
Appendices to the Throne of God, he says, was rather a means to increase than
diminish the Peoples Reverence to them. If by Reverence he means worship, we
may here see an instance of the variety of men's understandings. For no less a
man than Vasquez, from hence argues, Vasquez disp. 104. c. 6.
That the Cherubims were never intended as an object of worship, because they
were only the Appendices to another thing; but a thing is then proposed as an
object of worship, when it is set up by it self, and not by way of addition or
ornament to another thing: with whom Lorinus, Azorius, and Visorius agree. And
even Aquinas himself grants, Lorin. in Act. 17.25. and in Psalm. 98.5.

Azor. Instit. Mor. l. 9. c. 6.

Visor. resp. ad Moncei. p. 16.

Aq. 1.2. qu. 102. art. 4. ad 6.


That the Seraphim (he means the Cherubim) were not set up for worship, but
only for the sign of some Mystery; nay, he says, the Jews were expressly
forbidden to worship them. Thus I hope I have made it appear, how very little
the worshipping of God before the Ark and the Cherubims does prove toward the
lawfulness of the worship of Images in the Roman Church.

The second Argument of T. G. is, From the judgment of S. Augustine, who makes
that which we call the Second Commandment to be only an explication of the
First. Which I thought so weak and trifling an Argument, that I gave a short
answer to it in these two particulars, 1. That S. Augustine did not seem
constant to that opinion. 2. That supposing he were, yet it does not follow
that according to his judgment, these words are only against Heathen Idols,
and not against the worship of God by Images. Here T. G. thinks he has the bit
fast between his teeth, and away he runs, raising a dust to blind the eyes of
beholders; but he must be stopped in his carier, and brought to better Reason. I
asked T. G. how he was sure this was S. Austins constant judgment, since in
his latter Writings he reckons up the Commandments, as others of the Fathers
had done before him? upon this he insults, and calls it a new way of answering
Fathers, and the readiest he ever met with, T.G. p. 46.
except it be that of denying them: and if this be allowed, when an express
Testimony of a Father is alleged, there is no more to do, than to ask how he
is sure, that the Father did not afterward change his mind? but, he says, he
is sure he has his judgment professedly for him in his former Writings; and
that I ought to bring better evidence of his being of another mind than I have
done. But if I do evidently prove, that S. Augustine was of our mind in the
main point as to the unlawfulness of the worship of God by Images; then what
matter is it, whether it be the first, or second, or third, or fourth
Commandment, so we are sure it is one of the Ten? And I have already produced
sufficient Testimonies from him to this purpose; For does not S. Augustine
declare, Aug. de Fide and Symb. c. 7.
That it is unlawful to worship God by an Image, when, he says, it were
impiety for a Christian to set up a corporeal Image of God in a Temple; and
that they who do it are guilty of the Sacrilege condemned by S. Paul, of
turning the glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible man? Does not St. Augustine commend Varro for speaking so
reproachfully concerning the very manner of worshipping the Deity by an Image?
De Divit. Dei. l. 4. c. 31.
and he says, That if he durst have opposed so old a corruption, he would have
both owned the unity of the Godhead, Et sine simulachro colendum esse censeret,
and have thought he ought to be worshipped without an Image. Does not S.
Augustine, when he purposely explains that which he accounts the First
Commandment, say, That any similitude of God is thereby forbidden to be
worshipped; Epist. 119. ad Ian. c. 11.
because no Image of God is to be worshipped but what is God himself, i. e. his
Son? And can any one speak more expressly our sense than S. Augustine here
does? Let not T.G. then boast of his possession of S. Augustine, unless it be,
as he did lately of all the Fathers; and in truth, the reason is much alike for
both. But as to the division of the Commandments he is of T. G 's side; and
what is that to our business? If S. Augustine be of our side as to the sense of
the Commandment, I can allow him to find out something of the Mystery of the
Trinity in having three Commandments of the First Table; and I can be contented
with this, that the generality of the Fathers were for the other division, and
upon more considerable Reasons. But T.G. says, T.G. p. 43.
That S. Augustine translates this Precept, Thou shall not make to thy self any
Idol, and the sense of the Law to be the forbidding the giving the worship of
God to Idols. One would think by this, S. Augustine had no other word but
Idolum here; whereas he uses both figmentum and simulachrum, both which words
he elsewhere uses about the Images of the True God. But this is their common
method, if they meet with a word in the Fathers that sounds their way, they
never stay to consider the sense of it, but presently cry out Idolum, Idolum;
and then with the Man at Athens, take all that comes for their own: So does T.
G. boast of the possession of the Fathers upon as slight grounds as he did; and
makes up by the strength of Imagination what is wanting in the goodness of his
title; if at least imagination can sway him so much against the plain evidence
of Reason.

. 10.
Having thus cleared the way by removing these mighty difficulties which T. G.
had laid in it to obstruct our passage, I now come to consider the several
methods I proposed for finding out the sense of this Law. The first whereof was
from the general Terms wherein it is expressed, which are of so large and
comprehensive a sense as to take in all manner of representations, in order to
worship; and I challenged him to show where the word Temunah which they render
similitude as well as we, is ever used in Scripture to signify such an Idol as
he supposes this Law intends. And to what purpose are words of the largest
signification put into a Law, if the sense be limited according to the most
narrow acceptance of one word mentioned therein? for there is no kind of
Image, whether graven or painted, whether of a real or imaginary Being, but is
comprehended under the signification of the words set down in the Law. To this
T. G. answers, T.G. p. 47* 48, 49, etc.
that how large soever the signification of this word Temunah or similitude be
when taken by it self, yet in our present case, it is limited by the following
words, Thou shall not bow down to them nor serve them, to signify something
which is made to be worshipped as God, that is, to be an Idol. And so, by the
word Idol in the Commandment he understands such an Image as is made to
represent for worship a Figment that has no real Being; and by similitude an
Image or resemblance of some real thing, but falsely imagined to be God; but,
he says, it was nothing to the purpose to put the word similitude in its
largest meaning, that is, as signifying any Image whatsoever though made with
respect to the worship of the true God, when God himself commanded the Ark and
the Cherubims to be made with that respect: (does he mean to represent the true
God? or to be objects of worship? which I have already showed to be false.)
That which I am to prove, he says, is, that the word Similitude is to be taken
so here; whereas, he affirms, that the word similitude is to be restrained to
the similitude of false Gods: And to make all sure, he interprets similitude
only of the representation of false Gods, and bowing down to and worshipping
that similitude is the Worshipping that Similitude as God: i. e. taking the
Likeness to be the Thing it self. I cannot blame T. G. for making the thing
forbidden in the Commandment, if it be possible, more absurd than their
practice in the worship of Images is; but, whether he has made the sense of
the Law or himself more ridiculous let the Reader judge. By similitude, he
says, is here to be understood, only the Similitude of False Gods, as the Sun,
Moon and Stars, and other like things which they worshipped as Gods; this I
confess is intelligible and true, although not the full meaning of the
Commandment; but what then is, bowing down to and worshipping this similitude?
that is, says he, to worship this similitude as God: How is that? Is it by
believing the Similitude to be the Thing? as the Image of the Sun to be really
the Sun? this is absurd enough of all Conscience, and they were sottish
Idolaters indeed that did so. Or is it, that they thought there was no other
God, besides that similitude? That were strange indeed, they should think the
similitude to be God, and not the thing represented by it. But so the wise Pope
Gregory 2. interpreted this Commandment in his incomparable Epistle to Leo
Isaurus; Greg. 2. Ep. 1. ad Leon. p. 10.
The Emperor tells the Pope he durst not allow the Worship of Images, because
of this severe Prohibition of any kind of similitude, and he desires him to
show, who it was that since had made it lawful to worship the work of men's
Hands. The Pope for this calls him, (...)
an Ignoramus, a dull, and insolent Fool; and bids him lay aside his pride and
haughtiness, and come and learn of him the meaning of the Commandment. And now
we expect something becoming an Infallible Head of the Church; This
Commandment, says the Pope, was made for the sake of the Idolaters who lived
in the Land of Promise, that worshipped living Creatures of Gold and Silver,
and Wood, and all sorts of Creatures and Fowls of the Air; and said, These are
our Gods, and there is no God besides them; and for the sake of this
workmanship of the Devil, God said that we should not worship them; but there
is other Workmanship for the Honor of God, and this men may worship.
Exceedingly well spoken! The mischief is, Maimonides says, there never were
such Fools in the world to believe there was no other God but their Idols; More
Nevoch. l. 1. c. 36.
but what is Maimonides his saying to the Head of the Church? I am not yet
satisfied about T. G's worshipping a similitude as God, and so making it an
Idol. If it be a God, how is it the similitude of a God? If it be not, how
comes it to be worshipped as God? What is it the similitude of? of God? yes.
But it is God it self to him that worships it as God; and so it is the
similitude of it self. So that the similitude here forbidden to be worshipped,
is a Thing that is like its own self. T. G. in another place says, T. G. p. 39.
the thing forbidden in the Commandment, is bowing our selves down to the
Images themselves, and this by the Concession of all is worshipping them
instead of God. What is this bowing down to the Images themselves? Is it
supposing them to be really Gods? then they are not worshipped as similitudes;
and this seems to be his meaning, when he says, To bow down our selves to the
Images themselves, without any Relation to God, is to worship them instead of
God. But I am still to seek for his meaning; is it bowing down to Images
themselves, without relation to any other God? that must suppose that those who
do so worship them believe there is no God besides the Images, and that were to
make God to forbid a thing, that we never read to be practiced in the World.
Or, is it to suppose those Images themselves to be Objects of Worship? if it
be, then all those stand condemned for Idolaters who assert that Images
themselves are to be worshipped. Which I have showed to be the common opinion
of their Divines, and by them thought to be the Decree of the Councils for the
worship of Images. Or lastly, is the worshipping Images themselves, without
relation to the True God, the worshipping them instead of God? but this is both
false, and impertinent. It is false, because they who worship Images without
relation to the true God, may yet worship them barely as they represent a false
God (as the wisest of the Heathens did) and therefore not as God; and Eusebius
says in general of the Heathens, Eusib. Praep. l. 4. c. 1
that they did not look on their Images as Gods: it is impertinent, because by
the confession of their own Writers (as I have showed) an Image that has
relation to the True God may be worshipped as God, when divine worship is given
to an Image of God or Christ. And therefore all this ado is to no purpose; for
this Commandment must then be so understood, as to exclude the worship of the
True God by an Image. Otherwise it cannot be unlawful to give any kind of
worship to an Image of the True God; and so the Gnostics were not to blame in
the worship they gave to the Image of Christ, although they stand condemned in
all Ages of the Church for it. If this were unlawful, (as they all say it is
unlawful to Sacrifice to an Image) then some kind of worshipping the True God
by an Image is forbidden by the second Commandment. And now let the Reader
judge, how well T.G. has acquitted himself in his admirable undertakings, T.G.
p. 38, 39.
when he says, with so much confidence, that the second Commandment speaks not
one Word against the worshipping God himself by an Image; which is to charge
the whole Christian Church with Folly and Ignorance in condemning the
Carpocratians, for worshipping the Image of Christ with divine worship; who
says Bellarmin, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 24.
sine dubio Imaginem ejus propter ipsum colebant, without all doubt worshipped
the Image of Christ with relation to him.

But still when T. G. is miserably mistaken,. 11.
the Fathers must bear the blame of it. Alas poor Fathers! Must you bear the
load of all his miscarriages? It is but doing you justice, to vindicate your
innocence in this righteous Cause. He tells me, T. G. p. 50.
that I must prove against these Fathers (viz. Origin and Theodoret) and the
general sense of the Church of Christ for so many hundred years, that the word
similitude is to be taken in the second Commandment for any Image made with
respect to the worship of God. A very easy undertaking in it self; but by no
means either against those Fathers, or the sense of the Christian Church for
many hundred years, which is as plainly on my side in this case, as it is in
the Articles of the Creed; as may be seen in the foregoing Chapters. But T. G.
is again unlucky when he pretends to the Fathers; for those two Fathers he
mentions are point blank against him in this matter: witness the many citations
I there produced out of Origin; wherein, he says, the Christians durst have no
Images of the Deity, because of this Commandment; and that they would rather
dye than defile themselves with such an impiety. And even Theodoret himself
says, Theodor. in Deuteronomy. quaest. 1. ^. 168.
they were forbidden to make any Image of God, because they saw no similitude
of him: and which is more to T. G. even the Nicene Council and the great
Patrons of Images for a long time after, did yield that the second Commandment
did forbid the making or worshipping any representation of God; as I have
already at large proved. If I might advise T. G. I would never have him venture
at the Fathers again; but be contented to bear his own burdens; and out of mere
pity to them, not to load them with the imputation of his own infirmities, if
not wilful mistakes. To make it appear that the intention of the Law was not
merely against the Idols of the Heathens, I added these words If this had been
the meaning of the Law, why was it not more plainly expressed? why were none of
the words elsewhere used by way of contempt of the Heathen Idols here
mentioned, as being less liable to ambiguity? why in so short a comprehension
of Laws, is this Law so much enlarged above what it might have been, if nothing
but what he says, were to be meant by it? For then the meaning of the two
first precepts might have been summed up in very few words, Thou shall have no
other Gods but me, and Thou shall worship the Images of no other Gods but me.
To all this, which is surely something more than saying, that it is ridiculous
to imagine the Law means any thing else; T. G. answers not one word: T. G. p.
51, 52, 53.
but instead of that he spends some pages about two similitudes, one of mine,
and another quainter of his own; which must stand or fall according to the
Reason given for the sense of the Law; and therefore I shall pass them over.
Only for his desiring me, to make my similitude run on all four, as the Beasts
mentioned in it; it is such a piece of Wit, that I desire he may enjoy the
comfort of it.

But he has not yet done with the word Pesel; which, he says, T. G. p. 54.
the LXX. would never have rendered it here contrary to their custom, Idol,
without some particular Reason for it. What particular Reason was there here,
more than in the repetition of the Commandment, Deuteronomy. 5.8? where they translate
it by (...), in the Alex. M S. and in other Copies of the LXX. Deuteronomy. 4.16. Was
there not as much reason to have used the same word in those places as in this,
since the Commandment is the very same? And for the other places, he mentions,
as Isaiah 40.18 -- 44.9, 10, 13. I dare leave it to the examination of any man,
whether they do not far better prove, that an Idol in Scripture is an Image set
up for worship, than that by graven Image is meant an Heathen Idol. This I am
certain of, that Pet. Picherellus an excellent Critic, Picherell. Opusc. p.
220, 221.
and learned Divine in the Roman Church, was convinced by comparing of these
places, that the signification of an Idol in the second Commandment, is the
same with that of a graven Image; and that the using any outward sign of
worship before any Image is the thing forbidden in this Commandment, p. 230,
231.
and that the doing so is that Idolatry which God has threatened so severely to
punish: which I beseeth T. G. and those of his Church to consider, and repent.

The second way I proposed to find out the sense of the Commandment was from
the Reason of it;. 14.
which, I said, the Scripture tells us was derived from Gods infinite and
incomprehensible nature which could not be represented to men, but in a way
that must be an infinite disparagement to it. For which I produced Isaiah
40.19, 20, 21, 22. To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will ye compare
to him? The workman melts a graven Image, and the Goldsmith spreads it over
with gold, etc. Have ye not known, have ye not heard? has it not been told you
from the beginning? Have ye not understood from the foundation of the earth? It
is he that sits upon the circle of the earth, etc. Whence I desired to know,
whether this reason be given against Heathen Idols, or those Images which were
worshipped for Gods or no? or whether by this reason, God does not declare,
that all worship given to him by any visible representation of him is extremely
dishonorable to him? And to this purpose when this precept is enforced on the
people of Israel by a very particular caution, Deuteronomy. 4.15, 16.
Take ye therefore good heed to your selves, lest ye corrupt your selves, and
make you a graven Image, the similitude of any figure, etc. the ground of that
Caution is expressed in these words, For ye saw no manner of similitude on the
day that the Lord spoke unto you. If the whole intention of the Law had been
only to keep them from worshipping the Heathen Idols, or Images for Gods, to
what purpose is it here mentioned that they saw no similitude of God, when he
spoke to them? For although God appeared with a similitude then, yet there
might have been great Reason against worshipping the Heathen Idols, or fixing
the intention of their worship on the bare Image. But this was a very great
Reason why they ought not to think of honoring God by an Image; for if he had
judged that a suitable way of Worship to his Nature and Excellency, he would
not have left the choice of the similitude to themselves, but would have
appeared himself in such a similitude as had best pleased him. This Discourse
T.G. says, T. G. p. 58.
is apt enough to delude a vulgar Auditory out of the Pulpit (I with their
Pulpits had never any worse before not vulgar Auditories) but altogether empty
and insignificant when brought to the Test of Reason. That is to be tried,
whether my Reason or his Answer will be found so: However, he says, this does
not prove it Idolatry. No! that is very strange, for if the Image of God, when
worshipped, be an Idol and forbidden as such in the Commandment, then I suppose
the worship of it is Idolatry. But none so blind as they that will not see.

Now for the terrible Test of Reason. He says 1. That all representations of
God, are not dishonorable to him; and for that, he produces a Hieroglyphical
Picture of a three cornered light within a Cloud, T. G. p. 59.
and the name Jehovah in the midst of it in the Frontispiece of a Book of
Common Prayer, by Rob. Barker, 1642. from whence he inferrs, that the Church of
England does not look on all visible representations as an infinite
disparagement to God. As though the Church of England were concerned in all the
Fancies of Engravers in the Frontispieces of Books publicly allowed: He might
better have proved that we worship Jupiter Ammon in our Churches, because in
some he may see Moses painted with Horns on his Forehead; I do not think our
Church ever determined that Moses should have horns, any more than it appointed
such an Hieroglyphical Representation of God. Is our Church the only place in
the World, where the Painters have lost their old privilege, quidlibet
audendi? T. G. p. 60.
There needs no great atonement to be made between the Church of England and me
in this matter: for the Church of England declares in the Book of Homilies,
Homil. p. 3. p. 40.
that the Images of God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are expressly forbidden
and condemned by these very Scriptures I mentioned. For how can God a most pure
Spirit, whom man never saw, be expressed by a gross body, or visible
similitude? or how can the infinite Majesty and Greatness of God
incomprehensible to man's mind, much more not able to be compassed with the
sense, be expressed in an Image? With more to the same purpose, by which our
Church declares, as plainly as possible, that all Images of God are a
disparagement to the Divine Nature; therefore let T. G. make amends to our
Church of England for this and other affronts he has put upon her. Here is
nothing of the Test of Reason, or Honesty in all this; let us see whether it
lies in what follows. T. G. p. 61.
2. He says, That Images of God may be considered two ways, either as made to
represent the Divinity it self, or Analogically; this distinction I have
already fully examined, and showed it to be neither fit for Pulpit nor Schools,
and that all Images of God are condemned by the Nicene Fathers themselves, as
dishonorable to Him. 3. He says, That the Reason of the Law was to keep them
in their duty of giving Sovereign Worship to God alone, p. 63.
by restraining them from Idolatry. This is now the Severe Test, that my Reason
cannot stand before. And was it indeed only Sovereign worship to God, that was
required by the Law to restrain them from Idolatry? Does this appear (to return
his own words) in the Law it self, or in the Preface, p. 57.
or in the Commination against the transgressors of it? if in none of these
places, nor any where else in Scripture, methinks it is somewhat hard venturing
upon this distinction of Sovereign and inferior worship, when the words are so
general, Thou shall not bow down to them, nor worship them? And if God be so
jealous a God in this matter of worship, he will not be put off with idle
distinctions of vain men, that have no color or pretense from the Law: for
whether the worship be supreme or inferior, it is worship; and whether it be
one or the other, do they not bow down to Images? and what can be forbidden in
more express words than these are? But T. G. proves his assertion, T. G. p. 64*
1. From the Preface of the Law; because the Reason there assigned, is, I am
the Lord thy God; therefore Sovereign honor is only to be given to me, and to
none besides me. Or, as I think, it is better expressed in the following words,
Thou shall have no other Gods but me: and who denies, or doubts of this? but
what is this to the Second Commandment? Yes, says T. G. The same reason is
enforced from Gods jealousy of his honor: very well, of His Sovereign Honor?
but provided, that supreme worship be reserved to Him, He does not regard an
inferior worship being given to Images: Might not T. G. as well have explained
the First Commandment after the same manner, Thou shall have no other Sovereign
Gods besides me; but inferior and subordinate Deities you may have, as many as
you please, notwithstanding the Reason of the Law; which T. G. thus
paraphrases, I am the only supreme and super-excellent Being, above all, and
over all, to whom therefore Sovereign Honor is only to be given, and to none
besides me. Very true, say the Heathen Idolaters, we yield you every word of
this, and why then do you charge us with Idolatry? Thus by the admirable Test
of T. G's reason, the Heathen Idolaters are excused from the breach of the
First Commandment, as well as the Papists from the breach of the Second. 2. He
proves it from the necessary connection between the prohibition of the Law on
the one side, p. 65, 66, 67.
and the supreme excellency of the Divine Nature on the other; For from the
supreme excellency of God, it necessarily follows that Sovereign Worship is due
only to it, and not to be given to any other Image or thing: but if we consider
Him as invisible only and irrepresentable, it does not follow on that account
precisely, that Sovereign worship or indeed any worship at all is due unto it.
Which is just like this manner of Reasoning. The Supreme Authority of a
Husband, is the Reason why the Wife is to obey him; but if she consider her
Husband, as his name is John or Thomas, or as he has such features in his
face; it does not follow on that account precisely, that she is bound to obey
him and none else for her Husband. And what of all this, for the love of School
Divinity? May not the reason of obedience be taken from one particular thing in
a Person; and yet there be a general obligation of obedience to that Person,
and to none else besides him? Although the features of his countenance be no
Reason of obedience, yet they may serve to discriminate him from any other
Person, whom she is not to love and obey. And in case, he forbids her
familiarity with one of his servants, because this would be a great
disparagement to him; does it follow that because his Superiority is the
general Reason of obedience, he may not give a particular Reason for a special
Command? This is the case here. Gods Supreme Excellency is granted to be the
general Reason of obedience to all Gods Commands; but in case he gives some
particular precept, as not to worship any Image, may not he assign a Reason
proper to it? And what can be a more proper reason against making or
worshipping any representation of God, than to say, He cannot be represented?
Mere invisibility I grant is no general reason of obedience; but invisibility
may be a very proper reason for not painting what is invisible. There is no
worship due to a sound, because it cannot be painted; but it is the most proper
reason why a sound cannot be painted, because it is not visible. And if God
himself gives this reason, why they should make no graven Image because they
saw no similitude on that day, etc. is it not madness and folly in men to say,
this is no Reason? But T. G. still takes it for granted, T.G. p. 67.
That all that is meant by this Commandment, is that Sovereign worship is not
to be given to Graven Images or similitudes; and of the Sovereign worship, he
says, Gods excellency precisely is the formal and immediate Reason why it is
to be given to none but him. But we are not such Sots (say the Heathen
Idolaters again) to give Sovereign worship to our Images of Mercury, or Apollo,
etc. therefore the Reason of your Command does not reach us; but we may worship
our Images, as well as you do yours. 3. He proves it, ad hominem, thus, I grant
that no perfect Image of God can be made, and that God need not by a Law forbid
an impossible thing; but from the Divine Natures being invisible it only
follows that men ought not to presume to make any Image, or likeness to
represent it as it is, i. e. a perfect Image; and the Law in virtue of it must
be to forbid making any such Image; therefore according to my self, the
irrepresentableness of the Divine Nature as precisely considered, cannot be
assigned for the proper cause or reason of this Law. Very subtly argued! What
I said, could not be the sense of the Law, he takes to be the sense of it, and
from thence argues against the Reason I had given: which is as if I should say
to him; T. G. denies, That this Commandment does contain any prohibition of the
worship of God by an Image; but the Law must be understood to forbid
worshipping God by an Image; therefore according to T. G. the Law does forbid
worshipping God by an Image. Call you this arguing ad hominem! One would think
it were to a creature of a lower rank. He says, I deny that the Law forbids
making an impossible thing, i.e. a perfect Image of God; he asserts, That the
Law must be understood to forbid the making of any such Image; and from hence
he infers, that according to my self, that cannot be the reason of the Law
which I assigned; because from that reason that only follows to be forbidden by
the Law, which I said could not be the thing forbidden by the Law: and he
says, must be only forbidden by it. Before T. G. had gone about to prove any
thing from hence against my self, he ought to have showed, 1. That Gods
irrepresentable Nature does only hold against making impossibilities, that is,
perfect Images of God. 2. That this must be the meaning of the Second
Commandment, which he says, I denied. 3. That when I denied, and he barely
affirmed it, he can argue ad hominem from my denial and his affirmation of the
same thing, against the Reason alleged by me, viz. I assigned from Scripture,
that no Image is to be made of God because He is Infinite and Invisible; now
says T.G. I will prove from your own words, this cannot be the Reason of this
Law. How so? You say, that the Law does not forbid making a perfect Image of
God, for that is impossible. And what then? does it hence follow, that the Law
does not forbid making a possible Image of God? Hold, says T. G. Gods infinite
Nature does only hold against a perfect Image, and this must be the meaning of
the Commandment; which I utterly denied. And so if T. G. will argue ex
concessis, it must proceed thus, I deny that the Law does forbid an impossible
Image of God, or that Gods infinite Nature does only hold against such Images;
and therefore according to my self, this infinite Nature of God cannot be the
reason why Images are forbidden in the Second Commandment. Can any man in the
earth discern the consequence of this? When I say the Law is made against
possible Images, and that the Nature of God is represented so perfect to deter
men from making the most imperfect Images of God, because they are a
disparagement to Him; does it follow from my words that this Reason cannot hold
against the making of Images?

T. G. having given us such a Test of his Reason; I now follow him to the
interpretation he gives of the places of Scripture produced by me. To the
First, Isa. 40.18. To whom will ye liken God? Or what likeness will ye compare
unto Him? T.G. p. 69.
He Answers, That there is a likeness of representation and a likeness of
Comparison; if the words be understood of the former, then he says, it only
follows that such a likeness is not to be made. Which is all that I desire. But
again he is at it, That I deny the prohibition hereof to be any part of the
Law: Is it possible for T. G. to say this, when my design is to prove the
contrary? but By Likeness T. G. understands a perfect representation; why does
he not say then, by likeness is understood sameness? which is not
representation, but the thing it self. All representation by the art of man
must fall very much short of the perfection of the meanest animal; and no Image
can represent a thing as it is, but as it appears; not in regard of its
invisible nature, but of its outward lineaments; either therefore T. G. must
deny any likeness of representation, or he must yield that to be a likeness of
representation in an Image of God which does not perfectly represent him. For
if it had the Perfection of God, it would be God. If the words be understood of
a likeness of comparison, then the meaning, he says, is, that none of the
Idols of the Heathens are to be compared to Him in Wisdom, p. 70.
Greatness, or Power. But me thinks if not the Hebrew words, nor the Chaldee
Paraphrast, nor the LXX, nor other versions, could prevail with T. G. yet the
Vulgar Latin should have had Authority enough to let him know, that these
words are not spoken of Heathen Idols, but of an Image of God, Cui ergo similem
fecistis Deum? aut quam Imaginem ponetis ei? which surely ought to signify
more with him, than merely the Contents of the Chapters do with us.

To Deuteronomy. 4.15. he answers, That de facto no manner of similitude was seen at
the giving of the Law, by the people; p. 71.
that afterward they might not take occasion to conceive it to have been a
proper representation of the Divinity, and so entertain an erroneous conceit of
God. And does T. G. think, there was not as much danger of dishonouring God by
worshipping any such representation of God, as by entertaining an erroneous
conceit of God in their minds? But why must this be understood only of a proper
representation, when the words are, no manner of similitude; is there no manner
of similitude, but a proper representation? and yet after all this, the Images
of God allowed and worshipped in the Roman Church are as much in danger of
making men entertain erroneous conceits of God, as any similitude of that time;
and therefore as much against the Reason of this Commandment. But T. G. very
modestly denies, these words to contain a Reason of this Commandment (although
they be, For ye saw no manner of similitude, p. 72.
etc. Therefore take heed lest ye corrupt your selves and make a graven Image,
etc.) but the matter of fact was made use of by him as a motive to induce the
People to the observance of the Law in a Sermon he makes, Deuteronomy. 4. to press
them to that duty. I see T. G. is resolved to make just such another Test of
Scripture as he did of Reason; Could it ever enter into a man's head waking,
that these words are a general reason of the Whole Law, and not a particular
Reason of that Command which immediately follows it, and by the very words
relates to it? Ye saw no similitude, therefore make no similitude; this is
proper, and natural, and easy to all capacities: but ye saw no similitude;
therefore obey my Law; Hold there, says T. G. himself (if he be not in a dream
and has forgotten himself) to be supremely excellent is the proper reason of
Obedience, and not the seeing no similitude, therefore this is no proper Motive
to obedience, whatever the Contents of Chapters or tops of the Pages of our
Bibles say, which are the pitiful refuges T. G. betakes himself to, to escape
downright sinking. But some men would rather give all for lost, than think to
save themselves by such a mean defense.

Well; p. 73.
but T. G. has something yet to say; which is, That supposing all this to be
true which I have said, as to the Reason of the Law, yet this does not reach
home to them; for it does not follow from hence, that Christ according to his
humanity cannot be represented but with great disparagement to him: or that to
put off our hats when we behold the figure of his sacred body with intent to
worship him, must be extremely dishonorable to him. This argument therefore
does not concern Catholics in making the Image of Christ and his Saints with
respect to their honor. p. 74.
This is the last effort of T. G. on this argument, and as weak as any of the
rest: For, 1. it is a false and most disingenuous representation of their
practices, as may appear to any one that will but look back, on what I have
said upon that Subject. One would think, by T. G'S words, they had never used
or allowed, or worshipped any Images of God or the Trinity in the Church of
Rome; which he knows to be otherwise; and I have abundantly proved it already.
2. The force of the second Command, extending to Christians, does equally hold
against the worship of Christ by an Image, as it did under the Law against
worshipping God by an Image. For if the Law be perpetual, as the Christian
Church always believed, and Christ be only the object of worship as He is God,
we are as much forbidden to worship Christ by an Image, as the Jews were to
worship God by one. I do not say, there is as great an incongruity in
representing the humane nature of Christ, as there was in representing the
infinite nature of God; but I say, there is as great an incongruity still in
supposing an Image, of whatsoever it be, can be the proper object of divine
worship. For the humanity of Christ is only capable of receiving adoration from
us, as it is hypostatically united to the divine nature; and S. Austin says,
Being considered as separated from it, In. Evang. secund. Ioh. Sermon. 58.
is no more to be worshipped than the Robe or Diadem of a Prince when it lies
on the Ground; and if the humane nature of Christ be not, what then is the
Image of it? What union is there between the Divine Nature and a Crucifix? All
that can be said is, that imagination supplies the union, and Christ is
supposed to be present by representation; but this overthrows all measures and
bounds of worship, and makes it lawful to worship any Creature, with respect to
God; it contradicts the argument of S. Paul, For then God may be worshipped
with the Work of men's hands; it is contrary to the sense and practice of the
Primitive Church which interpreted this Commandment, to hold against all Images
set up for worship, as well those proper to Christians, as others among Jews or
Gentiles.

3. The last way I proposed to find out the sense of the Law,. 13.
was from the Judgment of the Lawgiver: which was fully manifested in the
case of the Golden Calf, and the two Calves of Jeroboam. This he calls a solid
principle indeed to work upon; T.G. p. 153.
I am glad to see that we Protestants can fall into the way of Principles; and
more glad that Gods judgment recorded in Scripture is acknowledged for such a
Principle: but after all, he calls this mere imagination; p. 156.
and it must undergo the Test of his Reason. The force of my argument, as he
lays it down, is this, That the Israelites were condemned by God of Idolatry,
for worshipping the Golden Calf, and yet they did not fall into the Heathen
Idolatry by so doing, but only worshipped the true God under that Symbol of His
presence. To this T. G. opposes his Opinion, p. 154.
That the Israelites herein fell back to the Egyptian Idolatry. Here then is
the state of the Question between us; to resolve which, and to bring it home to
our business, I shall propose these two things. 1. Whether the Israelites did
in worshipping the golden Calf, fall back to the Egyptian Idolatry? 2. Whether
it be sufficient to T. G's purpose to prove that they did so? for in case the
Egyptians themselves did worship the true God under Symbols, T. G. falls short
of his design, if he could prove that the Israelites did relapse to the
Egyptian Idolatry: for it would then appear however to be Idolatry to worship
the True God by an Image. 1. I shall examine the evidence on both sides,
whether the Israelites did fall back to the Egyptian Idolatry? I offered
several reasons to prove that the Israelites had no intention to quit the
worship of that God, who had so lately given them the Law on Mount Sinai. 1.
From the occasion of this Idolatry, which was not any pretense of infidelity as
to the true God; or that they had now better reasons given them for the worship
of other Gods besides him; but all that they say is, that Moses had been so
long absent; that they desired Aaron to make them Gods to go before them. To
this T. G. answers, that the very text I mention shows their infidelity, viz.
in their despair of Moses returning. But if their infidelity had been with a
respect to God, it had been far more pertinent to have said, Up make us Gods to
go before us; for as for this God who gave us the Law, we know not what is
become of him; but they only speak of Moses and not of God, and the reason was,
because immediately before Moses his going up into the Mount, the last promise
God made to the People was of an Angel going before them; Exodus 23.20, 23.
and they understood that there was to be an extraordinary Symbol of his
Presence among them; but what it was they could not tell; and Moses being so
long absent, as the text says, they grew impatient of having this Symbol,
Exodus 32, 1.
and so put Aaron upon making the golden Calf. T. G. says, T.G. p. 160.
they had forgotten this promise, or thought that God was not able to perform
it: for which he has not the least color from Scripture or Reason; as will
appear by the following particulars. 2. From the intolerable folly of desiring
Aaron to make that God, which before he was made delivered them out of the Land
of Egypt. For so the People say, This is thy God, or these are thy Gods, which
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Is it possible to suppose people so
extremely stupid to imagine a God just then made, should before it was made,
deliver them out of Egypt? But T. G. is a notable man, and has made a rare
discovery, viz. that Calvin said some such thing before me; I thank him for the
discovery, for I do assure him it was more than I had ever read in Calvin; but
T. G. has a great mind to make Calvin my Master in every thing. I should not
be ashamed to learn from a man of so great abilities; but it falls out
unhappily, that I do not find one thing he charges me with following Calvin in,
but it is from him that I learn what Calvin said. And if he had pleased he
might have quoted an Author of their own for these words; neque enim tam
stupidi erant, Fer. in Act. 7. p. 94.
says Ferus, quod crederent Aaron posse facere Deum; they were not so stupid
to believe that Aaron could make a God; and therefore he says, very honestly,
that the Israelites worshipped the True God, by the Calf. But suppose Calvin
did say this, is there ever the less reason in the saying? T.G. p. 155.
But we can imagine as sottish things of them, viz. that they terminate their
worship on the Images, although they deny any Divinity to be in them? Is it
indeed so sottish a thing to terminate their worship on the Images? what
becomes then of all their Divines who plead for it, and say that by the Decrees
of their Councils, worship ought to be terminated on the Images themselves? as
T. G. may see in the precedent Chapter. But the Scripture, T. G. says, p. 165.
represents the Israelites as a people void of understanding; and they were
without learning, and oppressed for four hundred years together, by the most
Idolatrous Nation in the world; and served their Gods, Ezekiel. 20.8. I grant the
Scripture gives that severe character of them, but it was because they did not
consider the consequence of their disobedience; as appears by the next verse
Deuteronomy. 32.29. Must we because of this imagine them to be such Fools and Sots,
that no Idolaters in the World can be paralleled with them; viz. to make a God
which did mighty things for them, before it was made? Therefore the meaning of
making a God can be nothing else, but making a Symbol or representation of God;
and the Question then is, whether it were the representation of an Egyptian
Idol, or the God of Israel? That it was not the former I proved -- 3. From the
way of worship used by the Israelites, which was an abomination to the
Egyptians, Exodus 8.26. To this T. G. returns not the least word of Answer; but
he shall not escape so, for from hence I shall make it appear beyond
contradiction, that it was not Egyptian Idolatry, which the Israelites fell
into; for which we must consider the sacrifices that were offered to the golden
Calf. And they rose up early on the morrow, Exodus 32.6.
and offered burnt-offerings, and brought peace offerings, and the people sat
down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play. Act. 7.41.
S. Stephen says, And they made a Calf in those days, and offered sacrifice
unto the Idol, and rejoiced in the Works of their own hands. Now the
burnt-offerings and peace offerings, are expressed, Exodus 20.24. to be their
Oxen and their Sheep: and immediately before Moses his going up into the Mount
it is said, that they offered burnt-offerings, Exodus 24.5.
and sacrificed peace offerings of Oxen unto the Lord: where the very same
words (...) and (...) are used, and the LXX. there render the word we translate
oxen (...), and the Vulg. Lat. Vitulos, the same word which is used for the
Golden Calf. Now I shall show that nothing could be more repugnant to the
Egyptian Idolatry, than such sacrifices as these. For which we have this
considerable Testimony of Horus in Macrobius, Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 7.
Nunquam fas fuit Aegyptiis pecudibus aut sanguine, sed precibus and ture solo
placare Deos. It was never lawful for the Egyptians to sacrifice with Cattle
and blood, but only with prayers and incense: Cuperi Harpocrat. p. 105.
and from thence he proves that the Worship of Saturn and Serapis were but
lately received among the Egyptians, in the time of the Ptolemies; and after
they were received, their Temples were without the Cities, that they might not
be polluted with blood within the Cities. And every one knows, that the Feasts
were upon their sacrifices; but the Satyrist says of the Egyptians; Lanatis
animalibus abstinet omnis Iuv. Satyr. 15. v. 11.

Mensa; nefas illic foetum jugulare capellae.
Anaxandrides in Athenaeus, Athen. l. 7.
says, that a Greek could have no conversation with an Egyptian; because the
one worshipped an Ox which the other sacrificed: and Herodotus says, Herod. l.
2* c. 41.
that the Egyptians would not touch so much as the knife, or spit, or pot which
the Greeks had used; so great an aversion had they from those who either eat or
sacrificed the Creatures they worshipped. Herodotus indeed says, that the
Thebans abstained from sheep, Herod. l. 2. c. 42.
and offered Goats; the Mendesians on the contrary abstained from Goats and
offered Sheep; but this was on the account of the particular Religion of those
two Provinces; (for they differed very much among themselves as to particular
animals:) but all the Egyptians agreed, as Herodotus there says, in the
worship of Osiris and Isis, Now Diodorus Siculus affirms that Apis and Mneuis
the Bulls of Heliopolis and Memphis were sacred to Osiris; Diod. Sic. l. 1. c.
13.
Plutarch says, Plut. de Iside p. 366.
that the Ox was the Image of Osiris; and Strabo that Apis was the same with
Osiris; and Mela, Mela l. 1. c. 9.
that Apis was the Deity of all the Egyptians. Strabo gives the most particular
account of the Egyptian worship, Strabo l. 17.
and what creatures were worshipped in the several Provinces; but, he says,
there were three universally worshipped, whereof the first is, the Ox; and it
was an universal practice not to touch or hurt those creatures that were sacred
among them; as the Oxen were quite through Egypt; from whence Moses desired to
go into the Wilderness to sacrifice, Exodus 8.26.
for we shall sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to the Lord our God.
Lo, shall we sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, and
will they not stone us? i. e. says the Targum of Onkelos, because the
Egyptians worship Oxen. Because Lambs are the Idols of the Egyptians, says
Jonathan. If we kill, says S. Hierome, the things which they worship. I leave
it now to the consideration of any man, whether the Israelites using their
accustomed burnt-offerings and sacrifices, and Feastings upon them, as they did
in the Worship of the golden Calf, can be supposed to have returned to the
Egyptian Idolatry.

4. I urged this, as an argument that the Israelites intended to worship the
true God, because Aaron proclaimed a Feast, Exodus 32.5.
(...) to Jehovah. And however the People were void of understanding, I suppose
Aaron being High Priest, and Head of the Church at that time, was not so berest
of common sense, as to give the incommunicable name of Jehovah to a Calf of his
own making. All that T. G. says to this, is, T.G. p. 159.
that Aaron perhaps and some of the wiser men among them might not be so
sottish, as to suppose the Calf he made to be the God that delivered them out
of Egypt, yet it is certain they were so weak, as to concur with the people in
the external practices of their Idolatry. But this is not the force of my
argument, which lies in this, that Aaron said, it was a Feast to Jehovah, when
they were to sacrifice to the golden Calf; either therefore he must suppose
that worship was intended for the honor of the True God, or he must give the
name of Jehovah to the Calf; which would show him to have been more sottish
than the People, for they only called the Calf by the name of Elohim, but he
gives the name of Jehovah to it, which was that peculiar name God was known by
to the people of Israel upon the accomplishment of his promise in bringing them
out of Egypt. Exodus 6.3, 6.
I appeared unto Abraham, and to Isaac, and to Jacob by the name of God
Almighty, but by my name Jehovah was I not known unto them: wherefore say unto
the Children of Israel, I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the
burdens of the Egyptians, etc. Therefore when the people say, This is the God
that brought us out of the Land of Egypt, Aaron presently proclaims a Feast to
Jehovah, i. e. to the God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt. And when
afterward the Ark (which was the Symbol God himself appointed of his presence
among them) was removed, upon their traveling from the Mount of the Lord,
Numb. 10.35, 36.
Moses said, Rise up Jehovah; and when it rested, Return O Jehovah unto the
many thousands of Israel. Thus the name of Jehovah was used by Moses himself
upon occasion of the appointed Symbol of Gods presence; but when Aaron
proclaimed a Feast to Jehovah upon making the golden Calf, Moses calls it a
Golden God, because God says, Exodus 32.31.
they had made a molten Calf, and worshipped it, and sacrificed thereunto, v. 6.
and said, This is thy God which brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. Which
therefore by S. Stephen is called an Idol. Act. 7.41.
5. The expressing it to be the God that brought them out of the Land of Egypt,
does imply, that they did not intend one of the Egyptian Gods. For what reason
could they have to think that one of the Gods of Egypt should deliver them out
of the Egyptian bondage; and while their own worshippers were forsaken by them,
to preserve those who were so great enemies to them? And how could they think
the Gods of Egypt had wrought all the miracles for them which were seen in that
deliverance? And how unlikely was it they should forsake the God of Israel and
return to the Egyptian Gods; when they make use here of the very Preface of the
Law, which God had so lately given them on Mount Sinai: viz. I am the God that
brought thee out of the Land of Egypt. To this T. G. returns no manner of
Answer. 6. When the Israelites revolted to the Idolatry of their Neighbors,
the Scripture punctually sets down the names of the Idols they worshipped, as
Baal Peor, Moloch, Remphan; but here is nothing of that nature mentioned. To
this T. G. answers, T.G. p. 162.
What then? Is it the Idols having a name, that makes the worshippers Heathen
Idolaters? If they conceived or believed the Calf to be a God, were they not as
much Heathen Idolaters for worshipping it without a name, as the Egyptians for
worshipping it under the name of Apis? But T.G. cunningly dissembles the force
of the argument, which was not from their worshipping it without a Name, but
from the Scriptures not expressing it, which it does upon other occasions: and
Bellarmin himself tells us, from Abulensis, Bell. de Imag. l. 2. c. 13.
Cajetan and others, that the Israelites had two sorts of Idols, one without a
certain name, as the Idol of Micha, Judges 17. and it may be, the golden Calf
which Aaron made, and Jeroboam renewed, for the Scripture does not call it
Moloch or Baal, etc. The other had a certain name, as Baal, Moloch, Ashtaroth,
Chamos. Therefore say they not improbably (mark that) that it may be allowed of
the first sort, that the Jews did worship the True God in the Idol. Then an
Image of the true God may be an Idol, and those Idolaters, who worship such an
Image. But they erred most grievously, says Bellarmin, in three things: 1.
That they sacrificed to the Idol, i. e. gave divine worship to it. 2. That they
believed the Divinity to be in it: how does that appear? no more surely, than
those who believe Images to speak and to work miracles. 3. That they thought
God to be corporeal and like the Idol, i. e. the Israelites thought the great
Jehovah to be just of the fashion of the Calf. What prodigious Fools must some
men make the Israelites, that they may not appear as great Idolaters
themselves? 7. I argued from S. Stephens words, And they made a Calf in those
days and offered sacrifice to the Idol: Acts 7.41, 42.
then God turned and gave them up to worship the Host of heaven; whereby, I
said it was observable, that the Idolatry of the Calf was distinct from the
other Heathen Idolatry, this being a punishment of the other. To this T. G.
says nothing; and yet it is a thing which deserves consideration, that that
which the Fathers accounted the most justifiable Idolatry of the Heathens, viz.
the worshipping the Host of Heaven, is looked upon as the judgment following
the worship of the Golden Calf. So Clemens Alexandrinus, Clem. Alex. Str. 6. p.
482. Orig. c. Cells. l. 5. p. 238.
and Origin plead for this so much in comparison with other Heathen Idolatries,
as hardly to think it a fault in them; and it is farther observable that in no
kind of Idolatry, which the Israelites ever fell into, save only that of
Jeroboam, which was of the same nature with this, that expression was ever
used, These are thy Gods which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt; which
shows that this worship had a peculiar respect to that God who brought them in
so remarkable a manner out of the bondage they were under there. These are the
Reasons which I have to prove, that the Israelites did intend to worship the
True God by the Golden Calf: and we have seen what weak answers T. G. gives to
some of them, and none at all to others.

I must now attend to the Reasons he gives to the contrary,. 14.
and those are either from Scripture or Fathers. 1. From Scripture, T.G. p. 155.
where they are charged with forsaking God, Deuteronomy. 32.15, 16, 17, 18. As though
the Israelites committed no Idolatry in the Wilderness but that of the Golden
Calf: whereas it is well known that they worshipped Baal Peor, Moloch, and
Remphan; of which a blacker character is given than of the other. But the
Psalmist says, that in worshipping the Calf, they did forget God, Psalm.
106.19, 20, 21. And was not that forgetting the God that appeared with such a
terrible Majesty on Mount Sinai, to turn His glory into the similitude of an Ox
that eats grass? But in the expressions of Scripture to forget God is to
disobey Him; Deuteronomy. 8.11, 14.6.12.
Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God, in not keeping His Commandments,
and His Judgments, and His Statutes which I command thee this day. And was not
this forgetting God in this sense, so openly to break one of the Laws he had so
lately given them? That which seems to come nearest the matter is, the
expression of S. Stephen, That our Fathers would not obey, but thrust Him from
them (that is, the true God, says T. G. whereas the words are plainly meant of
Moses) and in their hearts turned back again into Egypt, saying, Act. 7.39.40.
Make us Gods to go before us; which relates not to the object but to the
manner of worship by such a Symbol of worship as was in greatest veneration
among all the Egyptians. This is the force of all that he brings out of the
Scripture.

2. From them he betakes himself to the Fathers: T. G. p.
and he quotes two passages of S. Athanasius, and S. Hierome; and a doubtful
place of S. Chrysostom to his purpose. This is the first time I have found T.
G. citing the Fathers truly and pertinently; and it were too hard dealing with
him, not to allow him these Testimonies; especially about the exposition of a
place of Scripture; wherein their best Commentators take so much liberty of
receding from them, when they apprehend the scope and circumstances of the
place do enforce another sense; as I have already showed at large concerning
this. And to these Fathers, I shall oppose the Testimony of others, who make
the Egyptian Ox to be only a Symbolical representation of the Patriarch Joseph,
and say that on this account the Israelites made choice of the Golden Calf; so
the Author of the Book De Mirabilibus S. Script. in S. Augustins Works, (as
good an Author as the Homilist de Poenit. De mirab. S. Script. l. 1. c. 15.
whom he quotes under S. Chrysostom. name) says, That the Egyptians set up the
Image of an Ox by the Sepulcher of Joseph; and for this cause the Israelites
made choice of that similitude, when they made an Idol in the Wilderness.
Julius Firmicus Maternus says, That the Neocori did preserve in Egypt the
Image of Joseph, by which he understands Apis, or the Sacred Bulls; the same is
affirmed by Rufinus and Suidas. De errore prosan. Relig. p. ^8.

Rufin. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 23.

Suid. v. (...).


From whence it follows, that this being looked on as the Symbol taken up in
Egypt in remembrance of the service of Joseph, it was very unlikely, that the
Israelites should look on the Image it self as so powerful a thing, as the
Testimonies of Athanasius and S. Chrysostom imply; to be able even before it
was made, to deliver them out of Egypt: which is such a horrible contradiction,
that we had need to have better Testimonies than those, to make us think the
Israelites such Sots to believe it. But if it were only looked on as a Symbol
of Gods presence, this gives a probable account why the Israelites should make
choice of this, before any other of the Egyptians Images, because by it, the
Kindness of Joseph (who by Moses is compared to a young Ox) was supposed to be
remembered by them. But, Deuteronomy. 33.17.


2. We are to enquire whether supposing that the Israelites did revolt to the
Egyptian Idolatry in the worship of the Golden Calf,. 15.
that be sufficient to prove that they did not worship the True God under this
Symbol? For if the Egyptians themselves did worship the Supreme God under
Symbolical representations of Him, then although the Israelites might return
with their hearts into Egypt, yet this does not prove, that they did not
worship the true God by the Golden Calf. Plutarch, Plut. de Isid. p. 366.
Iuven. Satyr. 15.
who discourses largely concerning the Egyptian Worship, says, That the
Golden Bull was the Image of Osiris, which was showed for four days together,
from the seventeenth of the Month Athir; And it was a common practice in Egypt
to have Golden Images (effigies sacri nitet aurea Cercopitheci) wherein Lucian
says, Lucian in Jove. Tragoed.
The barbarous Nations did exceed the Greeks, who made their Images of Wood, or
Ivory, or Stone. For there were two sorts of Images of their Gods among the
Egyptians. Those Images and representations which were in their Temples, or
places of worship, and those which they accounted the living Images of their
Gods, viz. Beasts; such as the two famous Bulls, Apis and Mneuis: the one at
Memphis, the other at Heliopolis; both in honor of Osiris: which places were
as the Dan and Bethel of Egypt; Marsham. Chronic. Can. p. 60.
Memphis being the Metropolis of the upper, Heliopolis of the lower Egypt;
wherein the Israelites lived, and saw the worship of the sacred Bull of
Heliopolis. Plutarch says, The Egyptians looked on Apis as the Image of the
Soul of Osiris. Diodorus says, Plut. de Isid. p. 36^. Diod. l. 1. p. 76.
That they looked on the soul of Osiris as passing by transmigration into Apis
(from which doctrine the worship of Beasts was not only entertained in Egypt,
but is so in the East Indies to this day, in which case the Beast is only the
material object of worship, but the formal Reason is the Presence of some
Divine Soul which they suppose to be there, which on their supposition ought to
have divine worship given to it by the principles of the Roman Church, as the
Elements of Bread and Wine on a supposition more extravagant, viz. of
Transubstantiation.) But whether the worship of Animals came into Egypt, from
the doctrine of transmigration, or from their usefulness, or from some politic
Reasons, which are mentioned both by Plutarch, and Diodorus; this is certain,
that Plutarch thinks, Their wiser men did not worship the Animals themselves,
but looked on them only as representations of some divine perfection which they
discerned in them, and on that account gave worship to them. Plut. de Isid. p.
382.
(...), Those persons ought to be most esteemed, who did not worship the
Animals themselves, but through them did worship the Deity; and they ought to
be looked on as clearer and more natural representations of God, than inanimate
things; and we ought to esteem them, as the Workmanship and Instrument, (...)
(...) the God that orders all things. And there is all the reason to imagine,
that what has a soul and sense, is better than that which has none, viz. an
Image: and the Divine Nature is not seen in colors and Figures, and smooth
Superficies; which are worse than dead creatures, for these never had life in
them: but that which has life, and sense, and motion, has a greater influence
from that Divine Wisdom which governs all things; therefore, says he, these
ought not to be looked on as inferior representations of the (...) the Divine
Being, than those Images which are made of Brass or Stone by the Workmanship of
men, and are subject to corruption, and destitute of all sense and
understanding. Whereby we see that Plutarch did put a difference between the
common practices of the People, and the intention of the wiser men in the
Egyptian Idolatry. He before takes notice of the follies of the People, that
worshipped the living creatures themselves as Gods, p. 379.
and thereby not only exposed their Religion to the scorn and contempt of
others; but led some men into horrible superstition, and tempted others to turn
Atheists; and then he gives this, as the most reasonable account of the worship
of these Animals according to their wiser men, whose opinions ought most to be
followed in Religion. From whence it appears that the distinction of the
practice of the People, and the Doctrine of Divines has obtained among the
grossest Idolaters; and if the Peoples Practice be excused because the Divines
teach otherwise, the most sottish Egyptian Idolaters are excusable, as well as
those in the Roman Church. For what is there in this principle of worship laid
down by Plutarch, which may not be defended by the avowed doctrine of the Roman
Church? Here is (1.) a right ultimate object of worship, viz. the (...) the
Divine Being, which orders and governs all things. (2.) Here is a
representation of that object by the perfections derived from that Being to a
Creature. (3.) Here is a right directing the Intention through that
representation to the ultimate object. And (4.) the formal reason of worship is
the derivation or participation of that perfection which represents God from
the divine Being: and therefore this is no Sovereign worship which is given to
it.

. 16.
The only difficulty here is to show that the Egyptians did intend to worship
the Supreme God by either sort of their Images: which is not only affirmed by
Plutarch, who says, They understood by Osiris the wise Providence of God, and
by Porphyrie, Porphyr. de Abstin. l. 4. sect. 9.
who says, The Egyptians, by the several animals they worshipped, did express
their devotion toward the Almighty power of God; and by Apuleius, who was
initiated in the Egyptian Mysteries, and in the conclusion of his
Metamorphosis, Apul. Metam. l. 11.
Osiris is called, Deus Deum magnorum potior, and majorum summus, and summorum
maximus, and maximorum regnator Osiris, which are descriptions of no less than
the Supremest God; but Max. Tyrius yields at last that the Egyptians did
worship the (...), Max. Tyr. diss. 38. in sin.
the Deity by the worship of Animals, as the Greeks did by the Statue of
Phidias. And there is a considerable Testimony to this purpose in Vopiscus, Fl.
Vopisc. in Saturnino.
taken out of an Epistle of the Emperor Adrian, which he wrote to Servianus
from Egypt, giving an account of the manners of the Egyptians; wherein are
these words, Unus illis Deus est, hunc Christiani, hunc Iudaei, hunc omnes
vener antur and gentes. They had one God, whom Christians and Jews, and all
Nations worshipped. Is. Casaubon suspects this passage, but without any reason
as Salmasius proves, and is apparent because the same thing is said in the
beginning of the same Epistle: Where he says, that however they differed in
other points, yet they all agreed in the worship of Sarapis, by whom Phylarchus
in Plutarch understands That God which Governs the World: Plut. de Isid. p. 362.
and Seguinus shows from ancient Coins and Authors, Seguin. Numism. p. 2, 3, 4.
that Sarapis, and Jupiter Ammon, and Jupiter Pharius, and Jupiter rerum omnium
potens were all one. Thence the Inscriptions, D.E.O. I.N.V.I.C.T.O. Grut.
Inscript. p. 85.

S.E.R.A.P.I. S.E.R.V.A.T.O.R.I.
D.E.O. M.A.G.N.O.
S.E.R.A.P.I.
and that mentioned by Tristan, Tristan. Comment. Histor. To. 2. p. 190.
I.O.M. S.A.R.A.P.I.D.I.
P.R.O. S.A.L.V.T.E. I.M.P.
From which it appears that supposing the Israelites did relapse to the
Egyptian Idolatry, it does not from thence follow that they did not worship the
true God by an Image.

. 17.
I proceed now to the two Calves of Jeroboam at Dan and Bethel; which being made
in imitation of the Golden Calf must stand or fall by what has been said
already concerning that. But I shall here make good the peculiar arguments to
Ieroboam's case, which were brought to prove that he did intend to worship the
God of Israel by the Calves of Dan and Bethel. 1. Because Jeroboam manifests no
design of taking the people off from the worship of the true God, but only from
the worshipping Him at Jerusalem. For all that he says to the People is, It
is too much for you to go up to Jerusalem, 1 Kings 12.28.
behold thy Gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the Land of Egypt. If
Ieroboam's intention had been to have altered their Religion, he would have
spoken against that, and not only against the place of it; and to show to them
that he had no such intention, he continued the same Feasts and way of worship
which were at Jerusalem. To this T. G. answers, T.G. p. 164.
That Jeroboam 's end was to secure the Ten Tribes to himself; and the
likeliest way to effect it, was the making them such Idols as their Fathers had
worshipped in Egypt and the Wilderness: and yet soon after T. G. represents him
as a great Politician, that would not make any sudden Changes. p. 165.
But could there be any change greater or more sudden, than to change the true
God for Molten Gods and Devils; as T. G. says he did: which words (if they be
understood in T. G's sense for the Egyptian Idols and Devils in them) was as
great a change as could be made in Religion, and too sudden to be made by such
a Politician. He should have begun the alteration in the smaller matters, if he
intended no sudden change; and first have gained some of the Great men to him
to be ready to join with him, when opportunity served, with hopes of Preferment
and Places at Court; when these were secured, then put in some of the vilest of
the people into the Priesthood (as he did) to render that sacred Office mean
and contemptible, the better to prepare the people for a change; then to send
Agents abroad to tamper with the most active among them, to allure some and to
terrify others according to their several dispositions; then to give liberty
to those tender consciences that longed for the Onions and Fleshpots and Bulls
of Egypt; and when he had by degrees prepared a considerable party, that would
be sure to adhere to him, then by little and little to open the great Design to
them, which he aimed at all this while. But it was too great a Change for such
a Politician, to say at the very first to them; Come, renounce the God of
Israel without more ado; I have set up other Gods for you to worship, and I
command you all immediately to obey me: methinks, this would seem too harsh and
unpolitick, and too dangerous for so new a Government as his was; a little
Indulgence for tender consciences, for a time, with the sweetest words, had
better become such an Achitophel, as T. G. calls Jeroboam. This, this had been
the way to have wheadled and drawn in the silly and injudicious multitude, By
telling them what an oppression it was for them to be under the jurisdiction of
the High Priest and his Brethren at Jerusalem; and that there was no Reason
such a vast number of lazy Priests and ignorant Levites should be maintained
out of their labors by Tithes and Offerings; that all the pretense of the true
worship of God being confined to the Temple at Jerusalem, was only out of a
design to enrich the Priests and the City; that it was only zeal for their own
interest and revenues, which made them so earnest for that particular way of
worship which was so different from the rest of the World. What! could they
imagine that God had no other people in the World, but such as went up to
Jerusalem to worship? what would become of the Catholic way of worship, which
was in all the Nations round about them? Was it credible, that God should
suffer so great a part of mankind to run on in such Idolatry, as a few Jews
accounted it? If it were so displeasing to God, could it ever be thought that
the Wisest King they ever had, viz. Solomon, should in the wisest time of his
Life, viz. in his old Age, fall to the practice of it? Besides all this, they
ought to consider, how much the honor and safety of the Nation was concerned
in embracing the same Catholic way of worship which prevailed round about
them. Their pretending to greater purity of worship than their Neighbors, made
them hated and scorned, and reproached by their Neighbors of all sides, viz.
by Moab and Ammon, and Amalek, the Philistines, and those of Tire: but if they
returned to the worship of the Neighbor Nations, they might be sure of the
assistance of the King of Egypt, with whom Jeroboam had lived many years, who
would be ready to help them on all occasions; and their lesser enemies would
then be afraid to disturb them. Thus we see what plausible pretenses there were
to have drawn the people off from the Law of Moses, to the Idolatries of Egypt;
but we read not the least intimation of this Nature in the whole History of
this Revolt: but Jeroboam only says, These are thy Gods which brought thee out
of the Land of Egypt, which was the most unpolitick way of persuading them to
return to the Gods of Egypt. Besides he not only appointed a Feast like unto
that in Judah, but it is said, 1 Kings 12.32.
That he offered upon the Altar, and sacrificed unto the Calves which he had
made, i. e. according to the custom of the Jewish Sacrifices, than which
nothing could be more repugnant to the Egyptian Idolatry, as I have already
proved. But T. G. says, T. G. p. 165.
The Text speaks but of one Feast; it is very true, it mentions but one; but it
is said afterward in several places, That they departed not from the way of
Jeroboam; 2 Kings 17.22, 23.
and that very Feast being accompanied with so many Sacrifices, was a plain
evidence it was not the Egyptian Idolatry, which he then set up. And it is
remarkable to this purpose, that every one who was to be consecrated a Priest
to the Golden Calves, was to be consecrated with a Sacrifice of a young
Bullock, 2 Chronicles. 13.9.
and of seven Rams; which according to the Rites of the Egyptian Idolatry were
enough to have profaned the most sacred Person. And Josephus, Joseph. Antiq.
Iud. l. 8. c. 3.
(who may be allowed to have understood the mind of Jeroboam as well as T. G.)
says expressly, That in the speech he made to the People, he only pleaded,
that God being every where present, he might be worshipped at Dan and Bethel,
as well as Jerusalem: and that for their greater convenience he had set up the
Calves at Dan and Bethel, that there they might worship God. Thus we see that
in this worship at Dan and Bethel, Jeroboam intended no more than to worship
the God of Israel there. I will not deny, that Jeroboam was for Liberty of
Conscience, and allowed the practice of Egyptian Idolatry, and appointed
Priests to serve at the several Altars, as the People had a mind; but the
established worship, at which himself was present, was at the Calves of Dan and
Bethel. For it is said, That he offered on the Altar there. 1 Kings 12.33.
But we read that he appointed Priests, not only for the Calves, but 1. for the
High places; 2 Chro^. 11.15.
which were of two sorts, 1. Some for the worship of false Gods, as those which
Solomon allowed to be built for Chemosh and Moloch on the Mount of Olives. 1
Kings 11.7. 2 Kings 23.13.
2. Others were for the worship of the true God in the ten Tribes. For there
being some dissenting Brethren among the Israelites, who would neither join
with the House of Judah in the worship at Jerusalem, nor with Jeroboam in the
worship of the Calves at Dan and Bethel; to keep these secure to his interest,
he permits them to worship God on the High places, i. e. Altars erected to that
purpose upon an ascent of ground. And this I prove from that passage of Elias,
They have thrown down thy Altars; 1 Kings 19.10, 14.
speaking of the Children of Isreal's demolishing them in the time of Ahab, who
was the eighth in succession from Jeroboam. And in the Reformation of Josiah,
he puts a difference between the Priests of the High places; for some of them
were permitted to eat unleavened bread among their Brethren; 2 Kings 23.9, 20.
and others he slew upon the Altars. Which shows that both in Judah and Israel
there were some who did still worship the true God on the High places. 2.
Jeroboam appointed Priests (...) Pilosis, to the hairy ones; which I wonder,
how it come to be translated Devils both here, and Levit. 17. since in above
fifty places of Scripture, it signifies Goats; and but in one, the LXX. render
it by (...), and there Aquila has (...), Isa. 13.21.
and the Vulgar Latin Pilosi, and our translation Satyrs: and since the
worship of Goats, and other hairy animals was so frequent among the Egyptians,
as of Dogs, Wolves, Cats, Ichneumons, Apes, etc. but especially the Goats, as
Herodotus, Herod. l. 2. c. 46.
Strabo, Strab. l. 17.
Diodorus, Diodor. l. 1.
Plutarch, Plut. de Isid.
and others relate (and the Pan, and Faunus, and Silenus, and Silvanus, and
Satyri were but a sort of Goats: for the Arabic word Satar is a Goat, and the
Egyptian name for Pan is Mendes, which, says Bochartus, Boch. de Anim. Sacr.
l. 2. c. 53
signifies a Goat too.) And since this worship was so common in Egypt was there
not reason to forbid it by a Law, Levit. 17.7? and is there not cause where we
meet with this word relating to an object of worship, to understand it
according to the common practice of Idolaters, and the common sense of the
word? Therefore I grant that Jeroboam did permit the Egyptian Idolatry, but he
established the Golden Calves as the Religion of the State.

. 18.
2. I showed, that the true God was worshipped by the Golden Calves; because the
sin of Ahab who worshipped Baal is said to be so much greater than the sin of
Jeroboam. And it came to pass as if it had been a light thing for him to walk
in the sins of Jeroboam, 1 Kings 16.31, 32.
that he took to wife Iezabel, daughter of Baal, King of the Zidonians, and
went and served Baal, and worshipped him; and he reared up an Altar for Baal,
in the House of Baal, which he had built in Samaria. Yes, says T. G. Ahabs sin
was greater, T. G. p. 1^^.
because he added this Idolatry to the other. Who denies that his sin might
have been greater in that respect? but that it was not so to be understood,
appears by the opposition between God and Baal in the words of Elijah? How long
halt ye, says he to all the People, between two opinions? if the Lord be God,
follow Him: 1 Kings 18.21.
but if Baal, then follow him. Now there being three several ways of worship
among the people, if two of the three had not agreed in the same object of
worship, viz. the God of Israel, Elijah could not have said that they halted
only between two opinions of God and Baal; if some were for the God of Israel,
others for the Gods of the Egyptians, and others for Beel Samen, or the God of
the Zidonians. But, says T. G. Elijah supposes a general Apostasy of the ten
Tribes to Baal in the next Chapter. T. G. p. 167.
And what then? It was but very lately so, and they were not yet so fixed but
they might be put in mind that they were lately of another opinion: and some
render it, How long will ye pass from one extreme to another? how long will ye
be so uncertain in Religion, now for God, and then for Baal? So Vatablus
renders it, Quousque tandem alternis, etc. Now of one side, then of the other?
or as some imagine, they themselves worshipped the Calves, and sometimes Baal.
So that notwithstanding what T. G, says, the opposition is here plain between
the God worshipped by the Calves, which was the public and established worship
of the ten Tribes, and the worship of Baal, which was newly introduced: and so
the True God is supposed to be worshipped by those who did not worship Baal. To
confirm this, I added, that Iehu magnifies his zeal for Jehovah against Baal,
when it is said of him but a little after, That he departed not from the Calves
of Dan and Bethel; 2 Kings 10.16.
which evidently shows the opposition between the God of Israel worshipped by
the Calves, and the worship of Baal. No, says T. G. Iehu's zeal for the Lord
does not acquit him from Idolatry in following Jeroboam, any more than the
lawful act of Matrimony acquits a Husband from the Crime of Adultery, who
defiles his Neighbors Bed. I perceive T. G. grew very sleepy when he wrote
this, T.G. p. 166.
and forgot what we were about: for I never intended to clear Iehu from
Idolatry by his zeal for Jehovah, but from such an Idolatry as excludes the
worship of the True God. For that was my business to show that he might be
guilty of Idolatry, and yet worship the true God, by the Calves of Jeroboam; as
he not only shows by that expression to Ionaedab, but by distinguishing between
the Priests of the Lord, v. 23.
and the Priests of Baal; and yet soon after that character is twice given of
Iehu, That he departed not from that worship which Jeroboam had established. v.
29, 31.


To the last instance I brought of the Samaritans, who sent to the King of
Assyria for an Israelitish Priest to teach them the accustomed worship of the
God of the Land, who accordingly came and dwelt in Bethel, 2 Kings 17.26, 27,
28, 32, 33.
and taught it them, upon which it is said, They feared the Lord; T. G. returns
a strange answer, T. G. p. 168.
viz. That there is no mention at all made of his teaching them to worship him
in the Calves as Symbols of his presence; here T. G. nodded again: For if he
would but have held his eyes open so long as to have looked back on the 22, and
23 verses of the same Chapter, he would have found these words, For the
Children of Israel walked in all the sins of Jeroboam which he did, they
departed not from them: until the Lord removed Israel out of his sight, as he
had said by all his servants the Prophets. So was Israel carried away out of
his own Land to Assyria; and then immediately follows this story of the
Samaritans, desiring to know the worship of the God of the Land; what can this
refer to, but to the worship established by Jeroboam? I leave this to be
considered by T. G. when he is awake, T.G. p. 168.
for he seems to have written these things in a Dream. As to what he says, of
his having confuted my conjectures, or rather Monceius his; (when it is
apparent I differ from Monceius in his main ground, to any man that has read
him) I leave it as a fresh token of his kindness, when he will not so much as
suffer me to be the Author of such weak conjectures, which he has so easily,
and so pleasantly confuted; and for the phrase of my plowing with his Heifer, I
suppose it has relation to the Calves of Dan and Bethel; which I take notice
of, that he may not think his Wit is lost upon me.

To conclude this point of the meaning of the Second Commandment,. 19.
I said, That since the Law giver has thus interpreted his own Law, we need
not be solicitous about the sense of any others, yet herein I say we have the
concurrence of the Jewish and Christian Church. The Jews have thought the
prohibition to extend to all kinds of Images for worship, and almost all for
ornament, and the Image worship of the Church of Rome is one of the great
scandals to this day, which hinder them from embracing Christianity. All that
T. G. answers to this is, T.G. p. 169.
That he would gladly know, whether we must stand or fall by the interpretation
of the Jews? Did I bring their Testimony for that purpose? or intimate the
least thing that way? did I not use so much caution on purpose to prevent such
a cavil? I declared that I did not need their Testimony in so clear a case; and
yet it is no small advantage to our Cause, that we have herein the concurrence
of all that had any Reverence to this Law of God, whether Jews or Mahumetans;
and not barely of them, but of the whole Christian Church for so many Ages, as
I have fully proved in the precedent Chapters. T.G. p. 175.
As to the Prophetical confutation of my opinion about Idolatry and the Second
Commandment by Mr. Thorndike, I do assure him if I could have thought what that
learned Person had said in this matter, to have been agreeable either to
Scripture or Reason, or the sense of the Primitive, or our own Church, it might
have prevented my writing, by changing my opinion; for I was no stranger to his
Writings, or his Arguments. But he that can think the Israelites believed the
Golden Calf delivered their people out of Egypt before it was made, may easily
believe that Mr. Thorndikes Book of 1662. was a confutation of mine, long
before it was written; and upon equal reason at least, I may hope that this
Answer will be a Prophetical Confutation of all that T. G. will ever be able to
say upon this Subject.

CHAP. IV. An Answer to T. G's charge of Contradictions, Paradoxes, Reproach of
the second Council of Nice, School disputes; and to his parallel Instances.
UNder these Heads I shall comprehend all that remains scattered in the several
parts of his Book,. 1.
which seem to require any farther Answer. The first thing I begin with is, the
Head of Contradictions, T. G. p. 13, 14, 15.
for he makes in another Book the charge of Idolatry to be inconsistent with my
own assertion; Because I had said that Church does not look on our negative
articles against the Church of Rome, Rational Account, p. 54.
as articles of Faith, but as infriour Truths; from whence, he says, it
follows, that their Church does not err against any article of Faith; but
Idolatry is an error against the most Fundamental point of Faith, and
therefore for me to charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry, must according to
my own principles, be the most groundless, unreasonable, and contradictory
proceeding in the World. Upon my word, a very heavy charge! And I must clear my
self as I can from it. Had not a man need to have a mighty care of dropping any
kind words toward them, who will be sure to make all possible advantages from
them to overthrow the force of whatever can be said afterward against them?
Thus have they dealt with me; because I allowed the Church of Rome to be a true
Church, as holding all the essential points of Christian Faith; therefore all
the arguments I have used to prove them Idolaters, are presently turned off
with this, That herein I contradict my self. Thus I was served by that feat man
at Controversy, I. W. who thought it worth his while to write two Books (such
as they are) chiefly upon this argument: Dr. Still. still against Dr. Still.
A.D. 1675.
and he makes me to pile Contradictions on Contradictions, as Children do Cards
one upon another, and then he comes and cunningly steals away one of the
supporters, and down all the rest fall in great disorder and confusion.
Infallibility of the Roman Catholic Church against Dr. Still. by E. W. 1674.
Preface.
And herein he is much applauded for an excellent Artist, by that mighty man at
Ecclesiastical Fencing, E. W. the renowned Champion of our Lady of Loreto, and
the miraculous translation of her Chapel; about which he has published a
Defiance to the World, and offers to prove, it against all Comers (but
especially my inconsiderable self) to be an undeniable Verity. I must have
great leisure, and little care of my self, if I ever more come near the
Clutches of such a Giant, who seems to write with a Beetle instead of a Pen;
and I desire him to set his heart at rest, and not to trouble himself about the
ways of my attacking him; for he may lie quietly in his shades, and snore on
to Doomsday for me; unless I see farther reason of disturbing his repose than
at present I do. But this charge being resumed by so considerable an Adversary,
as T. G. is, in comparison with the rest, I shall, for his sake, endeavor more
fully to clear this whole matter. When I. W. had objected the same thing in
effect against me; the substance of the Answer I made him was this, 1. That it
was a disingenuous way of proceeding, Answer to several Treatises, First part,
p. 19, etc.
to oppose a judgment of charity concerning their Church, to a judgment of
Reason concerning the nature of actions, without at all examining the force of
those Reasons which are produced for it. This was the case of I. W. but
ingenuity is a thing my Adversaries are very little acquainted with: and
therefore I said 2. There was no contradiction in it: For the notion of
Idolatry as applied to the Church of Rome, is consistent with its owning the
general principles of Faith, as to the True God and Jesus Christ, and giving
Sovereign Worship to them; when therefore we say, that the Church of Rome does
not err in any Fundamental point of the Christian Faith, I there at large show,
the meaning to have been only this, that in all those which are looked on by us
as necessary Articles of Faith, we have the Testimony and approbation of the
whole Christian World of all Ages, and are acknowledged to be such by Rome it
self; but the Church of Rome looks upon all her Doctrines, which we reject, as
necessary Articles of Faith: so that the force of the Argument comes only to
this, that no Church which does own the ancient Creeds can be guilty of
Idolatry. And I farther add, that when we enquire into the essentials of a
Church, we think it not necessary to go any farther than the doctrinal points
of Faith; because Baptism admits men into the Church upon the profession of the
true Faith in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: but if beyond the essentials we
enquire into the moral integrity and soundness of a Church, then we are bound
to go farther than the bare profession of the essential points of Faith; and if
it be found that the same Church may debauch those very principles of Faith by
damnable errors, and corrupt the worship of God by virtue of them, then the
same Church which does hold the Fundamentals of Faith, may notwithstanding lead
men to Idolatry without the shadow of a contradiction. But T. G. says, That
Idolatry is an Error against the most Fundamental point of Faith. What does T.
G. mean by this? I suppose it is, that Idolatry does imply Polytheism, or the
belief of more Gods than one, to whom Sovereign worship is due; then I deny
this to be the proper Definition of Idolatry, for although, where ever this is,
it has in it the nature of that we call Idolatry; yet himself confesses, the
true notion of it to be, The giving the worship due to God, to a Creature; so
that, if I have proved that the worship of Images in the Roman Church, is the
giving the worship due only to God to a Creature; then, although the Church of
Rome may hold all the essentials of Faith, and be a true Church, it may be
guilty of Idolatry without contradiction. But it may be I. W. in his Reply,
says something more to purpose; (at least it will be thought so, if I do not
answer him:) I must therefore consider what he says, that is material, if any
thing be found so. However, he says, Dr. Still. still against Dr. Still. p. 95.
that if the Roman Church does hold any kind of Idolatry to be lawful, she must
needs hold an Error destructive to a Fundamental and essential point of Faith,
and by consequence a Fundamental error inconsistent with the essence of a true
Church. And since no kind of Idolatry is lawful, if the Roman Church hold it to
be so, she must needs hold an error inconsistent with some Truth. Most
profoundly argued! He only ought to have subsumed, (as I think such Logicians
as I. W. call it) but all Error is Fundamental and inconsistent with the
essence of a true Church; or That Infallibility is necessary to the Being of a
Church, and when he proves that, I promise to renounce the charge of Idolatry.
Now it is not possible, says I. W. that the Roman Church should bold any
Idolatry lawful (knowing it to be Idolatry) unless she holds that some Honor,
which is due only to God, may be given to a Creature. I am afraid to be snapt
by so cunning a Sophister, and therefore I distinguish in time. The Roman
Church does not hold any Idolatry lawful which it judges to be Idolatry, or the
Honor due only to God; but the Roman Church may give the real parts of worship
due only to God to a mere creature, and yet at the same time, tell men it is
not a part of the Honor which is due to God. To make this plain even to the
understanding of I. W. The Church of Rome may entertain a false notion of
Idolatry, or of that worship which is due only to God: which false notion being
received, men may really give the worship that only belongs to God to His
Creatures; and the utmost error necessary in this case is no more than having
a false notion of Idolatry, as, that there can be no Idolatry without giving
Sovereign Worship to a Creature, or that an Idol is the representation only of
an Imaginary Being, etc. Now on these suppositions, no more is necessary to the
practice of Idolatry, than being deceived in the notion of it. If therefore T.
G. or I.W. will prove that the Church of Rome can never be deceived in the
notion of it, or that it is repugnant to the essence of a Church to have a
false notion of Idolatry, they do something toward the proving me guilty of a
contradiction in acknowledging the Church of Rome to be a true Church, and yet
charging it with Idolatry. But I. W. says, That it is impossible the Roman
Church should teach or hold any kind of Idolatry, p. 97.
whatsoever it be, but she must hold expressly or implicitly, that some Honor
due only to God, may be given to a mere Creature. Such kind of stuff as this
would make a man almost repent ever reading Logic (which this man pretends so
much to) for surely Mother Wit is much better than Scholastic Fooling. Such a
Church which commits, or by her doctrines and practices leads to Idolatry,
needs not to hold, i. e. deliver as her judgment that some Honor due only to
God may be given to a Creature; it is sufficient if she commands or allows such
things to be done, which in their own nature, or by the Law of God is really
giving the worship of God to a Creature. Yet upon this mistake, as gross as it
is, the poor waspish Creature runs on for many leaves, and thinks all that
while he proves me guilty of a contradiction. But the man has something in his
head which he means, although he scarce knows how to express it, viz. that in
good Catholic Dictionaries, a Fundamental error, and a damnable error, p.
101.
and an error inconsistent with the essence of a true Church, are terms
Synonymous. Now I know what he would be at, viz. that Infallibility is
necessary to the Being of a Church: therefore to suppose a Church to err, is to
suppose it not to be a Church: But will he prove me guilty of contradiction by
Catholic Dictionaries? I beg his pardon: for in them Transubstantiation
implies none; but whosoever writes against them, must be guilty of many. If he
would prove me guilty of Contradiction, let him prove it from my own sense and
not from theirs. Yet he would seem at last to prove that the practice of any
kind of Idolatry, p. 10^, etc.
especially being approved by the Church, is destructive to the Being of a
Church. Which is the only thing, he says, that deserves to be farther
considered, by enquiring into two things. 1. Whether a Church allowing and
countenancing the practice of Idolacry can be a true Church? 2. Whether such a
Church can have any power or Authority to consecrate Bishops, or ordain
Priests? For this is a thing which T. G. likewise objects, as consequent upon
my assertion of their Idolatry, that thereby I overthrow all Authority, and
Jurisdiction in the Church of England, as being derived from an Idolatrous
Church. These are matters which deserve a farther handling, and therefore I
shall speak to them.

1. Whether a Church may continue a true Church, and yet allow,. 2.
and practice any kind of Idolatry? And to resolve this, I resort again to the
ten Tribes; Supposing what has been said sufficient to prove them guilty of
Idolatry, my business is to enquire, whether they were a true Church in that
time. This I. W. denies; I.W. p. 78.
saying, I ought to have proved and not barely supposed that the Idolatry
introduced by Jeroboam was not destructive to the being of a True Church: and
several Protestants, he says, produce the Church of Israel to show that a true
visible Church may cease. Alas poor man! he had heard something of this Nature,
but he could not tell what; they had produced this as an instance against the
perpetual Visibility of the Church, and he brings it to prove that it ceased to
be a true Church; and the time they fix upon by his own Confession is, when
Elias complained that he was left alone in Israel; which was not when the
Idolatry of the Calves, but when that of Baal prevailed among the people of
Israel; i. e. when they worshipped Beel-samen or the Sun instead of God. Now
that they were a true Church while they worshipped Ieroboams Calves, I prove by
these two things. 1. That there was no time from Jeroboam to the Captivity of
Israel, wherein the worship of the Calves was not the established Religion of
the ten Tribes; this is evident from the expression before mentioned, that the
Children of Israel departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, 2 King. 17.22, 23. 1
Kings 15.26, 34.16.13, 19, 26, 31.
till God removed Israel out of his sight. And it is observable of almost every
one of the Kings of Israel, that it is said particularly, that he departed not
from the sins of Jeroboam. 22.52.
2. That during that time God did own them for his People, 2 Kings 3.3.
10.29.13.2.14.23.15.9, 18.24.28.
which is all one with making them a True Church. Thus Iehu is said to be
anointed King over the People of the Lord. 2 Kings 9.6.
And there is a remarkable expression in the time of Iehoahaz, that the Lord
was gracious unto them, 13.23.
and had respect unto them, because of his Covenant with Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob, and would not destroy them, neither cast he them from his presence as
yet. Would God have such respect to those whom he utterly disowned? Nay the
Prophet Hosea says, Hosea 11.8, 9.
that God was still the Holy one in the midst of Ephraim; and How shall I give
thee up Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee Israel? Which shows God had not yet
discarded them: and afterward he says to Israel, 14.1.
Return unto the Lord thy God; and Amos says, Amos 4.12.8.2.
prepare to meet thy God O Israel: and both he and Micah, Micah 6.2, 3.
call them still Gods people. From whence it is evident, that they were still a
true Church notwithstanding the Idolatry of Jeroboam.

2. Supposing a Church to continue a True Church, what reason can there be to
question the Authority of that Church as to the consecration of Bishops, or the
ordination of Priests? I have formerly showed that no Act of Ordination is
invalid in case of any heresy or Crime of the Giver; Answer first part Gener.
pres. in sin.
and that the contrary doctrine is condemned for heresy by the Church. I now
shall particularly show that the Power of giving Orders is not taken away by
the guilt of Idolatry; which I prove from the case of the Arian Bishops. I have
at large made it manifest, Part 1. Chapter 1. sect. 17.
that the Arians were condemned for Idolatry by the consent of the Fathers of
greatest reputation, S. Athanasius, S. Basil, S. Gregory Nazianzen, Nyssen,
Epiphanius, S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, etc. And the second Nicene
Council says, Council. Nicen. 2. act. 6. p. 411.
that the Catholic Church looked on them as Idolaters. Now, if I can make it
appear, that the Arian Ordinations were allowed, I shall put this matter past
dispute, that the charge of Idolatry does not null the Ordinations of our
Church as being derived from those who were guilty of Idolatry. For this
purpose, the second Nicene Council affords us plentiful assistance in the First
Session; wherein Peter the Popes Vicar declares, that Meletius was ordained by
Arian Bishops, Act. 1. p. 82.
and yet his Ordination was never questioned; and this was received by the
Council as true. Epiphanius, Socrates and Sozomon all agree, Epiph. haer. 73.
n. 28. Socr. l. 2. c. 44. Sozom. l. 4. c. 28.
that Meletius received his Consecration from the Arian Faction; and Epiphanius
says, he had it from the hands of Acacius Bishop of Caesarea; the worst of all
the Arians, says Baronius. Baron. ad A.D. 360. n. 52.
Socrates and Sozomen do seem to imply, that the followers of Eustathius at
Antioch would not join with Meletius and his party, though both consenting in
the Nicene Creed, because of his ordination by the Arian faction, and the
peoples being baptized by Arian Priests; but Theodoret mentions no such thing,
Theod. l. 2. c. 31.
and says the first breach began there, when Meletius was banished by the
Arian party; and Euzoius the Arian was made Bishop of Antioch: and Baronius
makes the Schism to begin from the ordination of Paulinus by Lucifer
Caralitanus; Baron. ad A. 408. c. 31.
however this were, we never find the Ordination of Meletius disputed by the
Catholic Bishops; and when S. Athanasius writes a Synodical Epistle to those
of Antioch, to compose the differences among them upon the ordination of
Paulinus, he gives this direction to the other Catholic Christians concerning
Meletius his party, who met (...) (so the place of their meeting was called,
being in the old City, which the interpreter of Athanasius renders in veteris
Ecclesiae communione) that they should receive those who came to them from the
Arians without requiring any more from them, Athanas. ap. ad Antioch. p. 575.
than the renouncing Arianism and subscribing or owning the Nicene Creed;
Whereby, the Arian Baptism and Orders were allowed. But we have a fuller
Testimony of the general sense of the Church of that Age as to this matter of
the Arian Ordinations; Ruffinus says, Ruffin. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c. 28.
that when the Catholic Bishops were returned from banishment, several of them
met together at Alexandria to consult what was to be done with those who had
received Orders from the Arian Bishops; and after consultation about it, it was
decreed in Council, that only the Heads of the party should be rejected, but
others received to the exercise of their Priestly Office: upon which Asterius
was dispatched into the Eastern parts to settle the Churches there, and
Eusebius into the Western: but he returning to Antioch, found that Lucifer in
the mean time had broken his promise in the Consecration of Paulinus, and
Eusebius therefore would not own him as Bishop; which so enraged Lucifer, that
he quarrelled with the decree of the Alexandrian Council about receiving the
Arian Bishops and Priests upon disowning their Heresy. And so the Luciferian
Schism began: for the followers of Lucifer charged the Catholic Church with
being the Synagogue of Antichrist for receiving the Arian Bishops, as appears
by S. Hierom; Hieron. advers. Luciferian. init.
for they yielded to the receiving the penitent Laity but not the Clergy;
allowing the Arian Baptism, but not their Ordinations: upon which S. Hierom
triumphs over them. And he says, that eight Arian Bishops were received in the
Council of Nice, although their Arianism were declared before: and that the
decree of the Alexandrian Council was universally received by the Church: which
is as ample a Testimony to our purpose as can be desired.

. 3.
Next to contradictions, T. G. charges me with maintaining strange Paradoxes,
which he puts into the Title of one of his Chapters in these words, T.G. p. 76.
A strange Paradox advanced by Dr. St. What can an Image do to the heightning
of Devotion or raising affections? Not finding my self to be any great lover of
Paradoxes, but of plain and useful Truths, I was the more curious to find out
what Paradox it was I had broached. And searching for the place, I found these
words, And can any one imagine, there should be greater irreverence of God
shown in calling him to witness upon every slight occasion, than there is in
bowing down before a block or a hewn stone, representing God to my mind by it?
What can SUCH an Image do to the heightening of devotion, or raising
affections? This is the monstrous Paradox advanced by me, viz. that such a
gross representation of God by an Image does tend more to abate than raise our
estimation of him: which is so far from being a Paradox, that I have herein the
consent, not only of the ancient Fathers, but of the greatest Patrons of Images
in the Eastern and Western Churches, till the latter times, as I have showed
already. But T. G. sets himself very industriously to prove that Pictures have
an advantage in representation above living Creatures; T.G. p. 86. to 90.
which he does with great force of wit and strength of Reason; because Ladies
sit, (sometimes to make Madonna's by) for their Pictures, and Authors Pictures
are set before their Books; (it is pity we want our Authors on so just an
occasion) and men keep the Pictures of their Friends (and Sign-posts are very
useful in London streets, and may suggest many good meditations to men, as the
three Nuns or the like) but to hold the contrary opinion, is the way to undo
the company of Picture-drawers (which would be a great unkindness to all
ingenious Artists,) but the most dismal consequence of my doctrine is, that the
Ladies instead of the Pictures of their Friends should wear Ants and Flies in
Crystal cases; and instead of their own pictures the Apes and Asses should be
sent them; which I brought in so lamely, and the Tigers too if they can catch
them, as greater resemblances of their Perfections. These passages, I hope,
were intended for sallies of Wit; which do become T. G. as well in this
argument, as dancing upon the Ropes would do a Capucin Friar in his habit. But
whence comes all this Rage of Wit? this arming all the Pencils and brushes of
the Town against me? this Appeal to the Ladies against the pernicious
consequences of my opinion? this hurrying of me from the Playhouse and the
Scenes there to the Bear-garden, to the Apes, and Asses, and Tigers? All this
arises only from this innocent saying, that it seems more reasonable to me to
Worship God by prostrating my self to the Sun, nay to an Ant or a Fly, than to
a picture or an Image; for in the other I see great evidences of the Power, and
Wisdom and Goodness of God, which may suggest venerable apprehensions of God to
my mind; whereas these can have nothing worthy admiration, unless it be the
skill of the Painter or Artificer. Hinc illae lachrymae! Could I ever have
imagined that these words being spoken merely with a respect to the
representation of God in order to Worship, should have raised the Arriereban of
all the Ladies and Painters against me? If nothing will satisfy T. G. but
having it under my hand that I had no malicious intention against the ingenious
art of Painting, nor any design to ruin the company of picture-drawers, I do
hereby give it him, and with this humble acknowledgement I hope the parties
concerned will rest satisfied. It is not in the point of bare representation I
compare pictures and Gods Creatures; but it is in representing those
perfections which are the ground and Reason of Worship; and here I stand to it,
that the least living Creature is a far better Image of God, than an old Man in
Pontifical habits, or the best Crucifix in the world can be: i.e. it represents
more those perfections for the sake of which I give divine Worship to God. But
T. G. says, T.G. p. 89.
that Atheists will deny the perfections of the Creatures to be any evidence at
all of the being we call God; but cannot deny a Crucifix to represent to their
own thoughts that Person whom we believe to be God? This is very ill put; for
he should have paralleled blind men and Atheists together; and I dare say no
blind man discerns more of the excellency or likeness of a Picture, than
Atheists do of the perfections of God by his Creatures. If men will shut their
eyes, what can a Crucifix do to raise affections? and if their eyes be never so
open, it can only represent that which falls infinitely short of being a Reason
for Divine Worship. For, as to the mere representation of Christ's humanity by
an Image, whoever disputed with T. G. about the lawfulness of it? but if he
goes no farther than representation, or a help to memory or apprehension, T. G.
knows well enough, he falls short of what is required of him, by the Decrees of
their Councils, and the constant practice of their Church, about which our
Controversy with them is.

To the former paradox I added these words,. 4.
that I cannot for my heart understand why I may not as well, (nay better) burn
incense and say my Prayers to the Sun, having an intention only to honor God
by it, as to do both those to an Image? Here T. G. gives me warning not to say
my Prayers to the Sun no more than they do to Images; T.G. p. 90.
he needs not give me that warning, for I never intend to do it so much; for
although he would insinuate that I know they do not, I hope he will change his
mind when he reads the account I have given of their practices in that
particular; but I only pretended to pray to the Sun having an intention to
honor God by it; and in this sense I am sure T. G. cannot deny, that they pray
to their Images. But if I do not say my prayers to the Sun, but only bow down
to it, so it be not out of ignorance, or Heathenism, or to give scandal to weak
Brethren, he gives as much liberty as I could wish, and he quotes S. Leo for it
too; in that very place where he condemns it, as appears by the last words he
cites out of him; p. 91.
let the Faithful therefore abstain from so perverse and worthy to be condemned
a Custom, nor let the honor due to God alone, be mixed with their rites who
serve the Creatures, for the Holy Scripture says, Thou shall worship the Lord
thy God and him only shall thou serve. Where the reason he gives against it, is
not as T. G. insinuates, because there were some Relics of Paganism
remaining, but because it was giving the Creature part of that Honor which is
due to God alone. p. 93.
But T. G. offers to give me a clear solution to my scruple; which he does in
two particulars. 1. That although the Creatures do represent God after their
manner, yet it is so rudely, remotely, darkly, and imperfectly, that there is
need of a great deal of discourse to discover the analogy or proportion to
their Creator; and they are called the footsteps of God; whereas an Image (for
example) of Christ is so apparently representative of him, that upon sight
thereof our thoughts fly presently unto him. By which argument S. Paul was
strangely mistaken when he talked of the Eternal Power of God being so known or
manifest by the things that are seen, Romans 1.20.
that even the Heathens were left without excuse; no such matter, says T. G.
the Creatures represent God rudely, remotely, darkly and imperfectly; which
make an excellent paraphrase on the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 19.1.
The Heavens declare the glory of God, and the Firmament shows his handiwork.
Men's handiwork by Images will do it rarely, presently, effectually,
inflamingly; but Gods Work does it dully, remotely, rudely, and imperfectly. O
how much the skill of a painter exceeds the Power of God! Whereas in truth the
least work of Nature infinitely exceeds the greatest art of man in curiosity,
beauty, strength, proportion, and every thing that can discover Wisdom or
Power. But, says T. G. they are called Gods footsteps, and to gather the
height and bigness of Hercules from his footstep was not the Work of every
vulgar capacity, which is a very Childish way of reasoning, and taken only from
such a Metaphorical expression that Vasquez calls it a frivolous argument that
is taken from it. I, but the pretty story of Hercules and that put together
make a pleasant jingling: and looks like Reason to those that know not what it
means. Must men take the measure of God just by the same Geometrical
proportions that he did, that gathered the height and bigness of Hercules by
his foot? This sort of Wit is a delicate thing, and endures no rough handling.
But still I say it is not in the mere quickness of representation, but in the
perfections represented, that natural things do so far exceed the most
artificial Images; and we are to consider that in all representations of
objects of worship, those are the most excellent which best set forth the
Nature of that Being as it deserves our worship. Now in this respect, the works
of Creation manifest Gods eternal Power, and what is it the Image of an Old man
represents? So that comparing these two, the Sun, Moon and Stars do in regard
of real representation of the Divine Being, much more deserve to be worshipped
than any Image whatsoever. And Vasquez does well prove that upon the principles
of Worshipping Images, Vasquez Hisp. 110. c. 2.
one may lawfully Worship God in any Creature whatsoever. For if the presence
of God in the Image by a mere fiction of the mind, be a sufficient Ground to
worship that Image; is not Gods real presence in every creature a far better
ground and reason to worship it? and all the distinctions and evasions which
serve in one will equally serve in the other case. How earnestly did T. G.
contend for the Worship of Gods Footstool? and why may not His Footsteps be
worshipped as well as His Footstool? I am sure T. G. himself could not have
taken the height and bigness of Hercules from his Footstool, which he says,
was done from his Footsteps; and therefore one comes nearer to the thing
worshipped than the other. Cardinal Lugo gives an excellent answer to this
Metaphor of the Creatures being Gods Footsteps; Lugo de Mysterio Incarn. disp.
37. Sect. 1.
For, says he, they may be worshipped for all that; for do not we worship the
Footsteps of Saints in many Churches? how much more ought we to adore the
Footsteps of God?

But T. G. gives another reason against worshipping the Creatures,. 5.
T. G. p. 93, 94.
viz. That there is greater danger of terminating the worship upon them, than
upon an Image; because they are Creatures subsisting of themselves, and are the
causes of real benefits to mankind. If there be more danger in the one, there
is more folly in the other, in the judgment of the Fathers, who looked on the
worship of Images as the most silly and childish thing in the world; while they
thought the worship of the heavens very excusable: Upon this ground, I had said
before, it follows, that what deserves most honor should have the least given
it, and that which deserves least, should have most; for the danger is still
greater, where the excellency is greater; and by this reason we ought rather to
worship a Beast than a Saint, for there is less danger of terminating the
worship on one than on the other, and so the Egyptians were more excusable than
the Papists. These words he returns upon me, on a very slight occasion, viz.
setting the Sun before an Ant or a Fly; T. G. p. 86.
as though they had been a Reason of my giving, where as I only show the
ridiculousness of this which is the only pretense they have for not worshipping
God by a living Old Man, as well as by the Picture of one. And if this be all
T. G. has to say, I see still the distinctions of Sovereign and inferior, of
absolute and relative worship will bear any man out in the worship of any
Creature with a respect to God, as well at least as it does them in the worship
of Images. Vasquez says there are these several grounds for the worship of a
Creature among them. Vasq. ubi sup.
1. Representation, which belongs to an Image. 2. Contact, although long since
past; thence they worship the Cross, Nails, Garments, and other things that had
touched the bodies of Christ or the Saints. 3. Union; thence they worship all
Relics which had been parts of the Saints. 4. Presence: thence God being more
present in his Works, than any Saint can be in a Garment he did once wear;
there is more Reason to worship God in His Works, than any Saint in Relics.
Cardinal Lugo assigns these several Reasons for the worship of God in any
Creature. 1. Because they worship the work of men's hands, as the handwriting
of any Saint, Lugo ubi sup.
much more ought we to worship Gods Works with a Relative worship. 2. Because
they worship the very places where the Saints have been; as a Stone on which
they have sat, for the sake of contact and propinquity; much more ought we to
worship Gods Creatures, to whom He is far nearer than the Body of a Saint to a
Stone. 3. Because they receive gifts from Princes with great veneration,
although mean in themselves; therefore since all the Creatures are Gods gifts
we may worship them for His sake. 4. Because a man is the living Image of God,
therefore as a Wooden Image may be worshipped for the sake of the exemplar,
much more, says he, ought such a lively Image as man is. Thus we see how men
of the greatest understanding among them, have discerned the necessary
consequence of their own principles of worship, and find there is no defending
them, without yielding the lawfulness of worshipping God through any of His
Creatures; and living men rather than dead Images, on the account of a fuller
representation of God; and says Lugo, With the worship of Latria, in respect
of God, and an inferior worship on the account of His proper excellency. n. 8.
If men had set themselves to oppose the doctrine of the Primitive Church about
Divine Worship, they could not have thought of a principle more directly
opposite to the general sense of it than this is, of the lawfulness of the
worship of Creatures. But there are two cases wherein they will not allow it.
1. In the case of indecency, although there have been a real contact; thus the
lips of Judas are excepted, although they touched Christ. And Cardinal Lugo
with particular caution excepts the Tail of the Ass on which Christ rode to
Jerusalem. n. 11.
But says Arriaga, There was indignitas moralis, Arriag. de Myster. Incarn.
disp. 57. sect. 2. subject. 2. n. 10.
that did hinder the worship of Judas his lips; however he does not understand,
how this can cut off the adorability of them on the principles of Vasquez and
Lugo. As to the Ass on which Christ rode; there are some, says he, do yield
that it might be worshipped; and the Mule, and the Ass which stood by the
Maunger, as well as the Maunger is self: but it may be, it were better denied,
because there is, says he, I know not what meanness in it which hinders
adoration; but he adds, that in all these moral things very much depends on the
apprehension of the persons; and in case the intention be rightly directed, he
thinks it very hard (upon their principles) to prove that God cannot be
worshipped in any Creature. 2. In case of public scandal they do not allow it.
Not from any real hurt in the thing, but because the People have been only
hitherto accustomed to worship Images, and Relics of Saints. The danger,
says Vasquez from Cajetan, would be none to understanding men, but only to the
rude and ignorant people, that cannot so easily apprehend God in His Creatures,
as in an Image, and withal it would savor of Heathen superstition. But it
were well they would consider the Answer they give us in this case, when we
urge the same argument against the worship of Images: Hold, say they, Ysamb. de
Myster. Incarn. ad Qu. 25. disp. 3. art. 15.
a mere scandal is no reason to take away the use of a thing, if it be such as
does not arise from the nature of the thing; but only by accident through the
malice or ignorance of the Persons. So that in this case nothing is wanting,
but well instructing the People; and upon their principles of worship they may
revive the worship of the Host of Heaven, the Fire and Water, and Trees, and
the Earth it self; and it is but conquering a little squeamishness of stomach
at first, the very Tail of the Ass on which our Savio^r rode, will go down with
them. And now I leave the Reader to judge which of us two is guilty of the
greater Paradoxes.

I now come to the great rock of offense, the second Council of Nice:. 6.
which, he says, T.G. p. 118.
I most irreverently call that wise Synod; upon which he falls into a very
Tragical exclamation; that I should dare to reflect so much dishonor on a
Council, wherein there were 350. p. 119.
Fathers, with the Popes Legates, and the Vicars of the Oriental Patriarchal
Sees; and yet himself calls the Council of Constantinople a Conventicle,
wherein there were 338. Bishops; (and does he think the number of twelve more
in one than in the other, makes such a huge difference in point of Wisdom?) But
the Author of the Caroline Book says, Carol. de Imag. l. 4. c. 13.
That by their own confession they were but 306. And the Council of Francford
(which opposed this, and of which T. G. speaks not very honorably, as I shall
make appear) consisted of about ^00. Bishops, by the confessions of their own
Writers: so that if number carries it, I have above 600. Bishops of my side;
and if they were wise, the Nicene Council was not so. It is therefore in T. G's
choice to call 300. or 600. Bishops, Fools. But if he be guilty of the same
fault, that does not excuse me for speaking so Ironically, of so lawful, so
general, so judicious a Council, as that at Nice was: and therefore he advises
me to recant, and to follow the example of Gregory of Neocaelarea: I hope he
does not mean in the way of S. German; although one of that name was a great
Patron of Images about that time. But if this Council were neither so lawful,
so general, nor so judicious as T. G. pretends, for all that I know, the Rector
of a Parochial Church never to be found in the list of any General Council
(which is a shrewd aggravation of my fault) may have leave to call the Second
Council of Nice, a wise Synod.

1. I shall enquire whether this were a lawful General Council, and so received
by the Church: There are three things T. G. insists on to make this out. 1.
That it was called by the Popes Authority; which he knows we deny to be
sufficient to make a lawful General Council; for then every Assembly of Bishops
at Rome called by the Pope would be a General Council. 2. The consent and
presence of the Patriarchs. 3. That it has been received as such by the
Church. But I shall make it appear, that it was just such another General
Council as that of Trent was, and managed with as much fraud and collusion; and
that it was not received by the Church as a General Council. 1. As to the
presence and consent of the Patriarchs; this Council in their Synodical Epistle
boast that they had the concurrence of East, Act. 7. p. 586.
West, North and South: Which is such an extravagance, that no sober men would
have been guilty of, that had any regard to Truth or Honesty; or did in the
least consider the State of the World at that time. The Western Bishops were
never so much as summoned, the Patriarch, of Jerusalem was dead, the Eastern
Patriarch, and the Patriarch of Alexandria were neither in condition to appear
themselves, nor to send Legates thither; which Baronius ingenuously confesses:
Baron. ad A. D. 785. n. 40.
Because Aaron who was then Chaliph of the Saracens, was a great enemy to the
Christians, under whose dominion at that time they were. Although Christianus
Lupus, Christian. Lup. in Conc. T. 2. p. 1210.
a Professor of Divinity at Lovain, makes him a great Friend to the Christians
in Egypt; which is not only contrary to Baronius, but to the Synodical Epistle,
the two Monks carried to the Council, from the Monks of Palestine, and was read
and approved by the Council. Theophanes says, Theoph. Chrongr. p. 388. Histor.
Miscell. l. 23. p. 333.
That the Empress and Patriarch, both sent to the Patriarchs of Alexandria and
Antioch, while the Peace continued; but soon after upon Aaron 's being made
Chaliph, the peace was broke; and there was no liberty for the Patriarchs
either to go or send.

But do we not read in the Acts of the Council that John appeared and
subscribed as Vicar of the Oriental Patriarchs; and Thomas as Vicar of the
Patriarch of Alexandria? Very true: but Baronius gives an excellent account of
this notorious cheat. The Legates that were sent to the Patriarchs did never
arrive at Antioch or Alexandria; but coming into Palestine, they there
understood what a grievous persecution the Christians suffered under the new
Chaliph, and that if it should be discovered what errand they went upon, it
would not only hazard their own lives, but of all the Christians of those
parts; therefore they forbore going any farther, and acquainted the Monks of
Palestine with their design; who met together, and took upon them to send these
two, John and Thomas as the Legates of the Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria:
For Theodorus Patriarch of Jerusalem was lately dead. And these two were the
goodly Vicars of the Patriarchal See's which sat and subscribed in their names
in this most Ecumenical Council; and passed in all the Acts of it for the
Legates of the Oriental Patriarchs. Act. 7. p. 558.
For they subscribe themselves Legates of the three Apostolical Sees,
Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem: and yet the summons never came to either of
the Patriarchs, but they were in truth only the Plenipotentiary Monks of the
Patriarchal Monks of Palestine: So both Baronius and Binius confess they were
only the Monks that sent them, and they call themselves Eremites in the
beginning of their Epistle; and yet in the Acts of that Council they pass for
very great men of the East, Bin. not. in Council. Nic. 2. Council. Nic. Act. 3.
p. 187, 190.
and Euthymius Bishop of Sardis calls them the Patriarchs of the East; and
Epiphanius takes it for granted that the Letters were sent by the very same to
whom Tarasius directed his; when the very Letters themselves, which were read
in the Council, show that the Patriarchs of Antioch and Alexandria were never
consulted with. And yet Christianus Lupus in his late Notes on the Canons of
the General Councils, Lup. not. in Can. Council. Sept. To. 2. p. 1109.
very fairly tells a formal story of Politian, Patriarch of Alexandria, and
Theodoret of Antioch, and Elias of Jerusalem, sending these for their Legates to
this Council (I had thought it had been only the Popes Prerogative to make
titular Patriarchs) and he gravely magnifies the zeal and courage both of the
Patriarchs and Legates for venturing so much in such a time of Persecution: and
then falls into a mighty Encomium of the two Legates that Tarasius sent, for
venturing through a thousand deaths to get to the Patriarchs, when God knows
they never came near them. But which is far more to be wondered at, Pope Adrian
in his Answer to Charles the Great about the Nicene Synod had the face to say,
Adriani epist. Synod. Nic. To. 7. Council. p. 924.
That the Synodical Epistle of the three Patriarchs, of Cosmus of Alexandria,
and of Theodore of Antioch, (it seems Elias is turned to Theodore again) and
Theodore of Jerusalem was read and approved in this Council of Nice; than which
(with his Holiness's leave) there never was a more notorious falsehood, unless
it were that of Tarasius; who upon the approbation of these Letters of the
Monks, cried out, p. 154*
That the East and the West, the North and the South were all agreed; and the
whole Council followed this with an acclamation of Glory be to God that has
united us; when the Eastern Patriarchs knew nothing of the Council, the Western
Bishops opposed it as soon as ever they knew it. And was not this a very
hopeful General Council, having as T. G. says, T.G. p. 118.
The Popes Legates for Presidents, and the Vicars of the Oriental Patriarchal
Sees assisting in it?

2. That it was not received for a General Council by the Church.. 7.
For even in the Greek Church it self, Theophanes only says, Theoph. Chron. p.
389.
That the Emperor called together all the Bishops within his own Dominions;
which is said likewise by Landulphus Sagax; only Theophanes would have it
believed that the Oriental Patriarchs sent their Legates, Paul. Diacon. l. 23.
p. 733.
which was very false: as not only appears from the very Acts of the Council,
wherein the Monks Letter is inserted, but because this Council was not received
many years after in those Patriarchal Sees; which is evident from Photius his
Encyclical Epistle to the Patriarch of Alexandria and others, Photii Epist. 2.
p. 60.
not long since published in Greek from a Ms. brought out of the East; wherein
Photius expostulates the case, why the Nicene Council was not received among
them, as the six General Councils were. In that Copy which is extant in
Baronius, translated by Metius, and with great diligence compared with two Mss.
whereof one was a very ancient one, it is said expressly, Baron. A. D. 863. n.
33.
That it was reported among them that none of the Churches under the
Apostolical See of Alexandria did own the Nicene Synod for a General Council;
which in B. Montagues Copy is mitigated into some; but by the tenor of his
Discourse it appears, it was not published in their Churches, nor received
among them as a General Council: and he uses many arguments to persuade them
to it; among the rest he says, That Thomas was present in it from his See, and
others with him; but he does not say, he came as Legate. And he has found out
Companions for him too; which is more than the Nicene Council discovered: and
yet he acknowledges that by reason of the persecution of the Saracens, the Acts
of that Council never came to them; which would be very strange, if the
Patriarch of Alexandria sent a Legate thither. Baronius ingenuously confesses
that this Nicene Council was not received as an Occumenical Council in any of
the Eastern Patriarchates, Ib. n. 6.
excepting only that of Constantinople; and he is very hard put to it to prove
that it was owned as such even at Rome it self; because Nicholaus 1. in a
Council at Rome in the cause of Photius reckons up but six General Councils,
which Photius upbraids him with; and it is but a pitiful pretense which
Baronius has for it, viz. that they had only a bad Translation of it; such a
one as it was, it was of Hadrians procuring, as Anastasius says. Anast. vit.
Hadrian. 1. p. 119.
If they had received it as a General Council, where were the Authentic Acts
of it? or if they did not understand Greek, could they not have procured a
better Latin Translation before the time of Anastasius? But the plain Truth
was, although Pope Hadrian joined with it, and would not allow Tarasius his
being Patriarch till he undertook to get the worship of Images confirmed, yet
the Nicene Council was so very ill received in the Western Church; that the
following Popes were ashamed to call it an Ecumenical Council; as Binius
confesses in the very words of Baronius, according to his custom. And long
after their times, it was so little known or esteemed in the Western parts,
Council. Gener. Tom. 8. p. 775.
that Aquinas and the ancient Schoolmen never mention it in the matter of
Images, but determine expressly against it. Which either shows it was not known,
or had not any value put upon it; For if Baronius his reason hold good, as soon
as Anastasius had finished his Translation, this Council would have been as
much known here, as any other; and so much the more, because so many Schoolmen
were concerned to justify the worship of Images, and they were so much to seek
for arguments to defend it, that they would have leaped for joy to have had a
Decree of an allowed General Council on their side; or if they had found it
against them, they would some way or other have answered it.

But the greatest Testimony against it is the Council of Francford,. 8.
which expressly condemned it; and as Sirmondus confesses, Sirmond. adm. de Can.
2. Council. Francford.
Did not look upon it as an Oecumenial Council, because none but Greeks met in
it, and other Churches were not asked their opinion; nay, he says, that Pope
Hadrian himself, did not give it the title of a General Council. To this T. G.
answers, T.G. p. 148
That what weight soever that Exception carried at that time, yet it is certain
now it has no force at all, since the Council it self has for many hundreds
of years been accepted as a true and lawful General Council, and its doctrine
as Catholic by all the Provinces of Christendom, and the contrary to it
condemned for Heresy. This latter is evidently false, as I have showed before,
and there is no reason for the other; for by the confession of their own
Writers the Copies of this Nicene Council lay buried in these Western parts for
many Ages, which is the reason they give why the Schoolmen take no notice of
it; and in the former Century, the Copies of it were first published from some
Mss. that were very little known. The account whereof was, that this Council
meeting with so brisk an opposition from the Council of Francford and
afterward from the Gallican Bishops, and being rejected here in England by the
consent of our Historians, the very name of it was almost quite forgotten;
thence it never was once cited either by Jonas Aurelianensis, or Walafridus
Strabo, as Spalatensis observes, Spalat. de Rep. Eccles. l. 7. c. 12. n. 59.
when they had the greatest occasion to do it in the matter of Images. But when
the worship of Images began to be opposed here in England by Wickliffe, the
defenders of it finding themselves concerned to find out every thing that made
for their advantage, Waldensis having heard of some such thing as a Council
against Iconoclasts, by Thomas and John, two Dominicans of his time, from a
certain Book; Waldens. Tom. 3. Tit. 19. c. 150* n. 4.
he adventures to set it down upon their report, but so faintly with ut fertur,
as if he had been telling the story of Pope Joan; and he says, it was called
under the pious Emperor Constantius the second, and Pascasius: by which we may
see what an excellent account they had of this General Council; but in the last
Century, Pet. Crabb, a Franciscan, with indefatigable diligence searching five
hundred Libraries for any thing pertaining to Councils, lights upon the old
Latin Edition of this Council, and published it A. D. 1551. From that time this
was looked on and magnified as the seventh General Council in these Western
parts, and its Authority set up by the Council of Trent: and the generality of
Divines finding it in the Volums of General Councils and there joined with
them, searched no farther, but imagined it was always so esteemed.

But it may be some will become confident of it,. 9.
when they see so good an Author as T. G. speaking with so much assurance, That
it has been received for many hundred years as a lawful General Council; If he
speaks from the time of its being published, he might as well have said for
many thousand years. For 1. In the Age wherein it was first sent abroad, it was
utterly rejected by the Council of Francford; as not only appears by the Canon
it self, but by the confession of some of the most learned and judicious
persons of the Roman Church: such as Sirmondus and Petrus de Marca were:
Sirmond. Admon. To. 2. Council. p. 191. Pet. de Marca de Concord. Sacerd. l. 2.
c. 17. n. 2. Petav. de Incarn. l. 15. c. 11. n. 4. Sur. admon. ad Lect. de
Council. Franc. Cop. Dial. 4. c. 18, 19. Sander. de Imag. c. 5. Suar. in 3. p.
Th. disp. 54. sect. 3.
and Petavius confesses, That the Council meant by the Council of Francford was
the Nicene Council, and not the former of Constantinople; as Surius, Cope, or
Harpsfield, Sanders, Suarez, and others were of opinion: nay Labbe and Cossart
in their late Edition of the Councils, have most impudently set down this in
the very Title of the Council of Francford, That the Acts of the Nicene Council
in the matter of Images were confirmed therein: whereas Sirmondus adds this to
the Title of his Admonition about the second Canon of that Council, Quo rejecta
est Synodus Nicaena: all which Advertisement they have very honestly left out,
although they pretend to give all Sirmondus his Notes. But the main pretense
for this was, because the words of the Canon do mention the Council of
Constantinople; Council. Gener. To. 7. p. 1013.
which Petavius thinks was called so, because Constantinople was the Head of
the Eastern Empire; but the plain reason is, because the Nicene Council was
begun at Constantinople upon the 17 of August; but the Emperors Guards would
not endure their sitting there, as Theophanes relates, Theop. Chronogr. p. 389.
upon which they were forced to rise; and the Empress found out a trick to
disband the suspected Officers and Soldiers, and brought in new ones; however
it was thought convenient the Council should sit no longer there, but remove
unto Nice. And what a mighty absurdity was this to call a Council, which was
begun at Constantinople, the Constantinopolitan Council? And it is observable,
that Gabriel Biel, Gab. Biel. in Can. Miss. c. 49.
who lived in the latter end of the fifteenth Century, quotes the Decree of
this Council of Nice, under the name of a Decree of the Council of
Constantinople. And the learned P. Pithaeus speaking of Anastasius his
Translation, P. Pithei praefat. ad histor. Pauli Diac.
calls it the Council of Constantinople. The new French Annalist is satisfied
with neither opinion, but he thinks, That another Council of Constantinople was
called between the Nicene Council, Annals Eccles. Franc. ad A. D. 794. n. 26.
To. 6.
and that of Francford, which did in express words determine that the same
worship was to be given to Images, which is due to the B. Trinity, and that
this was the Council condemned at Francford: but this New Council is a mere
invention of his own, there being no color for it either from the Greek or
Latin Historians; and in truth he pretends only to these reasons, 1. Because it
was a Council of Constantinople which was condemned. 2. Because it is not to be
supposed that the Council of Francford should condemn the Council of Nice: For
he says, it is not to be believed that so many Bishops, n. 34.
the Popes Legates being present, should misunderstand the doctrine of that
Council: yet this is all the refuge T. G. has in this matter: T.G. p. 144.
and he offers from Petr. de Marca, to give a particular account of it. To
which I answer, That the Author of the Caroline Book (as I have already
observed) takes notice of this passage of the Bishop of Constantia in Cyprus;
and although there were a mistake in the Translation of it, yet it ought to be
observed that, he says, the whole Council meant the same which Constantine
spoke out, Carol. de ^ag. l. 3. c. 17.
although in words they denied it, and he there quotes the very words of their
denying it, Non adoramus Imagines ut Deum, nec illis Divini servitii cultum
impendimus, etc. From whence it is plain, that the Western Church understood
well enough what they said, and what they denied; but they judged,
notwithstanding all their words to the contrary, that they did really give that
worship to Images which was due only to God; and no man that reads the Caroline
Book can be of another opinion. And T. G. is content to yield it of the Author
of that Book, T.G. p. 146.
from the Testimonies I brought out of him; but he says, That Author was not
contented with what the Council of Francford had condemned. Which is a
lamentable answer; since Hincmarus says, Hincmar. Opusc. c. 20. p. 457. Carol.
l. 4. c. 28.
That this very Volume was it which was sent from the Emperor to Rome by some
Bishops against the Greek Synod; and he quotes the very place out of it which
is still extant in that Book. And is it credible that the Emperor should
publish a Book in his own name as a Capitular, as Pope Hadrian calls it, that
was different from the sense of the Council of Francford, which was called on
purpose to resolve this Question about Images, as well as to condemn the
Heresy of Felix and Elipandus? Petavius indeed would have the main Book to
have been written some years before the Council, Petav. d^ Incarn. l. 15. c.
12. n. 8.
as soon as the Acts of the Nicene Synod were known in these parts (and
Cassander probably supposes Alcuinus to have been the Author of it) but when
the Council of Francford had condemned the Nicene Synod, Cassan. ep. 15.
only some excerpta were taken out of it and sent to the Pope. I am not
satisfied with Petavius his Reason, Because the Pope does not answer all of it,
(a better cause may be assigned for that) but in the Preface of the Book the
Author declares that it was done with the Advice of the Council (Quod opus
aggressi sumus cum conhibentia sacerdotum in regno a Deo nobis concesso
Catholicis gregibus praelatorum) and Bellarmin and Baronius both grant,
Bellarm. de Council. l. 2. c. 8.

Baron. ad A. 794. n. 31.


That this Book contains the Acts of the Council of Francford; However if the
Book were extant before under the name of Charles, it is so much the more
improbable that if the Council differed in opinion from it, the Excerpta out of
this Book should be sent as the Reasons of rejecting the Nicene Synod. And that
passage which Hincmarus cites out of this Book, is very considerable to our
purpose; for the design of it is to show, That the Greek Synod could have no
pretense to be esteemed a lawful General Council, because the doctrine of it
was not Catholic, neither were the Acts of it done by the universal Church:
and in another place, That Synod is charged with folly and presumption, Carol.
de Imag. l. 3. c. 11.
in that being but one part of the Church, it should dare to impose its Decrees
upon the Church without advising and consulting with the other parts of it,
(debuerat enim ad circumjacentium provinciarum Ecclesias legationem
sciscitativam facere, utrum imagines adorari aut non adorari deberent.) For
what Rage and Madness is this, for the Church of one part to go about to
determine that which was never determined by the Apostles or their Successors,
and to endeavor to Anathematize the Churches of the whole World? But this is
cursing without reason, anger without Power, damning without Authority: and
therefore they are charged with no less than Luciferian pride for taking upon
them to pronounce Anathema's against those who dissented from them. Petavius
says, Petav. de Incarn. l. 15. c. 12. n. 4, 10.
That when Pope Hadrian sent the Acts of the Council to Charles the Great, and
would have a Council called to advise about it; the Pope had not yet declared
it for an Ecumenical Council! but if it were not then declared to be a General
Council, it is very unlikely he should do it afterward when he found that
three hundred Bishops of Germany, France, and Italy, says Surius, did so
stiffly and resolutely oppose the definition of it in spite of the Popes
Legates, who were present there. Which contradiction of theirs shows, how very
far this Council was from being received by the Church as a lawful General
Council; and from the Answer of Hadrian it appears that it was not then
solemnly confirmed by the Pope, nor ever after, that we can find, till the
Council of Trent.

2. We have the Testimony of the best Historians of that and several Ages
after, that the Nicene Synod was not received as a lawful General Council. In
the Annals of Eginhardus, Eginhardi Annals A. D. 794.
who was Secretary to Charles the Great, we have this Account, that not many
years before the Council of Francford, there was a Synod at Constantinople,
which was called by themselves, not only the seventh, but a General Council;
but Charles having summoned together a Council of Bishops out of all parts of
his dominions, it was there utterly rejected, so as not to be called or thought
to be either the seventh, or a General Council. The Annals Tiliani, Histor.
Franc. Script. Coaetan. Tom. 2. and 3.
Loiseliani, Bertiniani, Fuldenses, Metenses, Laurishamenses, Massianenses,
Egraismenses being the best Records of that Age, all agree with Eginhardus in
the rejecting of the Greek Synod; and most of them call it the false Synod,
others say, that which would be called the seventh and a General Council; and
with these agree Ado Viennensis, Rhegino, Hermannus Contratus and Urspergensis
in their several Chronicles, wherein we have a plainer Testimony that this
Council was rejected, than we have that any General Council was ever received.

3. That this was not barely the sense of that Age,. 10.
but continued to be so of succeeding Ages, appears from the Testimony I gave
of the Gallican Church in the time of Ludovicus Pius, and the Synod of Paris,
A. D. 824. wherein they persisted in condemning the Nicene Synod, and the
doctrine therein asserted: which shows evidently that it was no mistake of the
Words of the Council which caused the Council of Francford to condemn the
Nicene: for Pope Hadrian had now written in Vindication of it, and endeavored
to clear the sense of the Council; and yet after all this the Gallican Bishops
adhered to the sentence of the Council of Francford. To this T. G. returns only
this answer, T.G. p. 149.
that although they were of this opinion at that time, yet afterward the
doctrine of the Nicene Council was received in the Gallican Church. I proceed
therefore to show, that in the time of the Controversy between Jonas
Aurelianensis and Claudius Taurinensis the Gallican Church had not changed its
opinion: ( Jonas lived, says Labbe, to A. D. 842.) For Bellarmin yields that
Jonas denied that any worship was to be given to Images, Bell. de Script.
Eccles. A. 820.
although he disputed against Claudius Taurinensis who followed the opinion of
Serenus and would have them all destroyed. Marg. de la Bigne says, Biblioth.
Patr. To. 4. p. 533.
that Jonas was one of the Heads of those who opposed the Pope and the
Orientals, i. e. the Nicene Synod in this point of the worship of Images, and
he calls it a superstitious and pernicious practice, p. 538. p. 547.
from which the Gallican Church was free; and a detestable and most wicked
error; notwithstanding the Orientals pretended that they did not worship the
Images, but the exemplars by them; and he prays God they may be at last
delivered out of that superstition: with so much more to that purpose, that it
were endless to repeat it. Walafridus Strabo who lived some years after Jonas,
Walafrid. Strabo de reb. Eccles. l. (...).
and mentions the death of Ludovicus Pius, is yielded by Baronius to have been
of the same opinion with Jonas in this matter: Baron. A.D. 794. n. 41.
and he says, all the honor due to Images is barely negative, not to misuse
or destroy them. In the same time with Jonas lived Agobardus Archbishop of
Lions, and is at this day reckoned among the Saints and Confessors of that
City; of whose doctrine I had given before an account from the abstract of
Papirius Massonus, and from thence I showed how zealous he was against all
worship of Images: and I produced the Testimony of Baluzius to show that he
said no more than the whole Gallican Church in that Age believed. T. G. gives
up Agobardus; T.G. p. 150.
but he will not yield that Baluzius says any such thing, for the French
Bishops allowed Images to be kept says Baluzius, that the faithful seeing them
might be excited to the imitation of those holy persons whom they represented:
whereas Agobardus went so far as to affirm that they were kept for ornaments to
delight the eyes, but not for the instruction of the People; nay that they were
not to be painted upon Church walls. The words of Baluzius are, Baluz. no^. in
Agob. p. 88.
Ego crediderim Agobardum scripsisse quod omnes tum in Gallia sentiebant; and
what sense can any man make of these words, if he did not believe, that what
Agobardus wrote was the sense of the Gallican Church? I cannot but pity T. G.
in these straights he runs himself into; he can creep in at a Mouse-hole, but
he soon grows too big ever to get out again. For Baluzius says what I
affirmed, and Agobardus says no such thing, as he affirms of him: and in that
very Synopsis of his doctrine by Massonus, to which he referrs, we have just
the contrary; Papir. Masson. Synops. Agob. c. 10.
Picturae aspectandae causa historiae and memoriae, non Religionis; Images are
to be looked on for history and memory sake, but not for Religion; and what is
this but for instruction of the people? Whosoever it was, that helped T. G. to
this citation, I desire him as a Friend that he will never trust him more; for
I would think better of T. G. himself, than that he would wilfully prevaricare.
But if this were Agobardus his opinion, why have we it not in his own words?
rather than those of Pap. Massonus, who talks so ignorantly and inconsistently
in that very place where those words are, but are not set down by him as the
judgment of Agobardus. If T. G. would have taken, no great pains, to have read
over Agobardus his discourse of Images, Agobard. de Imag. c. 19.32.
he would have saved me the labor of confuting him about his opinion; for he
delivers it plainly enough against all worship of Images, though for the sake
of the Exemplar; but he expressly allows them for instruction. I am sorry T. G.
makes it so necessary for me to give him such home-thrusts; for he lays himself
so open, and uses so little art to avoid them, that I must either do nothing,
or expose his weakness, and want of skill.

But all this while we are got no farther than toward the middle of the ninth
Century, the Church of France might change its opinion after this time, and
assert the Council of Nice to have been a General Council, and submit to the
Decrees of it. I grant all this to be possible, but we are looking for
certainties, and not bare possibilities. Hincmarus of Rhemes, Hincmar, ubi supr.
a stout and understanding Bishop of the Gallican Church, died says Bellarmin,
A. D. 882. and he not only calls the Nicene Synod a false General Council, but
he makes that at Francford to be truly so: (And these latter words of his are
cited with approbation by Card. Cusanus) and he condemns both Factions among
the Greeks, Cusan. de Concord. Cathol. l. ^. c. 1.
of the Iconoclasts, and of the Nicene Fathers. In the same Age lived
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, who made it his business to recommend all the Greek
Canons and Councils to the Latin Church; (he was alive says Baronius, A. D.
886.) He first translated the eighth General Council, at which himself was
present; and when this was abroad, he tells the Pope what a soloecism it would
be, Anast. Biblioth. Praefat. in sept. Synod.
to have the eighth, without a seventh, (ubi septima non habetur, are his very
words) from whence it appears in how very little Regard that Council was in the
Western Church. It is true, he says, it was translated before; but it was,
almost by all so much contemned, that it was so far from being transcribed,
that it was not thought worth reading. This he would have to be laid upon the
badness of the translation, (he has mended the matter much) when in his Lives
of the Popes, he says, it was done by the particular Command of Pope Hadrian,
and laid up in his Sacred Library. But when he has said his utmost for the
Catholic doctrine of Image Worship, (as he would have it believed) he cannot
deny that the admirable usefulness of this doctrine was not yet revealed to
some of the Gallican Church; because they said it was not lawful to worship the
Work of men's Hands. After this time, came on the Midnight of the Church;
wherein the very names of Councils were forgotten, and men did only dream of
what had past; but all things were judged good, that were got into any vogue in
the practice of the Church; yet even in that time we meet with some glitterings
of light, enough to let us see the Council of Nice had not prevailed over the
Western Church. Leo Tuscus who was a Secretary to the Greek Emperor, and lived
says Gesner, Gesner. Biblioth. To. 1. v. Leo.
A. D. 1170. giving an account of the Schism between the Greek and Latin
Churches, has these words, (says Cassander) that among the Causes of the
Breach, Cassand. Ep. 19.
that Synod was to be assigned which was called by Constantine and Irene, and
which they would have called the seventh, and a General Council; and he adds
moreover, that it was not received even by the Church of Rome. About the year
1189. was the Expedition into Palestine by Fredericus Aenobarbus, and Nicetas
Acominatus, Nicet. Choniat. l. 2. Is. Angeli. Baron. A. 1189. n. 10.
who was a great Officer under the Greek Emperor, Isacius Angelus, (and
present in the Army says Baronius) gives this account of the Germans opinion
in those times about the worship of Images. When, says he, all the Greeks had
deserted Philippopolis, the Armenians staid behind, for they looked on the
Germans as their Friends, and agreeing with them in Religion, for the worship
of Images is forbidden among both of them. Which being a Testimony of so
considerable a Person, and not barely concerning the opinion of some Divines,
but the general practice of the people, does show that in the twelfth Century,
the Necene Council had not prevailed all over the Western Church, when T. G.
affirms it did for many hundreds of years before the Reformation. Especially,
if we consider what the judgment and practice of the Armenians was, as it is
delivered by Nicon, Biblioth. Patr. To. 3. p. 151.
(who is supposed to have been a Saint and Martyr in Armenia,) who says, that
they do not worship Images, and their Catholic Bishop or Patriarch
excommunicates those that do. Which is confirmed by what is said to the same
purpose by Isaac an Armenian Bishop, Auctur. Biblioth. Patr. To. 2.409.
who lived in the same Century, viz. that they do not Worship the Images either
of Christ, the B. Virgin, or the Saints. And Pet. Pithaeus a learned and
ingenuous Papist, P. Pithaei Praes. ad Pauli Diac. hist.
confesses, that it was but very lately that those of the Gallican Church began
to be fond of Images: and he writ that Epistle wherein those words are extant,
A. D. 1568. Surely he did not think the doctrine of the Nicene Council had been
received in the Gallican Church for many hundred years.

. 11.
But suppose the Nicene Synod were not owned for a General Council, yet it
might be very wise and judicious Assembly; to say that, is to reflect on the
Emperor Charles the Great and all the Western Bishops in his Dominions. And I
am sure their expressions would justify me, if I had spoken sharper without an
Irony: for in the Caroline Book we frequently meet with such expressions as
these, concerning those grave Fathers; Lib. Carol. de Imag. l. 1. c. 16. c. 13.
c. 15. c. 19. c. 20. c. 25.
ut illi stultissime and irrationabiliter putant; indocte and inordinate
dicunt; quam absurd agant; quod magnae sit temeritatis dicere; quod non minus
omnibus sed pene plus cunctis Tharasius delirasse dignoscitur; l. 2. c. 8.16.
c. 25. l. 3. c. 10.17. c. 19. c. 23. c. 29.31.
Deliramento plena dictio Leonis. Ut illi delirant: ut illi garriunt:
Ridiculose and pueriliter dictum; infauste, praecipitanter, sive insipienter:
dementia prolatum and risu dignum. l. 4. c. 1. c. 17. c. 23.
Inutile and mendacio plenum. Dementissimum and ratione carens Deliramentum,
errore plenum. Falsissimum and risu dignum. Ridiculosissimum Dictum.
Superciliose and indocte dixerunt. When T. G. has considered these
expressions, and the force and pungency of them, being all applied to the
Fathers of that Nicene Synod, by the Western Bishops under the name of Charles
the Great, he may possibly cool and abate his rage toward me for using only
that Ironical expression of That Wise Synod. And there is nothing considerable
said by the Nicene Fathers which is not answered in that Book, to whom I may
therefore better referr him, than he does me to the Answers of Epiphanius in
the Nicene Council for satisfaction of no less than eight arguments (as himself
numbers them) of the Constantinopolitan Fathers against the Worship of Images.

But that he may not think the greatest weight lies in any thing that is passed
by, I shall briefly consider the Defense he makes for the Nicene Synod in the
particulars mentioned by him. 1. He says, That the Nicene Fathers did justly
plead the continuance of Christ Kingdom against the Idolatry of Christians,
T.G. p. 125.
because God has promised that he will take away Idols from the earth, Zach.
13.2.
not for four or five hundred years, but to the end of the world. I desire T.
G. to consider, whether this argument would not have held as well against the
Catholic Bishops who charged the Arrians with Idolatry: and what answer he
gives himself about that, will show the feebleness of his answer in this case.
And the prophecies of the Old Testament relating to Events under the New
(supposing that does so, which is far from being clear) do certainly show what
the design and tendency of the Christian doctrine is, and what would be if men
did observe it. As it is in all the prophecies of the Peace and tranquillity of
the World, notwithstanding which, we find the World at the old Rate of
quarrelling and Fighting under new pretenses: Just so it is with Idolatry, no
doctrine in the world would preserve men more effectually from it, if they
would observe it; but if under the color of Christianity they bring in only a
new scheme of it; it is still the same kind of thing, although it appears in a
fresher dress. But then, says T. G. the Gates of Hell would prevail against
the Church. Against what Church? The whole Christian Church? whoever said they
could, or how does that follow? The Church of Constantinople, or the Church of
Jerusalem? Have not the Gates of the Turk been too strong for them? The Church
of Rome? The Gates of Hell do certainly prevail against that, if it does
Unchurch all other Christians that are not of its communion? And why may not
Idolatry prevail, where Luciferian Pride, and Hellish Cruelty and desperate
Wickedness have long since prevailed? Has Christ made promises to secure that
Church from error, which has been overrun with all sorts of Wickedness by
the confession of her own members and Friends? These are gobbets, fit only to
be crammed down the throats of very implicit believers.

T.G. p. 127.
2. He undertakes to show, that the saying of the Fathers against the Arrians
cannot reach to those that worship Images, because Epiphanius says, the
Arrians trusted in Christ, and gave properly Divine Honor to Christ, which
they do not to the Images of Christ. To answer this, I showed that Aquinas and
his followers did declare that Latria was to be given to the Images of Christ,
therefore this could not, at least, excuse them from being parallel to the
Arrians, and if their arguments hold good, then all that worship Images fall
under the like condemnation. This he bestows the name of many fallacies upon;
T.G. p. 128.
and runs on so briskly with showing the inconsequence of it, as though he did
in earnest believe it were an impertinent answer; by which he would insinuate,
that I had made use of Aquinas his opinion to prove those guilty of Idolatry
which were of another opinion. No such matter; For the question was, whether
the saying of the Fathers concerning the Arrian Idolatry can be justly applied
to those that worship Images? Yes, say I, upon Epiphanius his own ground they
may, if they who worship Images give divine Honor to them; but Aquinas and his
Followers contend that Divine Honor is to be given to them; and therefore they
fall under the like censure. And by their argument, all that worship Images
must come under it; For either they worship Images for themselves, and then
they all acknowledge it is Idolatry; or for the sake of the exemplar: which if
it be the reason and object of worship as represented by the Image, it must
have the same worship which the thing considered in its own being deserves;
which being divine honor, that must be given to the Image. But T. G. supposes
the force of all this to depend upon their being of this opinion, and because
the Nicene Fathers are not mentioned by me as agreeing with Aquinas, therefore
he represents this arguing as ridiculous. Whereas my design was to show (that
since divine honor being given to Images, was confessed to make the case
alike) that it was confessed by the most prevalent party in the Church of Rome,
that such honor was to be given to them, and that others did it, although they
would not own the doing it. And whether men acknowledge it or no; if they give
that which is really Divine Worship, they become guilty of Idolatry as well as
the Arrians; and let men call it by what names they will, of Relative or
absolute, Sovereign or inferior Worship, if it be that which God has
forbidden to be given to any Creature, it becomes Idolatry.

3. T. G. says, T.G. p. 134.
that the argument does not hold, that if the union of the Divine and humane
nature be the reason of the worship given to the Person of Christ, then there
must be an equal presence or union between Christ and the Image to make that an
object of Worship; for, says he, not only union, but representation may
occasion worship. Who doubts of that? but may it not as well occasion people to
commit Idolatry? But the question is not, whether representation may occasion
the worship of God or no; for so an Ant or a Fly, or any Creature may occasion
it. But this is notorious shuffling to talk of Images being only an Occasion of
Worship, whereas I have at large showed that the doctrine and Practice of their
Church makes them Objects of Worship. And since the Christian Church
acknowledged the humanity of Christ to be capable of worship only on the
account of an Hypostatical Union with the Divine Nature; I desired to know how
a mere Image of that Humane Nature can be an object of lawful worship? If T. G.
says, That the Image is a fit object of worship, and representation the reason
of it; let him show how Representation comes to be an equal reason with
personal union; and at last, this Representation is nothing but an act of
Imagination, which does not make the object any more really present there than
any where else: against which Imagination we set the positive Law of God
forbidding any such kind of worship, as I have already proved.

4. He says in defense of his Nicene Fathers, T.G. p. 136.
That although the Image of Christ can only represent the humane Nature as
separate from the Divine, yet the charge of Nestorianism does not follow;
because the Object of their worship, is that which is conceived in their minds;
and worship being an act of the Will, it is carried to the Prototype, as it is
conceived in the understanding; but their understandings being free from
Nestorianism, their Wills must be so too: which is all the sense I can make of
T. G's answer. Who does not seem at all to consider there are two things blamed
by the Church in Nestorianism. 1. The heretical opinion. 2. The Idolatrous
practice consequent upon that opinion, of the separation of the two Natures in
Christ. Now the argument of the Constantinopolitan Fathers proceeds not upon
their opinion, as though they really believed the principles of Nestorianism
who worshipped Images; but they were guilty of the same kind of worship; for
since an Image can only represent the humane nature of Christ; if it were
lawful to worship that Image on the account of Christ, then upon the Nestorian
principles it would be as lawful to worship the humane nature of Christ,
although it had no hypostatical union with the Divine. For could not the
Nestorians say that when they considered Christ as a humane Person, yet that
humane Person did represent to them the Divine Person, who was the proper
object of worship; and although they were not really and hypostatically united,
yet by representation, and an Act of the mind, they directed their worship
toward the Divine Person. For if a bare Image of the humane Nature be a
sufficient object of worship, much more is the humane Nature it self; and if on
the account of such representation the worship of Christ may be directed to his
Image, with much greater Reason it might be toward Christ, as Homo Deiferus,
in regard of that humane Nature, which had the Divine Nature present, although
not united. And upon this Ground the Constantinopolitan Fathers did justly
charge the worshippers of Images with Nestorianism as to their worship; and
that they could not defend themselves, but they must absolve the Nestorians,
whom the Christian Church and this Nicene Synod it self would seem to condemn.
For there is a greater separation between the Image of Christ and Christ, than
the Nestorians did suppose between the Divine and humane Nature; for they did
still suppose a real presence, although not a real Union; but in the case of
Images there is not so much as a real presence, but only by representation;
therefore if the Nestorians were to blame in their worship, much more are those
that worship Images.

As to the last Answer, being only a desire that I would bear in mind against a
fit season, T.G. p. 138.
that the Eucharist is called by the Constantinopolitan Fathers an Honorable
Image of Christ, I shall do what he desires; and I promise him farther to show
the Nicene Fathers Ignorance and Confidence, when they said, It was contrary to
the Scriptures and Fathers to call the Eucharist an Image of Christ. All the
other arguments of the Constantinopolitan Fathers, to the number of eight, T.
G. passes over, and so must I.

From hence I proceed to the next Charge,. 12.
which is, That I mix School disputes with matters of Faith; For I desired
seriously to know, whether any worship does belong to Images or no? if there be
any due, whether is it the same that is given to the Prototype, or distinct
from it? If it be the same, then proper Divine Worship is given to the Image;
if distinct, then the Image is worshipped with Divine Worship for it self, and
not relatively and subordinately as he speaks: and which side soever is taken,
some or other of their Divines charge the worship with Idolatry; so that it is
in men's choice which sort of Idolatry they will commit when they worship
Images, but in neither way they can avoid it. To this T. G. answers several
ways. T.G. p. 192.
1. That this is a point belonging to the Schools, and not at all to Faith:
which I said, was their common Answer when any thing pincheth them; but to show
the unreasonableness of that way of answering, I added that both sides charge
the other with Idolatry, and that is a Matter of Conscience, and not a
Scholastic Nicety. For if the worship of Images be so asserted in the Church
of Rome, that in what way soever it is practiced, there is by their own
confession such danger of Idolatry; the General Terms of Councils serve only to
draw men into the snare, and not to help them out of it. 2. He answers this, by
a drolling comparison, about the worship due to the Chair of State, T.G. p. 186.
whether it be the same which is due to the King or no; if the same, then
proper Regal worship would be given to something besides the King, which were
Treason: if distinct, then the Chair would be worshipped with Regal Honor for
it self, and not relatively, which were for a man to submit himself to a piece
of Wood. This he represents pleasantly, and with advantage enough: and
supposing the Yeomen of the Guard to have done laughing, I desire to have a
difference put between the customs of Princes Courts, and the worship of God:
and it is strange to me T. G. should not see the difference. But whatever T. G.
thinks, we say, that God by His Law having made some Acts of worship peculiar
to himself by way of acknowledgement of His Sovereignty and Dominion over us,
we must not use those Acts to any Creature; and therefore here the most
material Question can be asked, is, whether the Acts of worship be the same
which we are to use to God or no, i. e. whether they are acts forbidden or
lawful? for if they are the same, they are forbidden; if not, they may be
lawful. But in a Princes Court, where all expressions of Respect depend on
custom, and the Princes Pleasure, or Rules of the Court, the only Question a
man is to ask, is, whether it be the custom of the Court, or the Will of the
Prince to have men uncovered in some Rooms and not in others; no man in his
wits would ask, whether that be the same Honor that is due to the King
himself? or who but T. G's Clown could suspect it to be Treason to put off his
Hat in the Presence Chamber, or to the Chair of State, let it be done with what
intention he pleases? If the Yeomen of the Guard should see an old Courtier
approach with many bowings to the Chair of State, and there fall down upon his
Knees, and kiss the Arms of the Chair, and deliver his Petition to it for a
good Office at Court, and observe that he does this frequently, and with great
gravity, I am afraid they would hardly hold their Countenances long to see such
a solemn Fop; and yet this pleasant Courtier might pretend, that he did all
this as imagining the King to be there present by representation, and that he
did not give this Honor to the Chair of State absolutely, considered as a
piece of Wood; but only Relatively, and for the sake of his Master* that he
knew better what belonged to the Honor due to Sovereign worship than such rude
fellows as they; that his intention was to show what esteem he had for his
Prince by all this; and though as to the substance of the act this was the same
that was done to the Person of the King, yet it fell upon the Chair of State
after an inferior Manner, as a thing relating to the King, and purely for his
sake. I leave the substantial Yeomen of the Guard (T. G's Judges in this
Controversy) to determine in a General Council among them, whether T. G's
Quaker, or this old Courtier were the more ridiculous By which instance we see
that even in Princes Courts men may over-act their Reverence, and make
themselves laughed at for their foolish and extravagant Relative worship; for
in all such cases the Rules of the Court are to be observed, where there is no
intrenchment upon Divine Laws; and every man that comes to Court enquires after
the Orders of the Court, and he that keeps within them does his duty, and never
fears the Yeomen of the Guard. If the Orders of the Court were for men to pass
through the Presence, or other Chambers without any Ceremony, would not the
Yeomen of the Guard be as ready to observe those who used it? Their business is
to observe Orders themselves, and to see that others do it. And this is the
only way how this parallel can reach to our Case; all that we plead for, is,
that the Rules and Orders be observed which God has given us for His Worship;
since He has given Laws we ought to obey them; and since He has appointed
what He will have done, and what He will not, we must follow His Rule, and not
our own extravagant Fancies, pretending that we have pretty devices to honor
Him with, which He has expressly forbidden. In such a case, we have Reason to
enquire, whether the Acts of Worship be the same that He has forbidden or no:
but not where the whole matter depends on custom, and general Rules, which
every man may easily know; and no one has any reason to be scrupulous as long
as he keeps within the measures of Decency.

But withal, the force of my Question lay in the confession of our Adversaries,
who acknowledge on one side, That if the Act of Worship be the same that is
given to the Prototype, it is Idolatry; on the other side, if it be distinct it
is Idolatry; and then I had all the reason in the world to put this Question,
because either way they are entangled by the confession of their own party. But
as if Yeomen of the Guard should be so senseless, as some of them to tell a
poor Countryman, when he is going through the Presence Chamber, that if he
gives the Chair of State the same Honor he gives the King, he commits Treason;
and others say, if he does not, he worships the Chair for it self, and so
commits Treason; would not any man say, the Countryman had reason to stand, and
scratch his head, and consider what he does, for he does not care to commit
Treason, and if he must do it one way or other, for his part he would go some
other way, or be better resolved what he is to do. Thus in our case Bellarmin
says, It is Idolatry to give the same worship to an Image which is due to God:
Vasquez says, It is Idolatry to give distinct worship; therefore if a man
would avoid Idolatry, he must give none at all: especially when there is no
necessity at all of doing it; and therefore it is in no case parallel with the
difficulties about sight and motion, which T. G. makes use of, T.G. p. 188, 185
to show that such subtilties ought not to hinder men from doing things. Not
when they are in themselves necessary to be done; but when it is a doubtful
case, and so doubtful that their most learned men say there is danger of
Idolatry either way, I do not know a more prudent consideration to keep a man
from the Practice of it.

Therefore T. G. after all his complaint of mixing these School disputes,. 13.
and letting me know what edge-tools these School distinctions are (as any one
might guess by his manner of handling them) yet at last he resolves to venture
upon clearing the point. T.G. p. 176, 188.
1. He says, The Councils declare in this matter that we are not to give
Latria to Images, or the worship due only to God; and this without any
distinction of absolute or relative Latria. 2. He confesses, That S. Thomas,
and those of his way, p. 189.
do hold that the same worship is to be given to Christ, and to His Image. Can
any two things appear with a face of greater opposition than these two? But,
says T. G. Latria is twofold, one absolute, p. 190.
and that is due to God himself; and the other relative, that may be given to
the Image: or rather, in the same act of worship is a double Notion, the one as
it tends to God himself, which is absolute Latria, the other as it reflects on
the Image for His sake, which is relative Latria. Which distinction I have
already examined, and showed the vanity of in several places; and that there
are many in the Church of Rome who hold absolute Latria to be given to Images,
and that upon the grounds of a Relative Latria any Creature may be worshipped;
therefore I shall keep to what is proper to this place. 1. I said this
distinction is just as if an unchaste Wife should plead to her Husband, that
the Person she was so kind with, was extremely like him, and a near Friend of
his, that it was out of respect to him, that she gave him the honor of his
bed; can any one think that such an excuse as this would be taken by a jealous
Husband? How much less will such pretenses avail with that God who has
declared himself particularly jealous of His honor in this Command above
others, and that he will not give His glory to another, but has reserved all
Divine Worship as peculiar to himself, and no such fond excuses of Relative,
inferior, and improper worship will serve, when they encroach upon His
Prerogative. To this T. G. answers, That the object of Jealousy is a Rival,
T.G. p. 180.
or what has relation to or Union with Him, not what may serve to express
affection and respect to the Person who ought to be loved. But I have already
showed, from the confession of their own Writers, and the sense of the
Christian Church, that even an Image of Christ becomes a Rival when it has
Divine Honor given to it: and T. G. himself will not allow Sacrifice to be
offered to an Image; T.G. p. 182, 183.
and he denies from the Catholic Catechism (although contrary to the Catholic
Practice) that they do pray to Images: let us then suppose that men do pray and
Sacrifice to the Image of Christ. Is all this only like the Wifes kissing the
Picture for the Husbands sake? If it be no more, it is lawful and commendable
to do them according to T. G's principles; if it be more, then an Image of
Christ may have such honor done to it as makes it an Idol, and consequently a
Rival with God for His Honor. And so the dispute comes to this, whether the
practices of the Roman Church in the worship of Images do not imply giving
Divine Honors to them: of which I have treated at large already. 2. By this
distinction men might say the Lords Prayer to Saints, or offer up the Host to
an Image, so they were done absolutely to God, and only Relatively to the
Saints or Images. T. G. being nettled with this, tells me in some passion; That
I can no where contain my self within bounds of Mediocrity; T.G. p. 182.
he shall see I can by not following his Extravagancy: but he lets me know that
the Church of God has no such custom; I do not ask whether the Church of Rome
have any such Custom (the Church of God I know has not) but whether it may not
have that as well as some others, and upon the same grounds of Relative
Worship? But if I must not understand this till I become a Proselyte, I hope I
shall be always cntented with my Ignorance; if I can be no otherwise informed,
T.G. ib.
I am not sorry to see such evidence of their inability to answer who make such
put-offs.

Having thus passed through the several Charges drawn up against me,. 14.
I come in the last Place to consider his parallel Instances, by which he hopes
to clear and vindicate their Worship of Images. To his first about the Chair of
State, and the third about the Jews worshipping toward the Ark and Cherubims,
I have answered already, (the fifth belongs to the Adoration of the Host.)
There remain only three to be examined, 1. The Reverence showed to the Ground
by Moses and Joshua. 2. The bowing at the name of Jesus. 3. The bowing toward
the Altar; If I can clear these from being of the same Nature with the worship
of Images as allowed and practiced in the Roman Church, I know no shadow of
difficulty which remains throughout his Book.

1. To the Reverence showed to the Holy Ground where God himself appeared by
Moses and Joshua, being commanded to pull off their Shoos. I answered, That,
(whatever T. G. thinks of it) there is some difference to be made between what
God has commanded, and what he has forbidden; for in the case of Moses and
Joshua, there was an express Command, but in the case of Image Worship there is
as plain a prohibition: The former part he calls a short Descant on the former
erroneous Ground, T.G.p. 198.
and the latter, a note above Ela. I am glad to see the second Commandment set
to Musical Notes among them, for I was afraid it had been quite cast out of
their Churches. 2. That the special presence and appearance of God does
sanctify a place to so high a degree, that we may lawfully testify our
Reverence toward it, but this will not hold for Images, unless God be proved
present in them, in the same manner as he appeared to Moses and Joshua, and yet
even then, the Reverence he required was not kissing it, or bowing to it, much
less praying to it, but only putting off their shoes. Upon this T. G. being in
a Musical vein, T. G. ib.
sings his Io Paean;and cries out of the wonderful force of Truth, that after
long standing out makes all her Adversaries submit to her Power. I wish we
could see such effects of the Power of Truth; for it would soon rid us of many
Fears and Iealousies. But what is it I have said so much amiss, to gain T. G's
good word? p. 199.
Enough as he thinks to ruin our own Cause and establish theirs. That were
indeed confuting him with a Vengeance. But what is the matter? wherein have I
given up the Cause? I yield, that the special Presence and appearance of God
does sanctify a place to so high a degree, that we may lawfully testify our
Reverence toward it. And what then? Why then says T. G. all my darts which I
have so spitefully thrown in the face of the Images of Christ (or the Holy
Trinity and the Saints) recoil with double force on my own Head. How with
double force? nay how does it appear that they recoil at all? for to the best
of my sight they stick fast where they did; and I do not by my feeling perceive
they recoil upon my Head. Well; but a subtle Logician would ask me, whether
this Reverence be absolute or Relative: and he does not question my answer
would be, that it was not to the Ground for it self, but merely out of a
Respect to God. Is this indeed the fatal blow I have given the Cause of our
Church, when I expressly mention a Command of God going before it? and who
doubts but we may give a Reverence to places, with respect to God, especially
when God requires it, as he did in this case? And when T. G. has made the most
of this Ceremony of pulling off the Shoes, he will find, that it was of no
other signification in the Eastern parts, than having our heads uncovered is
with us; which is the lowest testimony of Respect that may be. Yet this was all
which God himself required when he was present after a signal and extraordinary
manner: and what is all this, to the consecrating, bowing, kneeling, praying to
Images, as they do in the Roman Church? and this I say and have proved, against
an express Command of God; and that not upon any real, but Imaginary presence
of the true object of worship. He that cannot see the difference of these
things, has some Cataracts before his Eyes, which need couching. But still T.
G. demands, T.G.p. 201.
is this the same Reverence that is due to God, or distinct from it? I say, it
is distinct from it; then, says he, Vasquez comes upon you wish his artillery;
for then you express your submission to an inanimate thing, that has no kind
of excellency to deserve it from you. Alas poor T. G! how does he argue like a
man spent and quite gone! That which Vasquez says is, that for a man to use
all the acts of adoration to Images which are performed in the Roman Church
without respect to the exemplar, were to express our submission to an inanimate
thing, which is Idolatry. Where it is to be observed, that he speaks of all the
Acts of Worship which in the Church of Rome they give to Images, and which
being given to an Image makes it Idolatry, because those Acts are such which do
imply a submission to the thing, i. e. they are the highest expressions of
adoration; and those who assert that inferior worship, do hold it to be
internal as well as external, and to be terminated on the Images themselves;
which is the Reason why Vasquez says it were Idolatry; But Vasquez was not a
man of so shallow an understanding to charge this upon those who declare they
put off their shoes or hats, out of no intention or design to worship the
Ground or Place, but merely to express some outward Reverence to a Place on the
account of its being Sacred to God. Those who contended for that worship which
Vasquez charges with Idolatry, did agree with him in all external acts of
adoration to Images; and went farther than Vasquez thought fit as to the
internal; for they said, both ought to concur in the worship of Images, and
that this inferior worship was terminated on the Images themselves (as I have
showed at large in the stare of the Controversy.) Now says Vasquez, to assert
and practice worship of Images after this manner is Idolatry, for it is
expressing our submission to a mere inanimate thing. But do we say, that all
acts of worship are to be performed to the Ground that is holy; or that any one
act of worship is to be terminated upon it; or that any submission of our minds
is to be used toward it? All these we utterly disavow as to the Reverence of
Sacred Places, and these things being declared, we yet say there is a Reverence
left to be showed them on the account of their discrimination from other places
and separation for sacred uses; which Reverence is best expressed in the way
most common for men to show Respect by, which was putting off Shoes in the
Eastern parts, and of Hats here; (of the difference of Reverence and worship, I
have spoken before.) I hope by this time, T. G. sees a little better the force
of the argument of Vasquez, T.G.p. 202, 203.
and how very far it is from recoiling on my head, because I assert a Reverence
to sacred places to have been showed by Moses and Joshua on the account of Gods
special presence: and so all that insipid Discourse of Idolatry which follows,
sneaks away as being ashamed to be brought in to so little purpose here; but
has been fully handled in the First part.

. 15.
2. To his Instance of Bowing at the name of Jesus, I answered, that he might as
well have instanced in our going to Church at the tolling of a Bell, for as the
one only tells us the time when we ought to go to worship God, so the
mentioning the name of Jesus does only put us in mind of him to whom we owe all
manner of Reverence, without dishonouring him as the Object of our worship by
any Image of him, which can only represent that which is neither the object nor
reason of our worship. At this Answer T. G. is inflamed, and when he has
nothing else to say, he endeavors to set me at variance with the Church of
England. This runs quite through his Book, and he takes all occasions to set me
forth as a close and secret enemy to it, although I appear never so much in its
Vindication. If my Adversaries were to be believed (as I see no great reason
they should be) I must be a very prodigious Author in one respect; for they
represent me as a Friend to that which I write against, viz. Socinianism; and
an enemy to that which I have defended, viz. the Church of England. But wherein
is it, that T. G. thinks me such a back-friend to our Church? T.G. p. 208*
in disavowing all Reverence to the Sacred Name of Jesus, which he says, our
Church has enjoined, and has been defended by Fulk, Whitgift, and B. Andrews.
I am glad I know my charge, and I do not doubt to clear my self to hold nothing
in this or any other matter, but what the Church of England has declared to be
her sense. Witness, as to this point, the Declaration of the Archbishops and
Bishops in Convocation: When in time of Divine Service, Book of Canons, 1603.
c. 18.
the Lord Jesus shall be mentioned, due and lowly Reverence shall be done by
all Persons present as has been accustomed; testifying by these outward
ceremonies and gestures, their inward humility, Christian Resolution, and due
acknowledgement that the Lord Jesus Christ, the true and Eternal Son of God is
the only Savior of the World. Is this bowing to the very name of Jesus, and
worshipping that as they do Images, when the Convocation declares that only a
significant Ceremony is intended by it. Arch-B. Whitgift, in the very place
cited by him says, Defense of the Answ. tr. 21. c. 7. div. 3.
that the Christians used it to signify their faith in Jesus; and therefore
they used bodily reverence at all times when they heard the name of Jesus, but
especially when the Gospel was read. Dr. Fulk, Fulk against Rhem. Phil. 2.10.
another of his Authors says, that the place alleged by T. G. to prove it,
pertains to the subjection of all Creatures to the Judgment of Christ;
however, he says, the ceremony of bowing may be used out of Reverence to his
Majesty; not to the bare name; and that their Idolatrous worship is unfitly
compared with the bowing at the name of Jesus. Bishop Andrews says, Andrew's
Ser. 9. of Resur. Speech in Starchamb. p. 50.
we do not bow to the name, but to the sense; which answers and clears all the
long allegation out of him. Archbishop Laud calls it, the Honor due to the Son
of God at the mentioning of his Name, which are almost the very words I used.
And Whittington and Meg of Westminster will altogether serve as well for his
expression as that used by me. But T. G. need not be so angry at my mentioning
the tolling of a bell, when he remembers the Christening of bells among them,
and what mighty Power they have after that, and what Reverend Godfathers they
have, and what Saints names are given to them; so that I should rather have
thought he would have drawn an argument from the Bells, than have been so
disturbed at the naming of them. For all this T. G. fancies a strange Analogy
between Words and Pictures, a picture being a word to the Eye, and a word being
a Picture to the Ear: which sounds just like Whittington to my ears: and I
desire him to consider, that Suarez tells us, Suarez in 3. p. Th. q. 25. disp.
2.54. art. 3. sect. 6.
that some of their own Divines say, no worship is due to any Name, because
they signify only by imposition, and do not supply the place of the thing
represented as Images do: of which opinion, he says, Soto and Corduba are: and
Suarez himself grants, that a name being a transient sound can hardly be
apprehended as conjoined with the Person, or the Person in it, so as to be
worshipped together with it; Paul. Maria Quarti in Rubr. Miss p. 264, 266.
And one of their latest Ritualists says, that when the name of Jesus is
mentioned they bow to the Crucifix; which shows that even among them, they do
not think the Name of Jesus equal to an Image of Christ.

. 16.
I am now come to his last Instance, viz. bowing toward the Altar; he would
insinuate, as though the Church of England were for giving some kind of worship
to the Altar, T.G. p. 218.
although under the degree of Divine Worship due to God alone; and says, that
as the allowing this would render me a true Son of the Church of England, so
the allowing the like to the sacred Images of Christ would make me in this
point, a perfect Proselyte of the Church of Rome. Which is in effect to say,
that the Church of England, in allowing bowing to the Altar, does give the very
same worship to it, which their Church requires to be given to Images; and that
they who do one and not the other, do not attend to the Consequence of their
own Actions. I shall therefore show, 1. That the Church of England does not
allow any worship to be given to the Altar. 2. That the adoration allowed and
practiced in the Church of England is of a very different Nature from the
Worship of Images.

1. That the Church of England does not allow any Worship to be given to the
Altar. For this I appeal to that Canon wherein is contained the Explication of
the sense of our Church in this particular. Whereas the Church is the House of
God, dedicated to his holy Worship, Canons and Constit. c. 7.1640.
and therefore ought to mind us, both of the Greatness and Goodness of his
Divine Majesty, certain it is that the acknowledgement thereof, not only
inwardly in our hearts, but also outwardly with our bodies, must needs be pious
in it self, profitable unto us, and edifying unto others. We therefore think it
very meet and behooveful, and heartily commend it to all good and well affected
People, members of this Church, that they be ready to tender unto the Lord the
said acknowledgement, by doing Reverence and obeisance both at their coming in
and going out of the said Churches, Chancels, or Chapels, according to the
most ancient Custom of the Primitive Church in the purest times, and of this
Church also for many years of the Reign of Q. Elizabeth. The reviving therefore
of this ancient and laudable custom, we heartily commend to the serious
consideration of all good People, NOT WITH ANY INTENTION TO EXHIBIT ANY
RELIGIOUS WORSHIP TO THE COMMUNION TABLE, THE EAST OR THE CHURCH, or any thing
therein contained in so doing, or to perform the said gesture in the
Celebration of the Holy Eucharist, upon any Opinion of the CORPORAL PRESENCE OF
THE BODY OF JESUS CHRIST ON THE HOLY TABLE OR IN THE MYSTICAL ELEMENTS, but
ONLY for the advancement of Gods Majesty, and to give him ALONE that honor and
glory that is due unto him and NO OTHERWISE. And in the practice or omission of
this Rite, we desire that the Rule of charity prescribed by the Apostle may be
observed, which is, That they which use this Rite despise not them who use it
not, and they who use it not, condemn not those that use it. This is the full
declaration of the sense of our Church about it, made by those who met in
Convocation, and were most zealous for the practice of it. Speech in
Star Chamber. p. 43.
Agreeably to this Archbishop Laud speaks, when this was charged as an
innovation; To this I answer, says he, First, That God forbid that we should
worship any thing but God himself. 2. That if to worship God when we enter into
his House, or approach his Altar be an Innovation, it was a very old one, being
practiced by Jacob, Moses, Hezekiah, etc. p. 46.
And were this Kingdom such, as would allow no holy Table standing in its
proper place, yet I would worship God when I came into his House. And
afterward he calls it, doing Reverence to Almighty God, p. 47.
but toward his Altar: and Idolatry it is not to worship God toward his holy
Table. Now with us the People did ever understand them fully and apply them to
God, p. 48. p. 52.
and to none but God. From whence it appears that God is looked on as the sole
Object of this Act of Worship, and that our Church declares, that it allows no
intention of exhibiting any Religious worship to the Communion Table, or East
or Church, or any Corporal Presence of Christ.

2. That the adoration allowed and practiced in the Church of England, is of a
very different nature from the worship of Images. For, (as I have fully made it
appear in the State of the Controversy) the Church of Rome does by the Decrees
of Councils, require Religious worship to be given to Images; and that those
who assert this inferior worship do yet declare it to be truly Religious
worship, and that the Images themselves are the Object of it: (whereas our
Church declares point blank the contrary) nay, that those Persons are looked on
by the Generality of Divines in the Roman Church, as suspected at least, if not
condemned of Heresy, who practice all the external acts of adoration to
Images, but yet do not in their minds look on them as Objects, but only as
Occasions of Worship, which make the difference so plain in these two cases,
that T. G. himself could not but discern it.

But to remove all scruple from men's minds, that suspect this practice to be
too near the Idolatrous worship, which we reject in the Roman Church, I shall
consider it not only as to its Object (which is the main thing, and which I
have showed to be the proper Object of worship, viz. God himself, and nothing
else) but as to the nature of the act, and the local circumstance of doing it
toward the Altar. 1. As to the nature of the act, so it is declared to be an
act of external adoration of God; which I shall prove from Scripture to be a
lawful and proper act of Divine Worship. I might prove it from the general
consent of Mankind, who have expressed their Reverence to the Deity by acts of
external adoration, from whence I called it a natural act of Reverence, but I
rather choose to do it from Scripture; and that, both before the Law had
determined so punctually the matters of Divine Worship, and under the Law by
those who had the greatest regard to it; and under the Gospel, when the
spiritual nature of its doctrine would seem to have superseded such external
acts of worship. 1. Before the Law, I instance in Abraham's servant; because
Abraham is particularly commended for his care in instructing his Household to
keep the way of the Lord in opposition to Heathen Idolatry, Genesis 18.19.
and this was the Chief Servant of his House, of whom it is said three times in
one Chapter, That he bowed his head worshipping the Lord; the Hebrew words
signify, Genesis 24.26, 48, 52.
and he inclined and bowed himself to the Lord; for the word we translate
worship does properly signify to bow, and both the Jews and others say, It
relates to some external act of the body, Pet. Picherell. de Imag. p. 225.
whereby we express our inward Reverence or Subjection to another. So it is
said of the People of Israel, when they heard that the Lord intended to deliver
them out of Egypt, They bowed their heads and worshipped; Exodus 4.31.
when Moses declared the Institution of the Passover to all the Elders of
Israel, it is said again, The People bowed their heads and worshipped. 12.27.
2. Under the Law; when they were so strictly forbidden in the same words to
bow down or worship any Image or similitude; yet the outward act of adoration
toward God was allowed and practiced. So Moses commanded Aaron and the seventy
Elders of Israel to bow themselves a far off; the very same word which is used
in the second Commandment. 24.1.
And when God had so severely punished the Israelites for bowing to the Golden
Calf; yet when He appointed the Pillar of Fire for the Symbol of His own
presence, 22.8.
it is said, That when all the People saw the Cloudy Pillar stand at the
Tabernacle door, they rose up and bowed themselves every man in his Tent-door.
33.10.
When God appeared to Moses, it is said, That he made have and bowed his head
toward the earth and worshipped. 34.8.
And when Moses and Aaron came to the door of the Tabernacle of the
Congregation, they are said to fall upon their faces. Numb. 20.6.
In the time of David, upon his solemn thanksgiving to God it is said, 1 Chronicles.
29.20.
All the Congregation blessed the Lord God of their Fathers, and bowed down
their heads, and worshipped the Lord and the King. And in the time of Hezekiah,
2 Chronicles. 29.29.
When they had made an end of offering, the King and all that were present with
him bowed their heads and worshipped. 3. Under the Gospel; we are to observe
the difference between the same external act of worship, when it was used
toward Christ and toward His Apostles. When the Syrophoenician woman came to
our Savior, in one place it is said, She worshipped Him; and in another,
Matthew. 15.25.
That she fell at His feet; but in no place is there the least mention of any
check given to her or any others, Mark 7.25.
who after that manner worshipped Christ: But when Cornelius came to S. Peter,
Acts 10.25, 26.
and fell down at his feet and worshipped him, he would by no means permit it,
but said, Stand up, I my self also am a man: Revel. 19.10.22.9.
And when S. John fell down at the feet of the Angel, he would not suffer it,
but bade him worship God. That which I observe from hence is, that even under
the Gospel the external acts of Religious adoration are proper and peculiar to
God, so that men are to blame when they give them to any Creature, but no
Persons are condemned for giving them to God. And I desire those who scruple
the lawfulness of giving to God such external adoration under the Gospel, how
they can condemn those for Idolatry, who give it to any Creature, if it be not
a thing which does still belong to God?

But if all the scruple be about the directing this Adoration, one way more
than another, I say still it is done in conformity with the Primitive Church,
as our Canon declares, and which every one knows, did worship toward the East;
and this at the most is but a local circumstance of an Act of Worship, which I
have already showed to be very different from an Object of it, when I
discoursed of the Nature of the Israelites worshipping toward the Ark and the
Cherubims.

Thus, through the Assistance of God, I have gone through all the material
points of T. G's Book, which relate to the General Nature of Idolatry; and have
diligently weighed and considered every thing that looks like a difficulty in
this Controversy about the Worship of Images, and do here sincerely protest,
that I have not given any Answer, or delivered any Opinion which is not
agreeable not only to the inward sense of my Mind, but to the best of my
understanding to the sense of Scripture, and the Primitive Church, and the
Church of England. And if the subtilties of T. G. could have satisfied me, or
any other Argument I have met with, I would as freely have retracted this
Charge of Idolatry, as I ever made it. For I do not love to represent others
worse than they are; but I daily pray to God to make both my self and others
better: and therein I know I have the hearty concurrence of all who are truly
Good.

FINIS.

