Christian Magnanimity. A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL CHURCH AT WORCESTER
AT THE Time of the Assizes. September 21. 1690. By the Right Reverend Father in
GOD, EDWARD Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortclocke at the Phoenix in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1690.

To my Honored Friends, ROBERT BERKELY, Esquire High Sheriff of the County of
WORCESTER, AND The Gentlemen of the Grand Jury.
Gentlemen,
IT is at Your Request, that I Publish this Sermon, which You were Pleased to
think might be Useful to others, as well as to those who heard it. And I could
not deny the First Request that was made to me by the Gentlemen of this
Country, in which I have found so much Civility and Kindness. I thank God, I
came hither with no other Intention but to do as much Good as I could; and I
hope I shall always pursue that Design with a sincere and vigorous Mind, as far
as I have Health and Opportunity. I thought I could not do my Duty at this
time, without Representing the Evil and Mischief of some very unseasonable
Heats and Animosities, among those who pretend to the same Common Interest, as
to Religion and Laws, which are the most certain Standard of our Public Good;
and none, but such as are Enemies to it, can understand it otherwise.

May God Almighty Bless this Country and the Whole Nation, with a hearty Zeal
and Concernment for it.

I am, Gentlemen, Your Faithful Servant for the best Ends, E. WIGORN.
Worcester, Sept. 23* 1690.
A SERMON Preached at The Assizes AT WORCESTER, September 21. 1690.
2 TIMOTHY I. 7. For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, and
of Love and of a Sound Mind.
IF we look into the Scope and Design of this Epistle, we shall find S. Paul at
the time of writing it, under more than ordinary Apprehensions of the sad
Condition of the Christian Church.

As to Himself, he had great Satisfaction in the particular Care of Divine
Providence toward Him: 2 Timothy iij. 11.
For, God had not only formerly delivered him out of many Persecutions; but
had lately Rescued him out of the Mouth of the Lion, Chapter iv. 17.
i. e. from a great and imminent Danger. And though he foresaw, that the time
of his Departure was at hand; Chapter iv. 6.
yet that was so far from giving him any Trouble, that he had the Comfort of a
Good Conscience in looking back; I have fought a good fight, I have finished my
course, Verse. 7.
I have kept the faith; and in looking forward, Verse. 8.
Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the Lord
the righteous Judge shall give me at that Day.

But all his Dissatisfaction did arise from looking about him; For without were
Fightings, and within were Fears. The Persecutions abroad were indeed so sharp
and severe, that none could keep a Good Conscience without a share in them;
which makes him say, Yea, and all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall
suffer Persecutions. Verse. 12.
But this was not that which troubled him most; for there were two things which
seem to have made a deep and sad Impression upon his Mind.

(1.) He observed a great Coldness and Indifferency among some who pretended a
mighty Zeal for the common Interest of their Religion before. Of this he gives
a strange Instance in his own Case. At my first Answer, Chapter iv. 16*
says he, no man stood with me, but all men forsook me; I pray God it be not
laid to their Charge. They might think it Prudence and Caution at such a
dangerous time, but the Apostle certainly thought it a fault, or else he would
never have prayed that it might not be laid to their Charge. Something might be
said in Excuse of those who were so near danger; but what can be said for the
general Coldness of those at a Distance? Chapter i. 15.
This thou know, that all they which are in Asia be turned away from me. A
sad Consideration to Timothy, who was entrusted by him with the particular Care
of those in Asia! For, what Comfort could he hope for among them, who were
turned away from S. Paul? Such a Defection as this must needs bring great
dishonor to Religion, as well as dissatisfaction to him.

(2.) He observed a busy sort of Seducers, who were crept in among them; who
were crafty, restless and designing Men; such as could not compass their own
ends without taking upon them a pretense of Zeal for Religion. They were Men of
as ill Tempers as we can well imagine Men to be; Chapter iij. 1, 2, 3, 4.
They were lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, etc. But he
concludes their Character with what one would have least expected from such a
sort of Men, Verse. 5.
that they had a Form of Godliness. They were such painted Sepulchers that made
a more than ordinary Show and Appearance, but within there was nothing but
Rottenness and Corruption. Men who pretended to Religion without Virtue; and
hoped to be accounted Godly without any real Goodness. They made a great Show
of Zeal about some things, and were industrious in gaining Proselytes; for
which end they crept into Houses, etc. but whatever they pretended, their own
Interest lay at bottom; Supposing that gain is Godliness; 1 Timothy vj. 5.
and they were so far from any hopes of Amendment, that S. Paul gives that
dreadful character of them, that they waxed worse and worse, 2 Timothy iij. 13.
deceiving and being deceived.

And what now should Timothy do under such a Complication of ill Circumstances?
Should he only stand still and see which way things would go? Or should he
give way to Despondency and sink under the Burden of his Fears? No, S. Paul,
although at a Distance, and a Prisoner, yet thinks fit to Rouse, to Animate, to
Encourage him; and not only to put him in Mind of the Gift of God which was in
him; 2 Timothy i. 6.
but of that Spirit and Temper, which true Christianity possesses men's minds
with.

For God has not given us the Spirit of Fear, but of Power, of Love and of a
Sound Mind.

Which words may be considered Two ways:

I. With Respect to Difficulties and Troubles in the World; and so it is not a
Spirit of Fear, but of Power. Some render it Spiritum Timiditatis, a timorous,
pusillanimous Spirit; which is apt to be dejected with Fears, so as not to have
Courage and Resolution enough to do ones Duty for fear of Danger; and a Spirit
of Power is that which supports and bears up the Mind under a Prospect of
Difficulties, so as not to be hindered thereby from that Duty which lies upon
us.

II. With Respect to the Humors and Passions of Men; and so it is a Spirit of
Love and of a Sound Mind: Not a peevish, froward, exasperating, provoking
Spirit, but a Spirit of Love; Not a turbulent, seditious, unruly Spirit, but of
a Sound Mind.

I. With Respect to Difficulties and Troubles. Which may be understood Two ways:

1. As it may relate to such as S. Paul and Timothy; We have not received, i.
e. we that have an Apostolical Spirit given to us.

2. As it may relate to all Christians; We that own Christ sincerely and truly
have not received, etc.

(1.) I shall consider the Words with Respect to the Apostolical Spirit;
because this day we commemorate one of them, (S. Matthew.)

Those who had the Apostolical Office committed to them, (whether Primarily by
Christ himself, or Secondarily by the Apostles, as Timothy and Titus and
others) had great need of this Apostolical Spirit. For, really, the
Difficulties were so great, which they were to go through, that no ordinary
Measures of Courage and Resolution would serve them. When men fight with
Enemies in the open Field, there is a Multitude combined together; among whom
there is abundance of Noise and Heat and Examples; and the Hopes of Present
Victory, and the Shame and Danger of running away; which animate Persons in a
Day of Battle: but it is another kind of Courage which is required to make men
bear up against the Malice and Subtilty of the Devil and of Wicked Men; for
here the Combination is to all appearance much stronger on the Worse side; and
if we are to Judge of Success by Numbers, those who promote Virtue and Goodness
could never bear up against their Adversaries; who were sure to carry it by the
Poll.

There were among the Heathens some few Great Men, who endeavored to Reform
the Vices of Mankind: but, alas! what poor Success had they in their Attempts
this way? Although they wanted neither Wit, nor Learning, nor Address to carry
on this Noble Design; such as Socrates at Athens and Epictetus at Rome, and
some others, who lived agreeably to their Doctrine; yet how little Effect had
both their Precepts and Example on the rest of the People either at Athens or
Rome? Socrates declared a mighty Resolution rather to die than to say or do any
thing unbecoming the Station God placed him in; and upon the Prosecution of two
malicious Men, the prevailing Party were resolved to try the Experiment, and
took him at his Word. After which, his Disciples durst not deal so plainly and
openly as he had done; and the Artifice they were put to, lost the force of the
best Part of their Philosophy; which they so mixed with Numbers and Figures and
Abstracted Speculations, that it became a Mystery, instead of a plain Design to
Reform the Manners of Men. The best and wisest of them seem to have taken more
pains to Satisfy themselves, than to have Instructed others; or if they did,
they were some few chosen Disciples, whom they initiated with as much Care, as
they were wont to do in their Solemn Mysteries.

But the Apostles undertook to Reform the World, as to two things, which
Mankind are the hardest brought off from, and those are Idolatry and Vice. And
they went plainly and roundly to Work, which men can the least bear; as we see
by the Persecutions they underwent almost in every Place as soon as their Design
was understood. There was a general Clamor against them as the Disturbers of
Mankind, Act. xvij. 6.
as those who turned the World upside down; which in some Sense was true, but
not as they meant it with Respect to Order and Government. But when Men have no
mind to be Reformed, they must have some Terms of Reproach to fasten upon those
who go about to do it. It being Natural for them to put Pictures of Devils on
those, whom they have a Mind to Execute. And when they undeavour'd to Convince
them of their Immoralities, they were very Impatient; of which we have a clear
Instance in S. Paul's Preaching to Felix concerning Righteousness and
Temperance and Judgment to come: Act. xxiv. 25.
which were excellent Subjects, but they went too near him; he was too much
concerned, to be willing to hear any more of them. The Discourse of S. Paul had
too much Force in it for him to bear it any longer; for it caused such a
disorder in his Mind as affected his Body, for, Felix trembled: And then he
thought it best to dismiss him to a more convenient Season, which never came,
that we read of. Which shows, how much more willing men are to continue in
their Faults, than to hear them reproved in order to Amendment. Gal. iv. 16*
Am I therefore become your Enemy, says S. Paul, because I tell you the Truth?
No doubt of it: For, no Truths can be so uneasy and provoking as those which
gaul the Consciences of men.

The false Teachers whom S. Paul complains so much of, were sensible of the
Inconveniences which followed Plain Truth; and therefore, to avoid
Persecution, they so mixed and adulterated the Doctrine of the true Apostles,
that it lost its main Force and Efficacy. And although by their shifts and
compliances with Jews and Gentiles, they escaped the hard Usage which others
underwent; yet the Effect of it was, that their Doctrine took no deep rooting
in the World: For, in Origen's time, a very inconsiderable Number of their
Disciples were left. But though the plain Simplicity of the Gospel met with
Persecutions on all hands; yet by the undaunted Courage of the Preachers of it,
the more it was opposed, the more it prevailed; and at last triumphed over its
greatest Persecutors.

(2.) These Words may be understood with Respect to all Christians; and so they
show what the Temper and Spirit of Christianity is, where it has its due and
proper Effect upon men's Minds.

The Moralists speak much of an excellent Virtue, which they call Magnanimity:
which implies such a Greatness of Mind, that it carries a man on in doing what
becomes him, without being discouraged by the Fears of what may befall him in
it.

And this our Savior does suppose to be so attainable by all his Disciples,
that he requires it from them. Matthew. x. 28.
Fear not them which can kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul; or
Be not afraid of them that kill the Body, Luke xij. 5.
and after that have no more that they can do. i. e. Govern your Fears by the
Consideration of another World and not of this. But is this possible, to be rid
of our Fears as to this World? It may be some Heroical minds may attain to
this; or those on whom God bestows the extraordinary Gifts of his Spirit: but
can any by the common Measures and Assistances of Grace reach to it? Fear is a
Natural and Violent Passion; which is not easily dissembled, much less cured;
and the weaker any are, as to mind or body, the more they are subject to the
Power of it. There are some Constitutions by Reason of their dark and confused
and melancholy Apprehensions of things, can never get out of the Labyrinth of
their own Fears. And where Suspicions and Jealousies find an easy
entertainment, it is not possible to cure such Persons Fears; for they are
afraid of all possible things. Such I must exclude as laboring under a Disease
of Imagination; as we do those who are under a Fever; And for whose
Unreasonable Fears I know no better Cure than there is of Madness, which is to
bring the Persons to the Use of Reason as well as we can; and if Reason does
not cure them, nothing else will.

But let us suppose the Fears Reasonable, i. e. such as considering the State
of the World a Prudent man may justly apprehend; is it not possible to master
these Fears? Not to Cure our Apprehension when it is Reasonable, but to take
Care, that it do not torment and disquiet our Minds; but especially that it do
not hinder us from doing our Duty.

And this is that Spirit of Christian Magnanimity which I design to speak of;
and to make the matter as clear as I can; I shall,

(1.) Enquire into those things which the Nature of Magnanimity requires in
general.

(2.) Show the particular Measures of it according to Christianity.

(3.) Consider the Possibility of attaining it, and the Means in order to it.

(1.) As to Magnanimity in general; It is not so much any one Virtue, as a
Result from several put together; and especially these,

(1.) Integrity of Mind: Which implies these things.

1. A Freedom from any mean and sinister Ends in what we do. (...). Arist. de
Virt. and Vitiis.
Aristotle, who considered the Nature of Moral Virtues, as well as any man,
says, there can be no Magnanimity without Simplicity and Truth. Itaque Viros
fortes, magnanimos, eosdemque bonos and simplices, veritatis amicos, minimeque
fallaces esse volumus. Off. l. 1.
And Cicero says, Men of Courage and Magnanimity, are men of Simplicity and
Truth, and not given to Tricks. It is the Sense of its own Weakness which
disposes any Living Creature to Craft and Cunning: The Lion knows his own
strength and despises it; the Fox is sensible he has not strength enough for
his own Security, and therefore tries all other ways to compass his End. A
Spirit of Magnanimity is above all little Arts and Shifts, which tend only to
some mean and pitiful end, not worthy to be regarded. Men of Artifice and
Design may think it Weakness and Folly; but it is really a Greatness of Mind
which makes a Good and Wise Man despise such things as unbecoming that true
Greatness which lies in a Generous Integrity: which cunning men can no more
reach to, even when they affect it, than an Actor upon a Stage can the true
Greatness of a Prince.

2. Sincere and unaffected Goodness. Which is that, Nicom. l. 4. c. 3.
which Aristotle calls (...), and makes absolutely necessary to Magnanimity.
The first thing in the Character of a Good Man among the Moralists is, that he
be inwardly so; not taking upon him the Appearance and Show of Virtue for the
sake of others; but forming his Mind and Temper according to the Principles and
Rules of it. And when he has done this, the whole Course of his Actions will
be agreeable thereto: he will not only be just and temperate, but kind and
obliging, ready to do Good to all, according to his Circumstances; and behaving
himself under all, as becomes a Good Man.

(2.) There must not only be Integrity, but Courage and Resolution; without
which, in difficult times, it is impossible to maintain Integrity. I do not by
this mean any sudden and violent Heats, which rather show the Greatness of the
Passions than of the Mind; but a calm and sedate Courage, which exceeds the
other, as a man of true Valor does one that is rash and foolhardy. The latter
may do bolder things than the other; but none of the Moralists allow it to be
true Fortitude; for that must be guided by Reason and Discretion. The bold and
daring man never considers what he does; but he is carried on by a sudden and
violent Impetus, or such an agitation of Spirits, that suffer him not to Think;
but on he goes, and if he meets with Success, it is more owing to his Passion
and Heat, than to his Wisdom or Courage. Violent and furious Heats (although
under a pretense of Zeal for Religion) are like the furious Onsets of
undisciplined Soldiers, which do more Mischief by their want of Order, than
they do Good by unseasonable Courage. True Courage must be a Regular thing; it
must have not only a Good End, but a wise choice of Means; and then the
Courage lies in the vigorous Pursuit of it: not being disheartened by
difficulties, nor giving over through despondency or disappointments.

(3.) There must be an Indifferency of Mind, as to the Event of doing our Duty.
Not a perfect Indifferency, which human Nature is hardly capable of; but such
as keeps a man's mind firm and constant so as not to be moved from the Dictates
of a well-satisfied Conscience by the Motives of this World. It was a
remarkable saying of Socrates, which Antoninus takes notice of, Antonin. l. 7..
44.
That man, says he, is of no value, who regards any thing so much as doing his
Duty. It is not whether a man lives or dies, but whether what he does be just
or unjust, whether it becomes a Good man to do it, or not, which he is to look
after.

If thou can not find any thing in Life, l. 3.. 3.
says that excellent Emperor himself, better than Justice and Truth, a sound
Mind ((...) the word here used) and a discreet Courage; then make this thy
great business and apply thy self to it with all thy heart. Let neither popular
Applause, nor Power, nor Riches, nor Sensual Pleasure draw thee off front it.
Choose that which is best and pursue it, (...) with simplicity of mind and the
free Inclination of thy will.

But the Roman Orator goes beyond them, when he says, Off. l. 1.
that Nothing argues so mean and narrow a mind, as the Love of Riches; nothing
savours more of a great Mind, than to contemn them; and if Men enjoy them to
bestow them in Beneficence and Liberality. And again,

To value Justice and Honesty and Kindness and Liberality above Pleasure and
Riches and Life it self, and the Common Good above ones private Interest,
argues a truly Great Mind, and is most agreeable to human Nature.

These things I have mentioned, not only to clear the Nature of Magnanimity;
but to show what generous Notions these Heathens had concerning the Practice of
Virtue and Integrity, even when it was accompanied with Losses and Hardships
for the sake of it; and what a mean Esteem they had in Comparison of that great
Idol, which the World still worships, i. e. Riches.

(2.) I now come to show the true Measures of Magnanimity according to the
Christian Doctrine. And that consists in two things:

1. In studying to Please God above all things.

2. In choosing rather to Suffer than to Displease him.

1. In studying to Please God above all things. Mor. l. 4. c. 3.
Aristotle has observed that Magnanimity has a particular Respect to Honor:
the Question then is, whether it relates to what gets Esteem and Honor among
Men; or, to that Honor which comes from God. It Is true, the Heathen Moralists
knew very little of this; l. 10.
although Aristotle once mentions the Kindness which God has for Persons of
the most excellent and virtuous Minds, as being nearest of Kindred to the Gods.
But this was not settled as a Principle among them; but it is the Foundation of
all true Religion with us, that our main Care ought to be to Please God, and to
value other things as they are most pleasing to him. The most Refined Atheists
of this Age confess, that the Doctrine of the Prophets and Apostles is very
Pious and Virtuous; although they look on them as deceived in their
Imaginations. We take what they grant, viz. that the Morals of Christianity are
very Good; but we say, that it is a heightning and improving of Moral Virtues
to make them Divine Graces; and not to practice them merely as agreeable to
Reason, but as Pleasing to God. Those who allow a God, who is wise and
Powerful, do confess, that no Sacrifices are so pleasing to him, as a Pious,
devout and virtuous Mind: but then they were to seek, as to the Measures of
Piety and Virtue. But that is the Infinite Advantage by the Scriptures, which
we enjoy, that by them we know what is most pleasing to God. He has showed
thee, O Man, Mic. vj. 8.
what is Good, and what has the Lord required of thee; but to do justly, and
to love Mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God. When God shows us our Duty,
we have no longer any ground to dispute it; especially, when it is so agreeable
to the Divine Nature, and our own. What can we do better with Respect to
Mankind, than to do justly and to love Mercy? What can become us more with
Respect to God, than to walk humbly with our God? To walk with God, is to have
a constant Regard to him in the Course of our Lives; thus Enoch walked with
God, and Noah and Abraham: and to walk humbly with him, is to maintain a due
Sense of our Distance from him and our Dependence upon him. And this Humility
of Mind does not take off from true Magnanimity; for, it is the Magnanimity of
Christians that I am speaking of. The Magnanimity of Philosophers carried them
beyond the due bounds of their Dependence upon God; for they presumed upon
their own Sufficiency, both as to the support of their Minds under Difficulties
and the making themselves happy. In both which they were lamentably mistaken.
But the Humility of Christians in depending upon God for Assistance and
Happiness is so far from being inconsistent with Magnanimity, that it is not to
be had without it. Phil. iv. 13.
For, says S. Paul, I can do all things. Can any thing be said greater than
that? But how? Through Christ which strengthens me. And this Dependence upon
God for his Grace is no more inconsistent with Magnanimity, than a Favorites
Greatness is with his Duty and Service to his Prince. The Christians
Magnanimity lies in having but one to please; but such a one, as is the
Greatest, the Wisest, the Happiest Being in the World.

2. But if he cannot Please God and the World together, then this Magnanimity
carries him rather to choose suffering under the World's Displeasure, than to
displease God. This seems a hard choice; but there would be no Magnanimity
without Difficulty. It may please God, that our Duty and Interest may lie
together, and then it is Folly and Humor to choose to suffer when we need not.
Where there is true Magnanimity in Suffering, there is an impartial and prudent
weighing and ballancing all Circumstances together, before there can be a just
Resolution of Suffering. And a man's Courage in suffering depends very much upon
the Motives induced him to it; which every Man's Conscience must judge of.

But there are two sorts of Sufferings Magnanimity may show it self in:

(1.) The Necessary and unavoidable Accidents and Calamities of Life.

(2.) The Voluntary preferring a suffering Condition rather than sinning
against God.

(1.) As to the Common Accidents of Life. It is observed by the Moralists,
Aristot. Mor. l. 3. c. 12. Aug. 83. q. 36.
that it is a harder thing to bear things that are troublesome, than to abstain
from things that are pleasant: the Sense of Pain and Suffering being much more
uneasy, than the forbearing what is delightful; which is only crossing a
Natural Inclination. And though many Persons choose rather to yield to their
vicious Inclinations than to avoid the Pains and Diseases which follow them;
yet that is because they look on them as uncertain and at a Distance, and hope
they may escape them.

But when it is certain and present, human Nature is very tender and sensible
of Pain and shrinks from it; and requires inward Courage to support it self
under it. It is observed by the Roman Orator, that a peculiar kind of Courage
is necessary for suffering Pains and Diseases; for many that have been brave
men in the Field, yet could not viriliter aegrotare, behave themselves like Men
when they came to be sick. The Truth is, all Mankind abhor suffering so much,
that one of the great Inducements to the study of Morality of old, was to find
out some Antidotes against the Common Accidents of Life.

For they soon found there were some Sufferings incident to human Nature, which
all the Art and Skill of the Wisest Men could never prevent. Our Bodies are
continually subject to Pains, to Diseases, to Corruption and Dissolution. Our
Estates to Violence, Fraud and Misfortune. Our Houses and Cities to Flames, to
Earthquakes, to Inundations. Our Friends and Relations are all liable to the
same Calamities with our Selves, and that makes our Trouble the greater.

What now should Wise Men do? Can they hope to stem the Tide, and to turn back
the Stream? No, that is too violent for them. Can they raise any Banks or
Sea-Walls against them to keep them out? All such are vain and fruitless. What
then? Shall they strip themselves of all the Comforts of Life, that they may
leave nothing to Misfortune? So some did, to no great purpose, unless they
could shake off their Passions too. But this does not look like Magnanimity,
but Cowardice; not overcoming an Enemy, but running away from him. By the same
Method, they must go naked to avoid Robbery; and live on the Tops of Mountains
to escape a Deluge.

But some thought these things looked most terrible at a Distance; whereas if
they considered how common they were, they would learn to bear them better. But
Carneades said well, Malevoli animi Solatium est turba miserorum; it is a kind
of ill-natured Comfort which one draws from the commoness of Calamities. And
after all, it is no real Satisfaction to a man's mind, to think that so many
suffer as he does; it is like the unnatural Pleasure of Revenge, which one man
takes in another Pain.

There is one thing it serves well for, and that is to show the Folly of great
Impatience under such things which the rest of Mankind bear. Thus Julian in his
Epistle to Amerius relates a Story of Democritus his dealing with Darius upon
the loss of his beloved Wife. Epist. 37.
After several ineffectual Ways of comforting him; at last he asked him,
whether bringing her to Life would not put an End to his Grief? No doubt of it.
But how should this be done? Let me alone for that, said the Philosopher, if
you will provide me all the things I shall desire in order to it. After great
Care taken in providing many things for him, Darius asked him if he had all he
wanted? No, said he; there is one thing more I must have, and you are the most
likely Person to furnish me with it. In short, you must get me three Names to
be put upon her Monument of such Persons who have gone to their Graves without
Sorrow or Trouble; and You, said he, have very large and populous Dominions,
and no doubt if such a thing be to be had, you can procure it. Darius was
struck with this, and after some consideration said, he doubted he could not.
Why then, said the Philosopher smiling, Are not You ashamed to be guilty of so
much Folly as to be so exceedingly cast down under such a Calamity, as though
you were the only Person in the World that underwent it? This was agreeable
enough to his Humor in Exposing the Folly of Mankind; which was a Subject
large enough for his whole Life; but he was too pleasant upon it.

I do not deny but the Moralists did find out some very Useful Considerations
to bear men up under the Common Accidents of Life; but those of greatest
Moment, were such as are much improved by Christianity; viz. the Wisdom of
Providence, the Usefulness of Trials, the Benefit of Patience, and the
Expectation of a better State.

(2.) As to Voluntary and chosen Sufferings. We have in Scripture several
extraordinary Instances of this kind of Magnanimity; such was Abraham's leaving
his Kindred and Country and going he knew not whither on God's Command, and his
readiness to Sacrifice his Son; which argued an entire Sacrifice of himself to
the Will of God. Such was Moses his Choosing rather to suffer Affliction with
the People of God than to enjoy the Pleasures of Pharaoh's Court. Such was the
Son of God's choosing to suffer for our sakes, with admirable Resignation to
the Divine Will; and praying for his Persecutors under the greatest Agonies on
the Cross. Such was the Apostles Resolution and Courage, when they rejoiced to
be accounted worthy to suffer for the sake of Christ; when they were more than
Conquerors in the midst of Persecutions. And truly the Magnanimity of
Suffering rather than Sinning, was never so much shown to the World as in the
Case of the Primitive Christians. There were some few Heroic Instances of
Suffering for Truth among the Heathens; but they were no more to be compared
with the Numerous Examples of the Primitive Church than the Miracles of the
Vestal Virgins were with those of the Apostles.

It could not but amaze the common sort of Spectators of Rome, who were wont to
see the Gladiators, (who were either hired or condemned to that Cruel
Entertainment of others with their blood) to behold a sort of Grave and Serious
Persons expose themselves to so much Torment and Cruelty, when so small a
matter as burning a little Incense would set them free. This was a New
Spectacle to the World, and it could not but put them upon thinking what
strange sort of Philosophy this was, which inspired ordinary Persons with such
a Magnanimity in suffering. They had never found those who pretended to
Philosophy among them very fond of Suffering for the Doctrine they taught. They
rather liked the Example of Aristotle than Socrates; who when the People of
Athens were enraged against him, withdrew to Chalcis; and when he was upbraided
with it, made a witty Excuse, that he had no mind the City of Athens should sin
twice against Philosophy. Whereas the Christians were so forward to suffer for
their Doctrine, that it was imputed as a Fault to them; and it appears by
Tertullian that some out-went the bounds of Christianity in offering themselves
too freely to it. Tertull. ad Scap.
This made such as Antoninus and others impute all their Sufferings to an
invincible Obstinacy and a sort of Madness which possessed them: Antonin. l.
11.. 3.
which had been easily confuted, Arrian. l. 4. c. 7.
if they would have had the Patience to have examined the Reasons and Grounds
of their Religion, as they did the peculiar Doctrines of the several Sects of
Philosophers. But this is not all which Christian Magnanimity does imply; for
it is not only a Spirit of Power, but of Love and of a Sound Mind. And so it
has

II. A Respect to the Humors and Passions of Men. And truly, there is such a
Variety and Uncertainty in them; so much Folly and Mistake; so much Prejudice
and Peevishness in some; so much Wilfulness and Stiffness in others; so little
Regard to the true Interests of Religion and Virtue, under all the pretenses to
it; that those who sincerely desire to promote them had need of Magnanimity to
bear them up against such Humors and Distempers of Men's Minds. Aristotle has
well observed that Magnanimity does go beyond the Consideration of Dangers.
Mor. l. 4. c. 3.
It makes a man more ready to do Kindnesses than to receive them; and to forget
Injuries. I add, and to forgive them; for else, it is rather want of Memory,
than Magnanimity. It is well he adds one thing, viz. that he that has
Magnanimity is (...), Contented within himself; so he had need to be; for he
will find very little Satisfaction abroad, especially in an Age when Sincerity
is almost lost: when men have used themselves to so much Hypocrisy and
Dissimulation with God and Man, that they can zealously pretend to Love what
they would be glad to Ruin, and cry up Peace and Unity only to get an
Opportunity to destroy them. But still true Magnanimity keeps a Man's own mind
at Ease, and makes him to govern himself, as the same Philosopher observes,
with due Temper and Moderation in all things. Such a one is not only Easy to
himself, but to all others, as far as is consistent with his Duty. For a Mind
truly Great, has nothing of Bitterness, or Sowreness; Peevishness, or Ill
Will to the rest of Mankind. All Malice and Cruelty argue a Mean and Base
Spirit. The more noble and generous any Tempers are, the more tender and
compassionate they are, the more ready to oblige, the more easy to forgive,
the more willing to be Reconciled.

But to be more particular, there are two things implied in this Spirit of Love
and of a Sound Mind.

(1.) The making all Reasonable Allowances for the Infirmities of others. It
makes men to consider the Prejudices of Education; the Variety and Weakness of
most men's Judgments; the Power of Persuasion; the Bias of Parties; and the
Shame and Reproach which Persons undergo that break off from them, after they
have been once ensnared by them. On these Accounts it makes them rather Pity
than Triumph over the Follies of Mankind. There are two things which a Great
Mind does most abhor in Religion, and are most directly contrary to a Spirit of
Love and a Sound Mind; and these are Hypocrisy and Cruelty; which make men
false to God, and Enemies to Mankind. These two often go together; and although
they are masked under a pretense of Religion, yet there are no two things more
opposite to the true Spirit and Design of it. S. John concludes that man to
have no true Love to God who does not love his Brother. 1 John iv 20.
He that loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he
has not seen? And we may argue the other way; If a man does not Love God, how
can he love his Brother? When the Love of God is the best Foundation for
Charity and Kindness to our Brethren; who were at first made after the Image of
God, and have it again renewed in them by the Power of Divine Grace in
Righteousness and true Holiness. Ephesians. iv. 24.
And even where that does not appear, yet there is a Tenderness and Compassion
due to Mankind, as far as is consistent with the Order and Government of the
World.

(2.) The Spirit of Love and of a Sound Mind, consists in laying aside private
Animosities and Heats for a Public and General Good. That is a thing too great
and too sacred, to be exposed and ridiculed, as though it were only a Popular
pretense for Faction and Sedition. Whereas Nothing is more directly opposite to
it; for therefore it is called Faction and Sedition, because it is against it.
If it has been abused by men of ill Minds, so have the best things in the
World; but they do not lose their Nature and Excellency by it. If there be not
such a thing as a Common Good, whence comes any Man's Obligation to preserve
Order and Government, and to seek the Safety and Welfare of his Country,
although it may be to the hazard of his own Life? If there be such a thing, it
deserves our Regard in the first Place, and we ought to lay aside all
Prejudices, and mutual Animosities and the Interests of particular Parties, and
heartily to promote that which is our true Common Interest, as we are English
Men and Protestants of the Church of England; which is a great and considerable
Part of the Christian Church, and the Chief of the Reformation. It is hard for
any not to see that the whole Protestant Interest lies at Stake; and that the
Preservation of it depends very much on our Conduct and Union at this time.

But if we find any to be humoursome and peevish, any to struggle more for the
Interest of a Party to make it uppermost, than for our Common Good, although it
be a very sad Consideration and bodes very ill to us all; yet we have that poor
Comfort left us, that men were as ill disposed even in the Apostles times.
Phil. ij. 21.
For, says S. Paul, (at a time when one would have thought they should have
been much better inclined) All men seek their own, not the things which are
Jesus Christ's. I hope it cannot be said of all now; but I fear it is so true of
too many, that it is one of the worst Symptoms of the present State of our
Affairs. And that which makes it more deplorable is, that some Men have
entertained such Suspicion and Jealousy of each other, that he that goes about
to Reconcile them, instead of making them Friends, is looked on as a common
Enemy. I am afraid there is not Sincerity and Integrity enough left to be a
Foundation for uniting several Parties among us; at least there wants an
Opinion of it. And as long as there are such Mistrusts and Jealousies, the
greatest Integrity is so far useless.

Some learned and good Men have been of late apt to persuade themselves and
others, that the Glorious and Happy times of the Church are coming on; I could
be glad to be of their opinion; for it is a comfortable thing to a man who
travels in an ill Road and with bad Company, whom he is perpetually afraid of,
to see at a distance a pleasant and safe Country, where he shall be rid of his
Fears and Dangers. But I confess, I cannot much please my self with such
thoughts, till I see the Tempers of Men's minds begin to change toward one
another. If I could once see the Spirit of Love and a sound time prevail among
us; If men would be contented to Sacrifice their Humors and Piques to the
Public Interest; in short, if there were any hopes Men would be Wise and Good,
there were then a great Foundation for hope, that all things would be settled
among us, so as to continue for succeeding Generations.

But if Men will persist in their own Wilful Humors; If they had rather all
should perish, than they not compass their own Ends; we need no foreign Enemies
to come in upon us, we shall soon come to that height of Animosity, Gal. v. 15.
as to bite and devour one another; and then it is an easy Inference, that we
shall be consumed one of another. I am far from thinking our Case desperate;
for I hope Men have not lost all their Sense and Zeal for our Common Interest;
but if Men's Heats and Passions increase and grow fiercer, a Man needs not
pretend to Prophecy to foretell what the dreadful Consequence will be.

The true Spirit of Religion seems to be buried in Men's warm Contentions about
it; and some have pretended to a sort of Zeal without Conscience, to Religion
without Faith, and to Scruples without common Honesty.

If ever God designs to do us Good, there must be a great Alteration in Men's
Tempers and Manners. We must have more Sincerity and Integrity among us; the
want of which has caused such a general Mistrust of one another; that if Faith
were to save the Nation, I am afraid there is hardly enough left in it. And it
looks like one of the Symptoms of the Day of Judgment upon us: For, If the Son
of Man should come, he would hardly find Faith upon Earth.

But instead of discoursing of Magnanimity, I am sensible I have run into the
Object and Reason of our Fears. But therefore to conclude all, I shall speak
briefly to the last Particular, which was,

(3.) To consider what Arguments and Means there are to support us against our
Fears; or to attain to that Christian Magnanimity I have been discoursing of.
And there are two great Arguments which Christianity does particularly
recommend to us.

1. Let things go as ill as we can fear in this World; if we are sincere
Christians, there is a far better State to come; to which we shall be admitted
when we are once out of this troublesome and sinful World. There will be no
Hurries and Confusions, no Jealousies and Suspicions, no Piques and
Animosities. The highest Regions of the Air are the most calm and serene; all
the Clouds and Storms and blustering Winds are below and arise from the
Atmosphere. If our Minds were more loose from the World we should be more at
quiet: For, at the bottom, the Considerations of this World make Men so
troublesome in it. It is Honor or Power or Riches which make them so unquiet,
and endeavoring to supplant and undermine one another. If Men could learn to
be content with that which they pretend was all they so long and so impatiently
desired, there might be some hopes of seeing something like Peace and Unity
among us: but if Liberty be thought to signify nothing without Power, it is
Reasonable to suppose that Power will signify nothing, unless it be all in
their own Hands. And what can they imagine the rest of the Nation will do? Will
they suffer an established Church, and such a one as ours is (which I think an
Apostolical Church, as to Doctrine, Worship and Government, if there be any now
in the World) to be run down with the violent Heats of some men, and look on as
wholly unconcerned? They are extremely mistaken in the Temper of the Nation who
think so. But if men will not be quiet, when they have all they pretended to
desire, what can we expect but further Animosities will Discourage our Friends,
Animate our common Enemies, and Expose us all to Confusion, if not to Ruin. If
Men loved this World less and another better, they would be more quiet here,
and be more careful to prepare for that better State. If our Conversation were
in Heaven, as it ought to be, with what Contempt should we look down upon the
busy Designs, the restless Cares, the vain Hopes and the perplexing Fears of
the greatest part of Mankind? Then we should have more Peace and Tranquillity
in our minds while we live, and greater Satisfaction when we come to die. For
Integrity and Innocence will keep us most from giving disturbance to others,
and from finding any in our own Breasts. Pro. i. 23.
Whosoever hearkeneth unto Wisdom, shall dwell safely and shall be quiet from the
Fear of Evil.

2. We are assured that we are under the Constant Care of Divine Providence.
The Tranquillity of our minds in this World depends very much upon the Esteem
we have of Providence and the Trust we repose in God. What makes Children pass
their time without solicitous thoughts about themselves, but the Confidence
they have in the Wisdom and Care of their Parents? What makes Passengers lie
down at rest in a Ship at Sea, but because they trust to the Conduct of their
Pilot? We cannot alter the Methods of Providence by all our Solicitude; God
will govern the World by his own Measures and not by ours. The Government is
his* the duty of Submission is ours. Let us not then be peevish and quarrelsome
at what he does; but make the best Use of any extraordinary Instance of his
Providence which seems to be intended for our Good, unless we turn it another
Way.

But it is not enough to be merely Contented with Providence; but we ought to
be active and useful in our own Places to promote the common Interest; and not
to Repine and Murmr at what is Necessary for the Support of it. Let us not
torment our Selves with fears of what may and what may not happen; but let us
commit our Selves to God in well-doing as to our Creator and Preserver.

FINIS.

