A DISCOURSE In VINDICATION of the Doctrine of the Trinity: WITH An ANSWER To
the Late Socinian Objections Against it from Scripture, Antiquity and Reason.
AND A PREFACE concerning the different Explications of the Trinity, and the
Tendency of the present SOCINIAN Controversy.

By the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward, Lord Bishop of Worcester.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Henry Mortlock at the Phoenix in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1697.

THE PREFACE.
WHen I was desired, not long since, to reprint the Discourse lately published,
concerning the Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction, I thought it necessary to
look into the Socinian Pamphlets, (which have swarmed so much among us within a
few years) to see how far an Answer had been given in them to any of the
arguments contained in it; but I found the Writers of them thought it not for
their purpose to take any notice at all of it; but rather endeavored to turn
the Controversy quite another way, and to cover their true Sense under more
plausible Expressions. Of which I have given a full account in the Preface to
the late Edition of it. But among those Treatises which ^or the general good of
the Nation are gather^d into Volumes and dispersed abroad to make either
Proselytes or Infidels) I found one, wherein there is p^etended to be an Answer
to my Sermon about the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, (reprinted with the
former Discourse*) and therein I meet with a passage, which has given occasion
to this Vindication. For there are these Words, That I had utterly mistaken, in
thinking that they deny the Articl^s of the new Creed, or Athanasian Religion,
because they are Mysteries, or because, say they, we do not comprehend them; we
deny them, because we do comprehend them, we have a clear and distinct
Perception, that they are not Mysteries, but Contradictions, Impossibilities
and pure Nonsense. Which words contain in them so spiteful, so unjust, and so
unreasonable a Charge upon the Christian Church in general, and our own in
particular* that I could not but think my self concerned, especially since they
are addressed to me, to do what in me lay (as soon as my uncertain State of
Health would permit) toward the clearing the fundamental Mystery of the
Athanasian Religion, as they call it, viz. The Doctrine of the Trinity, (which
is chiefly struck at by them) without running into any new Explications, or
laying aside any old terms, for which I could not see any just occasion.

For however thoughtfull Men may think to escape some particular difficulties
better, by going out of the common Roads; yet they may meet with others, which
they did not foresee, which may make them as well as others judge it, at last,
a wiser and safer course to keep in the same way, which the Christian Church
has used, ever since it has agreed to express her Sense in such Terms, which
were thought most proper for that purpose. For in such cases, the Original and
Critical Signification of words is not so much to be attended, as the use they
are applied to, and since no other can be found more significant or proper for
that end; it looks like yielding too great advantage to our Adversaries, to
give up the Boundaries of our Faith. For although there be a difference between
the necessary Article of Faith it self, and the manner of expressing it, so
that those may truly believe the Substance of it, who differ in the
Explication; yet since the Sense of the Article has been generally received
under those terms, there seems to be no sufficient reason to substitute new
ones instead of the old, which can hardly be done, without reflecting on the
Honor of the Christian Church, and giving occasion for very unreasonable Heats
and Disputes, among those, who, if we may believe their own words, agree in the
same fundamental Doctrine; viz. a Trinity in Unity, or three Persons in the
same undivided divine Essence.

I am so little a Friend to any such Heats and Differences among our selves
especially when we are so violently attacked by our common Adversaries, that
were there no other reason, I should for the sake of that alone forbear making
use of new Explications; but there is another too obvious, which is, the mighty
advantage they have taken from hence to represent our Doctrine as uncertain, as
well as unintelligi^le. For as soon as our Unitarians began to appear with that
Briskness and Boldness they have done now for several years, some of our
Divines thought themselves obliged to write in Defense of the Doctrine of the
Trinity. Thence came several Answers to them, and in several Methods, as the
Persons thought most subservient to the same end; but whatever their intentions
were, our Adversaries were too much pleased to conceal the Satisfaction which
they took in it. For soon after, we had the several Explications set forth and
compared with each other; and all managed so, as to make the Cause to suffer by
the disagreement of the Advocates for it. And from hence they have formed a
fivefold Trinity. 1. The Ciceronian Trinity, because Tully had used the Word
Personae for different Respects; Consideraton the Ezplications of the Doctrine
of the Trinity, by Dr. W. etc. p. 10.
Sustineo ego tres Personas; and according to this Acceptance, Three Persons
in the Godhead are no more than three Relations, Capacities or Respects of God
to his Creatures, which say they, is downright Sabellianism: and is no manner
of Mystery, P. 9.
but the most intelligible and obvious thing in the World. 2. The Cartesian
Trinity, which makes three divine Persons, and three infinite Minds, Spirits
and Beings to be but one God. 3. The Platonic Trinity, of three divine
Coeternal Persons, whereof the second and third are subordinate or inferior
to the first in Dignity, Power, and all other Qualities, except only Duration.
4. The Aristotelian Trinity, which says the Divine Persons are one God,
because they have one and the same numerical Substance. 5. The Trinity of the
Mobile, or that which is held by the common People, or by such lazy Divines,
who only say in short, that it is an unconceivable Mystery; and that those are
as much in fault who go about to explain it, as those who oppose it.

But that which has made the most noise, and caused the greatest Heat and
Ferment among us, has been a difference first begun between two learned
Divines of our Church, about the second and fourth; and the account which our
Unitarians give of both is this, P. 13.
That the one is a rational and intelligible Explication, but not true nor
Orthodox; the other is true and Orthodox, but neither rational, intelligible
nor possible. I do not mention this, as though their words were to be taken as
to either; but only to show what advantage they take from both, to represent
that which is set up for the Churches Doctrine, either not to be truly so, or
to be neither rational nor intelligible.

The design of the following Discourse, is to make it appear, (1.) That the
Churches Doctrine, as to the Trinity, as it is expressed in the Athanasian
Creed, is not liable to their charges of Contradiction, Impossibilities and
pure Nonsense. (2.) That we own no other Doctrine than what has been received
by the Christian Church in the several Ages from the Apostles Times: (3.) And
that there are no Objections in point of reason, which ought to hinder our
Assent to this great point of the Christian Faith.

But the chief Design of this Preface, is to remove this Prejudice which lies
in our way from the different manners of Explication, and the warm Disputes
which have been occasioned by them.

It cannot be denied, that our Adversaries have taken all possible advantage
against us from these unhappy differences; and in one of their latest
Discourses they glory in it, and think they have therein outdone the foreign
Unitarians: For, say they, We have showed, Discourse concerning the Real and
Nominal Trinitarians, A. D. 1695, p. 3.
that their Faiths concerning this pretended Mystery are so many and so
contrary, that they are less one Party among themselves, than the far more
learned and greater number of them are one Party with us: this is spoken of
those they call Nominal Trinitarians; and for the other whom they call Real,
they prove them guilty of manifest Heresy; the one they call Sabellians, which
they say is the same with Unitarians, and the other Polytheists or disguised
Pagans, Letter to the Universities, p. 15.
and they borrow arguments from one side to prove the charge upon the other;
and they confidently affirm that all that speak out in this matter, must be
driven either to Sabellianism, or Tritheism. If they are Nominal Trinitarians,
they fall into the former, if Real, into the latter.

This is the whole Design of this late Discourse, which I shall here examine,
that I may remove this stumbling Block, before I enter upon the main business.

1. As to those who are called Nominal Trinitarians. Who are they? And from
whence comes such a Denomination? They tell us, Discourse of Nominal and Real
Trinit. p. 7.
That they are such who believe three Persons, who are Persons in Name only;
indeed and in truth they are but one subsisting Person. But where are these to
be found* Among all such, say they, as agree that there is but one only and
self-same divine Essence and Substance. But do these assert, that there is but
one subsisting Person, and three only in Name? Let any one be produced who has
written in defense of the Trinity; for those who have been most charged, have
utterly denied it That learned Person, who is more particularly reflected upon
in this Charge, P. 10.
is by them said to affirm, That God is one divine intellectual Substance, or
really subsisting Person, and distinguished and diversified by three relative
Modes, or relative Subsistences. And Mr. Hooker is produced to the same
purpose, P. 11.
That there is but one Substance in God, and three distinct rela^ive
Properties, which Substance being taken with its peculiar Property, makes the
distinction of Persons in the Godhead. But say they, These Modes and Properties
do not make any real subsisting Persons; but only in a Grammatical and Critical
Sense, and at most, this is no more than one Man may be said to be three
Persons on the account of different Relations, as Solomon was Son of David,
Father of Rehoboam, and proceeding from David and Bathsheba, and yet was but
one subsisting Person. This is the force of what they say. But then in a
triumphing manner they add, P. 13.
That the Realists have so manifest an advantage against them, that they have
no way to de^end themselves but by Recrimination, i. e. by showing the like
Absurdity in their Doctrine. And thus they hope either side will baffle the
other, and in the mean time, the Cause be lost between them.

But in so nice a matter as this, we must not rely too much on an Adversaries
Representation; for the leaving out some expressions, may make an opinion look
with another Appearance, than if all were taken together, it would have. We
must therefore take notice of other passages which may help to give the true
Sense of the learned Author, who is chiefly aimed at.

1. In the very same Page he asserts, That each of the divine Persons has an
absolute Nature distinctly belonging to him, though not a distinct absolute
Nature; Tritheism charged, etc. p. 157.
and to the same purpose in another place.

Animadvers p. 245.
2. That the eternal Father is and subsists as a Father, by having a Son, and
communicating his Essence to another. And elsewhere, Animadv. etc. p. 243.
that the Relation between Father and Son is founded on that eternal Act, by
which the Father communicates his divine Nature to the Son.

3. That the foundation of the Doctrine of the Trinity is this, Ibid p. 240.
1. That there can be but one God. 2. That there is nothing in God but what is
God. 3. That there can be no Composition in the Deity with any such positive
real Being, distinct from the Deity it self. But the Church finding in
Scripture mention of three, to whom distinctly the Godhead does belong,
expressed these three by the Name of Persons, and stated their Personalities
upon three distinct Modes of Subsistence, allotted to one and the same Godhead,
and these also distinguished from one another by three distinct Relations.

What do these men mean, to charge one who goes upon these grounds with
Sabellianism? Does he make the three Persons to be mere Names, as S. Basil in
few words expresses the true nature of Sabellianism, Basil Ep. 64.
that it was (...), One thing with different Denominations? Can the
communicating the divine Essence by the Father to the Son, be called a Name, or
a Mode, or a Respect only? And these Men of wonderful Subtilty, have not
learnt to distinguish between Persons and Personalities.

Where is the least Intimation given, that he looked on the divine Persons as
Modes and Respects only? That is impossible, since he owns a Communication of
the divine Essence, and that each of the divine Persons has the divine Nature
belonging to him; could it ever enter into any Man's head to think, that he
that owns this should own the other also? But the Personality is a thing of
another consideration. For it is the reason of the distinction of Persons in
the same undivided Nature. That there is a distinction, the Scripture assures
us; and withal, that there is but one divine Essence. How can this distinction
be? Not by essential Attributes, for those must be in the divine Essence, and
in every Person alike, otherwise he has not the entire divine Nature; not by
accidents, as Men are distinguished from each other, for the divine Nature is
not capable of these; not by separate or divided Substances, for that would be
inconsistent with the perfect Unity of the Godhead; since therefore there can
be no other way of distinction, we must consider how the Scripture directs us
i^ this case; and that acquaints us with the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, as
having mutual Relation to each other; and there is no Repugnancy therein to the
divine Nature, and therefore the distinction of the Persons has been fixed on
that, as the most proper foundation for it. And these are called different
Modes of Subsistence, on which the distinct Personalities are founded, which
can be no other than relative. But a Person is that which results from the
divine Nature and Subsistence together; and although a Person cannot be said to
be a relative, considered as such, yet being joined with the manner of
Subsistence, it does imply a Relation, and so a Person may be said to be a
relative Being.

Considerat. on the Explication, p. 23.
But say they, If the three Persons have all the same individual Substance, then
they are truly and properly only three Modes; and therefore a^though among Men,
Personalities are distinct from the Persons, because the Persons are distinct
intelligent Substances, yet this cannot hold where there is but one individual
Substance.

The question is, Whether those they call Nominal Trinitarians, are liable to
the charge of Sabellianism; the answer is, That they cannot, because they
assert far more than three Names, viz. That each Person has the divine Nature
distinctly belonging to him. But say they, Animadv. p. 291.
These Persons are but mere Modes. No, say the other; We do not say that the
Person is only a Modus, but that it is the divine Nature, or Godhead subsisting
under such a Modus, so that the Godhead is still included in it, joined to it,
and distinguished by it. Grant all this, the Unitarians reply, yet where there
is the same individual Substance, the Person can be only a Modus. To which it
is answered, That this individual Substance has three distinct ways of
subsisting, Tritheism charged, p. 306.
according to which it subsists distinctly and differently in each of the three
divine Persons. So that here lies the main point, whether it be Sabelliani^m,
to assert the same individual Substance under three such different Modes of
Subsistence. If it be, the most learned and judicious of the Fathers did not
know what Sabellianism meant (as I have showed at large in the following
Discourse) for they utterly disowned Sabellianism, and yet asserted, Chap. VII.
That the several Hypostases consisted of peculiar Properties in one and the
same divine Substance. But it is not the authority of Fathers which they
regard, for they serve them only as Stones in the Boys way when they quarrel,
viz. to throw them at our Heads.

Let us then examine this matter by reason without them. Persons among Men, say
they, are distinguished from Personalities, because they have distinct
Substances, therefore where there is but one Substance, the Person can be only
a Mode, and therefore the same with the Personality.

I answer, that the true original Notion of Personality is no more than a
different Mode of subsistence in the same common Nature. For every such Nature
is in it self one and indivisible; and the more perfect it is, the greater must
its Unity be. For the first Being is the most One; and all Division comes from
Distance and Imperfection. The first foundation of Distinction is Diversity;
for if there were no Diversity, there would be nothing but entire and perfect
Unity. All Diversity comes from two things, Dissimilitud^ and Dependence. Those
Philosophers (called Megarici) did not think much amiss, who said, That if all
things were alike, there would be but one Substance or Being in the World; and
what we now call different Substances, would be only different Modes of
Subsistence in the same individual Nature. The difference of Substances in
created Beings, arises from those two things. 1. A Dissimilitude of Accidents,
both internal and external. 2. The Will and Power of God, whereby he gives them
distinct and separate Beings in the same common Nature. As for instance, the
Nature or Essence of a Man considered in it self, is but one and indivisible;
but God gives a separate Existence to every Individual, whereby that common
Nature subsists in so many distinct Substances, as there are Individuals of
that kind; and every one of these Substances is distinguished from all others*
not only by a separate internal vital Principle and peculiar Properties, but by
such external Accidents, as do very easily discriminate them from each other.
And the subject of all these Accidents is that peculiar Substance, which God
has given to every Individual, which in rational Beings is called a Person;
and so we grant that in all such created Beings the Personality does suppose a
distinct Substance; not from the Nature of Personality, but from the condition
of the subject wherein it is. The Personality in it self is but a different
Mode of Subsistence in the same common Nature, which is but One: but this
Personality being in such a subject as Man is, it from thence follows* that
each Person has a peculiar Substance of his own; and not from the Nature of
Personality. But when we come to consider a divine Essence, which is most
perfectly one, and is wholly incapable of any separate Existence or Accidents,
there can be no other way of distinction conceived in it, but by different
Modes of Subsistence, or relative Properties in the same divine Essence. And
herein we proceed, as we do in our other Conceptions of the divine Nature, i.
e. we take away all Imperfection from God, and attribute only that to him,
which is agreeable to his divine Perfections, although the manner of it may be
above our comprehension. And if this be owning the Trinity of the Mob, I am not
ashamed to own my self to be one of them; but it is not out of Lazyness or
affected Ignorance, but upon the greatest and most serious consideration.

Letter to the University, p. 15.
They may call this a Trinity of Ciphers, if they please, but I think more
modest and decent Language about these matters would become them as well as the
things themselves much better. And they must prove a little better than they
have done, that different Modes of Subsistence in the divine Nature, or the
relations of Father and Son are mere Ciphers, which is so often mentioned in
Scripture, as a matter of very great consequence; and that when we are baptized
in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, we are baptized into a Trinity
of Ciphers.

But our Unitarians proceed, and say that the same Author affirms not only the
Personalities, Discourse of Nominal and real Trinitarians, p. 10.
but the Persons to be merely Relative. For he says, That every Person, as
well as every Personality in the Trinity, is wholly Relative. Tritheism
charged, etc. p. 157.
But it is plain he speaks there, not of the Person in himself, but with
respect to the manner of Subsistence, or the relative Properties belonging to
them. But if the Notion of a Person does besides the relative Property,
necessarily suppose the divine Nature together with it; how can a Person then
be imagined to be wholly Relative? But they urge, That which makes the first
Person in the Trinity to be a Person, makes him to be a Father, and what makes
him to be a Father, makes him to be a Person. And what follows from hence, but
that the relative Property is the Foundation of the Personality? But by no
means, that the Person of the Father is nothing but the relative Property? The
instance of Solomon is not at all to the purpose, unless we asserted three
Persons founded upon those different Relations in his individual Nature. Who
denies, that one Person may have different Respects, and yet be but one Person
subsisting? Where does the Scripture say, That the Son of David, the Father of
Rehoboam, and he that proceeded from David and Bathsheba were three Persons
distinguished by those relative Properties? But here lies the foundation of
what we believe as to the Trinity; we are assured from Scripture, that there
are three to whom the divine Nature and Attributes are given, and we are
assured both from Scripture and Reason, that there can be but one divine
Essence; and therefore every one of these must have the divine Nature, and yet
that can be but One. But it is a most unreasonable thing to charge those with
Sabellianism, who assert, That every Person has the divine Nature distinctly
belonging to him, and that the divine Essence is communicated from the Father
to the Son. Did ever N^etus or Sabellius, or any of their Followers speak after
this manner? Is the divine Essence but a mere Name, or a different respect only
to Mankind? For the asserting such relative Persons as have no Essence at all,
was the true Sabellian Doctrine, as will be made appear in the following
Discourse. And so much is confessed by our Unitarians themselves, for they say,
That the Sabellians held, that Father, Discourse of Nominal and Real
Unitarians, p. 18.
Son and Spirit are but only three Names o^ God given to him in Scripture, by
occasion of so many several Dispensations toward the Creature, and so he is
but one subsisting Person and three relative Persons; as he sustains the three
Names of Father, Son and Spirit, which being the Relations of God toward
things without him, he is so many relative Persons, or Persons in a Classical
Critical Sense, i. e. Persons without any Essence belonging to them as such.
But those who assert a Communication of the divine Essence to each Person can
never be guilty of Sabellianism, if this be it, which themselves affirm. And so
those called Nominal Trinitarians, are very unjustly so called, because they do
really hold a Trinity of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead.

2. Let us now see what charge they lay upon those whom they call Real
Trinitarians: and they tell us, Discourse of Nom. etc. p. 19.
That the Nominals will seem to be profound Philosophers, deep Sages in
comparison with them. These are very obliging expressions to them in the
beginning. But how do they make out this gross Stupidity of theirs? In short it
is, That they stand condemned and anathematized as Heretics by a general
Council, and by all the Moderns, and are every day challenged and impeached of
Tritheism, and cannot agree among themselves, but charge one another with great
Absurdities; and in plain terms they charge them with Nonsense in the thing, P.
32.
whereas the other lay only in words. Because these assert three divine
subsisting Persons, three infinite Spirits, Minds or Substances, as distinct as
so many Angels or Men, each of them perfectly God, and yet all of them are but
one God. To understand this matter rightly, we must consider that when the
Socinian Pamphlets first came abroad, some years since, a learned and worthy
Person of our Church, who had appeared with great vigor and reason against our
Adversaries of the Church of Rome in the late Reign (which ought not to be
forgotten) undertook to defend the Doctrine of the Trinity against the History
of the Unitarians, and the Notes on the Athanasian Creed; but in the warmth of
disputing, and out of a desire to make this matter more intelligible, he
suffered himself to be carried beyond the ancient Methods which the Church has
used to express her Sense by, still retaining the same fundamental Article of
three Persons in one undivided Essence, but explaining it in such a manner, as
to make each Person to have a peculiar and proper Substance of his own.

This gave so great an advantage to the Author of those Treatises, that in a
little time, Consideraton the Explication of the Trinity, p. 12.
he set forth his Notes with an Appendix in answer to this new Explication.
Wherein he charges him with Heresy, Tritheism and Contradiction. The very same
charges which have been since improved and carried on by others; I wish I could
say, without any unbecoming Heat or Reflections.

But I shall now examine how far these charges have any ground, so as to affect
the Doctrine of the Trinity, which is the chief end our Adversaries aimed at,
in heaping these Reproaches upon one who appeared so early, and with so much
zeal to defend it. We are therefore to consider these things:

1. That a Man may be very right in the Belief of the Article it self; and yet
may be mistaken in his Explication of it. And this one of his keenest
Adversaries freely acknowledges. For he plainly distinguishes between the
fundamental Article and the manner of explaining it, and affirms, That a Man
may quit his Explication without parting with the Article it self. Tritheism
charged, etc. p. 309.
And so he may retain the Article with his Explication.

But suppose a Man to assent to the fundamental Article it self, and be
mistaken in his Explication of it, can he be charged with Heresy about this
Article? For Heresy must relate to the fundamental Article to which he
declares his hearty and unfeigned Assent; but here we suppose the mistake to
lie only in the Explication. As for instance, Sabellianism is a condemned and
exploded Heresy, for it is contrary to the very Doctrine of the Trinity; but
suppose one who asserts the Doctrine of three Persons, should make them to be
three Modes, must such a one presently be charged with Heresy, before we see
whether his Explication be consistent with the fundamental Article or not? For
this is liable to very obvious Objections, that the Father begets a Mode
instead of a Son, that we pray to three Modes instead of three real Persons,
that Modes are mutable things in their own Nature, etc. but must we from hence
conclude such a one guilty of Heresy, when he declares, that he withal
supposed them not to be mere Modes, but that the divine Essence is to be taken
together with the Mode to make a Person? Yea, suppose some spiteful Adversary
should say, That it is a Contradiction to say, That the same common Nature can
make a Person with a Mode superadded to it* unless that be individuated, for a
^erson does imply an individual Nature, and not a mere relative Mode. Is this
sufficient to charge such a Person with the Sabellian Heresy, which he utterly
disowns? Is not the like Equity to be shew^d in another though different
Explication? Suppose then a Person solemnly professes to own the fundamental
Doctrine of the Trinity as much as any others; but he thinks, that three
Persons must have distinct Substances to make them Persons, but so as to make
no Division or Separation in the Godhead, and that he cannot conceive a
Communication of the divine Essence without this; must this presently be run
down as Heresy, when he asserts at the same time three Persons in the same
undivided Essence? But this is said to be a Contradiction; so it was in the
other case and not allowed then and why should it be otherwise in this? I speak
not this to justify such Explications, but to show that there is a difference
between the Heresy of denying an Article, and a mistake in the Explication of
it. Even the greatest Heresie-makers in the world, distinguish between Heresies
and erroneous Explications of Articles of Faith, as any one may find that looks
into them. And even the Inquisitors of Heresy themselves allow the distinction
between Heresy and an erroneous Proposition in Faith, which amounts to the
same with a mistaken Explication of it; and they all grant that there may be
Propositions that tend to Heresy or savor of it, which cannot be condemned
for Heretical. And even Pegna condemns Melchior Canus for being too cruel in
asserting it to be Heresy to contradict the general Sense of Divines, Direct.
Inquisit. part II. quaest. 2. p. 226.
because the Schools cannot make Heresies.

2. It is frequently and solemnly affirmed by him, Modest examine p. 19.
That the Unity of the Godhead is the most real, essential, indivisible,
inseparable Unity; that there is but one divine Nature, which is originally in
the Father, and is substantially communicated by the Father to the Son, as a
distinct subsisting Person, P. 27, 28.
by an eternal ineffable Generation, and to the Holy Ghost by an eternal and
substantial Procession from Father and Son. Do the others who maintain a
Trinity deny this? By no means. For we have already seen that they assert the
same thing. So that they are fully agreed as to the main fundamental Article.
And even the Unitarians yield, that from the beginning he asserted, Notes on
Athanasius his Creed, Edit. 2. p. 19.
That the three divine Persons are in one undivided Substance. Wherein then
lies the foundation of this mighty Quarrel, and those unreasonable Heats that
Men have fallen into about it; to the great scandal of our Church and Religion?
In short it is this; that the same Author asserts, Modest examine p 15.
(1.) That it is gross Sabellianism to say, That there are not three personal
Minds, or Spirits, or Substances. (2.) That a distinct substantial Person must
have a distinct Substance of his own proper and peculiar to his own Person. But
he owns, P. 17.
that although there are three distinct Persons, or Minds, each of whom is
distinctly and by himself God, P. 29.
yet there are not three Gods, but one God, or one Divinity; which he says, is
entirely, and indivisibly, and inseparably in three distinct Persons or Minds.
That the same one divine Nature is wholly and entirely communicated by the
eternal Father to the eternal Son and by the Father and Son to the eternal
Spirit without any Division or Separation; P. 30.
and so it remains one still.

This is the substance of this new Explication, which has raised such Flames,
that Injunctions from authority were thought necessary to suppress them. But
those can reach no farther than the restraint of Men's Tongues and Pens about
these matters, and unless something be found out to satisfy their Minds and to
remove Misapprehensions, the present Heat may be only covered over and kept in;
which when there is a vent given* may break out into a more dangerous Flame.

Therefore I shall endeavor to state and clear this matter so as to prevent
any future Eruption thereof, which will be done by considering how far they are
agreed, and how far the remaining difference ought to be pursued.

1. They are agreed, That there are three distinct Persons and but one Godhead.

2. That there are no separate and divided Substances in the Trinity; but the
divine Nature is wholly and entirely one and undivided.

3. That the divine Essence is communicated from the Father to the Son, and
from both to the holy Spirit. So that the charge of Sabellianism on those who
reject this new Explication is without ground. For no Sabellian did or could
assert a Communication of the divine Essence.

Which being agreed on both sides, the Dispute turns upon this single point,
whether a communicated Essence, does imply a distinct Substance or not. On the
one side it is said, Remarks upon the examinat. p. 33.
That there being but one God, there can be but one divine Essence, and if more
Essences more Gods.

On the other side, that since they own a communicated Essence necessary to
make a distinction of Persons in the Son and Holy Ghost, if the Essence be not
distinct, the foundation of distinct Personalities is taken away. But how is
this cleared by the other Party? They say, Remarks p. 34.
That it is one peculiar Prerogative of the divine Nature and Substance,
founded in its infinite and therefore transcendent Perfection, whereby it is
capable of residing in more Persons than one, and is accordingly communicated
from the Father to the Son and Holy Ghost.

So that the Communication of the divine Nature is owned to the Persons of the
Son and Holy Ghost. But how then comes it not to make a distinct Essence, as it
makes distinct Persons, by being communicated?

The answer we see is, That it is a peculiar Prerogative founded on the
infinite and therefore transcendent Perfection of the divine Nature. But they
further add, That when the Son and Holy Ghost are P. 36.
said to have the same divine Nature from the Father, as the Origin and
Fountain of the Divinity; not by the Production of a new divine Nature but by a
Communication of his own; which is one and the same in all three without
Separation, Difference, or Distinction; that this is indeed a great Mystery,
which has been always looked upon by the greatest and wisest Men in the
Church, to be above all Expressions and Description.

So that the greatest difficulty is at last resolved into the incomprehensible
Perfection of the divine Nature; and that neither Man nor Angels can give a
satisfactory answer to Enquiries about the manner of them. Ibid.
And the Author of the Animadversions says, Animadv. p. 36.
That in the divine Persons of the Trinity, the divine Nature and the personal
Subsistence coalesce into one, by an incomprehensible, ineffable kind of Union
and Conjunction.

But do those on the other side think, that the asserting three distinct
Substances in one and the same individual Substance tends to clear and explain
the Notion of the Trinity and make it more easy and intelligible? The
Divinity, they say, is whole, entire, indivisible, Modest examine p. 30.
and inseparable in all three. But can one whole entire indivisible Substance
be actually divided into three Substances? For if every Person must have a
peculiar Substance of his own; and there be three Persons, there must be three
peculiar Substances, and how can there be three peculiar Substances, and yet
but one entire and indivisible Substance? I do not say, there must be three
divided Substances in place, or separate Substances, but they must be divided
as three Individuals of the same kind, which must introduce a Specific Divine
Nature, which I think very inconsistent with the divine Perfections; but of
this at large in the following Discourse.

I do not lay any force upon this argument, that there can be no ground of the
Distinction between the three Substances, Tritheism charged, p. 262.
if there be but one Substance in the Godhead, (as some have done) because the
same Substance cannot both unite and distinguish them; for the ground of the
distinction is not the Substance but the Communication of it, P. 264.
and where that is so freely asserted, there is a reason distinct from the
Substance it self, which makes the Distinction of Persons.

But the difficulty still remains, how each Person should have a Substance of
his own; and yet there be but one entire and indivisible Substance, for every
Person must have a proper Substance of his own; or else according to this
Hypothesis, he can be no Person; and this peculiar Substance must be really
distinct from that Substance which is in the other two: so that here must be
three distinct Substances in the three Persons. But how then can there be but
one individual Essence in all three? We may conceive one common Essence to be
individuated in three Persons, as it is in Men; but it is impossible to
conceive the same individual Essence to be in three Persons, which have
peculiar Substances of their own. For the Substances belonging to the Persons,
are the same Essence individuated in those Persons: and so there is no avoiding
making three individual Essences and one specific or common divine Nature. And
Maimonides his argument is considerable against more Gods than one; If, says
he, there be two Gods, More Nevoch, par. II. c. 1.
there mu^t be something wherein they agree, and something wherein they differ;
that wherein they agree must be that which makes each of them God; and that
wherein they differ must make them two Gods. Now wherein does this differ from
the present Hypothesis? There is something wherein they differ, and that is
their proper Substance; but Maimonides thought that wherein they differed
sufficient to make them two Gods. So that I fear it will be impossible to clear
this Hypothesis as to the reconciling three individual Essences with one
individual divine Essence, which looks too like asserting that there are three
Gods and yet but one. And the Author of this Explica^ion does at last confess,
that three distinct whole inseparable Sames, Modest examine. p. 30.
are hard to conceive as to the manner of it. Now to what purpose are new
Explications started and Disputes raised and carried on so warmly about them,
if after all, the main difficulty be confessed to be above our Comprehension?
We had much better satisfy our selves with that Language which the Church has
receiv^d and is expressed in the Creeds, than go about by new Terms, to raise
new Ferments, especially at a time, when our united Forces are most necessary
against our common Adversaries. No wise and good Men can be fond of any new
Inventions, when the Peace of the Church is hazarded by them. And on the other
side, it is as dangerous to make new Heresies as new Explications. If any one
denies the Doctrine contained in the Nicene Creed, that is no new Heresy; but
how can such deny the Son to be consubstantial to the Father, who assert one
and the same indivisible Substance in the Father and the Son? But they may
contradict themselves. That is not impossible on either side. But does it
follow that they are guilty of Heresy? Are not three Substances and but one a
Contradiction? No more, say they, than that a communicated Substance is not
distinct from that which did communicate. But this whole dispute we find is at
last resolved into the infinite and unconceivable Perfections of the Godhead,
where it is most safely lodged; and that there is no real Contradiction in the
Doctrine it self, is part of the design of the Discourse afterward.

But here it will be necessary to take notice of what the Unitarians have
objected against this new Explication, Considerat. on the Explication of the
Trinity, etc. p. 12.
viz. That it was condemned by the ancients in the Person of Philoponus; in the
middle Ages, in the Person and Writings of Abhor Ioachim; but more severely
since the Reformation, in the Person of Valentinus Gentilis, who was condemned
at Geneva, and beheaded at Bern for this very Doctrine.

To these I shall give a distinct answer:

1. As to Joh Philoponus, I do freely own, that in the Greek Church, when in
the sixth Century he broached his opinion, That every Hypostasis must have the
common Nature individuated in it, this was looked upon as a Doctrine of
dangerous consequence, both with respect to the Trinity and Incarnation. The
latter was the first occasion of it; for as Leontius observes, Leont. de Sectis
Act. 5.
the dispute did not begin about the Trinity, but about the Incarnation; and
Philoponus took part with those who asserted but one Nature in Christ after the
Union, and he went upon this ground, That if there were two Natures there must
be two Hypostases, because Nature and Hypostasis were the same. Then those on
the Churches side, says Leontius, objected, That if they were the same, there
must be three distinct Natures in the Trinity, as there were three Hypostases;
which Philoponus yielded, and grounded himself on Aristotle's Doctrine, that
there was but one common Substance and several individual Substances, and so
held it was in the Trinity, whence he was called the leader of the Heresy of
the Tritheius. This is the account given by Leontius who lived very ^ear his
time, A. D. 620. The same is affirmed of him by Nicephorus, Niceph. Callist l.
18. c. 46, 47.
and that he wrote a Book on purpose about the Union of two Natures in Christ,
out of which he produces his own words concerning a common and individual
Nature, (which he calls (...)) which can agree to none else. And the main
argument he went upon was this, that unless we assert a singular Nature in the
Hypostases, we must say, that the whole Trinity was incarnate; as unless there
be a singular humane Nature distinct from the common, Christ must assume the
whole Nature of Mankind. And this argument from the Incarnation, was that which
made Roscelin, in the beginning of the disputing Age, A. D. 1093, to assert,
That the three Persons were three things distinct from each other, as three
Angels or three Men, because otherwise the Incarnation of the second Person
could not be understood, as appears by Anselm's Epistles, Anselm. epist. l. 2.
ep. 41. De fide Trinit. etc. c. 3.
and his Book of the Incarnation written upon that occasion. But as A^selm
shows at large, if this argument hold, it must prove the three Persons not only
to be distinct, but separate and divided Sub^^ances, (which is directly
contrary to this new Explication) and then there is no avoiding Tritheism. But
to return to Joh. Philoponus, who, says Nicephorus, divided the indivisible
Nature of God into three Individuals as among Men: C. 48.
Which, says he, is repugnant to the Sense of the Christian Church; and he
produces the Testimony of Gregory Nazianzen against it, and adds, that Leontius
and Georgius Pisides confuted Philoponus.

But in that divided time. C 49.
there were some called Theodosiani, who made but one Nature and one
Hypostasis; and so fell in with the Sabellians; but others held, That there was
one immutable divine Essence, but each Person had a distinct individual Nature:
which the rest charged with Tritheism. Which consequence they utterly rejected,
because although they held three distinct Natures, yet they said, They were but
one God, because there was but one invariable Divinity in them. Nicephorus
says, that Conon's Followers rejected Philoponus; but Photius mentions a
conference between Conon and others, Phot. Biblioth. Cod. 24.
a^out Philoponus, wherein he defends him against other Severians. Photius
grants, that Conon and his Followers held a consubstantial Trinity and the
Unity of the Godhead, and so far they were Orthodox: but says, They were far
from it, when they asserted proper and peculiar Substances to each Person. The
difference between Conon and Philoponus about this point, Phot Cod. 23.
(for Conon wrote against Philoponus about the Resurrection) seems to have been
partly in the Doctrine, but chiefly in the consequence of it; for these
rejected all kind of Tritheism, which Philoponus saw well enough must follow
from his Doctrine, but he denied any real Division or Separation in those
Substances as to the Deity. Isidore says, Isid. Orig. l. 7. de haeret de
Trinit.
That the Tritheists owned three Gods, as well as three Persons; and that if
God be said to be Triple, there must follow a Plurality of Gods. But there were
others called Triformiani, of whom S. Augustine speaks. Aug. de haeres^^ 74.
Who held the three Persons to be three distinct parts, which being united made
one God; which, says he, is repugnant to the divine Perfection.

But among these Severians, there were three several opinions:

1. Of Philoponus, who held one common Nature and three Individual.

2. Of those who said there was but one Nature and one Hypostasis.

3. Of those who affirmed there were three distinct Natures, but withal, that
there was but one indivisible Godhead; and these differed from Philoponus in
the main ground of Tritheism, which was, that he held the common Nature in the
Trinity, to be only a specific Nature, and such as it is among Men. For
Philoponus himself in the words which Nicephorus produces, does assert plainly,
that the common Nature is separated from the Individuals, (...), by a mere act
of the Mind; so that he allowed no individual Unity in the divine Nature, but
what was in the several Persons; as the common Nature of Man is a Notion of the
Mind, as it is abstracted from the several Individuals, wherein alone it really
subsists; so that here is an apparent difference between the Doctrine of Joh.
Philoponus and the new Explication, for herein the most real, essential and
indivisible Unity of the divine Nature is asserted; and it is said to be no
Species, Modest examine. p. 19.
because it is but one, and so it could not be condemned in Joh. Philoponus

2. We now come to Abbat Joachim, whose Doctrine seems to be as much mistaken,
as it is represented in the Decretal, where the Condemnation of it by the
Lateran Council is extant. But here I cannot but observe what great Authority
these Unitarians give to this Lateran Council, as if they had a Mind to set up
Transubstantiation by it, which they so often parallel with the Trinity. Thence
in their late Discourse they speak of it as the most general Council that was
ever called, Discourse of Real and Nominal Trinit p 4
and that what was there defined, it was made Heresy to oppose it. But by
their favor, we neither own this to have been a general Council, nor that it
had Authority to make that Heresy which was not so before. But that Council
might assert the Doctrine of the Trinity truly, as it had been received, and
condemn the opinion of Joachim justly But what it was, they do not or would not
seem to understand. Joachim was a great Enthusiast, but no deep Divine (as Men
of that Heat seldom are) and he had many Disputes with Peter Lombard in his
Life, as the Vindicator of Joachim confesses. Greg de Laur Apol. Joachim Abb^t,
c. 66.
After his Death, a Book of his was found, taxing Peter Lombard with some
strange Doctrine about the Trinity, wherein he called him Heretic and Madman;
Decret. Greg. l. 1. c. 2.
this Book was complained of in the Lateran Council, and upon Examination it
was sound, that instead of charging Peter Lombard justly, he was fallen into
Heresy himself, which was denying the essential Unity of the three Persons,
and making it to be Unity of Consent. He granted that they were one Essence,
one Nature, one Substance: but how? Not by any true proper Unity, but
Similitudinary and Collective, as they called it, as many Men are one People,
and many Believers make one Church. Whence Thomas Aquinas says, Comment. in
decret. opusc. 24.
that Joachim fell into the Arian Heresy. It is sufficient to my purpose, that
he denied the individual Unity of the divine Essence, which cannot be charged
on the Author of the new Explication, and so this comes not home to the purpose.

3. But the last charge is the most terrible, for it not only sets down the
Heresy, but the capital punishment which followed it. Yet I shall make it
appear, (notwithstanding the very warm Prosecution of it by another hand) that
there is a great difference between the Doctrine of Valentinus Gentilis, and
that which is asserted in this Explication.

1. In the Sentence of his Condemnation it is expressed, Bri^f Account of
Valentin. Gentilis, p. 132.
That he had been guilty of the vilest Scurrility and most horrid Blasphemies
against the Son of God and the glorious Mystery of the Trinity. But can any
thing of this Nature be charged upon one, who has not only written in Defense
of it, but speaks of it with the highest Veneration?

2. In the same Sentence it is said, That he acknowledged the Father only to be
that infinite God which we ought to worship, Ibid.
which is plain Blasphemy against the Son. But can any Men ever think to make
this the same case with one, who makes use of that as one of his chief
arguments, That the three Persons are to be worshipped with a distinct divine
Worship? Modest examine. p. 20.


3. It is charged upon him, That he called the Trinity a mere human Invention,
not so much as known to any Catholic Creed, and directly contrary to the Word
of God. Brief Account, etc. p. 40.
But the Author here charged, has made it his business to prove the Doctrine
of the Trinity to be grounded on Scripture and to vindicate it from the
Objections drawn from thence against it.

4. One of the main Articles of his charge was, Brief Account, etc. p. 41, 42,
43, 45.
That he made three Spirits of different Order and Degree, that the Father is
the one only God, by which the Son and Holy Ghost are excluded manifestly from
the Unity of the Godhead; But the Person charged with his Heresy says, Modest
examine. p. 29.
The Reason why we must not say three Gods, is, because there is but one and
the same Divinity in them all; and that entirely, indivisibly, inseparably.

But it is said, that although there may be some differences, yet they agree in
asserting, That there are three distinct eternal Spirits or Minds in the
Trinity; and Genebrard is brought into the same Heresy with them But Genebrard
with great indignation rejects the Doctrine of Valentinus Gentilis, Genebrard
de Trinit l. 2. p. 91.
because he held an Inequality in the Persons, and denied the individual Unity
of the Godhead in them; but he says, he followed Damascen in asserting three
real Hypostases; and he utterly denies Tritheism, L 2 p 159.
and he brings a multitude of reasons, why the charge of Tritheism does not lie
against his opinion, although he owns the Hypostases to be three distinct
individuals, but then he adds, P. 153.
That there is an indivisible and insep^rable Union of the divine Nature in all
three Persons.

Now to deal as impartially in this matter as may be, I do not think our
understandings one jot helped in the Notion of the Trinity by this Hypothesis;
but that it is liable to as great difficulties as any other, and therefore none
ought to be fond of it, or to set it against the general Sense of others, and
the current Expressions of Divines about these Mysteries; nor to call the
different opinions of others Heresy or Nonsense, which are provoking Words,
and tend very much to inflame Men's Passions, because their Faith and
Understanding are both called in question, which are very tender things.

But on the other side, a difference ought to be made between the Heresy and
Blasphemy of Valentinus Gentilis, and the opinion of such who maintain the
individual and indivisible Unity of the Godhead; but withal, believe that every
Person has an individual Substance as a Person, and that Sabellianism cannot
be avoided otherwise. Wherein I think they are mistaken, and that the Fathers
were of another opinion; and that our Church owns but one Substance in the
Godhead, as the Western Church always did, (which made such difficulty about
receiving three Hypostases, because they took Hypostasis for a Substance) but
yet I see no reason why those who assert three Hypostases, and mean three
individual Substances should be charged with the Heresy of Valentinus
Gentilis, or so much as with that of Abba^ Joachim or Philoponus, because they
all rejected the individual Unity of the divine Nature, which is constantly
maintained by the Defenders of the other Hypothesis.

But it is said and urged with vehemence, that these two things are
inconsistent with each other; that it is going forward and backward, being
Orthodox in one Breath and otherwise in the next; that all this looks like
shuffling and concealing the true meaning, and acting the old Artifices under a
different Form. For the Samosatenians and Arians, when they were pinched,
seemed very Orthodox in their Expressions, but retained their Heresies still in
their Minds; and there is reason to suspect the same Game is playing over
again, and we cannot be too cautious in a matter of such Consequence.

I grant very great caution is needful, but the mixture of some Charity with
it will do no hurt. Why should we suspect those to be inwardly false, and to
think otherwise than they speak, who have showed no want of Courage and Zeal,
at a time when some thought it Prudence to say nothing, and never called upon
their Superiors then to own the cause of God, and to do their Duties as they
have now done, and that in no very obliging manner? And if the same Men can be
cool and unconcerned at some times, (when there was so great reason to be
otherwise) and of a sudden grow very warm, and even to boil over with Zeal; the
World is so ill natured, as to be too apt to conclude there is some other cause
of such an alteration than what openly appears. But there is a kind of bitter
Zeal, which is so fierce and violent, that it rather inflames than heals any
Wounds that are made; and is of so malignant a Nature, that it spreads and eats
like a Cancer, and if a stop were not given to it, it might endanger the whole
Body. I am very sensible how little a Man consults his own ease, who offers to
interpose in a dispute between Men of Heat and Animosity; but this moves me
very little, when the interest of our Church and Religion is concerned, which
ought to prevail more than the fear of displeasing one or other Party, or it
may be both. I do heartily wish, that all who are equally concerned in the
common Cause, Od^^at rixas and jurgia, p^aesertimque inter eruditos; ac turpe
esse diceb^t viros indubitate doctos canina rabie famam vicissim suam rodere ac
lacerare scriptis trucibus, tanquam vilissimos de plebe cerdones in Angiportis
sese luto ac stercore conspurcan^^^. Nic Rigalt. vit. P. (...), p. 48.
would lay aside Heats, and Prejudices, and hard Words, and consider this
matter impartially; and I do not question, but they will see cause to judge, as
I do, that the difference is not so great as our Adversaries for their own
advantage make it to be. And since both sides yield, that the matter they
dispute about is above their reach, the wisest course they can take is to
assert and defend what is revealed, and not to be too peremptory and quarrelsom
about that which is acknowledged to be above our comprehension, I mean as to
the manner how the three Persons partake of the divine Nature.

It would be of the most fatal consequence to us, if those Weapons, which might
be so usefully employed against our common Adversaries, should still be turned
upon one another. I know no manner of advantage they have against us, but from
thence, and this is it which makes them write with such Insolence and Scorn
toward those who are far their Superiors in Learning and Wit, as well as in
the Goodness of their cause. And is it possible that some of our most skillful
Fencers should play Prizes before them, who plainly animate them against each
other for their own Diversion and Interest? Sometimes one has the better,
sometimes the other, and one is cried up in Opposition to the other, but taken
alone is used with the greatest Contempt. One Man's work is said to be learned
and accurate, and the more, Considerat. on the Explication by Dr. W. etc. p. 12.
because it follows, that he concerns not himself with the Socinians. The wiser
Man no doubt, for that Reason. At another time it is called the Birth of the
Mountains, and the Author paralleled with no less a Man than Don Quixot, P. 13.
and his elaborate Writings with his Adventures, and they ridicule his Notion
of Modes as if they were only so many Gambols and Postures. P. 22.
And then for his Adversary, they hearten and encourage him all they can; they
tell him, He must not allow to the other the least Title of all he contends
for, least their sport should be spoiled; and to comfort him, they tell him, P.
23.
that his Adversary is a Socinian at bottom, and does not know it; P. 25.
that all his Thingums, Modes, Properties are only an Addition of Words and
Names, and not of Persons properly so called, and that his whole Scheme is
nothing but Socinianism dressed up in the absurd Cant of the Schools. That his
Book has much more Scurrility than Argument, P. 19.
that his usage of him was barbarous, and a greater Soloecism in manners, than
any he accuses him of in Grammar or Speech; and in short, That his Explication
of the Trinity is a great Piece of Nonsense, P. 13.
(though it comes so near to Socinianism.) But how does the other Antagonist
escape? What, nothing but good Words to him? In this place they had a mind to
keep him in heart, and only charge him with a Heresy which they laugh at; but
in another place, they set him out with such colors, as show they intended
only to play one upon the other. They charge him not only with Heresy but
Polytheism, Defense of the Notes on Athanasius his Creed. p. 24.
Which, they say, is next to Atheism; that his Vindication is a supercilious,
disdainful and peevish Answer: that he had neither Humanity nor good Manners
left: P. 31.
that there is nothing considerable in his Books but what he borrowed from
Them. These are some of the Flowers which they bestow on these Persons of
Reputation in Polemick Squabble as they call it, which plainly show, that their
aim is, as much as may be, to divide and then to expose us. And shall we still
go on to gratify this insulting Humor of theirs, by contending with one
another, and afford them still new matter for Books against both? As we may see
in their late Discourse about Nominal and Real Trinitarians, which was intended
for a rare show, wherein the two Parties are represented as combating with one
another, and they stand by and triumph over these Cadmean Brethren, as they
call them.

Neither are they the Socinians only, but those who despise all Religion (who I
doubt are the far greater number) are very much entertained with such
encounters between Men of Wit and Parts, because they think, and they do not
think amiss, that Religion it self will be the greatest sufferer by them at
last: And this is the most dangerous, but I hope not the most prevailing Party
of Men among us. The Socinians profess themselves Christians, and I hope are
so, (especially if but One Article of Faith be required to make men so) but I
cannot but observe that in the late Socinian Pamphlets, there is too strong a
biass toward Deism, (which consideration alone should make us unite and look
more narrowly to their steps.) I do not charge their Writers with a professed
design to advance Deism among us; but their way of managing their Disputes, is
as if they had a mind to serve them. And such men who are Enemies to all
revealed Religion, could not find out better Tools for their purpose than they
are. For they know very well, that in such a Nation as ours, which is really
concerned for the Profession of Religion one way or other, there is no opening
professed Schools of Atheism; but the design must be carried on under some show
of Religion. And nothing serves their turn so well, as setting up natural
Religion in opposition to Revealed. For this is the way by degrees to loosen
and unhinge the Faith of most Men, which with great reason is built on the
Scripture as the surest foundation.

But here it is fit to observe the several steps they take in order to this
advancing Deism, and how our Unitarians have complied with all of them.

I. The first point they are to gain is, The lessening the Authority of
Scripture, and if this be once done, they know Men's Minds will be left so
roving and uncertain, that they will soon fall into Skepticism and Infidelity.

II. The next is, to represent Churchmen as Persons of Interest and Design,
who maintain Religion only because it supports them; and this they call
Priest-Cra^t, and if they can by this means take away their Authority too, the
way lies still more open for them; for it is more easy to make a Prey of the
Flock, when the Shepherds are suspected only to look after their Fleeces. Since
such a suspicion takes away all Trust and Confidence in their Guides; and they
know very well, how little others will be able to defend themselves.

III. Another step is, to magnify the Deists as Men of Probity and good Sense;
that assert the just Liberties of Mankind, against that terrible thing called
Priestcraft; and that would rescue Religion from false Glosses and absurd
Notions taken up from the Schools and taught in the Universities, on purpose to
keep under those Principles of universal Liberty as to Opinions, which those of
freer Minds endeavor to promote. But especially they are great Enemies to all
Mysteries of Faith, as unreasonable Impositions on those of more refined
Understandings, and of clear and distinct Perceptions, as they have learnt to
express themselves. These they account intolerable Usurpations on Men of such
Elevations as themselves; for Mysteries are only for the Mob, and not for
Persons of such noble Capacities.

IV. The last thing is, to represent all Religions as indifferent, since they
agree in the common Principles of natural Religion, especially the Unity of
God, and all the rest is but according to the different Inventions of Men, the
skill of the Contrivers, and the several Humors and Inclinations of Mankind.

These are the chief Mysteries of Deism in our Age; for even Deism has its
Mysteries, and it is it self a Mystery of Iniquity, which I am afraid is too
much working already among us, and will be more if no effectual stop be put to
it.

I call it Deism, because that Name obtains now, as more plausible and modish;
for Atheism is a rude unmannerly Word, and exposes Men to the Rabble, and makes
Persons shun the company and avoid the Conversation and Dealing with such who
are noted for it. And this would be a mighty Prejudice to them, as to their
Interests in this World, which they have reason to value.

But to be a Deist, seems to be only a setting up for having more Wit, than to
be cheated by the Priests, and imposed upon by the common Forms of Religion,
which serve well enough for ordinary People that want Sense, and are not
skill^d in Demonstrations; but the Deists are so wise as to see through all
these things. And therefore this name gains a Reputation among all such as hate
Religion, but know not how otherwise to distinguish themselves from prosessed
Atheists, which they would by no means be taken for; although if they be
pressed home, very few among them will sincerely own any more than a Series of
Causes, without any intellectual Perfections, which they call God. A strange
God without Wisdom, Goodness, Justice or Providence!

But I am now to show, how in all these points the present Unitarians have been
very serviceable to them, in the Books which they have lately published and
dispersed both in City and Country.

1. As to the Authority of Scripture: They have been already justly exposed for
undermining the Authority of S. John's Gospel, by mustering up all the
Arguments of the old Heretics against it, Vindication of the Archbishop's
Sermons. p. 5.
and giving no answers to them. And what defense have they since made for
themselves? No other but this very trifling one, that they repeat their Reasons
but do not affirm them. Answer to Dr. Bull, p. 47.
What is the meaning of this? If they are true, why do they not affirm them? If
they are false, why do they not answer them? Is this done like those who
believe the Gospel of S. John to be divine, to produce all the arguments they
could meet with against it; and never offer to show the Weakness: and
Unreasonableness of them? Does not this look like a design to furnish the
Deists with such arguments as they could meet with against it? Especially, when
they say, That S. John does not oppose them Why then are these Arguments
produced against his Gospel? Men do not use to dispute against their Friends,
nor to tell the World what all People have said against them, and give not a
word of answer in vindication of them. But they say, The modern Unitarians
allow of the Gospel and other Pieces of S. John. A very great favor indeed, to
allow of them. But how far? As of divine Authority? Not a word of that. But as
ancient Books which they think it not fit for them to dispute against. History
of the Unitarians, p. 10.
But if the ancient Ebionites were their Predecessors, as they affirm, they can
allow none but the Gospel according to the Hebrews; and must reject the rest
and all S. Paul's Epistles; and in truth, they make him argue so little to the
purpose, that they must have a very mean opinion of his Writings. But of these
things in the Discourse it self.

As to Churchmen, no professed Deists could express themselves more spitefully
than they have done, and that against those to whom they profess the greatest
respect. What then would they say of the rest? They say in general, Considerat.
on the Explication by the Archbishop, etc. p. 13.
That it is natural to Worldlings, to mercenary Spirits, to the timorous and
ambitious; in a word, to all such as prefer not God before all other, whether
Persons or Considerations, to believe as they would have it.

But although the words be general, yet any one that looks into them may s^e^
find that they were intended for such Churchmen who had written against their
opinions. And the Insinuation is, that if it were not for worldly Interests,
they would own them to be in the right. Whereas I am fully persuaded, that they
have no way to defend their Opinions, but to reject the Scriptures and declare
themselves Deists; and as long as we retain a just Veneration for the
Scripture, we can be of no other Opinion, because we look on their
Interpretations as unreasonable, new, forced, and inconsistent with the
circumstances of Places and the main Scope and Tenor of the New Testament. But
their Introduction to the Answer to the late Archbishop's Sermons about the
Trinity and Incarnation, show their Temper sufficiently as to all Churchmen.
He was the Person they professed to esteem and reverence above all others, and
confess that he instructs them in the Air and Language of a Father, Answ^r to
the Archbish. Sermon. p. 43.
(which at least deserved a little more dutiful Language from them.) But some
Men's fondness for their Opinions breaks all bounds of Civility and Decency; for
presently after, mentioning the Archbishop and other Bishops who had written
against them, they say it signifies nothing to the case, That they are great
Pensioners of the World. P. 44.
For it is certain we have a mighty Propensity to believe as is for our Turn
and Interest. And soon after, that their Opposers are under the power of such
fatal Biasses, that their Doctrine is the more to be suspected because it is
theirs. For the reason why they maintain the Doctrine of the Trinity is,
because they must. The plain meaning of all this is, that the late Archbishop
(as well as the rest) was a mere self-interested Man, (which none who knew
either the outside or inside of Lambeth could ever imagine) that if he were
really against them (as none could think otherwise, who knew him so well and so
long as I did) it only showed what a strange Power, Interest has in the Minds
of all Churchmen.

But what Bias was it, which made him write with that Strength and Judgment
against their Opinions? Let us set aside all Titles of Respect and Honor as
they desire, let Reason be compared with Reason; and his Arguments with their
Answers; and it will be soon found that the advantage which he had, was not
from any other Dignity than that of a clearer Judgment, and a much stronger way
of Reasoning Whereas their Answers are such, as may well be supposed to come
from those, who had some such Bias, that they must at least seem to answer what
in truth they could not. As has been fully made appear in the Vindication of
him, to which no reply has been given, although other Treatises of theirs have
come out since. In the Conclusion of that Answer they say, Answer to the
Archbishop p. 65.
That they did not expect that their Answer should satisfy us, and in truth
they had a great deal of reason to think so. But what reason do they give for
it? A very kind one no doubt; because Prepossession and Interest have taken
hold of us. As though we were Men of such mean and mercenary Spirits, as to
believe according to Prepossession without Reason, and to act only as serves
our present Interest. But we never made mean Addresses to Infidels to show how
near our Principles came to theirs, nor made Parallels between the Trinity and
Transubstantiation, as some did, and defended them, as well as they could, when
Popery was uppermost. But enough of this.

3. We have seen how much they have gratified the Deists by representing
Churchmen in such a manner, let us now see in what manner they treat the
Deists. It is with another sort of Language; and which argues a more than
ordinary kindness to them. In one place they say, That the Deists are mostly
well-natured Men, Some thoughts upon Dr. Sh. Vindication, p. 21.
and Men, of Probity and Understanding; in effect that they are sincere
honest-hearted Men, who do good by the impulse of their natural Religion,
Honesty and good Conscience, which have great Influence upon them. What another
sort of character is this from that of the greatest, and in their opinion the
best of our Clergy? This must proceed from some Intimacy and Familiarity with
them; and it is easy to imagine from hence, that they are upon very good Terms
with one another, because they must be Unitarians, if they believe a God at all.

But where else are these honest, conscientious Deists to be found?

It is rare indeed for others to find any one that rejects Christianity out of
pure Conscience, and that acts by principles of sincere Virtue. I never yet
could meet with such, nor hear of those that have. And I would fain know the
reasons on which such conscientious Men proceeded; for truly the Principles of
natural Religion are those which recommend Christianity to me; for without them
the Mysteries of Faith would be far more unaccountable than now they are; and
supposing them, I see no Incongruity in them, i. e. That there is a just and
holy God, and a wise Providence, and a future State of Rewards and Punishments;
and that God designs to bring Mankind to Happiness out of a State of Misery;
let these be supposed, and the Scheme of Christianity will appear very
reasonable and fitted to the Condition and Capacity of Mankind. And the
sublimest Mysteries of it are not intended to puzzle or amuse Mankind, as weak
Men imagine; but they are discovered for the greatest and best purposes in the
World, to bring Men to the hatred of Sin and Love of God, and a patient
continuance in well-doing, in order to a blessed Immortality. So that this is
truly a Mystery of Godliness, being intended for the advancement of real Piety
and Goodness among Mankind in order to make them happy. But as to these
Unitarians, who have such happy Acquaintance with these conscientious Deists; I
would fain learn from them, if they think them mistaken, why they take no more
pains to satisfy and convince them; for I find they decline saying a word
against them. In one place they compare the Atheist and Deist together; and
very honestly and like any conscientious Deists, they impute all the Deism and
most part of the Atheism of our Age to the Doctrines of the Trinity and
Incarnation. Letter of Resol. concerning the Trinity and Incarn. p. 18.


Is it possible for Men that live in our Age to give such an account as this of
the Growth of Deism and Atheism among us? What number of Atheists is there,
upon any other account than from a looseness of Thinking and Living? Where are
those who believe God to be an incomprehensible Being, and yet reject the
Mysteries which relate to his Being, because they are incomprehensible? Suppose
any reject spiritual Substance as Nonsense and a Contradiction, as they do the
Trinity on the same Pretenses. Is this a sufficient reason or not? They may
tell them, as they do us that they can have no Ideas, no clear and distinct
Perceptions of immaterial Substances? What answer do they give in this case?
Not a Syllable; although they take notice of it. But I hope they give some
better satisfaction to the Deist; Letter of Resol. p. 5.
No, for they say, This is not a place to argue against either Atheist or
Deist. By no means: some would say, They were not such Fools to fall out with
their Friends. And it cannot be denied, that they have been the greatest
Incouragers of such kind of Writings, which serve their turn so well; and in
pure Gratitude they forbear to argue against them.

IV. To show how near they come to an Indifferency in Religion, they speak
favorably of Mahometans, and Jews, and even Tartars, because they agree with
them in the Unity of the Godhead. What an honest-hearted Deist do they make
that Impostor Mahomet? One would hardly think such a character could have come
out of the Mouth of Christians. But these are their Words, Letter of Resol.
concerning the Trinity and Incarn. p. 18.
Mahomet is affirmed by diverse Historians to have had no other design in
pretending himself to be a Prophet, but to restore the Belief of the Unity of
God, which at that time was extirpated among the Eastern Christians by the
Doctrines of the Trinity and Incarnation. Who are those Historians who give
this character of him? Why are they not named, that their authority might be
examined? Was the Morocco Ambassador one of them? Or Paulus Alciatus, who from
a Unitarian turned Mohammedan? But by the best accounts we can meet with, we
find that he was a very cunning Impostor, and took in from the Jews and
Ishmaelites his Countrymen, Circumcision; from the Christians, an honorable
mention of Christ, as a Prophet, and as the the Word and Spirit of God, Elmacin
hist. Sarac. p. 4.

Levin. Warner. de Alcoran.


and owned his Miracles; from the ancient Heretics he denied his Suffering,
but owned his being taken up into Heaven. Yea, he owned, That he had his Gospel
from Heaven; but that his Disciples changed it after his Death, and attributed
more to Christ than he assumed to himself. Which shows that he had so much
Sense, as to discern, that if the Books of the New Testament were genuine, more
must be given to Christ, than either Mahomet or the Unitarians do allow. Let
any indifferent Reader compare their character of Mahomet with that of
Athanasius, Acts of Athanasius, p. 5.
which these Men give, and they will easily find that they take as much care to
blacken one, as they do to vindicate the other. What Christian Ingenuity is
here? But Mahomet was a Deist, and Athanasius a Trinitarian. But they go on.

Whatsoever the design of Mahomet was, its certain, that Mahometism has
prevailed over greater Numbers and more Nations, than at this day profess
Christianity. But how? Was it not by force of Arms and the Prevalency of the
Saracen and Turkish Empire? No, say these learned Historians, It was not by the
Force of the Sword, but by that one Truth in the Alcoran the Unity of God. It
were endless to quote the Historians, who say, That it was Mahomet's Principle,
to subdue all by Force of Arms who opposed his Religion; but the authority of
Elmacinus alone is sufficient; for in the beginning of his History he owns that
it was his Principle, To make War upon those that would not submit to his Law.
And others say, that in remembrance of this, Ricard. confut. legis Saracen. c.
10.
Their Law is expounded by their Doctors, with a Sword drawn by them, and that
it is the Law of the Alcoran to kill and slay those that oppose it. What
liberty the Turkish Empire allows to Christians in the conquered Provinces is
not to this purpose, but by what means Mahometism prevailed in the World.

But say they, The Jews as well as Mahometans are alienated from us, because
they suppose the Trinity to be the Doctrine of all Christians. And what then?
Must we renounce the Christian Doctrine to please the Jews and Mahometans? Must
we quit Christ's being the Messiah, because the Jews deny it? Or the suffering
of Christ, because the Mahometans think it inconsistent with his Honor?

But if this be the truth of the case, as to Jews and Mahometans; no Persons
are so well qualified to endeavor their Conversion, as our Unitarians; which
would be a much better employment for them, than to expose the Christian
Doctrine by such Writings among us. I am ashamed to mention what they say of
the Tartars, when they call them, The Shield and Sword of that way of
acknowledging and worshipping God. Letter of Resol. p. 19.
So that Mahometans, Jews and Tartars are fairly represented because they agree
in the grand Fundamental of the Unity of the Godhead; but the Christian Church
is charged with believing Impossibilities, Contradictions, and pure Nonsense.

And thus we find our Unitarians serving the Deists in all their methods of
overthrowing Revealed Religion and advancing Deism among us. And if this will
not awaken us to look more after them, and unite us in the defense of our
Common Cause against them, I do not think that other Methods will do it. For it
is become a Restless and Active, although as yet, but a small Body of Men, and
they tell the World plainly enough that they are free from the Biasses of Hopes
and Fears; Answer to the Archbishop p. 44. P. 66.
and sit loose from the Awes and Bribes of the World. So that there is no way
of dealing with them, but by showing the falsness and weakness of the grounds
they go upon; and that they have no advantage of us as to Scripture, Antiquity
or Reason: which is the Design of this Undertaking.

Worcester, Sept. 30. 1696. E. W.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Occasion and Design of the Discourse. Page 1. CHAP. II. The
Doctrine of the Trinity not received in the Christian Church by Force or
Interest. p. 10. CHAP. III. The Socinian Plea, for the Antiquity of their
Doctrine, Examined. p. 15. CHAP. IV. Of the Considerable Men they pretend to
have been of their Opinion in the Primitive Church. p. 29. CHAP. V. Of their
Charge of Contradiction in the Doctrine of the Trinity. p. 54. CHAP. VI. No
Contradiction for Three Persons to be in One common Nature. p. 68. CHAP. VII.
The Athanasian Creed cleared from Contradictions. p. 101. CHAP. VIII. The
Socinian Sense of Scripture Examined. p. 121. CHAP. IX. The General Sense of
the Christian Church, proved from the Form of Baptism, as it was understood in
the first Ages. p. 177. CHAP. X. The Objections against the Trinity, in point
of Reason, Answered. p. 230.
ERRATA.
Page 113. l. 12. for our r. one. p. 122. l. 12. r. Heb. 1.5. for unto which.
p. 124. l. 7. add N. 11. p. 126. l. 29. for Damascenus r. Damascius. p. 129. l.
21. for appointed r. appropriated. p. 181. l. 22. after them put in not. p.
192. l. 19 for we r. were. p. 211. l. 1. dele that. p. 217. l. 6. for
Hypostasis r. Hypothesis. p. 234. l. 6. for Intermission r. Intromission. p.
283. l. 21. r. as well as.

A DISCOURSE In VINDICATION of the Doctrine of the Trinity: WITH An ANSWER TO
THE Late SOCINIAN Objections.
CHAP. I. The Occasion and Design of this Discourse.
IT is now above twenty years since I first published a Discourse about the
reasons of the Sufferings of Christ, (lately reprinted) in answer to some
Socinian Objections at that time. But I know not how it came to pass, that the
Socinian controversy seemed to be laid asleep among us for many years after;
and so it had continued to this day, if some men's busy and indiscreet zeal for
their own particular Opinions (or rather Heresies) had not been more prevalent
over them, than their care and concernment for the common interest of
Christianity among us. For it is that which really suffers by these unhappy and
very unseasonable Disputes about the Mysteries of the Christian Faith, which
could never have been started and carried on with more fatal consequence to all
revealed Religion, than in an age too much inclined to Skepticism and
Infidelity. For all who are but well-wishers to that, do greedily catch at any
thing which tends to unsettle men's minds as to matters of Faith, and to expose
them to the scorn and contempt of Infidels. And this is all the advantage which
they have above others in their writings. For upon my careful Perusal of them
(which was occasioned by re^rinting that Discourse) I found nothing
extraordinary, as to depth of Judgment, or closeness of Reasoning, or strength
of Argument, or skill in Scripture or Antiquity, but the old stuff set out with
a new dress, and too much suited to the Genius of the age we live in, viz.
brisk and airy, but withal too light and superficial. But although such a sort
of Raillery be very much unbecoming the weight and dignity of the subject* yet
that is not the worst part of the character of them; for they seem to be
written, Considerat. on the explications of the Trinity, by Dr. W. etc. p. 22,
32.

Defense of the History of the Unit. p. 5. Answer to the Archbishop's Sermon,
p. 4.


not with a design to convince others, or to justify themselves, but to
ridicule the great Mysteries of our Faith, calling them Iargon, Cant, Nonsense,
Impossibilities, Contradictions, Samaritanism, and what not? any thing but
Mahometism and Deism. And at the same time they know, that we have not framed
these Doctrines our selves; but have received them by as universal a Tradition
and Consent of the Christian Church, as that whereby we receive the Books of
the new Testament, and as founded upon their authority. So that, as far as I
can see, the truth of these Doctrines and authority of those Books must stand
and fall together: For from the time of the writing and publishing of them all
persons who were admitted into the Christian Church by the Form of Baptism,
prescribed by our Savior, were understood to ^e received Members upon
profession of ^^e Faith of the Holy Trinity; the Hymns and Doxologies of the
Primitive Church were to Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and those who openly
opposed that Doctrine were cast out of the Communion of it: which to me seem
plain and demonstrative arg^ments, that this was the Doctrine of the Christian
Church from the beginning, as will appear in the progress of this Discourse.
The chief design whereof is to vindicate the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it
has been generally received in the Christian Church, and is expressed in the
Athanasian Creed, from those horrible Imputations of Nonsense, Contradiction
and Impossibility; with which it is charged by our Unitarians (as they call
themselves;) and that in the answer to the Sermon lately reprinted, about the
Mysteries of the Christian Faith: which I first preached and published some
years since, upon the breaking out of this controversy among us, by the Notes
on Athanasius his Creed, and other mischievous Pamphlets one upon another. I
was in hopes to have given some check to their insolent way of writing about
matters so much above our reach, by showing how reasonable it was for us to
submit to divine Revelation in such things, since we must acknowledge our
selves so much to seek, as to the nature of Substances, which are continually
before our Eyes; and therefore, if there were such difficulties about a Mystery
which depended upon Revelation, we had no cause to wonder at it; but our
business was chiefly to be satisfied, whether this Doctrine were any part of
that Revelation. As to which I proposed several things, which I thought very
reasonable, to the finding out the true sense of the Scripture about these
matters. After a considerable time, they thought fit to publish something,
which was to pass for an answer to it; but in it, they wholly pass over that
part which relates to the sense of Scripture, and run into their common place
about Mysteries of Faith; in which they were sure to have as many Friends, as
our Faith had Enemies: and yet they managed it in so trifling a manner, that I
did not then think it deserved an Answer. But a worthy and judicious Friend was
willing to take that task upon himself, which he has very well discharged: so
that I am not concerned to meddle with all those particulars, which are fully
answered already, but the general charge as to the Christian Church about the
Doctrine of the Trinity, I think my self obliged to give an answer to upon this
occasion. But before I come to that, since they so confidently charge the
Christian Church for so many ages, with embracing Errors, and Nonsense, and
Contradictions for Mysteries of Faith, I desire to know (supposing it possible
for the Christian Church to be so early, so generally and so miserably deceived
in a matter of such moment) by what light they have discovered this great
Error. Have they any new Books of Scripture to judge by? Truly they had need,
for they seem to be very weary of the old ones; because they find they will not
serve their turn. Answer to the Archb. Sermon. p 50. Explic^^ of the T^^nity, p.
29. Answer to Milbourn, p. 15, 23. History of the Unit. p. 43.

Answer to the Archb. p. 29, 30.


Therefore they muster up the old Objections against them, and give no answer
to them; they find fault with Copies, and say, they are corrupted and falsified
to speak the Language of the Church: they let fall suspicious words, as to the
Form of Baptism, as though it were inserted from the Churches Practice; they
charge us with following corrupt Copies and making false Translations without
any manner of ground for it.

And does not all this discover no good will to the Scriptures, at least, as
they are received among us? And I despair of meeting with better Copies, or
seeing a more faithful Translation than ours is. So that it is plain, that
they have no mind to be tried by the Scriptures. For these exceptions are such,
as a Malefactor would make to a Jury, he is afraid to be condemned by.

But what then is the peculiar light which these happy men have found in a
corner, the want whereof has made the Christian Church to fall into such
monstrous Errors and Contradictions? Nothing (they pretend) but the mere light
of common sense and reason; which they call after a more refined way of
speaking, clear Ideas and distinct Perceptions of things.

But least I should be thought to misrepresent them; I will produce some of
their own Expressions. In one place they say, We deny the Articles of the new
Christianity, or the Athanasian religion, not because they are Mysteries, or
because we do not comprehend them; we deny them, because we do comprehend them;
we have a clear and distinct Perception, that they are not Mysteries, but
Contradictions, Impossibilities, and pure Nonsense. We have our reason in vain,
and all science and certainty would be destroyed* if we could not distinguish
between Mysteries and Contradictions. And soon after, Answer to my Sermon p. 4.
we are not to give the venerable name of Mystery to Doctrines that are
contrary to nature's and reason's Light, or which destroy or contradict our
natural Ideas. These things I have particular reason to take notice of here,
because they are published as an Answer to the foregoing Sermon about the
Mysteries of the Christian Faith: and this shows the general grounds they go
upon, and therefore more fit to be considered here. To which I shall add one
passage more, wherein they insinuate, that the Doctrine of the Trinity has
been supported only by interest and force. Their words are (after they have
called the Doctrine of the Trinity, a monstrous Paradox and Contradiction) This
is that, Ans. to Dr. Wallis 's four Letters, p. 4.
say they, which because all other arguments failed them in their disputations
with the Photinians and Arians, they at last effectually proved, by the
Imperial Edicts, by Confiscations and Banishments, by Seizing and Burning all
Books written against it or them, by capital Punishments, and when the Papacy
(of which this is the chief Article) prevailed, by Fire and Faggot. This is a
new discovery indeed, that the Doctrine of the Trinity, as it is generally
received in the Christian Church, is the chief Article of Popery; although it
were embraced and defended long before Popery was known; and I hope would be
so, if there were no such thing as Popery left in the world. But if every thing
which displeases some men must pass for Popery, I am afraid Christianity it
self will not escape at last: for there are some who are building apace on such
foundations as these; and are endeavoring what they can, to remove out of
their way all revealed Religion, by the help of those two powerful Machines,
viz. Priestcraft and Mysteries.

But because I intend a clear and distinct Discourse concerning the Doctrine of
the Trinity, as it has been generally received among us; I shall proceed in
these four Enquiries.

(1.) Whether it was accounted a monstrous Paradox and Contradiction, where
Persons were not swayed by Force and Interest?

(2.) Whether there be any ground of common reason, on which it can be justly
charged with Nonsense, Impossibilities and Contradiction?

(3.) Whether their Doctrine about the Trinity or ours, be more agreeable to
the sense of Scripture and Antiquity?

(4.) Whether our Doctrine being admitted, it does overthrow all certainty of
reason, and makes way for believing the greatest Absurdities under the pretense
of being Mysteries of Faith?

CHAP. II. The Doctrine of the Trinity not received in the Christian Church by
Force or Interest.
AS to the first, it will lead me into an enquiry into the sense of the
Christian Church, as to this Doctrine, long before Popery was hatched, and at a
time when the main force of Imperial Edicts was against Christianity it self;
at which time this Doctrine was owned by the Christian Church, but disowned and
disputed against by some particular Parties and Sects. And the question then
will be, whether these had engrossed Sense, and Reason, and Knowledge among
themselves; and all the body of the Christian Church, with their heads and
governors, were bereft of common Sense, and given up to believe Nonsense and
Contradictions for Mysteries of Faith. But in order to the clearing this
matter, I take it for granted, That Sense and Reason are no late inventions,
only to be found among our Unitarians; but that all Mankind have such a
competent share of them, as to be able to judge, what is agreeable to them, and
what not, if they apply themselves to it; That no men have so little sense as
to be fond of Nonsense, when sense will do them equal service; That if there be
no Biass of Interest to sway them, men will generally judge according to the
evidence of reason; That if they be very much concerned for a Doctrine opposed
by others, and against their interest, they are persuaded of the truth of it,
by other means than by force and fear; That it is possible for men of sense and
reason to believe a Doctrine to be true on the account of divine Revelation,
although they cannot comprehend the manner of it; That we have reason to
believe those to be men of sense above others, who have showed their abilities
above them in other matters of Knowledge and Speculation; That there can be no
reason to suspect the integrity of such men in delivering their own Sense, who
at the same time might far better secure their interest by renouncing their
Faith; lastly, That the more Persons are concerned to establish and defend a
Doctrine which is opposed and contemned, the greater evidence they give, that
they are persuaded of the truth of it.

These are Postulata so agreeable to sense and common reason, that I think if
an affront to human Nature to go about to prove them. But to show what use we
are to make of them; we must consider that it cannot be denied, that the
Doctrine of the Trinity did meet with opposition very early in the Christian
Church, especially among the Jewish Christians; I mean those who strictly
adhered to the Law of Moses, after the Apostles had declared the freedom of
Christians from the obligation of it. These (as I shall show by and by) soon
after the dispersion of the Church of Jerusalem, gathered into a body by
themselves, distinct from that which consisted of Jews and Gentiles, and was
therefore called the Catholic Christian Church. And this separate body,
whether called Ebionites, Nazarens, or Mineans, did not only differ from the
Catholic Christian Church, as to the necessity of observing the Law of Moses,
but likewise as to the Divinity of our Savior, which they denied, although
they professed to believe him as the Christ or promised Messiah.

Theodoret has with very good judgment placed the Heresies of the first ages
of the Ch^istian Church, Theodoret haeret. l. 1. and 11.
under two distinct heads, (which others reckon up confusedly) and those are
such as relate to the Humanity of Christ, as Simon Magus, and all the Sets of
those who are called Gnostics, which are recited in his first Book. In his
second he begins with those which relate to the Divinity of Christ; and these
are of two kinds:

1. The Jewish Christians who denied it. Of these, he reckons up the Ebionites,
Cerinthians, the Nazarens, and Elcesaitae, whom he distinguished from the other
Ebionites, because of a Book of Revelation, which one Elxai brought among them;
Epiphan. Haeres. 19. n. 5.29. n. 17.
but Epiphanius says, he joined with the Ebionites and Nazarens.

2. Those of the Gentile Christians, who were looked on as broaching a new
Doctri^e among them: of these he reckons Artemon as the first, then Theodotus;
whom others make the first Publisher of it, as Tertullian, Tertull de
praescript. haeret c 52. Eusebius. hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 28.
and the old Writer in Eusebius, supposed to be Caius, who lived near the time,
and of whom a considerable Fragment is preserved in Eusebius, which gives light
to these matters. The next is another Theodotus, who framed a new Sect of such
as set up Mel^hisedeck above Christ. Then follow Paulus Samosatenus, and
Sabellius, who made but one Person as well as one God, and so overthrew the
Trinity; with whom Marcellus agreed in substance, and last of all Photinus. But
Theodoret concludes that Book with this passage, viz. That all these Heresies
against our Savior's Divinity were then wholly extinct; so that there were not
so much as any small Remainders of them. What would he have said, if he had
lived in our age, wherein they are not only revived, but are pretended to have
been the true Doctrine of the Apostolical Churches? Had all men lost their
Senses in Theodoret's time? And yet there were as many learned and able Men in
the Christian Church then, as ever were in any time.

CHAP. III. The Socinian Plea for the Antiquity of their Doctrine examined.
BUT this is not the age our Unitarians will stand or fall by. They are for
going backward; and they speak with great comfort about the old Ebionites and
Nazarens as entirely theirs; And that they had considerable men among them, as
Theodotion and Symmachus, Hist. of the Unit. p. 10. Edit. II.
two Translators of the Hebrew Bible. And among the Gentile Christians, they
value themselves upon three Men, Paulus Samosatenus, Lucianus, the most learned
Person, they say, of his age, and Photinus Bishop of Sirmium. As to the
Unitarians at Rome, (whom they improperly call Nazarens) they pretended that
their Doctrine was Apostolical, and the general Doctrine of the Church till the
times of Victor and Zepherin.

This is the substance of their Plea, which must now be examined.

I begin with those Primitive Unitarians, the Ebionites, concerning whom, I
observe these things:

1. That they were a distinct, separate body of men from the Christian Church.
For all the ancient Writers who speak of them, do mention them as Heretics,
and wholly divided from it, as appears by Irenaeus, Tertullian, Epiphanius,
Theodoret, S. Augustine, and others. Eusebius says of them, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 27.
That although the Devil could not make them renounce Christianity, yet finding
their weakness, (...), he made them his own. He would never have said this of
any whom he looked on as Members of the Christian Church. But wherein is it
that Eusebius blames them? He tells it in the very next words; that it was for
the mean opinion they entertained of Christ; for they looked on him as a mere
Man, but very just. And although there were two sorts of them; some owning the
miraculous Conception, and others not; yet says he, They at last agreed in the
same Impiety, which was, That they would not own Christ to have had any
Pre-existence before his Birth; nor that he was (...), God the Word. It Is true,
he finds fault with them afterward for keeping to the Law of Moses; but the
first Impiety he charges them with, is the other. That which I infer from
hence is, that Eusebius himself (to whom they profess to show greater respect
than to most of the ancient Writers, Ante-Nicenism. p. 37.
for his exactness and diligence in Church History) does affirm the Doctrine
which overthrows the Preexistence and Divinity of Christ to be an Impiety.
Answer to Milb. p. 20.
And therefore when he affirms the first fifteen Bishops of the Church of
Jerusalem who were of the Circumcision, viz. to the Siege of it by Hadrian,
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 5.
did hold the genuine Doctrine of Christ, it must be understood of his
Pre-existence and Divinity; for the other we see he accounted an Impiety. And
he tells us the Church of Jerusalem then consisted of believing Jews, and so it
had done from the Apostles times to that of Hadrian 's Banishment of the Jews.
Which is a considerable Testimony to two purposes:

1. To show that the Primitive Church of Jerusalem did hold the Doctrine of
Christ's Pre-existence and Divinity. But say our Unitarians, this does not
follow. For what reason? When it is plain that Eusebius accounted that the only
genuine Doctrine. No, say they, Resp. ad Judic. Eccles. p. 176.
he meant only the miraculous Conception, and that they held that, in
opposition to those Ebionites who said that he was born as other men are. This
is very strange; when Eusebius had distinguished the two sorts of Ebionites
about this matter, and had blamed both of them, even those that held him born
of a Virgin, for falling into the same Impiety. What can satisfy such men, who
are content with such an answer? But say they, Eusebius only spoke his own
sense. Not so neither: For he says in that place, that he had searched the
most ancient Records of the Church of Jerusalem. Yes, say they, for the
Succession of the first Bishops; but as to their Doctrine he had it from
Hegesippus, and he was an Ebionite himself. Then Eusebius must not be the man
they take him for. For if Hegesippus were himself an Ebionite, and told
Eusebius in his Commentaries, that the Primitive Church of Jerusalem consisted
of all such, then Eusebius must suppose that Church guilty of the same Impiety
with which he charges the Ebionites; and would he then have said, That they had
the true knowledge of Christ among them? No, say they, Eusebius spoke his own
opinion, but Hegesippus being an Ebionite himself, meant otherwise. But
Eusebius does not use Hegesippus his words, but his own in that place; and
withal, how does it appear that Hegesippus himself was an Ebionite? This, one
of their latest Writers has undertaken, but in such a manner, as is not like
to convince me. It is thus, Answer to Dr. Bull, part I. p. 41.
Hegesippus was himself a Jewish Christian, and made use of the Hebrew Gospel,
and among the Heretics which crept into the Church of Jerusalem, he never
numbers the Ebionites or Cerinthians, but only the Gnostics. I will not
dispute, whether Hegesippus was a Jewish Christian or not. Grant he was so, yet
how does it appear that all the Jewish Christians were at that time Ebionites
or Cerinthians? It seems they were neither of them Heretics, although they
were opposite to each other; the one held the World created by inferior
Powers, the other, by God himself: the one, we see, made Christ a mere Man; but
the Cerinthians held an illapse of the (...) upon him, and so made him a kind
of a God by his Presence, as Nestorius did afterward. But honest Hegesippus
took neither one nor the other for Heretics, if our Unitarians say true. But
yet it does not appear, that Hegesippus was either one or the other. For he
speaks of the Church of Jerusalem, as is plain by Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 4, c. 22.
and the Cerinthians and Ebionites, were in other parts; the former in Egypt
and the lesser or Proconsular Asia; and the latter about Decapolis and
Coelesyria, from whence they spread into Arabia and Armenia, as appears by
Epiphanius. But Origin says, That all the Jewish Christians were Ebionites.
What! no Cerinthians among them? Were not those Jewish Christians? Or were they
all turned Ebionites then? No such thing appears by Origen's saying. But we are
not enquiring now, what they were in his time, but in the Church of Jerusalem.
Does Origin say all the Jewish Christians there were such? And as to his own
time, it is not improbable that those who then made up the separate Body of
Jewish Christians were Ebionites. But what is this to the first Christians of
the Church of Jerusalem? Very much, say they, because the first Christians were
called Nazarens, and the Nazarens held the same Doctrine with the Ebionites.
But the title of Nazarens did not always signify the same thing. It was at
first used for all Christians, Act. 24.5.
as appears by the Sect of the Nazarens in Tertullus his Accusation of S. Paul;
then it was taken for the Christians who stayed at Pella and settled at
Decapolis and thereabouts, as Epiphanius affirms; Epiphan. haer. 29 n. 7.
for although all the Christians withdrew thither before the Destruction of
Jerusalem, as Eusebius says, yet they did not all continue there, but a great
number returned to Jerusalem, and were there settled under their Bishops; but
those who remained about Pella kept the name of Nazarens, and never were united
with the Gentile Christians, but kept up their old Jewish customs, as to their
Synagogues, even in S. Ierom and S. Augustine's time. Now these Nazarens might
be all Ebionites, and yet those of the Church of Jerusalem not so at all.

2. The next thing observable from this place of Eusebius is, that while the
Nazarens and Ebionites were settled in Coelesyria, and the parts thereabouts,
there was a regular Christian Church at Jerusalem, under the Bishops of the
Circumcision, to the Siege of Hadrian. Eusebius observes, that before the
destruction of Jerusalem, all the Christians forsook not only Jerusalem, Eusebius.
l. 3. c. 5.
but the Coasts of Judea. But that they did not all continue there, is most
evident from what Eusebius here says of the Church and Bishops of Jerusalem;
between the two Sieges of Titus Vespasian and Hadrian, L. 4. c. 8.
which was in the 18 year of his Empire, says Eusebius. Who produces another
Testimony out of Justin Martyr, which shows that the Christians were returned
to Jerusalem. For therein he says, That Barchochebas in that War used the
Christians with very great severity to make them renounce Christianity. How
could this be, if all the Christians were out of his reach, then being settled
about Pella? And although Eusebius says, L. 4 c. 6.
That when the Jews were banished their Country by Hadrian 's Edict, that then
the Church of Jerusalem was made up of Gentiles; yet we are not so strictly to
understand him, as though the Christians who suffered under Barchochebas, were
wholly excluded. Orosius says, Oros. l. 7. c. 13.
That they were permitted by the Emperor's Edict. It is sufficient for me, if
they were connived at, which is very probable, although they did not think fit
to have any such public Persons as their Bishops to be any other than
Gentiles. And Hegesippus is allowed after this time, to have been a Jewish
Christian of the Church of Jerusalem: so that the Church there must consist
both of Jews and Gentiles; but they can never show that any of the Ebionites
did admit any Gentile Christians among them, which shows that they were then
distinct Bodies.

2. They were not only distinct in Communion, but had a different rule of
Faith. This is a point of great consequence, and ought to be well considered.
For, since our Unitarians own the Ebionites as their Predecessors, we ought to
have a particular eye to the rule of Faith received by them, which must be very
different from ours, if they follow the Ebionites, as I doubt not to make it
appear. They say, The Ebionites used only S. Matthew 's Gospel. But the
Christian Church then, Answer to Dr. Bull, p. 42.
and ever since, have received the four Gospels, as of divine authority.
Eusebius, one of the most approved Authors in Antiquity by our Unitarians,
reckons up the four Evangelists and S. Paul 's Epistles, as writings
universally received by the Christian Church; then he mentions some generally
rejected as spurious; and after those which were doubted, among which he
mentions the Gospel according to the Hebrews, which the Jewish Christians
followed. Now here is an apparent difference put between the Gospel according
to the Hebrews, and S. Matthew 's Gospel; as much as between a Book received
without controversy, and one that was not. But if the Gospel according to the
Hebrews were then acknowledged to be the true Gospel of S. Matthew; it was
impossible a man of so much sense as Eusebius, should make this difference
between them. But it is worth our observing, what our Unitarians say about this
matter. And by that we may judge very much of their opinion about the Gospels.
I shall set down their words, for fear I should be thought to do them wrong.
Symmachus and the Ebionites, Answer to Dr. Bull, p. 39.
say they, as they held our Savior to be the Son of Joseph and Mary; so they
contended that the first Chapter of S. Matthew's Gospel was added by the Greek
Translators. S. Matthew wrote his Gospel in Hebrew, when it was translated into
Greek, the Translator prefaced it with a Genealogy and Narration that our
Savior was conceived by the Holy Spirit of God, and was not the Son of Joseph,
but this Genealogy and Narration, said Symmachus and the Ebionites, is not in
the Hebrew Gospel of S. Matthew, nay is the mere invention of the Translator.
As for the other Gospels, the Ebionites and Symmachians did not receive the
Gospel of S. Luke: and for that of S. John, they said it was indeed written by
Cerinthus, to confirm his Platonic Conceits about the Logos or Word, which he
supposed to be the Christ or Spirit of God, which rested on and inhabited the
person of Jesus. Let us now but join to this another passage, which is this,
Those whom we now call Socinians, were by the Fathers and the first ages of
Christianity called Nazarens; and afterward they were called Ebionites,
Mineans, Symmachians, etc.

If this be true, they must have the same opinions as to the Books of the New
Testament; and hereby we see what sort of men we have to deal with, who under
the pretense of the old Ebionites, undermine the authority of the New
Testament. As to S. Matthew's Gospel, I see no reason to question its being
first written in the Language then used among the Jews, which was mixed of
Hebrew, Syriack, and Chaldee: since this is affirmed, not merely by Papias,
whose authority never went far; but by Origin, Irenaeus, Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 3.
c. 24, 39. L 5. c. 8.10. L. 6. c. 25. Hieron. c. Pelag. l. 3.
S. Ierom, and others. But I must distinguish between S. Matthew's Authentic
Gospel, which Pantaenus saw in the Indies, and that which was called the Gospel
according to the Hebrews, and the Nazaren Gospel. S. Ierom in one place seems
to insinuate, that S. Matthew's Gospel was preserved in the Library of
Pamphilus at Caesarea, Hieron. de script. in Matthew.
and that the Nazarens at Berrhaea in Syria had given him leave to transcribe
it. But if we compare this with other places in him, we shall find, that he
questioned whether this were the Authentic Gospel of S. Matthew or not; he
says, Comment. in Matthew. c. 12.
it is so called by many; but he confesses it was the same which the Ebionites
and Nazarens used. In which were many interpolations, as appears by the
collections out of it in S. Ierom's Works and other ancient Writers; which some
learned men have put together. And S. Ierom often calls it the Gospel according
to the Hebrews. In Isa. c. 11. In Ezekiel. c. 18.
And so do other ancient Writers. From the laying several passages together,
Erasmus suspects, Erasm. advers. Stunic. c. 1.
that S. Ierom never saw any other than the common Nazaren Gospel, and offers a
good reason for it, viz. That he never made use of its authority to correct the
Greek of S. Matthew, which he would not have failed to have done in his
Commentaries; and he produces the Nazaren Gospel upon slight occasions. But
how came the Preface to be curtailed in the Ebionite Gospel? Of which
Epiphanius gives an account, and shows what was inserted instead of it: No, say
the Ebionites, the Preface was added by the Translator into Greek. From what
evidence? and to what end? To prove that Christ was born of the Holy Spirit.
This then must be looked on as a mere Forgery; and those Ebionites were in the
right, who held him to be the Son of Joseph and Mary. What do these men mean by
such suggestions as these? Are they resolved to set up Deism among us, and in
order thereto, to undermine the authority of the New Testament? For it is not
only S. Matthew's Gospel, but S. Luke's and S. John's which they strike at,
under the pretense of representing the arguments of these wretched Ebionites.
If their arguments are mean and trifling and merely precarious, why are they
not slighted and answered by such as pretend to be Christians? If they think
them good, we see what we have to do with these men; it is not the Doctrine of
the Trinity, so much as the authority of the Gospels, which we are to maintain
against them: And not those only, for the Ebionites rejected all S. Paul 's
Epistles; and called him an Apostate and a Transgressor of the Law. What say
our Unitarians to this? Why truly, Answer to Dr. Bull, p. 35.
This comes from Epiphanius, and because he quotes no Author, it seems to be
one of his malicious Tales. This is a very short way of answering, if it would
satisfy any men of sense. But they ought to have remembered that within a few
Pages, P. 40.
they allege Epiphanius as a very competent Witness about the Ebionites,
because he was born in Palestine, and lived very near it. But we do not rely
wholly upon Epiphanius in this matter. For those whom they allow to be the best
Witnesses as to the Doctrine of the Nazarens, say the same thing concerning
them. P. 39. Origin c. Cells. l. 5. p. 274.
As the most learned Origin, as they call him, who lived a long time in Syria
and Palestine it self; and he affirms, that both sorts of Ebionites rejected S.
Paul 's Epistles: and Theodoret, Theodor haeret. l. 2. c. 1.
who they say, lived in Coelesyria, where the Nazarens most abound, affirms of
them, That they allowed only the Gospel according to the Hebrews, and called
the Apostle an Apostate: by whom they meant S. Paul. And the same is said by S.
Ierom who conversed among them; Hieron in Matthew. c. 12.
That they look on S. Paul as a Transgressor of the Law, and receive none of
his Writings. Have we not now a very comfortable account of the Canon of the
New Testament from these ancient Unitarians? And if our modern ones account
them their Predecessors, we may judge what a mean opinion they must have of the
Writings of the New Testament. For if they had any concernment for them, they
would never suffer such scandalous insinuations to pass without a severe
censure, and a sufficient answer. But their Work seems to be rather to pull
down, than to establish the authority of revealed Religion; and we know what
sort of men are gratified by it.

CHAP. IV. Of the considerable Men they pretend to have been of their Opinion
in the Primitive Church.
I Now come to consider the men of Sense they pretend to among these ancient
Unitarians.

The first is Theodotion, whom they make to be an Unitarian. But he was, says
Eusebius from Irenaeus, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 8.
a Jewish Proselyte, and so they may very much increase the number of
Unitarians, by taking in all the Jews as well as Proselytes. But must these
pass for men of Sense too, because they are against the Doctrine of the
Trinity, and much upon the same grounds with our modern Unitarians? For they
cry out of Contradictions and Impossibilities just as they do; i. e. with as
much confidence and as little reason. Symmachus is another of their ancient
Heroes; he was, if Epiphanius may be believed, Epiph. de ponder. and men's. n.
16.
first a Samaritan, and then a Jew, and Eusebius says indeed, Eusebius. l. 6. c.
17.
That he was an Ebionite, and therefore for observing the Law of Moses. S.
Augustine says, August. c. Crescon. l. 1. c. 31.
that in his time the Symmachiani were both for Circumcision and Baptism. Hier.
in Heb. c. 3.
S. Ierom observes, that Theodotion and Symmachus, both Ebionites, translated
the Old Testament in what concerned our Savior, like Jews, and Aquila who was
a Jew, like a Christian; but in another place he blames all three for the same
fault. Advers. Ruffin.
Eusebius goes somewhat farther: for he says, Symmachus wrote against S.
Matthew 's Gospel to establish his own Heresy, which showed he was a true
Ebionite.

The next they mention as one of their great Lights, was Paulus Samosatenus,
Bishop and Patriarch of Antioch. But in another place, they have a spiteful
Insinuation, that men in such places are the great Pensioners of the World;
Answer to the Archb. Sermon p. 44, 66.
as though they were swayed only by interest; and that it keeps them from
embracing of the truth. Now Paulus Samosatenus gave greater occasion for such a
Suspicion than any of the persons so unworthily reflected upon. For he was a
man noted for his Affectation of excessive Vanity and Pomp, and very unjust
methods of growing rich. It is well we have Eusebius his Testimony for this;
Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
for they slight Epiphanius for his malicious Tales, and S. Ierom for his
Legends; but they commend Eusebius for his Exactness and Diligence. Reflect. on
Dr. Bull, p 35. Answer to Milbourn, p. 20.
And I hope Theodoret may escape their censure, who affirms, that Paulus
Samofatenus suited his Doctrine to his interest with Zenobia who then governed
in those parts of Syria and Phoenicia, who professed her self to be of the
Jewish Persuasion. Athanasius says, Athan. ad solit. vit. agent p. 857.
She was a Jew and a Favourer of Paulus Samosatenus. What his opinions were,
our Unitarians do not take the pains to inform us, taking it for granted that
he was of their Mind. Eusebius says, Eusebius. l. 3. c. 27.
He had a very mean and low opinion of Christ, as having nothing in him above
the common nature of Mankind. Theodoret says, he fell into the Doctrine of
Artemon to oblige Zenobia, and Artemon, he says, held that Christ was a mere
Man born of a Virgin, but exceeding the Prophets in Excellency. Where the words
(...) are used to express the opinion of Artemon, which ought to be taken
notice of, Respons. ad judicium Ecclesiae p^r I^. Bull, p. 150
because our modern Unitarians say, That those words among the ancient Writers
were taken in opposition to the miraculous Conception of our Savior.

But Paulus Samosatenus was universally disowned by the Christian Church of
that time; although as long as Zenobia held her Power, he kept his See; which
was for some time after he was first called in question for his Heresy. But at
first he made use of many Arts and Devices to deceive the Christian Bishops of
the best Reputation, Restaurans Pauli Samosatensis Arts and Dolos.

Decret. Conc. Sardin. apud Hilar. fragment. p. 1310. Ed. Par. 1693. Eusebius l.
7. c. 27.

Theodor. haer. fab. l. 2. c. 8.


who assembled at Antioch in order to the suppressing this dangerous Doctrine,
as they all accounted it. For hearing of his opinions about our Savior, they
ran together, says Eusebius, as against a Wolf which designed to destroy the
Flock. Now from hence it is very reasonable to argue, that the Samosatenian
Doctrine was then looked on as a very dangerous Novelty in the Christian
Church. For, although the Ebionites had asserted the same thing, as to the
Divinity of our Savior, yet they were not looked on as true Members of the
Christian Church; but as S. Ierom says, While they affected to be both Jews
and Christians, they were neither Jews nor Christians. Artemon whoever he was,
was but an obscure person; and Theodotus had Learning, they say, but was of no
place in the Church; but for such a considerable person as the Bishop of
Antioch to own such a Doctrine must unavoidably discover the general sense of
the Christian Church concerning it. Paulus Samosatenus wanted neither parts,
nor interest, nor experience; and he was supported by a Princess of great
Spirit and Courage, enough to have daunted all the Bishops, at least in those
parts, from appearing against him. But such was the zeal and concernment of the
Bishops of the Christian Church in this great affair, that they not only
assembled themselves, but they communicated it to Dionysius Bishop of
Alexandria, Athanas. desentent. Dionysii, p. 558.
and to another of the same name, Bishop of Rome, and others; and desired their
advice and concurrence, who did all agree in the condemnation of his Doctrine.
The former said, He would have gone himself to Antioch, but for his extreme old
Age; and he died soon after the first Council, which met at Antioch on this
occasion; but he sent his judgment and reasons thither, which we find in an
Epistle of his still extant, whereof mention is made in the Epistle of the
second Synod of Antioch to Dionysius Bishop of Rome, and Maximus Bishop of
Alexandria, and all other Bishops, Priests and Deacons of the Catholic Church,
wherein they give an account of their proceedings against Paulus Samosatenus,
and they say, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
They had invited the Bishops of the remoter parts to come to Antioch for the
suppression of this damnable Doctrine; and among the rest Dionysius of
Alexandria, and Firmilian of Cappadocia, as persons of greatest reputation then
in the Church. Firmilian was there at the former Synod, (of whom Theodoret
says, that he was famous both for divine and humane Learning) and so were
Gregorius Thaumaturgus and Athenodorus Bishops of Pontus, and Helenus Bishop of
Tarsus in Cilicia, and Nicomas of Iconium, and Hymenaeus of Jerusalem, and
Theotecnus of Caesarea; who all condemned his Doctrine, but they spared his
person upon his solemn Promises to retract it; but he persisting in it when
they were gone home, and fresh complaints being made of him, Firmilian was
coming a third time to Antioch, but died by the way: but those Bishops who
wrote the Synodical Epistle do all affirm, That they were Witnesses and many
others, when he condemned his Doctrine, but was willing to forbear his person
upon his promise of amendment, which they found afterward was merely delusory.

Dionysius Alexandrinus, they say, would not write to him, but sent his mind
about him to the Church of Antioch. Which Epistle is mentioned by S. Ierom, (as
written by him a little before his death) as well as by Eusebius and Theodoret;
and I do not see sufficient reason to question the authority of that, which
Fronto Ducaeus published from Turrian's Copy, although it be denied by H.
Valesius and others. It Is said, indeed, That he did not write to him, i. e. he
did not direct it to him, but he might send it to the Council in answer to his
Letters, which he mentions. How far it differs from his style in other
Epistles, I will not take upon me to judge; but the design is very agreeable to
an Epistle from him on that occasion. It Is true, that it seems to represent the
opinion of Paulus Samosatenus after a different manner from what it is commonly
thought to have been. But we are to consider, that ^e made use of all the Arts
to d^sguise himself that he could; and when he found the making Christ to be a
mere Man would not be born, he went from the Ebionite to the Cerinthian
Hypothesis, viz. That the (...) did dwell in him, and that there were two
Persons in Christ, one Divine and the other Humane; and two Sons, the one by
Nature the Son of God, who had a Pre existence, and the other the Son of David,
who had no subsistence before. This is the opinion which Dionysius sets himself
against in that Epistle; and which therefore ^ome may imagine was written after
Nestorius his Heresy. But that was no new Heresy, as appears by the
Cerinthians; and it was that which Paulus Samosatenus fled to, as more
plausible; which not only appears by this Epistle, but by what Athanasius and
Epiphanius have delivered concerning it.

Athanasius* Athan. de Incarn. To I. p. 591.
wrote a Book of the Incarnation against the followers of Paulus Samosatenus,
who held, as he says, Two Persons in Christ, viz. One born of the Virgin, and
a divine Person, which descended upon him and dwelt in him. Against which
opinion he disputes from two places of Scripture; viz. God was manifest in the
Flesh; and the Word was made Flesh: and from the ancient Doctrine of the
Christian Church, and the Synod of Antioch against Paulus Samosatenus. And in
another place he says, P. 635.
that he held, That the divine Word dwelt in Christ. And the words of
Epiphanius are express to the same purpose; (...). Epiph. haer. 65. n. 1.

Council. Ephesin. part I. Supplicatio Basilii, etc.


That the Logos came and dwelt in the Man Jesus. And the Clergy of
Constantinople charged Nestorius with following the Heresy of Paulus
Samosatenus. And Photius in his Epistles says, Phot. Epist. 35.
That Nestorius tasted too much of the intoxicated Cups of Paulus Samosatenus;
and in the foregoing Epistle, he says, That Paulus his followers asserted two
Hypostases in Christ. But some think, that Paulus Samosatenus did not hold any
subsistence of the (...) before, but that the Word was in God before without
any subsistence of its own, and that God gave it a distinct subsistence when it
inhabited in the Person of Christ; and so Marius Mercator and Leontius
understand him; who say that he differed from Nestorius therein; Marius Market.
de 12 Anath. Nestorii, n. 16.

Leontius de sectis p. 436. edit. Basil.


who asserted a Divine Word with its proper subsistence. But according to them
Paulus by the Word unders^ood that Divine Energy whereby Christ acted, and
which dwelt in him; but Dionysius says he made two Christ's, and two Sons of
God. But the Doctrine of the Christian Church, he says was that there was but
one Christ, and one Son, who was the Eternal Word, and was made Flesh. And it
is observable, that he brings the very same places we do now to prove this
Doctrine, as In the beginning was the Word, etc. and Before Abraham was I am.
It seems that some of the Bishops who had been upon the examination of his
Opinions before the second Synod, which deposed him, sent him an account of
their Faith and required his answer; wherein they declare the Son not to be
God, according to God's Decree, (which he did not stick at) but that he was so
really and substantially; and whosoever denied this, they said, was out of the
Communion of the Church, and all the Catholic Churches agreed with them in it.

And they declare, that they received this Doctrine from the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament, and bring the same places we do now, as, Thy Throne O
God was for ever, etc. Who is over all, God blessed for ever. All things were
made by him, etc. And we do not find that Paulus Samosatenus, as subtle as he
was, ever imagined that these places belonged to any other than Christ, or that
the making of all things was to be understood of the making of nothing; but
putting it into men's power to make themselves new Creatures. These were
discoveries only reserved for the Men of Sense and clear Ideas in these
brighter Ages of the World.

But at last, after all the arts and subterfuges which Paulus Samosatenus used,
there was a Man of Sense, as it happened, among the Clergy of Antioch, called
Malchion, who was so well acquainted with his Sophistry, that he drove him out
of all, and laid his Sense so open before the second Synod, that he was
solemnly deposed for denying the Divinity of the Son of God, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 30.
and his Descent from Heaven, as appears by their Synodical Epistle. It is pity
we have it not entire; but by the Fragments of it, which are preserved by some
ancient Writers, we find that his Doctrine of the Divinity in him by
Inhabitation was then condemned, Leont. c. Nestor. l. 3.
and the substantial Union of both Natures asserted. I have only one thing more
to observe concerning him, which is, that the Arian Party in their Decree at
Sardica, (or rather Philippopolis) do confess that Paulus Samosatenus his
Doctrine was condemned by the whole Christian World. For they say, Hilar.
fragment. p. 1321. Theod. l. 1. c. 4.
That which passed in the Eastern Synod, was signed and approved by all. And
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, in his Epistle to Alexander of Constantinople
affirms the same. And now I hope, I may desire our Men of Sense to reflect upon
these Matters. Here was no Fire nor Faggot threatened, no Imperial Edicts to
enforce this Doctrine, nay the Queen of those parts, under whose Jurisdiction
they lived at that time, openly espoused the cause of Paulus Samosatenus, so
that here could be nothing of interest to sway them to act in opposition to
her. And they found his interest so strong, that he retained the Possession of
his See, till Aurelian had conquered Zenobia, and by his authority he was
ejected. This Synod which deposed him, did not sit in the time of Aurelian, as
is commonly thought, but before his time, while Zenobia had all the power in
her hands in those Eastern parts, which she enjoyed five years; till she was
dispossessed by Aurelian, from whence Ant. Pagi concludes, Pagi Critica in Bar.
A. 272. n. 2.
that Paulus kept his See three years after the Sentence against him; but upon
application to Aurelian; he who afterward began a Persecution against all
Christians, gave this rule, That he with whom the Italian Bishops, and those of
Rome communicated, should enjoy the Sea, upon which Paulus was at last turned
out. By this we see a concurrence of all the Christian Bishops of that time
against him, that denied the Divinity of our Savior; and this without any
force, and against their interest, and with a general consent of the Christian
World. For there were no mighty Awes and Draconic Sanctions to compel, Answer
to the Archbishop, p. 54.
of which they sometimes speak, as if they were the only powerful methods to
make this Doctrine go down. And what greater argument can there be, that it was
then the general sense of the Christian Church? And it would be very hard to
condemn all his Opposers for men that wanted Sense and Reason, because they so
unanimously opposed him.

Not so unanimously neither, say our Unitarians, because Lucian, a Presbyter of
the Church of Antioch, and a very learned man, joined with him. It would have
been strange indeed, if so great a Man as Paulus Samosatenus, could prevail
with none of his own Church to join with him, especially one that came from the
same place of Samosata, as Lucian did; and probably was by him brought thither.

He has an extraordinary character given him by Eusebius, Eusebius l. 8, 13, 9.
c. 6.
both for his Life and Learning; and so by S. Ierom, without the least
reflection upon him as to matter of Faith. But on the other side, Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria in his Epistle concerning Arius to Alexander of
Constantinople, does say, Theod. l. 1. c. 4.
That he followed Paulus Samosatenus, and held separate Communion for many
years, under the three following Bishops. He does not say that he died so, when
he suffered Martyrdom under Maximinus at Nicomedia; neither does he say the
contrary. Upon which learned Men are divided, whether he persisted in that
opinion or not. Petavius and Valesius give him up; Petav. de Trinit. l. 1. c.
4. n. 13. H. Valesius in Theod. l. 1. c. 4. Baron. A. 318. n. 75, etc.
on the other side Baronius vindicates him, and says, The mis-report of him
came from his zeal against Sabellianism; and that Alexander wrote that of him
before his Books were thoroughly examined; that Athanasius never joins him with
Paulus Samosatenus; that the Arians never produced his authority in their
debates, as they would have done, since the Emperor's Mother had built a City
in the place where he suffered Martyrdom. It cannot be doubted that the Arian
Party would have it believed that they came out of Lucian's School, as appears
by Arius his Epistle to Eusebius of Nicomedia; but on the other side, the great
argument to me is, That this very party at the Council of Antioch, produced a
Creed, which they said, was there found written with Lucian's own hand, which
is directly contrary to the Samosatenian Doctrine. Soz. l. 3 c. 5.
Now, either this was true or false: if it were true, then it was false that he
was a Samosatenian; if it were false, how came the Arian Party to give it out
for true? Especially those who valued themselves for coming out of his School.
They were far enough from being such weak men to produce the authority of
Lucian at Antioch, where he was so much esteemed, for a Doctrine utterly
inconsistent with that of Paulus Samosatenus, if it were there known, that he
was his Disciple, and separated from three Bishops on that account. For therein
the Son is owned to be God of God, begotten of the Father before all Ages,
perfect God of perfect God, etc. Suppose they had a mind to subvert the Nicene
Faith by this Creed under the name of Lucian, (only because (...) was left out)
yet what an improbable way did they take, when they supported the main points
by his authority, and that at Antioch, where it was greatest? If Philostorgius
may be credited, Philost. l. 2. c. 15, 16.
the great men of the Arian Party had been his Scholars, as besides Eusebius of
Nicomedia, Maris of Chalcedon, Theognis of Nice, Leontius of Antioch, and
several other leading Bishops, and even Arius himself pretended to it. Which
makes me apt to think, that Alexander knowing this, and at first not being able
so well to judge of Lucian's opinion, charged him with following Paulus
Samosatenus, from whence the odium would fall upon his Scholars. For his design
is to draw the succession down from Ebion, and Artemon, and Paulus Samosatenus,
and Lucian to Arius and his Associates; and charges them with holding the same
Doctrine, wherein he was certainly mistaken; and so he might be about Lucian's
separation from the following Bishops on that account.

The last our Unitarians mention among their great men, is Photinus Bishop of
Sirmium. They take it for granted that he was of their opinion. This is
certain, that whatever it was, it was generally condemned, as well by the
Arians as others; and after several Councils called, he was deposed for his
Heresy. The first time we find him condemned, was by the Arian Party in a
second Council at Antioch, as appears by the profession of Faith drawn up by
them, extant in Athanasius and Socrates. Athanas. Tom. 1. p. 898.

Socr. l. 2. c. 19.


There they anathematize expressly the Disciples of Marcellus and Photinus, for
denying the Pre-existence and Deity of Christ. But by Christ, they understood,
The Person born of the Virgin, who was the Son of God; but they did not deny
the Pre-existence of the (...), and never dreamed that any could think that
Christ was to be called the (...), from his Office of Preaching, as our modern
Unitarians assert. But Photinus his opinion was, Athan. de Synodis Arim. etc.
p. 897.
That the (...) was before all Ages, but not Christ, or the Son of God, which
divine word was partly internal, and so it was ever with God, and partly
external, when it was communicated to the Person of Christ, whereby he became
the Son of God. But the Arians there declare their Belief, That Christ was the
living Word, and Son of God before all Worlds, and by whom he made all things.
The next time he is said to be condemned, was in that which is called the
Council at Sardica, but was the Council of the Eastern Bishops after their
parting from the Western. This is mentioned by Epiphanius and Sulpitius
Severus, Epiph haeret. 71. Sulpit. Sever. l. 2. p. 397.
the latter says he differed from Sabellius only in the point of Union, i. e.
because Sabellius made the Persons to be merely Denominations which was then
called the Heresy of the Vnionitae; and therefore Photinus must assert an
Hypostasis to the (...), Prudent. Apoth.
or else he did not at all differ from Sabellius. And it appears by Epiphanius,
that Photinus did distinguish between Christ and the Word. In the Beginning was
the Word, said he, Epiph. n. 2.
but not the Son, which title was promised and foretold, but did not belong to
Christ till he was born of the Holy Ghost and Mary, so he expresses it. Herein,
says Epiphanius, he followed Paulus Samosatenus, N. 1, 2.
but exceeded him in his Inventions. In answer to him, he says, that S. John's
words are not, In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was in God, but the
Word was with God, N. 4.
and the Word was God. Little did either side imagine that this was to be
understood of the beginning of the Gospel, as our modern Photinians would make
us believe they think; but Photinus himself was a Person of too much Sagacity
to take up with such an absurd and insipid sense. I pass over the fresh
condemnations of Photinus in the Councils at Milan and Rome, because his
opinion is not to be learnt from them; and come to that at Sirmium, where it is
more particularly set ^orth, as well as condemned. But here we must distinguish
the two Councils at Sirmium; in the former, he was condemned, but the people
would not part with him; but in the second, he was not only condemned, but
effectually deposed, the Emperor Constantius a professed Arian, forcing him to
withdraw: But it was upon his own Appeal to the Emperor against the Judgment of
the Council, who appointed Judges Delegates to hear this cause: Epiph. haeret.
71. Socr. l. 2. ^. 30.
and Basilius Ancyranus was the manager of the debate with him, Soz. l. 4 c. 6.
Hist. Tripart. l. 5. c. 8.
wherein he is said to have been so much too hard for Photinus, that the
Emperor himself ordered his Banishment. And I can find nothing of his return;
but our Unitarians have found out (but they do not tell us where) that the
people recalled him, and so he planted his Doctrine among them, Hist. of the
Unit. p. 10.
that it overspread and was the Religion of the Illyrican Provinces, till the
Papacy on one hand, and the Turk on the other, swallowed up those Provi^ces.
This looks too like making History to serve a turn, unless some good proof were
brought for it. But instead of Photinus his returning, Council general. To. II.
p. 888.
and his Doctrine prevailing and continuing there, we find Valentinian calling
a Council in Illyricum, and establishing the Nicene Faith there: and a Council
at Aquileia against the Arians, where the Bishop of Sirmium was present, Ib. p.
989.
and declared against Arianism, and joined with S. Ambrose, who condemns
Photinus for making Christ the Son of David, Ambros. Apol. David. c. 4.
and not the Son of God* Paulinus says in his Life, that he went on purpose to
Sirmium to consecrate an Orthodox Bishop there; which he did, notwithstanding
the power of Iustina the Empress, who favored the Arians. S. Ierom in his
Chronicon says, that Photinus died in Galatia which was his own Country; so
that there is no probability in what they affirm of Photinus his settling his
Doctrine in those parts, till the Papacy and the Turk swallowed those
Provinces; for any one that looks into the History of those parts may be soon
satisfied, that not the Pope nor the Turk, but the Huns under Attila, made the
horrible Devastations not only at Sirmium, but in all the considerable places
of that Country: So that if these men's reason be no better than their History,
there is very little cause for any to be fond of their Writings.

But as though it were not enough to mention such things once; in their answer
to the late Archbishop's Sermons, they enlarge upon it. For he having justly
rebuked them for the Novelty of their Interpretations, they, to avoid this,
boast of the concurrence of the ancient Unitarians, the followers of Paulus and
Photinus, Ans. to the Archbish. Sermon p. 53.
who, they say, abounded everywhere, and even possessed some whole Provinces.
This passage I was not a little surprised at. Since Theodoret, who, I think,
was somewhat more to be credited than Sandius, does so expressly say, Theodor.
haer^t. Fab. l. 2. in Photino.
That the Samosatenians and Photinians were extinct in his time, in a place
already mentioned. But upon search I could find no other ground for it, but a
passage or two in Sandius, who is none of the exactest Historians. In one place
he says from an obscure Polish Chronicle (extant in no other Language but of
that Country) that the Bulgarians when they first received Christianity
embraced Photinianism. Sand. Hist. Enucl. l. 3. p. 357.
And is not this very good Authority among us? From hence he takes it for
granted, that they all continued Photinians to the time of Pope Nicolas, who
converted them. But all this is grounded on a ridiculous mistake in Platina,
who in the Life of Nicolas says, P. 372.
that the Pope confirmed them in the Faith, pulso Photino; whereas it should be
pulso Photio; for Photius at that time was Patriarch of Constantinople, and as
appears by his first Epistle, assumed their Conversion to himself; and insisted
upon the right of Jurisdiction over that Country. Sandius referrs to Blondus;
who says no such thing, Blond. Dec. 2. l. 2.
but only that the Bulgarians were converted before; which is true; and the
Greek Historians, as Ioh. Curopalates, Zonaras, and others, gives a particular
Account of it; but not a word of Photinianism in it. So that the Archbishop had
very great reason to charge their Interpretation with Novelty; and that not
only because the Photinians had no such Provinces, as they boast of; but that
neither Paulus Samosatenus, nor Photinus, nor any of their followers, that we
can find, did ever interpret the beginning of S. John, as they do; i.e. Of the
New Creation, and not of the Old; and so, as the Word had no Pre-existence
before he was born of the Virgin. I do not confine them to the Nicenists, as
they call them; but let them produce any one among the Samosatenians, or
Photinians, who so understood S. John. Sand. Hist. Eccles. l. 1. p. 64.93.
And therein Sandius was in the right (which ought to be allowed him, for he is
not often so) when he says, that no Christian Interpreter before Socinus ever
held such a sense of the Word, as he did; and therefore his followers he says,
ought to be called Socinians only, and not Ebionites, Samosatenians, or
Photinians.

But to return to Photinus his Opinion. It is observable, what Socrates says,
Socr. l. 2. c. 29. (...).
concerning his being deposed at Sirmium, viz. that what was done in that
matter was universally approved, not only then, but afterward. So that here we
have the general Consent of the Christian World, in that divided time, against
the Photinian Doctrine. And yet it was not near so unreasonable as our
Unitarians; for Photinus asserted the Pre-existence of the (...) and its
inhabiting in Christ from his Conception; wherein he differed from Paulus
Samosatenus who asserted it to have been upon the Merit of his Virtue. In the
Anathema's of the Council of Sirmium against Photinus, one is against any one
that asserts that there is one God, Hilar. de Synod. p. 1175. Ed. Paris.
but denies Christ to have been the Son of God before all Worlds, and that the
World was made by him in obedience to the Will of the Father. Others, against
him that asserts that there was a Dilatation of the Divine Substance to make
him the Son of God, who was a Man born of the Virgin Mary; this appears from
Anath. 6, 7, 9. put together. Which is best explained by Hilary himself in
another place, Hilar. de Trinit. l. 10. n. 50.
where he mentions this as the Photinian Doctrine, That God the Word did extend
himself so far, as to inhabit the person born of the Virgin. This he calls a
subtle and dangerous Doctrine. And therein he says Photinus differed from
Sabellius; Hilar. de Trin. l. 7. n. 7.
that the latter denied any difference between Father and Son, but only in
Names; but Photinus held a real difference, but not before the Nativity of
Christ; then he said, The Divine Word inhabiting in Christ made him to be the
real Son of God.

The only doubt is, whether Photinus held, the Word to have had a distinct
Hypostasis before or not. Marius Mercator an Author of good credit, who lived
in S. Augustin's time (and to whom an Epistle of his is extant in the new
Edition of his Works) gives a very particular account of the Opinion of
Photinus with relation to the Nestorian Controversy, August. Ep. 193.
in which he was very well versed. In an Epistle written by him on purpose,
Ma^ii Market. Oper. Par. 2. p. 17.
he shows that Nestorius agreed with Photinus in asserting, That the Word had a
Preexistence; and that the name of Son of God did not belong to the Word, but
to Christ after the inhabitation of the Word. But he there seems to think, that
Photinus did not hold the Word to have had a real Hypostasis before the Birth
of Christ: but when he comes after to compare their Opinions more exactly, he
then affirms, that Photinus and Nestorius were agreed, and that he did not deny
the Word to be Con^substantial with God; but that he was not the Son of God
till Christ was born in whom he dwelt. (...) 12. A^^th. N^s^orii p. 128.
By which we see how little reason our Unitarians have to boast of Photinus as
their Predecessor.

As to the boast of the first Unitarians at Rome, that theirs was the general
Doctrine, before the time of Victor; it is so fully confuted by the ancient
Writer in Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 28.
who mentions it, from the Scriptures and the first Christian Writers, named by
him, that it does not deserve to be taken notice of; especially since he makes
it appear, that it was not heard of among them at Rome, till it was first
broached there by Theodotus, as not only he, but Tertullian affirms; as I have
already observed.

Thus I have clearly proved, that the Doctrine of the Trinity, was so far from
being embraced only on the account of force and fear, that I have showed there
was in the first Ages of the Christian Church, a free and general Consent in
it, even when they were under Persecution; and after the Arian Controversy
broke out, yet those who denied the Pre-existence, and Co-eternity of the Son
of God were universally condemned; even the Arian Party concurring in the
Synods mentioned by Hilary. But our Unitarians are such great Pretenders to
Reason, that this Argument from the Authority of the whole Christian Church,
signifies little or nothing to them.

Therefore they would conclude still that they have the better of us in point
of Reason, because they tell us, that they have clear and distinct Perceptions,
that what we call Mysteries of Faith, are Contradictions, Impossibilities, and
pure Nonsense; and that they do not reject them, because they do not comprehend
them, but because they do comprehend them to be so.

This is a very bold Charge, and not very becoming the Modesty and Decency of
such, who know at the same time that they oppose the Religion publicly
established, and in such things which we look on as some of the principal
Articles of the Christian Faith.

CHAP. V. Of their Charge of Contradiction in the Doctrine of the Trinity.
BUT I shall not take any Advantages from thence, but immediately proceed to
the next thing I undertook in this Discourse, viz. To consider what Grounds
they have for such a Charge as this, of Contradiction and Impossibility. In my
Sermon which gave occasion to these Expressions (as is before intimated) I had
undertaken to prove, that considering the infinite Perfections of the Divine
Nature, which are so far above our reach, God may justly oblige us to believe
those things concerning himself which we are not able to comprehend; and I
instanced in some Essential Attributes of God, as his Eternity, Omniscience,
Spirituality, etc. And therefore, if there be such Divine Perfections, which we
have all the Reason to believe, but no Faculties sufficient to comprehend,
there can be no ground from Reason to reject such a Doctrine which God has
revealed, because the manner of it may be incomprehensible by us. And what
Answer do they give to this?

They do not deny it in general, that God may oblige us to believe things above
our Comprehension; Answer to the Sermon. about the Trinity, p. 4, 5, 8.
but he never obliges us to believe Contradictions, and that they Charge the
Doctrine of the Trinity with; and for this they only referr me to their Books,
where they say it is made out. But I must say, that I have read and considered
those Tracts, and am very far from being convinced that there is any such
Contradiction in this Doctrine, as it is generally received in the Christian
Church; or as it is explained in the Athanasian Creed. And, I shall show the
unreasonableness of this Charge from these things.

1. That there is a Difference between a Contradiction in Numbers, and in the
Nature of things.

2. That it is no Contradiction to assert three Persons in One Common Nature.

3. That it is no Contradiction to say that there are three distinct Persons in
the Trinity and not three Gods. If I can make out these things, I hope I may
abate something of that strange and unreasonable confidence, wherewith these
men charge the Doctrine of the Trinity with Contradictions.

1. I begin with the first of them. And I shall draw up the Charge in their own
words. In one of their late Books they have these Words.

History of the Unitar. p. 9. n. 7.
Theirs, they say, is an Accountable and Reasonable Faith, but that of the
Trinitarians is absurd and contrary both to Reason and to it self; and
therefore not only false but impossible. But wherein lies this Impossibility?
That they soon tell us. Because we affirm that there are Three Persons, who are
severally and each of them true God, and yet there is but one true God. Now,
say they, this is an Error in counting or numbering, which when stood in is of
all others the most brutal and inexcusable; and not to discern it is not to be
a Man. What must these men think the Christian Church has been made up of all
this while? What? were there no Men among them but the Unitarians? D^fence of
the History of the Unitarians, p. 7.
none that had common sense, and could tell the difference between One and
Three? But this is too choice a Notion to be delivered but once; we have it
over and over from them. In another place, they say, We cannot be mistaken in
the Notion of One and Three; we are most certain that One is not Three, and
Three are not One. This it is to be Men! But the whole Christian World besides
are in Brutal and Inexcusable Errors about One and Three. This is not enough,
for they love to charge home; for one of their terrible Objections against the
Athanasian Creed is, A^t o^ Athanasiu^, p. 13.
That here is an Arithmetical, as well as Grammatical Contradiction. For, in
saying God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, yet not three Gods
but one God, a Man first distinctly numbers three Gods, and then in summing
them up brutishly says, not three Gods but one God. Brutishly still! Have the
Brutes and Trinitarians learnt Arithmetic together? Methinks such Expressions
do not become such whom the Christian Church has so long since condemned for
Heresies. But it may be with the same Civility they will say, It was brutishly
done of them. But can these Men of Sense and Reason think, that the Point in
Controversy ever was, whether in Numbers, One could be Three, or Three One? If
they think so, I wonder they do not think of another thing; which is the
begging all Trinitarians for Fools; because they cannot count One, Two and
Three; and an Unitarian Jury would certainly cast them. One would think such
Writers had never gone beyond Shop-books; for they take it for granted, that
all depends upon Counting. But these terrible Charges were some of the most
common and trite Objections of Infidels. Interrogant enim nos aliquando
Infideles, and dicunt, Patrem quem dicitis, Deum dicitis? Respondemus Deum.
Filium quem dicitis, Deum dicitis? Respondemus Deum Spiritum Sanctum quem
dicitis, Deum dicitis? Respondemus Deum. Ergo inquiunt, Pater and Filius and
Spiritus Sanctus tres sunt Dei. Respondemus, Non. Turbantur, quia non
illuminantur, cor clausum habent quia clavem fidei non habent Aug. in Ioh. Tr.
39.
St. Augustine mentions it as such, when he says, the Infidels sometimes ask
us, what do you call the Father? We answer, God. What the Son? we answer, God.
What the Holy Ghost? we answer, God. So that here the Infidels make the same
Objection, and draw the very same Inference. Then, say they, the Father, Son
and H. Ghost are three Gods. But what says S. Augustine to this? Had he no more
skill in Arithmetic than to say there are Three and yet but One? He says
plainly that there are not three Gods. The Infidels are troubled, because they
are not Inlightend; their heart is shut up, because they are without Faith. By
which it is plain, he looked on these as the proper Objections of Infidels and
not of Christians. But may not Christians have such doubts in their minds? He
does not deny it; but then he says, Where the true foundation of Faith is laid
in the heart, which helps the Understanding; Nos ergo Fratres, fide
praecedente, quae sanat oculum cordis nostri, quod intelligimus sine
obscuritate capiamus, quod non intelligimus sine dubitatione credamus. Ibid.
we are to embrace with it, all that it can reach to; and where we can go no
farther, we must believe without doubting: which is a wise resolution of this
matter. For there are some things revealed, which we can entertain the notion
of in our minds, as we do of any other matters, and yet there may be some
things belonging to them which we cannot distinctly conceive. We believe God to
have been from all Eternity; and that because God has revealed it; but here is
something we can conceive, viz. that he was so; and here is something we cannot
conceive, viz. How he was so. This Instance I had produced in my Sermon, to
show that we might be obliged to believe such things concerning God, of which
we cannot have a clear and distinct Notion; as that God was from all Eternity,
although we cannot conceive in our minds, how he could be from himself. Now,
what says the Unitarian to this, who pretended to Answer me? He says, If God
must be from himself, Answ. to Sermon. p. 5.
then an Eternal God is a Contradiction; for that implies, that he was before
he was; and so charges me with espousing the cause of Atheists. I wish our
Unitarians were as free from this Charge as I am. But this is malicious
cavilling. For my design was only to show, that we could have no distinct
conception of something which we are bound to believe. For upon all accounts we
are bound to believe an Eternal God, and yet we cannot form a distinct and
clear Idea of the manner of it. Whether being from himself be taken positively,
or negatively, the matter is not cleared; the one is Absurd, and the other
Unconceivable by us. But still I say, it is a thing that we are bound to
believe steadfastly, although it is above our comprehension. But instead of
Answering to this, he runs out into an Examination of one notion of Eternity:
and as he thinks, shows some Absurdities in that, which are already answered.
But that was not my meaning, but to show that we could have no clear and
distinct Notion of Eternity; And if his Arguments were good they prove what I
aimed at, at least as to that Part; and himself produces my own Words to show,
that there were such Difficulties every way, which we could not master; and yet
are bound to believe, that necessary Existence is an inseparable Attribute of
God. So that here we have a clear instance of what S. Augustine says, That we
may believe something upon full Conviction, as that God is eternal; and yet
there may remain something which we cannot reach to by our understanding, viz.
the manner how Eternity is to be conceived by us: which goes a great way
toward clearing the Point of the Trinity, notwithstanding the Difficulty in
our conceiving the manner how Three should be one, and One three.

But S. Augustine does not give it over so; Let us keep steadfast, A fundamento
fidei non recedamus, ut ad culmen Perfectionis veniamus. Deus est Pater. Deus
est Filius, Deus est Spiritus Sanctus, and ramen Pater non est qui Filius: nec
Filius est qui Pater, nec Spiritu^ Sanctus. Patris and Filii Spiritus, Pater
est aut Filius. Ibid.
says he, to the Foundation of our Faith, that we may arrive to the top of
Perfection; the Father is God, the Son is God, the Holy Ghost is God; the
Father is not the Son, nor the Son the Father, nor the Holy Ghost either Father
or Son. And he goes on. The Trinity is one God, one Eternity, one Power, one
Majesty, Three Persons one God. Trinitas Unus Deus, Trinitas una Aeternitas,
una Potestas, una Majestas, tres Personae sed non tres Dii.
So it is in Erasmus his Edition; but the late Editors say, that the word
Personae was not in their Manuscript. And it is not material in this Place,
since elsewhere he approves the use of the word Persons, as the fittest to
express our meaning in this Case. Non audemus dicere unam Essentiam tres
Substantias, sed unam Essentiam vel Substantiam, tres autem Personas,
quemadmodum multi Latini ista tractantes and digni auctoritate dixerunt, cum
alium modum aptiorem non invenirent, quo enunciarent verbis, quod sine verbis
intelligebant. Aug. de Trinit. l. 5. c. 8.
For since some Word must be agreed upon, to declare our Sense by, he says,
those who understood the Propriety of the Latin tongue, could not pitch upon
any more proper than that, to signify that they did not mean three distinct
Essences, but the same Essence with a different Hypostasis, founded in the
Relation of one to the other; as Father and Son have the same Divine Essence,
but the Relations being so different that one cannot be confounded with the
other, that which results from the Relation being joined with the Essence, was
it which was called a Person.

But says S. Augustine, The Caviller will ask, Nunc mihi Calumniator
respondeat, quid ergo tres? Ecce inquit tres dixisti, sed quid tres exprime?
Immo tu numera. Nam ego compleo tres, cum dico, Pater and Filius and Spiritus
Sanctus. Id. ubi supra. Id enim quod Pater ad se est, Deus est, quod ad Filium
est, Pater est: quod Filius ad seipsum est, Deus est; quod ad Patrem est,
Filius est.
if there be Three, what Three are they? He answers, Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. But then he distinguishes between what they are in themselves, and what
they are to each other. The Father as to himself is God, but as to the Son he
is Father: the Son as to himself is God, but as to the Father he is the Son.
But how is it possible to understand this? Why, says he, Take two men, Father
and Son; the one as to himself is a Man, but as to the Son a Father; the Son,
as to himself is a Man, but as to the Father, he is a Son: but these two have
the same common Nature.

But says he, Will it not hence follow, that as these are two Men, so the
Father and Son in the Divine Essence must be two Gods? No, Sed non quomodo illi
duo homines sunt sic isti duo Dii. Quare hoc non est ita ibi? Quia illud aliud,
hoc autem aliud est, quia illa Divini^^ est, haec humanitas.
there lies the difference between the humane and Divine Nature. That one
cannot be multiplied and divided as the other is.

And therein lies the true Solution of the Difficulty, as will appear
afterward. When you begin to count, says he, Ubi cogitare coeperis, incipis
numerare; ubi numeraveris, quid numeraveris, non potes respondere. Pater, Pater
est; Filius, Filius; Spiritus Sanctus, Spiritus Sanctus est. Quid sunt isti
tres? non tres Dii? Non. Non tres omnipotentes? Non, sed unus Omnipotens. Hoc
solo numerum insinuant, quod ad invicem sunt, non quod ad se sunt.
you go on, One, two and Three. But when you have reckoned them what is it you
have been Counting? The Father is the Father, the Son the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, the Holy Ghost. What are these Three? Are they not three Gods? No, Are
they not three Almighties? No, They are capable of Number as to their Relation
to each other; but not as to their Essence which is but One.

The substance of the Answer lies here, the Divine Essence is that alone which
makes God, that can be but One, and therefore there can be no more Gods than
one. But because the same Scripture, which assures us of the Unity of the
Divine Essence, does likewise join the Son and Holy Ghost in the same
Attributes, Operations and Worship, therefore as to the mutual Relations, we
may reckon Three, but as to the Divine Essence, that can be no more than One.

Boethius was a great Man in all respects, Boeth. Oper. p. ^ 121.
for his Quality, as well as for his Skill in Philosophy and Christianity; and
he wrote a short but learned Discourse to clear this Matter. The Catholic
Doctrine of the Trinity, says he, is this; the Father is God, the Son God and
the Holy Ghost; but they are not three Gods but one God. And yet (which our
Unitarians may wonder at) this very man has written a learned Book of
Arithmetic. But how does he make this out? How is it possible for Three to be
but One? First he shows, That there can be but one Divine Essence; for to make
more than One must suppose a Diversity. Principium enim Pluralitatis Alteritas
est. If you make a real difference in Nature as the Arians did, then there must
be as many Gods, as there are different Natures. Among men, there are different
individuals of the same kind; but, says he, it is the Diversity of Accidents
which makes it; and if you can abstract from all other Accidents, yet they must
have a different Place, for two Bodies cannot be in the same place. The Divine
Essence is simple and immaterial, and is what it is of it self; but other
things are what they are made, and consist of Parts, and therefore may be
divided. Now that which is of it self can be but One; and therefore cannot be
numbered. And one God cannot differ from another, either by Accidents or
substantial Differences. But says he, there is a twofold Number; one by which
we reckon; and another in the things reckoned. And the repeating of Units in
the former makes a Plurality, Numerus enim duplex est, unus quidem, quo
numeramus, alter vero qui in rebus numerabilibus constat; Ergo in Numero quo
numeramus, repetitio unitatum facit Pluritatem; in rerum vero numero non facit
Pluralitatem Unitatum repetitio.
but not in the latter. It may be said, that this holds where there are only
different Names for the same thing; but here is a real Distinction of Father,
Son and Holy Ghost. But then he shows, "That the difference of Relation, can
make no Alteration in the Essence; and where there is no Diversity, there can
be but one Essence, although the different Relation may make three Persons.
This is the substance of what he says concerning this Difficulty, Ita igitur
substantia continet Unitatem, relatio vero multiplicat Trinitatem. Nam idem
Pater qui Filius non est; nec idem uterque qui Spiritus Sanctus. Idem tamen
Deus est, Pater Filius and Spiritus Sanctus.
which, as he suggests, arises from our Imaginations, which are so filled with
the Division and Multiplicity of compound and material things, that it is a
hard matter for them so to recollect themselves as to consider the first
Principles and Grounds of Unity and Diversity. But if our Unitarians have not
thoroughly considered those foundations, they must, as they say to one of their
Adversaries, Answer to Milb. p. 52.
argue like novices in these questions. For these are some of the most
necessary Speculations for understanding these matters; as what that Unity is
which belongs to a perfect Being; what Diversity is required to multiply an
infinite Essence, which has Unity in its own Nature: whether it be therefore
possible, that there should be more divine Essences than one, since the same
essential Attributes must be, where ever there is the divine Essence? Whether
there can be more Individuals, where there is no Dissimilitude, and can be no
Division or Separation? Whether a specific divine Nature be not inconsistent
with the absolute Perfection, and necessary Existence which belongs to it?
Whether the divine Nature can be individually the same, and yet there be
several individual Essences: These and a great many other Questions it will be
necessary for them to resolve, before they can so peremptorily pronounce, that
the Doctrine of the Trinity does imply a Contradiction on the account of the
Numbers of Three and One. And so I come to the second Particular.

CHAP. VI. No Contradiction for three Persons to be in one common Nature.
II. THat it is no contradiction to assert three Persons in one common Nature.
I shall endeavor to make these matters as clear as I can; for the greatest
difficulties in most men's minds have risen from the want of clear and distinct
apprehensi^ns of those fundamental Notions, which are necessary in order to the
right understanding of them.

1. We are to distinguish between the Being of a thing, and a thing in Being;
or between Essence and Existence.

2. Between the Unity of Nature or Essence, and of Existence or Individuals of
the same Nature.

3. Between the Notion of Persons in a finite and limited Nature, and in a
Being incapable of Division and Separation.

1. Between the Being of a thing, and a thing in Being. By the former we mean
the Nature and Essential Properties of a thing; whereby it is distinguished
from all other kinds of Beings. So God and his Creatures are essentially
distinguished from each other by such Attributes which are incommunicable; and
the Creatures of several kinds are distinguished by their Natures or Essences;
for the Essence of a Man and of a Brute are not barely distinguished by
Individuals, but by their kinds. And that which does constitute a distinct kind
is One and Indivisible in it self: for the Essence of Man is but one and can be
no more; for if there were more, the kind would be altered; so that there can
be but one common Nature or Essence to all the Individuals of that kind. But
because these Individuals may be or may not be, therefore we must distinguish
them as they are in actual Being, from what they are in their common Nature;
for that continues the same, under all the Variety and Succession of
Individuals.

2. We must now distinguish the Unity which belongs to the common Nature, from
that which belongs to the Individuals in actual Being. And the Unity of Essence
is twofold:

1. Where the Essence and Existence are the same, i. e. where necessary
Existence does belong to the Essence, as it is in God, and in him alone; it
being an essential and incommunicable Perfection.

2. Where the Existence is contingent, and belongs to the Will of another; and
so it is in all Creatures, Intellectual and Material, whose actual being is
dependent on the Will of God.

The Unity of Existence may be considered two ways.

1. As to it self, and so it is called Identity; or a thing continuing the same
with it self: the Foundation whereof in Man is that vital Principle which
results from the Union of Soul and Body. For as long as that continues,
notwithstanding the great variety of changes in the material Parts, the Man
continues entirely the same.

2. The Unity of Existence as to Individuals may be considered as to others, i.
e. as every one stands divided from every other Individual of the same kind;
although they do all partake of the same common Essence. And the clearing of
this, is the main point, on which the right Notion of these matters depends.

In order to that, we must consider two things.

1. What that is, whereby we perceive the difference of Individuals?

2. What that is, which really makes two Beings of the same kind to be
different from each other?

1. As to the reason of our Perception of the difference between Individuals of
the same kind, it depends on these things.

1. Difference of outward Accidents, as Features, Age, Bulk, Mien, Speech,
Habit and Place.

2. Difference of inward Qualities and Dispositions; which we perceive by
observation, and arise either from Constitution, or Education, or Company, or
acquired Habits.

2. As to the true ground of the real Difference between the Existence of one
Individual from the rest, it depends upon the separate Existence which it has
from all others. For that which gives it a Being distinct from all others and
divided by Individual Properties, is the true ground of the difference between
them, and that can be no other but the Will of God. And no consequent Faculties
or Acts of the Mind by Self-Reflection, etc. can be the reason of this
difference; because the difference must be supposed antecedent to them. And
nothing can be said to make that, which must be supposed to be before it self;
for there must be a distinct Mind in Being from all other Minds, before it can
reflect upon it self.

But we are not yet come to the bottom of this matter. For as to Individual
Persons, there are these things still to be considered.

1. Actual Existence in it self, which has a Mode belonging to it, or else the
humane Nature of Christ could not have been united with the divine, but it must
have had the personal Subsistence, and consequently there must have been two
Persons in Christ.

2. A separate and divided Existence from all others, which arises from the
actual Existence, but may be distinguished from it; and so the humane Nature of
Christ, although it had the Subsistence proper to Being, yet had not a separate
Existence, after the Hypostatical Union.

3. The peculiar manner of Subsistence, which lies in such properties as are
incommunicable to any other; and herein lies the proper reason of Personality.
Which does not consist in a mere Intelligent Being, but in that peculiar manner
of Subsistence in that Being which can be in no other. For when the common
Nature does subsist in Individuals, there is not only a separate Existence, but
something so peculiar to it self, that it can be communicated to no other. And
this is that which makes the distinction of Persons.

4. There is a common Nature which must be joined with this manner of
Subsistence to make a Person; otherwise it would be a mere Mode; but we never
conceive a Person without the Essence in Conjunction with it. But here appears
no manner of contradiction in asserting several Persons in one and the same
common Nature.

5. The Individuals of the same kind are said to differ in number from each
other, because of their different Accidents and separate Existence. For so they
are capable of being numbered. Whatever is compounded is capable of number as to
its parts, and may be said to be one by the Union of them; whatever is
separated from another is capable of number by distinction. But where there can
be no Accidents nor Division, there must be perfect Unity.

6. There must be a Separation in Nature, wherever there is a difference of
Individuals under the same kind. I do not say there must be an actual
Separation and Division as to place, but that there is and must be so in
Nature, where one common Nature subsists in several Individuals. (...).

Porphyr. Isag. c. 2.^6.

Niceph. Callist. l. 18. c. 47.


For all Individuals must divide the Species, and the common Nature u^ites
them. And this Philoponus understood very well, and therefore he never denied
such a Division and Separation in the divine Persons, as is implied in distinct
Individuals: which is the last thing to be considered here.

3. We are now to enquire how far these things will hold as to the Persons in
the Trinity, and whether it be a Contradiction to assert three Persons in the
Godhead and but one God. We are very far from disputing the Unity of the divine
Essence, which we assert to be so perfect and indivisible, as not to be capable
of such a difference of Persons as is among Men. Because there can be no
difference of Accidents, or Place, or Qualities in the divine Nature; and there
can be no separate Existence, because the Essence and Existence are the same in
God; and if necessary Existence be an inseparable Attribute of the divine
Essence, it is impossible there should be any separate Existence; for what
always was and must be, can have no other Existence than what is implied in the
very Essence. But will not this overthrow the distinction of Persons and run us
into Sabellianism? By no means. For our Unitarians grant, That the Noetians and
Sabellians held, Discourse concerning the nominal and real Trinitarian, p. 16.
that there is but one divine Substance, Essence or Nature, and but one Person.
And how can those who hold three Persons be Sabellians? Yes, say they, the
Sabellians held three relative Persons. But did they mean three distinct
Subsistences, or only one Subsistence sustaining the Names, or Appearances, or
Manifestations of three Persons? The latter they cannot deny to have been the
true sense of the Sabellians. But say they, these are three Persons in a
classical critical Sense. We meddle not at present with the Dispute which Valla
has against Boethius about the proper Latin Sense of a Person (and Petavius
says Valla's Objections are mere Jests and Trifles) but our Sense of a Person
is plain, Petav. de Trinit. l. 4. c. 4.
that it signifies the Essence with a particular manner of Subsistence, which
the Greek Fathers called an Hypostasis, taking it for that incommunicable
Property which makes a Person.

But say our Unitarians, a Person is an intelligent Being, Defense of the
History of the Unit. p. 5.
and therefore three Persons must be three intelligent Beings. I answer, that
this may be taken two ways. 1. That there is no Person where there is no
intelligent Nature to make it a Person, and so we grant it. 2. That a Person
implies an intelligent Being, separate and divided from other Individuals of
the same kind, as it is among men: and so we deny it as to the Persons of the
Trinity, because the Divine Essence is not capable of such Division and
Separation as the humane Nature is.

But say they again, The Fathers did hold a specifical Divine Nature, Ib.
and the Persons to be as so many individuals. This they repeat very often in
their late Books; and after all, refer us to Curcellaeus for undeniable Proofs
of it. Ib.
Let us for the present suppose it, Answer to La Moth. p. 5.

Explic. p. 13.

Letter to the University, p. 13.


then I hope the Fathers are freed from holding Contradictions in the Doctrine
of the Trinity; for what Contradiction can it be, to hold three individual
Persons in the Godhead, and One common Nature, more than it is to hold that
there are three humane Persons in One and the same common Nature of Man? Will
they make this a Contradiction too? But some have so used themselves to the
Language of Iargon, Nonsense, Contradiction, Impossibility, that it comes from
them, as some men swear, when they do not know it. But I am not willing to go
off with this Answer; for I do take the Fathers to have been men of too great
Sense and Capacity to have maintained such an absurd Opinion, as that of a
Specific Nature in God. For either it is a mere Logical Notion, and Act of the
Mind without any real Existence belonging to it as such, which is contrary to
the very Notion of God, which implies a necessary Existence; or it must imply a
Divine Nature, which is neither Father, Son, nor Holy Ghost. Which is so
repugnant to the Doctrine of the Fathers, that no one that is any ways
conversant in their Writings on this Argument, can imagine they should hold
such an Opinion. And I am so far from being convinced by Curcellaeus his
undeniable Proofs, that I think it no hard matter to bring undeniable Proofs
that he has mistaken their meaning.

Of which I shall give an Account in this Place, because I fear his Authority
has had too much sway with some, as to this matter. I shall not insist upon
his gross mistake in the very entrance of that Discourse, where he says,
Curcell. devocibus Trinit. Sect. 70.
That the Bishops of Gaul and Germany disliked the Homoousion, and gave three
Reasons against it; whereas Hilary speaks of the Eastern Bishops whom he goes
about to vindicate to the Western Bishops, who were offended with them for that
reason; as any one that reads Hilary de Synodis may see. But I come to the main
Point. His great Argument is from the use of the Word (...) which may extend to
Individuals of the same kind. Who denies it? But the Question is whether the
Fathers used it in that sense, so as to imply a difference of Individuals in
the same common Essence? There were two things aimed at by them in their
Dispute with the Arians.

(1.) To show, That the Son was of the same Substance with the Father, which
they denied, and made him of an inferior created Substance, of another kind.
Now the Fathers thought this term very proper to express their Sense against
them. But then this Word being capable of a larger Sense than they intended,
they took care, (2.) To assert a perfect Unity and Indivisibility of the Divine
Essence. For the Arians were very ready to charge them with one of these two
things. (1.) That they must fall into Sabellianism, if they held a perfect
Unity of Essence: or (2.) When they cleared themselves of this, that they must
hold Three Gods; and both these they constantly denied. To make this clear, I
shall produce the Testimonies of some of the chief both of the Greek and Latin
Fathers, and answer Curcellaeus his Objections.

Athanasius takes notice of both these Charges upon their Doctrine of the
Trinity: Athanas. de Sentent. Dionys. p. 558, 567.

Orat. 4. de Arian. p. 456.


As to Sabellianism he declared, That he abhorred it equally with Arianism; and
he says, it lay in making Father and Son to be only different Names of the
same Person; and so they asserted but one Person in the Godhead. As to the
other Charge of Polytheism, he observes, That in the Scripture Language, all
mankind was reckoned as one, because they have the same Essence; and if it be
so, as to Men, who have such a difference of Features, of Strength, of
Understanding, of Language, De Communi Essent. etc. p. 214.
how much more may God be said to be One, in whom is an undivided Dignity,
Power, Counsel and Operation. Does this prove such a difference, as is among
Individuals of the same kind among men? No man does more frequently assert the
indivisible Unity of the Divine Nature than he. Expos. Fidei, p. 25^. In illud
Omnia mihi trad p. 154.
He expressly denies such divided Hypostases, as are among men; and says, That
in the Trinity there is a Conjunction without confusion, and a distinction
without Division; that in the Trinity there is so perfect an Union, and that it
is so undivided and united in it self; that wherever the Father is, there is
the Son and the Holy Ghost, Ep. ad Serap. p. 259.
and so the rest, because there is but one Godhead, and one God who is over
all, and through all, and in all. But says Curcellaeus, Orat. 4. c. Arian. p.
554, 456, 459. etc.
The contrary rather follows from this (...) or mutual Inexistence, for that
could not be without distinct Substance, as in Water and Wine. But this is a
very gross mistake of the Fathers Notion, who did not understand by it a Local
In-existence as of Bodies, Curcell. Sect. III.
but such an indivisible Unity that one cannot be without the other, as even
Petavius has made it appear from Athanasius and others.

Athanasius upon all Occasions asserts the Unity of the Divine Nature to be
perfect and indivisible. Petav. de Trinit. l. 4. c. 16.

De Decret. Synod. Nic. p. 259.269, 274, 276.


God, says he, is the Father of his Son (...), without any Division of the
Substance. And in other places, that the Substance of the Father and Son admit
of no Division, and he affirms this to have been the sense of the Council of
Nice; so that the (...) must be understood of the same indivisible Substance.
Orat. 5. c. Arian. p. 514.
Curcellaeus answers, That Athanasius by this indivisible Unity meant only a
close and indissoluble Union. De Decret. Synod p. 275. Curcell. Dissert. n. 106.
But he excluded any kind of Division, and that of a Specific Nature into
several individuals as a real Division in Nature; for no man whoever treated of
those matters denied, that a Specific Nature was divided, when there were
several individuals under it. But what is it which makes the Union
indissoluble? Is it the Unity of the Essence or not? If it be, is it the same
individual Essence, or not? If the same individual Essence makes the
inseparable Union, what is it, which makes the difference of individuals? If it
be said, The incommunicable Properties of the Persons; I must still ask how
such Properties in the same individual Essence, can make different individuals?
If it be said to be the same Specific Nature; then how comes that which is in
it self capable of Division to make an indissoluble Union?

But says Curcellaeus, Curcell. n. 82.
Athanasius makes Christ to be of the same Substance as Adam, and Seth, and
Abraham, and Isaac are said to be Con-substantial with each other. And what
follows? That the Father and Son are divided from each other, as they were?
This is not possible to be his Sense; considering what he says of the
Indivisibility of the Divine Nature. And Athanasius himself has given
sufficient warning against such a Mis-construction of his Words; Athanas. de
Synod. Arim and Seluc. p. 916, 920, 928.
and still urges that our Conceptions ought to be suitable to the Divine
Nature, not taken from what we see among men. And it is observable, that when
Paulus Samosatenus had urged this as the best Argument against the term (...),
That it made such a difference of Substances as is among men; P. 919.
for that Reason says Athanasius, his Judges were content to let it alone, for
the Son of God is not in such a sense Con-substantial; but afterward, the
Nicene Fathers finding out the Art of Paulus, and the significancy of the Word
to discriminate the Arians, made use of it, and only thought it necessary to
declare, that when it is applied to God, it is not to be understood, as among
individual Men.

As to the Dialogues under Athanasius his Name, on which Curcellaeus insists so
much; Curcell. n. 84.
it is now very well known that they belong not to him, but to Maximus; and by
comparing them with other places in him, Maxim. Oper.

T. II. p. 384. T. I. p 413.


it may appear, that he intended no Specific Nature in God.

But says Curcellaeus, Curcell. Sect. 73.
If the Fathers intended any more than a Specific Nature, why did they not use
Words which would express it more fully, As (...) and (...)? For that very
Reason, which he mentions from Epiphanius, because they would seem to approach
too near to Sabellianism.

S. Basil was a great Man, (notwithstanding the flout of our Unitarians,) A
Discourse conc^rn^^g No^^^^l and real Unitar. p 26.
and applied his thoughts to this matter, to clear the Doctrine of the Church
from the Charge of Sabellianism and Tritheism. As to the former, he says, in
many places, That the Heresy lay in making but one Person as well as one God,
Basil Hom. ^7. p. 60^, 604.

Epist. 141, 391, 64.


or one Substance with three several Names. As to the latter, no man asserts
the individual Unity of the Divine Essence in more significant Words than he
does. For he uses the (...) and (...), T. I. p. 605. T. II. p. 9^6.
. as S. Cyril of Alexandria does likewise, Cyril Alex. Dialog. de Trinit. 3. p.
498, 500.
and yet both these are produced by Curcellaeus for a Specific Nature.

But says Curcellaeus, Curcell. n. 74.
S. Basil in his Epistle to Gregory Nyssen does assert the difrence between
Substance and Hypostasis to consist in this, That the one is taken for common
Nature, and the other for individual, and so making three Hypostases, he must
make three Individuals, and One common or Specific Nature. I answer, That it
is plain by the design of that Epistle, that by three Hypostases he could not
mean three individual Essences. For he says, The design of his writing it, was
to clear the difference between Substance and Hypostasis. For says he, From
the want of this, some assert but one Hypostasis, as well as one Essence; and
others, because there are three Hypostases, suppose there are three distinct
Essences. For both went upon the same Ground, that Hypostasis and Essence were
the same. Therefore says he, those who held three Hypostases, did make (...) a
Division of Substances. From whence it follows, that S. Basil did look upon the
Notion of three distinct Substances as a mistake: I say distinct Substances, as
Individuals are distinct; for so the first Principles of Philosophy do own that
Individuals make a (...), or Division of the Species into several and distinct
Individuals.

But does not S. Basil go about to explain his Notion by the common Nature of
man, and the several Individuals under it; and what can this signify to his
purpose, unless he allows the same in the Godhead? I grant he does so, but he
says the Substance, is that which is common to the whole kind; the Hypostasis
is that which properly distinguishes one Individual from another; which he
calls the (...) the peculiar incommunicable Property. (...).
Which he describes by a Concourse of distinguishing Characters in every
Individual. But how does he apply these things to the divine Nature? For
therein lies the whole difficulty. Does he own such a Community of Nature, and
Distinction of Individuals there? He first confesses the divine Nature to be
incomprehensible by us; but yet we may have some distinct Notions about these
things. As for instance, In the Father we conceive something common to him and
to the Son; and that is the divine Essence: and the same as to the Holy Ghost.
But there must be some proper characters to distinguish these, one from
another; or else there will be nothing but confusion: which is Sabellianism.
Now the essential Attributes and divine Operations are common to them; and
therefore these cannot distinguish them from each other. And those are the
peculiar Properties of each Person, as he shows at large.

But may not each Person have a distinct Essence belonging to him, as we see it
is among Men?

For this S. Basil answers: (1.) He utterly denies any possible Division in the
divine Nature.

And he never questioned, (...) p. 810. B.
but the distinction of Individuals under the same Species was a sort of
Division, although there were no Separation. And the followers of Ioh.
Philoponus did hold an indissoluble Union between the three individual Essences
in the divine Nature; but they held a distinction of peculiar Essences, besides
the common Nature, which they called (...) and (...); as appears by Photius,
Phot. Cod. 24.
who was very able to judge. And it appears by one of themselves in Photius,
that the controversy was, whether an Hyposiasis could be without an individual
Essence belonging to it self; Cod. 234.
or whether the peculiar Properties and Characters did make the Hypostasis. But
as to S. Basil's Notion, we are to observe; (2.) That he makes the divine
Essence to be incapable of number, by reason of its perfect Unity. Here our
Unitarians tell us, that when S. Basil says, Discourse conce^ning the Nominal
and Real Unitar. p. 26, 27.
That God is not one in number, but in nature, he means: as the Nature of Man
is one, but there are many particular Men, as Peter, James and John, etc. so
the Nature of God, or the common Divinity is one, but there are as truly more
Gods in number, or more particular Gods, as there are more particular Men. but
that this is a gross mistake or abuse of S. Basil's meaning, Basil. Ep. 141.
I shall make it plain from h^mself. For, they say, That he held, that as to
this question, How many Gods? it must be answered, Three Gods in number, or
three Personal Gods, and one in Nature, or divine Properties; whereas he is so
far from giving such an answer, that he absolutely denies that there can be
more Gods than one in that very place. He mentions it as an Objection, that
since he said, That the Father is God, the Son God, the Holy Ghost God; he must
hold three Gods; to which he answers, We own but one God, not in Number, but in
Nature: Then say they, He held but one God in Nature and more in Number. That
is so far from his meaning, that I hardly think any that read the passage in S.
Basil, could so wilfully pervert his meaning. For his intention was so far from
asserting more Gods in Number, that it was to prove so perfect a Unity in God,
that he was not capable of number, or of being more than one. For, says he,
That which is said to be one in Number, is not really and simply one, but is
made up of many, which by composition become one; as we say, the world is one,
which is made up of many things. But God is a simple uncompounded Being; and
therefore cannot be said to be one in Number. But the World is not one by
Nature, because it is made up of so many things, but it is one by Number, as
those several parts make but one World. Is not this fair dealing with such a
Man as S. Basil, to represent his Sense quite otherwise than it is? As though
he allowed more Gods than one in Number? Number, says he again, belongs to
Quantity, and Quantity to Bodies, but what relation have these to God, but as
he is the Maker of them? (...). Basil. T. II. p. 926.
Number belongs to material and circumscribed Beings; but, says he, the most
perfect Unity is to be conceived in the most simple and incomprehensible
Essence. Where it is observable, that he uses those Words which are allowed to
express the most perfect and singular Unity. Which Petavius himself confesses,
Petav. de Trinit. l. 4 c. 13. n. 10.
that they can never be understood of a specific Nature: and Curcellaeus
cannot deny, That (...) being added to (...), does restrain the Sense more to a
numerical Unity, as he calls it. How then is it possible to understand S. Basil
of more Gods than one in number? And in the very same Page he mentions the
(...), the Sameness of the divine Nature, by which the (...) is better
understood.

But Curcellaeus will have no more than a specific Unity understood. Cur. n
106.
Before he said, that (...) would have signified more, but now he finds it
used, the case is altered: So that the Fathers could not mean any other than a
specific Unity, let them use what expressions they pleased. But these, I think
are plain enough to any one that will not shut his Eyes.

In an other place, S. Basil makes the same Objection and gives the same
answer. One God the Father, and one God the Son; how can this be, and yet not
two Gods? Because, says he, the Son has the very same Essence with the
Father. Not two Essences divided out of one, as two Brothers; but as Father and
Son, the Son subsisting as from the Father, but in the same individual Essence:
(...).

But Curcellaeus has one fetch yet, viz. That S. Basil denied God to be one in
Number, Basil. T. I. p. 604. Cur n. 113.
and made him to be one in Nature, because he looked on a specific Unity or
Unity of Nature as more exact than numerical. S. Basil looked on the divine
Nature as such to have the most perfect Unity, because of its Simplicity, and
not in the least speaking of it as a specific Unity; but Curcellaeus himself
calls this, N. 105.
an Unity by a mere Fiction of the Mind; and can he imagine this to have been
more accurate than a real Unity? These are hard shifts in a desperate cause.

After all, our Unitarians tell us, T. II. p. 30.
That S. Basil does against Eunomius allow a distinction in Number with respect
to the Deity. But how? As to the Essence? By no means. For he asserts the
perfect Unity thereof in the same place, even the Unity of the Substance. But
as to the characteristical Properties of the Persons, he allows of Number, and
no farther. But say they, This is to make one God as to essential Properties,
and three as to Personal. How can that be? when he says, so often there can be
but one God, because there can be but one divine Essence; and therefore those
properties can only make distinct Hypostases, but not distinct Essences. And is
this indeed the great Secret which this bold Man, as they call him, has
discovered? I think those are much more bold, (I will not say impudent) who
upon such slight grounds, charge him with asserting more Gods than one in
Number. But Gregory Nyssen, Cur. n. 106. Greg. Nyssen. T. III. p. 17.
says Curcellaeus* speaks more plainly in his Epistle to Ablabius; for says
he, To avoid the difficulty of making three Gods, as three Individuals among
Men are three Men; he answers, that truly they are not three Men, because they
have but one common Essence, which is exactly one, and indivisible in it self,
however it be dispersed in Individuals* the same, he says, is to be understood
of God. And this Petavius had charged him with before, Petav. de Trin. l. 4. ^
9 n. 2, 3.
as appears by Curcellaeus his Appendix.

This seems the hardest passage in Antiquity for this purpose, to which I hope
to give a satisfactory answer from Gregory Nyssen himself.

1. It cannot be denied, that he asserts the Unity of Essence to be Indivisible
in it self, and to be the true ground of the Denomination of Individuals; as
Peter has the name of a Man, not from his individual Properties, whereby he is
distinguished from James and John; but from that one indivisible Essence, which
is common to them all, but yet receives no Addition or Diminution in any of
them.

2. He grants a Division of Hypostases among Men, notwithstanding this
Indivisibility of one common Essence: For says he; among Men, although the
Essence remain one and the same in all, without any Division; (...)
yet the several Hypostases are divided from each other, according to the
individual Properties belonging to them. So that here is a double consideration
of the Essence: as in it self, so it is one and indivisible; as it subsists in
Individuals, and so it is actually divided according to the Subjects. For
although the Essence of a Man be the same in it self, in Peter, James and John;
yet taking it as in the Individuals, so the particular Essence in each of them
is divided from the rest. And so Philoponus took Hypostasis for an Essence
individuated by peculiar Properties; Niceph. Calist. hist. l. 18. c. 47.
and therefore asserted, that wherever there was an Hypostasis, there must be
a distinct Essence; and from hence he held the three Persons to have three
distinct Essences.

3. We are now to consider, how far Gregory Nyssen carried this, whether he
thought it held equally as to the divine Hypostasis; and that he did not,
appears to me from these arguments:

1. He utterly denies any kind of Division in the divine Nature; for in the
conclusion of that Discourse, he says, it is not only (...) (a Word often used
by the Greek Fathers on this occasion, from whence Athanasius against
Macedonius inferred an Identity, Athan. T. II. p. 280.
and Caesarius joins (...); Caesar. Quaest. 3. p. 12.
and so S. Basil uses it) but he adds another Word, which is (...),
Indivisible. Yes, as all Essences are indivisible in themselves; but they may
be divided in their Subjects, as Gregory Nyssen allows it to be in Men. I grant
it, but then he owns a Division of some kind, which he here absolutely denies
as to the divine Nature; for his words are, that it is (...) in any
consideration whatsoever. Then he must destroy the Hypostases. Not so neither,
for he allows that there is a (...) as to the Hypostases however. For he
proposes the Objection himself, That by allowing no difference in the divine
Nature, the Hypostases would be confounded. To which he answers, That he did
not deny their difference, which was founded in the relation they had to one
another; which he there explains; and that therein only consists the difference
of the Persons. (...).
Which is a very considerable testimony, to show that both Petavius and
Curcellaeus mistook Gregory Nyssen's meaning. But there are other arguments to
prove it.

2. He asserts such a difference between the divine and human Persons, as is
unanswerable, viz. the Unity of Operation. For, says he, among Men, if several
go about the same Work, yet every particular Person works by himself, and
therefore they may well be called many; because every one is circumscribed: but
in the divine Persons he proves that it is quite otherwise, for they all
concur in the Action toward us; as he there shows at large. Petavius was
aware of this, and therefore he says, he quitted it and returned to the other;
whereas he only says, If his Adversaries be displeased with it, he thinks the
other sufficient. Which in short is, that Essence in it self is one and
indivisible; but among Men it is divided according to the Subjects; that the
divine Nature is capable of no Division at all, and therefore the difference of
Hypostases must be from the different Relations and Manner of Subsistence.

3. He expresses his meaning fully in another place. For in his Catechetical
Oration, Greg. Nyssen, Tom. III. p.
he says, he looks on the Doctrine of the Trinity as a profound Mystery (which
three individual Persons in one specific Nature is far from.) But wherein lies
it? Chiefly in this, That there should be Number and no Number; different View
and yet but One; a distinction of Hypostases, and yet no Division in the
Subjects. For so his words are, (...); which is contrary to what he said of
human Hypostases. Now, what is the Subject in this case? According to
Curcellaeus his Notion, it must be an Individual. But since he asserts there
can be no Division in the Subjects, then he must overthrow any such
Individuals, as are among Men. These are the chief Testimonies out of the Greek
Fathers, whose authority Curcellaeus and others rely most upon, as to this
matter, which I have therefore more particularly examined.

But S. Ierom, says Curcellaeus, Cur. n. 48.
in his Epistle to Damasus, thought three Hypostases implied three distinct
Substances; and therefore when the Campenses would have him own them, he
refused it and asked his Advice. Then it is plain, S. Ierom would not own three
distinct Substances, and so could not be of Curcellaeus his mind. But says he,
S. Ierom meant by three Substances, three Gods different in kind, N. 107.
as the Arians did. But how does that appear? Does he not say, the Arian
Bishop, and the Campenses put him upon it? But who was this Arian Bishop, and
these Campenses? No other than the Meletian Party; for Meletius was brought in
by the Arians, but he joined against them with S. Basil and others, who
asserted three Hypostases; and the Campenses were his People who met without
the Gates, as the Historians tell us. But it is evident by S. Ierom, that the
Latin Church understood Hypostasis to be the same then with Substance; and the
reason why they would not allow three Hypostases, was, because they would not
assert three Substances. So that Curcellaeus his Hypothesis has very little
color for it among the Latin Fathers; since S. Ierom there says, it would be
Sacrilege to hold three Substances, and he freely bestows an Anathema upon any
one that asserted more than one.

But Hilary, says Curcellaeus, owns a specific Unity, Cur. n. 89.
for in his Book de Synodis, he shows, That by one Substance, they did not mean
one individual Substance, but such as was in Adam and Seth, that is of the same
kind. No man asserts the Unity and Indiscrimination of the divine Substance
more fully and frequently than he does; and that without any Difference or
Variation, as to the Father and the Son. And although against the Arians he may
use that for an Illustration, of Adam and Seth; yet when he comes to explain
himself, he declares it must be understood in a way agreeable to the divine
Nature. And he denies any Division of the Substance between Father and Son,
Hilar. de Synod. n. 67.
but he asserts one and the same Substance to be in both; and although the
Person of the Son remains distinct from the Person of the Father, Hilar. de
Trinit. l. 4. n. 6.
yet he subsists in that Substance of which he was begotten, and nothing is
taken off from the substance of the Father, by his being begotten of it.

But does he not say, That he has a Legitimate and proper Substance of his own
begotten Nature from God, the Father? Hilar. de Synod. n. 18.
And what is this, but to own two distinct Substances?

How can the Substance be distinct, if it be the very same; and the Son subsist
in that Substance of which he was begotten? And that Hilary (besides a
multitude of passages to the same purpose in him) cannot be understood of two
distinct Substances will appear by this Evidence.

The Arians in their Confession of Faith before the Council of Nice set down
among the several Heresies which they condemned; Hilar. de Trinit. l. 6. n. 12.
that of Hieracas, who said the Father and Son were like two Lamps shining out
of one common Vessel of Oil. Hilary was sensible that under this that
Expression was struck at, God of God, Light of Light, which the Church owned.
His Answer is, Luminis Naturae Vnitas est, non ex connexione porrectio. i e.
they are not two divided Lights, from one common Stock; but the same Light
remaining after it was kindled that it was before. As appears by his Words,
Light of Light, says he, implies, That it gives to another that which it
continues to have it self. Lumen ex lumine, quod sine detrimento suo naturam
suam praestat ex sese, and quod dat habet, and quod dederit habeat, nascaturque
quod sit.
And Petavius says, that the Opinion of Hieracas was, That the substance of
the Father and Son differed Numerically as one Lamp from another. And Hilary
calls it an Error of humane Understanding which would judge of God, Petav. de
Trinit. l. 5. c. 8. n. 9, 12.
by what they find in one another.

Does not S. Ambrose say, as Curcellaeus quotes him, Curcell. n. 96.
That the Father and Son are not two Gods, because all men are said to be of
one Substance?

Ambros. de Fide l. 5. c. 3. ed. Nov.
But S Ambrose is directly against him. For, he says, The Arians objected, that
if they made the Son true God, and Con-substantial with the Father, they must
make two Gods; as there are two men, or two Sheep of the same Essence; but a
Man and a Sheep are not said to be Men, or two sheep. Which they said to excuse
themselves, because they made the Son of a different kind and substance from
the Father. And what Answer does S. Ambrose give to this?

1. He says, Plurality according to the Scriptures rather falls on those of
different kinds; and therefore when they make them of several kinds, they must
make several Gods.

2. That we who hold but One Substance, cannot make more Gods than One.

3. To his instance of Men, he answers, That although they are of the same
Nature by Birth, yet the^ differ in Age, and Thought, and Work, and Place from
one another; and where there is such Diversity, there cannot be Unity: but in
God, there is no difference of Nature, Will, or Operation; and therefore there
can be but one God.

The last I shall mention is S. Augustine, whom Curcellaeus produces to as
little purpose; Curcell. n. 97.
for although he does mention the same instance of several Men being of the
same kind; yet he speaks so expressly against a Specific Unity in God; that he
says, The Consequence must be, Aug. de Trinit. l. 7. c. 6.
that the three Persons must be three Gods; as three humane Persons are three
Men. And in another place, That the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, are One in the
same individual Nature. And what says Curcellaeus to these places, for he was
aware of them. C Maxim l. 1.
To the latter he says, That by individual, he means Specific. This is an
extraordinary Answer indeed. Curcell. n. 114.
But what Reason does he give for it? Because they are not divided in Place or
Time, but they may have their proper Essences however.

But where does S. Augustine give any such Account of it? August. de Trinit. l.
4. c. 21. l. 5. c. 3, 5, 8. l. 6. c. 1. De Ago^e Christ. c. 16. C. Maxim. l 3.
c. 10.
He often speaks upon this Subject; but always gives another Reason. viz.
because they are but One and the same Substance. The Three Persons are but One
God, because they are of One Substance; and they have a perfect Unity, because
there is no Diversity of Nature, or of Will. But it may be said, That here he
speaks of a Diversity of Nature. In the next Words he explains himself, that
the three Persons are One God, propter ineffabilem conjunctionem Deitatis; but
the Union of three Persons in one Specific Nature, is no ineffable
Conjunction, it being one of the commonest things in the World; and in the same
Chapter, propter Individuam Deitatem unus Deus est; and propter uniuscujusque
Proprietatem tres Personae sunt. Here we find one Individual Nature; and no
difference but in the peculiar Properties of the Persons.

In the other place he is so express against a Specific Unity, that
Curcellaeus his best Answer is, Curcell. n. 114.
That in that Chapter he is too intricate and obscure. i. e. He does not to
speak his Mind.

Thus much I thought fit to say in Answer to those undeniable Proofs of
Curcellaeus, which our Unitarians boast so much of, and whether they be so or
not, let the Reader examine and judge.

CHAP. VII. The Athanasian Creed cleared from Contradictions.
III. I Now come to the last thing I proposed, viz. to show, That it is no
contradiction to assert three Persons in the Trinity and but one God; and for
that purpose, I shall examine the charge of Contradictions on the Athanasian
Creed. The sum of the first Articles, say they, is this, Notes on Athanasius
his Creed, p. 11.
The one true God is three distinct Persons, and three distinct Persons,
Father, Son and Holy Ghost are the one true God. Which is plainly, as if a Man
should say, Peter, James and John, being three Persons are one Man; and one Man
is these three distinct Persons, Peter, James and John. Is it not now a
ridiculous attempt as well as a barbarous Indignity, to go about thus to make
Asses of all Mankind, under pretense of teaching them a Creed. This is very
freely spoken, with respect, not merely to our Church, but the Christian World,
which owns this Creed to be a just and true Explication of the Doctrine of the
Trinity. But there are some Creatures as remarkable for their untoward kicking,
as for their Stupidity. And is not this great skill in these Matters, to make
such a Parallel between three Persons in the Godhead, and Peter, James and
John? Do they think there is no difference between an infinitely perfect Being,
and such finite limited Creatures as Individuals among Men are? Do they suppose
the divine Nature capable of such Division and Separation by Individuals, as
human Nature is? No, they may say, but ye who hold three Persons must think so:
For what reason? We do assert three Persons, but it is on the account of divine
Revelation, and in such a manner, as the divine Nature is capable of it. For it
is a good rule of Boethius, Talia sunt praedicata, qualia subjecta permiserint.
We must not say that there are Persons in the Trinity, but in such a manner as
is agreeable to the divine Nature; and if that be not capable of Division and
Separation, then the Persons must be in the same undivided Essence. The next
Article is, Neither confounding the Persons, nor dividing the Substance; But
how can we, say they, not confound the Persons that have, as ye say, but one
numerical Substance? And how can we but divide the Substance, which we find in
three distinct divided Persons? I think the terms numerical Substance, not very
proper in this case; and I had rather use the Language of the Fathers, than of
the Schools; and some of the most judicious and learned Fathers would not allow
the terms of one numerical Substance to be applied to the divine Essence. For
their Notion was, That Number was only proper for compound B^ings, but God
being a pure and simple Being was one by Nature and not by Number, as S. Basil
speaks (as is before observed) because he is not compounded, Basil. Ep. 141.
nor has any besides himself to be reckoned with him. But because there are
different Hypostases, therefore they allowed the use of Number about them, and
so we may say the Hypostases or Persons are numerically different; but we
cannot say that the Essence is one Numerically. But why must they confound the
Persons, if there be but one Essence? The relative Properties cannot be
confounded; for the Father cannot be the Son* nor the Son the Father; and on
these the difference of Persons is founded. For, there can be no difference, as
to essential Properties, and therefore all the difference, or rather
distinction must be from those that are Relative. A Person of it self imports
no Relation, but the Person of the Father or of the Son must; and these
Relations cannot be confounded with one another. And if the Father cannot be
the Son, nor the Son the Father, then they must be distinct from each other.
But how? By dividing the Substance? That is impossible in a Substance that is
indivisible. It may be said, That the Essence of created Beings is indivisible,
and yet there are divided Persons. I grant it, but then a created Essence is
capable of different accidents and qualities to divide one Person from another,
which cannot be supposed in the divine Nature; and withal the same power which
gives a Being to a created Essence, gives it a separate and divided Existence
from all others. As when Peter, James and John received their several distinct
Personalities from God; at the same time he gave them their separate Beings
from each other, although the same Essence be in them all.

But how can we but divide the Substance which we see in three distinct divided
Persons? The question is, whether the distinct Properties of the Persons do
imply a Division of the Substance? We deny that the Persons are divided as to
the Substance, because that is impossible to be divided; but we say, they are
and must be distinguished as to those incommunicable Properties which make the
Persons distinct. The essential Properties are incapable of being divided, and
the Relations cannot be confounded; so that there must be one undivided
Substance and yet three distinct Persons.

But every Person must have his own proper Substance; and so the Substance must
be divided if there be three Persons. That every Person must have a Substance
to support his Subsistence is not denied, but the question is, Whether that
Substance must be divided or not. We say, where the Substance will bear it, as
in created Beings, a Person has a separate substance, i. e. the same Nature
diversified by Accidents, Qualities and a separate Existence, but where these
things cannot be, there the same Essence must remain undivided, but with such
relative Properties as cannot be confounded. But may not the same undivided
Substance be communicated to three divided Persons; so as that each Person may
have his own proper Substance, and yet the divine Essence be in it self
undivided? This is not the case before us. For the question upon the Creed is,
Whether the Substance can be divided? And here it is allowed to remain
undivided. Yes in it self, but it may be divided in the Persons. The Substance,
we say, is incapable of being divided any way; and to say, that a Substance
wholly undivided in it self, is yet divided into as many proper and peculiar
Substances, as there are Persons, does not at all help our understanding in
this matter; but if no more be meant, as is expressly declared, than That the
same one divine Nature is wholly and entirely communicated by the eternal
Father to the eternal Son* and by Father and Son to the eternal Spirit, without
any Division or Separation; it is the same which all Trinitarians assert. And
it is a great pity, that any new Phrases or Ways of Expression should cause
unreasonable Heats among those who are really of the same Mind. For those who
oppose the expressions of three distinct Substances as new and dangerous; yet
grant, That it is one peculiar Prerogative of the divine Nature and Substance,
founded in its infinite, and therefore transcendent Perfection, whereby it is
capable of residing in more Persons than one; and is accordingly communicated
from the Father to the Son and Holy Ghost; but this is done without any
Division or Multiplication. Now if both Parties mean what they say, where lies
the difference? It is sufficient for my purpose that they are agrred, that
there can be no Division as to the divine Essence by the distinction of
Persons. And so this passage of the Athanasian Creed holds good, Neither
confounding the Persons nor dividing the Substance.

The next Article, as it is set down in the Notes on Athanasius his Creed, is a
contradiction to this. For there it runs, There is one Substance of the Father,
another of the Son, another of the Holy Ghost. They might well charge it with
Contradictions at this rate. But that is a plain mistake for Person; for there
is no other variety in the Copies but this, that Baysius his Greek Copy has
(...), and that of Constantinople (...), but all the Latin Copies Persona. But
what consequence do they draw from hence? Then, say they, the Son is not the
Father, nor is the Father the Son, nor the Holy Ghost either of them. If they
had put in Person, as they ought to have done, it is what we do own. And what
follows? If the Father be not the Son, and yet is the one true God, then the
Son is not the one true God, because he is not the Father. The one true God may
be taken two ways: 1. The one true God, as having the true divine Nature in
him, and so the Father is the one true God; but not exclusive of the Son, if he
have the same divine Nature. 2. The one true God, as having the divine Nature
so wholly in himself, as to make it incommunicable to the Son; so we do not
say, that the Father is the one true God, because this must exclude the Son
from being God; which the Scripture assures us that he is; and therefore though
the Son be not the Father, nor the Father the Son, yet the Son may be the one
true God as well as the Father, because they both partake of the same divine
Nature, so that there is no contradiction in this, That there is but one true
God, and one of the Persons is not the other. For that supposes it impossible,
that there should be three Persons in the same Nature; but if the distinction
of Nature and Persons be allowed, as it must be by all that understand any
thing of these matters, then it must be granted, that although one Person
cannot be another, yet they may have the same common Essence. As for instance,
let us take their own, Peter, James and John. What pleasant arguing would this
be, Peter is not James nor John, nor James nor John are Peter, but Peter has
the true Essence of a Man in him; and the true Essence is but one and
indivisible; and therefore James and John cannot be true Men, because Peter
has the One and indivisible Essence of a Man in him? But they will say, We
cannot say that Peter is the One true Man, as we say, That the Father is the
One true God. Yes; we say the same in other Words, for he can be said to be the
One true God in no other Respect, but as he has the One true Divine Essence.
All the difference lies, that a finite Nature is capapable of Division, but an
infinite is not.

It follows, The Godhead of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost
is all one, the Glory Equal, the Majesty Coeternal.

To this they say, That this Article does impugn and destroy it self. How so?
For, if the Glory and Majesty be the same in Number, then it can be neither
Equal, nor Coeternal. Not Equal for it is the same, which Equals never are,
nor Coeternal for that intimates that they are distinct. For, nothing is Co
eternal, nor Co temporary with it self.

There is no appearance of Difficulty or Contradiction in this, if the
Distinction of Persons is allowed; for the three Persons may be well said to be
Coequal and Coeternal; and if we Honor the Son, as we Honor the Father, we
must give equal Glory to him.

But one great Point of Contradiction remains, viz. So that the Father is God,
the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and yet there are not three Gods;
but one God.

First, they say, This is as if a Man should say, the Father is a Person, the
Son a Person, and the Holy Ghost a Person, yet there are not three Persons; but
one Person. How is this possible, if a Person does suppose some peculiar
Property, which must distinguish him from all others? And how can three Persons
be one Person, unless three incommunicable Properties may become one
communicated Property to three Persons? But they are aware of a Distinction in
this Case, viz. that the term God is used Personally, when it is said God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost; but when it is said, There are not
three Gods, but one God, the term God is used Essentially, and therefore
comprehends the whole three Persons, so that there is neither a Grammatical,
Notes on Athanas. his Creed, p. 13.
nor Arithmetical Contradiction. And what say our Unitarians to this? Truly, no
less, Than that the Remedy is worse, (if possible) than the Disease. Nay then,
we are in a very ill Case. But how I pray does this appear? 1. Say they, Three
personal Gods, and one Essential God make four Gods; if the Essential God be
not the same with the personal Gods: and though he is the same, yet since they
are not the same with one another, but distinct, it follows, that there are
three Gods, i. e. three personal Gods. 2. It introduces two sorts of Gods,
three Personal and one Essential. But the Christian Religion knows and owns but
One, true and most high God of any sort. So far then, we are agreed, That there
is but One, true and most high God; and that because of the perfect Unity of
the Divine Essence, which can be no more than One, and where there is but One
Divine Essence, there can be but One true God, unless we can suppose a God
without an Essence, and that would be a strange sort of God. He would be a
personal God indeed in their critical Sense of a Person for a shape or
appearance. But may not the fame Essence be divided? That I have already showed
to be impossible. Therefore we cannot make so many personal Gods, because we
assert one and the same Essence in the three Persons of Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. But they are distinct, and therefore must be distinct Gods, since every
one is distinct from the other. They are distinct as to personal Properties,
but not as to Essential Attributes; which are and must be the same in all: So
that here is but one Essential God, and three Persons.

But after all, why do we assert three Persons in the Godhead? Not because we
find them in the Athanasian Creed; but because the Scripture has revealed that
there are Three, Father, Son and Holy Ghost; to whom the Divine Nature and
Attributes are given. This we verily believe, that the Scripture has revealed;
and that there are a great many places, of which, we think no tolerable Sense
can be given without it, and therefore we assert this Doctrine on the same
Grounds, on which we believe the Scriptures. And if there are three Persons
which have the Divine Nature attributed to them; what must we do in this Case?
Must we cast off the Unity of the Divine Essence? No, that is too frequently
and plainly asserted for us to call it into Question. Must we reject those
Scriptures which attribute Divinity to the Son and Holy Ghost, as well as to
the Father? That we cannot do, unless we cast off those Books of Scripture,
wherein those things are contained.

But why do we call them Persons, when that Term is not found in Scripture, and
is of a doubtful Sense? The true Account whereof I take to be this. It is
observed by Facundus Hermianensis, Facund. l 1. p. 19. Ed. Sermon.
that the Christian Church received the Doctrine of the Trinity before the
Terms of three Persons were used. But Sabellianism was the occasion of making
use of the name of Persons. It Is true, That the Sabellians did not dislike our
Sense of the Word Person, (which they knew was not the Churches Sense) as it
was taken for an Appearance, or an external Quality; which was consistent
enough with their Hypothesis, who allowed but One real Person with different
Manifestations. That this was their true Opinion, appears from the best account
we have of their Doctrine, from the first Rise of Sabellianism. The Foundations
of it were laid in the earliest and most dangerous Heresies in the Christian
Church, viz. that which is commonly called by the name of the Gnostics, and
that of the Cerinthians and Ebionites. For how much soever they differed from
each other in other things; yet they both agreed in this, that there was no
such thing as a Trinity, consisting of Father, Son and Holy Ghost; but that all
was but different Appearances and Manifestations of God to Mank^nd. In
consequence whereof, the Gnostics denied the very Humanity of Christ, and the
Cerinthians and Ebionites his Divinity. But both these sorts, were utterly
rejected the Communion of the Christian Church; and no such thing as
Sabellianism was found within it. Afterward, there arose some Persons who
started the same Opinion within the Church: Theod. haeret.

Fab. l. 2. c. 3.


the first we meet with of this sort, are those mentioned by Theodoret,
Epigonus, Cleomenes, and Noetus, from whom they were called Noe^ians; not long
after, Sabellius broached the same Doctrine in Pentapolis, and the Parts
thereabouts; which made Dionysius of Alexandria appear so early and so warmly
against it. Athan. de Sent. Dionys. p. 558.
But he happening to let fall some Expressions, as though he asserted an
Inequality of Hypostases in the Godhead, Complaint was made of it to Dionysius
then Bishop of Rome; who thereupon explained that, which he took to be the true
Sense of the Christian Church in this matter. Which is still preserved in
Athanasius: Athanas. de Decret. Fidei Nicen. p. 275.
Therein he disowns the Sabellian Doctrine, which confounded the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, and made them to be the same; and withal, he rejected those who
held three distinct and separate Hypostases; as the Platonists, and after them
the Marcionists did. Dionysius of Alexandria, when he came to explain himself,
agreed with the others and asserted the Son to be of the same Substance with
the Father; Athanas. de Sent. Dionys.
as Athanasius has proved at large: but yet he said, That if a distinction of
Hypostases were not kept up, the Doctrine of the Trinity would be lost; as
appears by an Epistle of his in S. Basil. Athanasius says, Basil de Sp. Sancto
c. 29.
That the Heresy of Sabellius lay in making the Father and Son to be only
different Names of the same Person; Athan. Orat. 4. c. Arian. p. 456.

Greg. Nazian. Or. I. p. 16, 17.


so that in one Respect he is the Father, and in another the Son. Gregory
Nazianzen in opposition to Sabellianism, says, We must believe one God, and
three Hypostases; and commends Athanasius for preserving the true Mean, in
asserting the Unity of Nature, and the Distinction of Properties. S. Basil
says, Or. XXI p. 380.
That the Sabellians made but one Person of the Father and Son: that in Name
they confessed the Son; but in Reality they denied him. In another place, that
the Sabellians asserted but one Hypostasis in the Divine Nature; Basil. Hom.
27. p. 602, 604.

Basil. Epist 141.


but that God took several Persons upon him, as occasion required: sometimes
that of a Father, at other times of a Son; and so of the Holy Ghost. And to the
same purpose, in other places he says, ^pist. 64.391.
That there are distinct Hypostases with their peculiar Properties; which being
joined with the Unity of Nature make up the true Confession of Faith. There
were some who would have but One Hypostasis; whom he opposes with great
vehemence; and the Reason he gives, is, That then they must make the Persons to
be mere Names; which is, Sabellianisn. And, he says, That if our Notions of
distinct Persons have no certain Foundation they are mere Names, such as
Sabellius called Persons. But by this Foundation he does not mean any distinct
Essences, but the incommunicable Properties belonging to them, as Father, Son
and Holy Ghost.

It is plain from hence, that the necessity of asserting three Hypostases, came
from thence, that otherwise they could not so well distinguish themselves from
the Sabellians whose Doctrine they utterly disowned; as well as Arianism and
Judaism; and it appears by the Testimonies of Athanasius, Gregory Nazianzen and
S. Basil, Athanas. ^. 567.

Greg. Naz. p. 16.

Basil. Hom. 27.


that they looked on one as bad as the other; and they commonly join Judaism,
and Sabellianism together.

But yet there arose Difficulties, whether they were to hold one Hypostasis or
three. The former insisted on the generally received Sense of Hypostasis for
Substance or Essence; and therefore they could not hold three Hypostases
without three distinct Essences, as the Platonists and Marcionists held. Upon
this a Synod was called at Alexandria to adjust this matter, where both Parties
were desired to explain themselves. Ruffin. p. 211. hist. l. 1.

Athan. Ep. ad Antioch, p. 577.


Those who held three Hypostases were asked, Whether they maintained three
Hypostases as the Arians did, of different Substances and separate
Subsistences, as Mankind and other Creatures are? Or as other Heretics, three
Principles or three Gods? All which they steadfastly denied. Then they were
asked, Why they used those terms? They answered, Because they believed the Holy
Trinity to be more than mere Names; and that the Father, and Son, and Holy
Ghost had a real Subsistence belonging to them; but still they held but one
Godhead, one Principle, and the Son of the same Substance with the Father; and
the Holy Ghost not to be a Creature, but to bear the same proper and
inseparable Essence with the Father and the Son. Then the other side were
asked, When they asserted but one Hypostasis, whether they held with Sabellius
or not; and that the Son and Holy Ghost had no Essence or Subsistence? which
they utterly denied; but said, that their meaning was, That Hypostasis was the
same with Substance; and by one Hypostasis, they intended no more, but that the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost were of the same individual Substance; (for the
Words are (...) and so they held but one Godhead and one divine Nature: and
upon these terms they agreed. From whence it follows, that the Notion of three
Hypostases, as it was received in the Christian Church, was to be under^^ood so
as to be consistent with the Individual Unity of the divine Essence. And the
great rule of the Christian Church was to keep in the middle, between the
Doctrines of Sabellius and Arius; and so by degrees, the Notion of three
Hypostases and one Essence was looked on in the Eastern Church, as the most
proper Discrimination of the Orthodox from the Sabellians and Arians.

But the Latin Church was not so easily brought to the use of three Hypostases,
because they knew no other Sense of it, but for Substance or Essence; and they
all denied that there was any more than one divine Substance, and therefore
they rather embraced the Word Persona; and did agree in the Name of Persons, as
most proper to signify their meaning, which was, That there were three which
had distinct Subsistences, and incommunicable Properties, and one and the same
divine Essence. And since the Notion of it is so well understood, to signify
such a peculiar Sense, I see no reason why any should scruple the use of it. As
to its not being used in Scripture, Socinus himself despises it, and allows it
to be no good reason. For when Franciscus Davides objected, That the terms of
Essence and Person were not in Scripture; Socinus tells him, Socin. Vol. l. p.
778.
That they exposed their cause who went upon such grounds; and that if the
sense of them were in Scripture, it was no matter whether the terms were or not.

H^ving thus cleared the Notion of three Persons, I return to the Sense of
Scripture about these matters. And our Unitarians tell us, that we ought to
interpret Scripture otherwise. How does that appear? They give us very little
encouragement to follow their Interpretations, which are so new, so forced, so
different from the general Sense of the Christian World, and which I may say,
reflect so highly on the Honor of Christ and his Apostles, i. e. by making use
of such Expressions, which if they do not mean, what to honest and sincere
Minds they appear to do, must be intended (according to them) to set up Christ
a mere Man to be a God. And if such a thought as this could enter into the Mind
of a thinking Man, it would tempt him to suspect much more as to those Writings
than there is the least color or reason for. Therefore these bold
inconsiderate Writers ought to reflect on the consequence of such sort of
Arguments, and if they have any regard to Christianity, not to trifle with
Scripture as they do.

But say they, The question only is, Whether we ought to interpret Scripture
when it speaks of God, Notes on Athanas. his Creed, p. 13.
according to reason or not, that is like Fools or like wise Men? Like wise Men
no doubt, if they can hit upon it, but they go about it as untowardly as ever
Men did. For is this to interpret Scripture like wise Men, to take up some
novel Interpretations, against the general Sense of the Christian Church from
the Apostles times? Is this to act like wise Men, to raise Objections against
the Authority of the Books, they cannot answer: and to cry out of false Copies
and Translations without reason, and to render all places suspicious, which
make against them? Is this to interpret Scripture like wise Men, to make our
Savior affect to be thought a God, when he knew himself to be a mere Man, and
by their own Confession had not his divine Authority and Power conferred upon
him? And to make his Apostles set up the Worship of a Creature, when their
design was to take away the Worship of all such, who by Nature are not Gods?
Answer to my Sermon, p. 14.
Is this like wise Men, to tell the World, that these were only such Gods, whom
they had set up, and God had not appointed; as though there were no Real
Idolatry but in giving Divine Worship without God's Command.

CHAP. VIII. The Socinian Sense of Scripture examined.
BUT they must not think to escape so easily for such a groundless and
presumptuous saying; that they interpret the Scripture not like Fools, but like
Wise Men: because the true sense of Scripture is really the main point between
us; and therefore I shall more carefully examine the Wise Sense they give of
the chief places which relate to the matter in hand.

1. Is this to interpret Scripture like Wise Men, to make the Author to the
Hebrews in one Chapter, and that but a short one, to bring no less than four
places out of the Old Testament, and according to their Sense, not one of them
proves that which he aimed at? viz. that Christ was superior to Angels, Heb.
1.5. as will appear by the Sense they give of them. For unto which of the
Angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?
Hist. of the Unit. p. 15. Edit. 2.
These words, say they, in their original and primary Sense are spoken of
David, but in their mystical Sense are a Prophecy concerning Christ. Was this
mystical Sense primarily intended or not? If not, they are only an
accommodation and no proof. But they say, even in that mystical Sense, they
were intended not of the Lord Christ's supposed eternal Generation from the
Essence of the Father, but of his Resurrection from the dead.

But if that be not taken as an Evidence of his being the eternal Son of God,
how does this prove him above Angels?

Heb. 1.6. And again, when he brings his first begotten into the World, he
says, And let all the Angels of God Worship him. This, one would think home to
the business. But our wise Interpreters tell us plainly, that the words were
used by the Psalmist on another occasion, Hist of the Unit. p. 17.
i. e. they are nothing to the purpose. But being told of this, instead of
mending the matter, they have made it far worse; for upon second thoughts, (but
not wiser) they say, The words are not taken out of the Psalm, Defense of of
the Hist. of Unitar. p. 35.
but out of Deuteronomy. 32.43. where the words are not spoken of God, but of God's
People; and if this be said of God's People, they hope it may be said of Christ
too, without concluding from thence, that Christ is the supreme God. But we
must conclude from hence, that these are far from being wise Interpreters; for
what consequence is this, the Angels worship God's People, therefore Christ is
superior to Angels?

Heb. 1.8. Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, i. e. say they, Hist. of the
Unit. p. 16.
God is thy Throne for ever. And so they relate not to Christ but to God. And
to what purpose then are they brought?

Heb. 1.10. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth,
and the Heavens are the work of thy Hands. These words, say they, Ibid p. 17.
are to be understood not of Christ, but of God. Which is to charge the Apostle
with arguing out of the old Testament very impertinently. Is this interpreting
the Scriptures like wise Men? Is it not rather exposing and ridiculing them?

Is this to interpret Scripture like wise Men, to give such a forced Sense of
the beginning of S. John's Gospel, as was never thought of from the writing of
it, till some in the last Age thought it necessary to avoid the proof of
Christ's Divinity from it. Answer to Dr. Wallis his Letter, p. 9.

Answer to my Sermon, p. 9.


For the (...) was never taken, in the Sense they put upon it, for him that was
to preach the Word, in S. John's time; but the signification of it was then
well understood from the Alexandrian School (as appears by Philo) whence it was
brought by Cerinthus into those parts of Asia, where S. John lived when he
wrote his Gospel: and one of themselves confesses, that Cerinthus did by the
(...) mean something divine, Reflections no Dr. Bull, p. 39, 46.
which rested upon, and inhabited the Person of Jesus, and was that power by
which God created original Matter and made the World, but as the Christ or the
Word descended on Jesus at his Baptism, so it left him at his Crucifixion. That
which I observe from hence is, that there was a known and current Sense of the
(...) at the time of S. John's writing his Gospel, very different from that of
a Preacher of the Word of God; and therefore I cannot but think it the wisest
way of interpreting S. John, to understand him in a Sense then commonly known;
and so he affirms the (...) to have been in the beginning, i. e. before the
Creation (for he says afterward, All things were made by him) and that he was
with God, and was God; and this Word did not inhabit Jesus, as Cerinthus held,
but was made Flesh and dwelt among us. And so S. John clearly asserted the
Divinity and Incarnation of the Son of God. And in all the Disputes afterward
with Paulus Samosatenus, and Photinus, it appears, that they understood the
(...) not for any mere Man, but for some Divine Power, which rested upon the
Person of Jesus. So that this was a very late, and I think no very Wise
Interpretation of S. John. And even Sandius Confesses, That Socinus his Sense
was wholly new and unheard of in the ancient Church; Sand. p. 93.
not only among the Fathers, but the Heretics, as I have before observed. For
they agreed (except their good Friends the Alogi who went the surest way to
work) that by the Word no mere Man was understood. Let them produce one if they
can, says Sandius (even the learned and judicious Sandius.) Did they all
interpret the Scriptures like Fools, and not like Wise Men? But if the
Christian Interpreters were such Fools; what think they of the Deists, whom
they seem to have a better opinion of, as to their Wisdom? What, if Men without
Biass of Interest, or Education think ours the more proper and agreeable Sense?

The late Archbishop to this purpose had mentioned Amelius the Platonist, as an
indifferent Judge. But what say our Wise Interpreters to this? Answ. to the
Archbishop, p. 54.
Truly they say, That the Credit of the Trinitarian Cause runs very low, when
an uncertain Tale of an obscure Platonist of no Reputation for Learning or Wit,
is made to be a good part of the Proof, which is alleged for these Doctrines.
If a Man happen to stand in their way, he must be content with such a
Character, as they will be pleased to give him. If he had despised S. John's
Gospel, and manner of expression, he had been as Wise as the Alogi; but
notwithstanding the extraordinary Character given of Friend Amelius (as they
call him) by Eusebius, Eus^b. Pra^p. Evang. l. 11. c. 18.
by Porphyrius, by Proclus, and by Damascenus, this very Saying of his sinks
his Reputation for ever with them. What would Julian have given for such a Wise
Interpretation of S. John? Cyril. c. Julian, l. 10. p. 427.335.

Julian ep. 51.


when he cannot deny, but that he did set up the Divinity of Christ by these
Expressions; and upbraids the Christians of Alexandria, for giving Worship to
Jesus as the Word and God? With what satisfaction would he have received such a
Sense of his Words; when he Complemented Photinus for denying the Divinity of
Christ; Facund. l. 4. p. 163.
while other Chrians asserted it?

But they do not by any means deal fairly with the late Archbishop as to the
Story of Amelius; for they bring it in, as if he had laid the weight of the
Cause upon it; whereas he only mentions it, as a Confirmation, of a probable
Conjecture, That Plato had the Notion of the Word of God from the Jews; because
that was a Title which the Jews did commonly give to the Messiah, as he proves
from Philo, and the Chaldee Paraphrast. To which they give no manner of Answer.
But they affirm in answer to my Sermon, p. 9. That Socinus his Sense was, That
Christ was called the Word, because he was the Bringer or Messenger of Gods
Word. But were not the Jews to understand it in the Sense it was known among
them? And if the Chaldee Paraphrast had used it in that Sense, he would never
have applied it to a Divine Subsistence, as upon Examination it will appear
that he does. Of which Rittangel gives a very good Account, who had been a Jew,
and was very well skilled in their ancient Learning. He tells us, That he had a
Discourse with a learned Unitarian upon this Subject, who was particularly
acquainted with the Eastern Languages; Rittangel in Jezirah p. 96.
and he endeavored to prove, That there was nothing in the Chaldee Paraphrasts
use of (...), because it was promiscuously used by him for (...) where it was
applied to God. This Rittangel denied; and offered to prove, that the Chaldee
Paraphrast did never use that Word in a common manner, but as it was
appropriated to a Divine Subsistence. He produces several places where (...) is
put, and nothing answering to Word in the Hebrew, as Genesis 20.21. The Chaldee
has it, The Word of Jehovah shall be my God. Exodus 2.25. And Jehovah said, He
would redeem them by his Word, Exodus 6.8. Your murmurings are not against us,
but against the Word of Jehovah, Exodus 19.17. And Moses brought the People out
to meet the Word of Jehovah, Levit. 26.46. These are the Statutes and
Judgments, and Laws, which Jehovah gave between his Word and the Children of
Israel by the hand of Moses, Numb. 11.20. Ye have despised the Word of Jehovah
whose Divinity dwelt among you, Numb. 23.21. The Word of Jehovah is with him,
and the Divinity of their King is among them, Deuteronomy 1.30. The Word of Jehovah
shall fight for you, Deuteronomy. 2.7. These forty years the Word of Jehovah has been
with thee, Deuteronomy. 1.32. Ye did not believe in the Word of Jehovah your God, Deuteronomy
4.24. Jehovah thy God, his Word is a consuming fire, Deuteronomy. 5.5. I stood between
the Word of Jehovah and you, to show you the Word of the Lord, Deuteronomy. 32.6.8.
Jehovah thy God, his Word shall go with thee, with many other places, which he
brings out of Moses his Writings; and there are multitudes to the same purpose
in the other Books of Scripture; which shows, says he, that this Term the Word
of God, was so appointed for many Ages; as appears by all the Chaldee
Paraphrasts and the ancient Doctors of the Jews. And he shows by several
places, that the Chaldee Paraphrast did not once render (...) when there was
occasion for it; no, not when the Word of God is spoken of with respect to a
Prophet; as he proves by many Testimonies; which are particularly enumerated by
him. The result of the Conference was, that the Unitarian had so much Ingenuity
to confess, That unless those Words had another Sense, their Cause was lost;
and our Faith had a sure Foundation.

But it may be objected that Morinus has since taken a great deal of pains to
prove the Chaldee Paraphrasts, Morinus Exerc. Biblic. l. 3. Exerc. 8. c. 6.
not to have been of that Antiquity, which they have been supposed by the Jews
to be of.

In answer to this, we may say in general, that Morinus his great Proofs are
against another Chaldee Paraphrast of very small Reputation, viz. of Jonathan
upon the Law; and not that of Onkelos, which Rittangel relied upon in this
Matter. And none can deny this to have been very ancient; but the Jews have so
little knowledge of their own History, but what is in Scripture, that very
little certainty can be had from them. But we must compare the Circumstances of
things, if we would come to any resolution in this Matter. Now it is certain,
that Philo the Alexandrian Jew, who lived so very near our Saviors time, had
the same Notion of the Word of God, which is in the Chaldee Paraphrast: whose
Testimonies have been produced by so many already, that I need not to repeat
them.

And Eusebius says, Eusebius Them. Evang. l. 4. c. 1.
The Jews and Christians had the same Opinion as to Christ, till the former
fell off from it in opposition to the Christians; and he particula^ly instances
in his Divinity. But if Morinus his Opinion be embraced, as to the lateness of
these Chaldee Paraphrases, this inconvenience will necessarily follow, viz.
That the Jews when they had changed so much their Opinions, should insert those
Passages themselves which assert the Divinity of the Word. And it can hardly
enter into any man's head that considers the Humor of the Jewish Nation, to
think, that after they knew what S. John had written concerning the Word; and
what use the Christians made of it to prove the Divinity of Christ, they should
purposely insert such passages in that Paraphrase of the Law which was in such
esteem among them, that Elias Levita says, They were under Obligation to read
two Parascha^s out of it every Week, together with the Hebrew Text. Now, who
can imagine that the Jews would do this upon any other account, than that it
was delivered down to them, by so ancient a Tradition, that they durst not
discontinue it. And it is observed in the place of Scripture which our Savior
read in the Synagogue, that he followed neither the Hebrew nor the Greek,
Bichin. Happerasch p. 21.
but in probability the Chaldee Paraphrase; and the Words he used upon the
Cross, were in the Chaldee Dialect.

The later Jews have argued against the Trinity, and the Divinity of Christ
like any Unitarians, as appears by the Collection out of Joseph Albo, Paris, A.
D. 1566.
David Kimchi, etc. published by Genebrard, with his Answers to them. And is it
any ways likely, that those who were so much set against these Doctrines,
should themselves put in such Expressions, which justify what the Evangelist
says about the Word, being in the Beginning, being with God, and being God?

The Substance of what I have said, as to S. John's Notion of the Word is this;
That there is no color for the Sense which Socinus has put upon it; either
from the use of it among other Authors, or any Interpretation among the Jews.
But that there was in his time a current sense of it, which from the Jews of
Alexandria, was dispersed by Cerinthus in those parts where he lived. That for
such a Notion there was a very ancient Tradition among the Jews, which appears
in the most ancient Paraphrase of the Law, which is read in their Synagogues.
And therefore according to all reasonable ways of interpreting Scripture, the
Word cannot be understood in S. John, for one whose Office it was to preach the
Word, but for that Word which was with God before any thing was made, and by
whom all things were made.

3. Is this to interpret Scripture like wise Men, to give a new Sense of
several Places of Scripture from a matter of Fact of which there is no proof,
the better to avoid the proof of the Divinity of the Son of God?

This relates to the same beginning of S. John's Gospel, the Word was with God;
Joh. 1.1.3.13.6.38, 62.8.42.

Answer to the Archbishop's Sermon. p. 56.


and several other places, making mention of his descent from Heaven. The Sense
which these wise Interpreters put upon them is, that Christ was rapt up into
Heaven, before he entered upon his Preaching. But where is this said? What
Proof, Answer to my Sermon, p. 10.
what Evidence, what credible Witnesses of it, as there were of his
Transfiguration, Resurrection and Ascension? Nothing like any Proof is offered
for it; but it is a wise Way they think of avoiding a pressing difficulty.

But they have a farther reach in it, viz. to show how Christ, being a mere
Man, should be qualified for so great an undertaking as the founding the
Christian Church; and therefore they say, That before our Lord entered upon his
Office of the Messiah* Hist. of the Unit. p. 29.
he was taken up to Heaven to be instructed in the Mind and Will of God (as
Moses was into the Mount, Exodus 24.1, 2, 12.) and from thence descended to
execute his Office, and declare the said Will of God. In another place, That
when it is said, the Word was with God; Answer to my Sermon, p. 9.
that is, the Lord Christ was taken up into Heaven to be instructed in all
points relating to his Embassage or Ministry. Ans. to the Archbishop, p. 56.
In a third, they say, That our Savior before he entered upon his Ministry,
ascended into Heaven, as Moses did into the Mount, to be instructed in all
things belonging to the Gospel Doctrine and Polity which he was to establish
and administer. Now considering what sort of Person they make Christ to have
been, viz. a mere Man; this was not ill thought of by them; to suppose him
taken up into Heaven and there instructed in what he was to teach and to do, as
Moses was into the Mount before he gave the Law. But here lies a mighty
difference; when Moses was called up into the Mount, the People had public
notice given of it; and he took Aaron and his Sons, and Seventy Elders of
Israel with him; who saw the Glory of God, v. 10. And all Israel beheld the
Glory of the Lord as a devouring Fire on the Top of the Mount, v. 17. and after
the 40 days were over, it is said, That Moses came down from the Mount, and the
Children of Israel saw him with his Face shining, Exodus 34.40. Now if Christ
were taken up into Heaven, as Moses was into the Mount, why was it not made
public at that time? why no Witnesses? why no Appearance of the Glory to
satisfy Mankind of the truth of it? And yet we find, that when he was
transfigured on the holy Mount, he took Peter, and James, and John with him;
Matthew. 17.1. Mar. 9 2. Luke 9.28.
which circumstance is carefully mentioned by the Evangelists. And Peter, who
was one of the Witnesses then present, lays great weight upon this being done
in the presence of Witnesses. 2 Pet. 1 16.
For we have not followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were Eyewitnesses of his
Majesty. 17.
For he received from God the Father, Honor and Glory, when there came such a
voice to him from the excellent Glory --. 18.
And this voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him in the
holy Mount. Now let any one compare this with the account which they give of
Christ's Ascension into Heaven. The Transfiguration was intended only for a
particular Testimony of God's Favor, before his suffering; but even in that,
he took care there should be very credible Witnesses of it. And is it then
possible to believe, there should be such an Ascension of Christ into Heaven,
for no less a purpose, than to be instructed in his Embassage, and to
understand the Mind and Will of God as to his Office; and yet not one of the
Evangelists give any account of the circumstances of it? They are very
particular, as to his Birth, Fasting, Baptism, Preaching, Miracles, Sufferings,
Resurrection and Ascension; but not one Word among them all as to the
circumstances of this being taken up into Heaven for so great a purpose? If it
were necessary to be believed, why is it not more plainly revealed? Why not the
time and place mentioned in Scripture, as well as of his Fasting and
Temptation? Who can imagine it consistent with that Sincerity and Faithfulness
of the Writers of the New Testament, to conceal so material a part of Christ's
Instructions and Qualifications; and to wrap it up in such doubtful
Expressions, that none ever found out this meaning till the days of Socinus?
Enjedinus mentions it only as a possible Sense; Enjed. in Joh. 6.62.
b^t he confesses, That the New Testament says nothing at all of it; but,
says he, neither does it mention other things before he entered upon his
Office. But this is a very weak Evasion, for this was of greatest importance
with respect to his Office, more than his Baptism, Fasting and Temptation; yet
these are very fully set down.

And after all, our Unitarians themselves seem to mistrust their own
Interpretations; for in their answer to my Sermon, they say, Answer to my
Sermon, p. 10.
it is not the Doctrine of all the Unitarians, and refer me to another account
given of these Texts in the History of the Unitarians. History of the Unit. p.
26.
There indeed I find Grotius his Interpretation (as they call it) prefer^d
before that of Socinus. But they say, Grotius was Socinian all over, P. 11
and that his Annotations are a complete System of Socinianism; and his Notes
on the first of S. John are written artificially, but the Sense at the bottom
is theirs. In short, That the Word, according to Grotius, P. 2^.
is not an eternal Son of God, but the Power and Wisdom of God; which abiding
without measure on the Lord Christ, is therefore spoken of as a Person and as
one with Christ, and he with that. And this Notion of the Word leads a man
through all the difficulties of this Chapter, with far more ease than any
hitherto offered. But these wise Interpreters have as much misinterpreted
Grotius, as they have done the Scriptures, as I shall make it appear.

(1.) Grotius on John 6.62. interprets Christ's Ascension into Heaven, of his
corporal Ascent thither after his Resurrection, where the (...) or Word was
before, of whom it is said, That the Word was with God. But how comes Christ to
assume that to himself which belonged to the Word? He answers, Why not, since
we call Body and Soul by the Name of the Man? But if no more were meant by the
Word, but a divine Attribute of Wisdom and Power, what color could there be
for the Son of Man taking that to himself, which belonged to an Attribute of
God? What strange way of arguing would this have been? What, and if ye shall
see the Son of Man ascending where he was before? For according to this Sense,
how comes a divine Attribute to be called the Son of Man? How could the Son of
Man be said to ascend thither, where a divine Attribute was before? The words
(...), must relate to him spoken of before; and how could the Power and Wisdom
of God be ever said to be the Son of Man? But if we suppose a personal Union of
the Word with the human Nature in Christ, then we have a very reasonable Sense
of the Words; for then no more is implied, but that Christ, as consisting of
both Natures, should ascend thither, where the Word was before; when it is
said, that the Word was with God; and so Grotius understands it.

(2.) Grotius does not make the Word in the beginning of S. John 's Gospel to
be a mere Attribute of Wisdom and Power, but the eternal Son of God. This I
shall prove from his own Words.

1. He asserts in his Preface to S. John's Gospel, that the chief cause of his
writing was universally agreed to have been to prevent the spreading of that
Venom which had been then dispersed in the Church; which he understands of the
Heresies about Christ and the Word. Now among these, the Heresy of Cerinthus
was this very opinion which they fasten upon Grotius; viz. that the Word was
the divine Wisdom and Power inhabiting in the Person of Jesus, as I have showed
before from themselves. And besides, Grotius says, That the other Evangelists
had only intimated the divine Nature of Christ from his miraculous Conception,
Miracles, knowing Men's Hearts, perpetual Presence, promise of the Spirit,
remission of Sins, etc. But S. John, as the time required, attributed the Name
and Power of God to him from the beginning. So that by the Name and Power of
God, he means the same which he called the divine Nature before.

2. He says, that when it is said, The Word was with God; it ought to be
understood as Ignatius explains it, with the Father; what can this mean, unless
he understood the Word to be the eternal Son of God? And he quotes Tertullian,
saying, that he is the Son of God, and God ex unitate Substantiae; and that
there was a Prolation of the Word without Separation. Now what Prolation can
there be of a mere Attribute? How can that be said to be the Son of God
begotten of the Father, without Division, before all Worlds, as he quotes it
from Justin Martyr? And that he is the Word, and God of God, from Theophilus
Antiochenus? And in the next Verse, when it is said, The same was in the
beginning with God; it is repeated on purpose, says he, That we might
consider, that God is so to be understood, that a Distinction is to be made
between God, with whom he was, and the Word who was with God; so that the Word
does not comprehend all that is God. But our Wise Interpreters put a ridiculous
Sense upon it; as though all that Grotius meant was, That Gods Attributes are
the same with himself (which although true in it self, is very impertinent to
Grotius his purpose) and that the Reason why he says, That the Word is not all
that God is, was, because there were other Attributes of God besides. But where
does Grotius say any thing like this? Is this Wise interpreting? or honest and
fair dealing? For Grotius immediately takes notice from thence of the
Difference of Hypostases; which he says was taken from the Platonists, but
with a change of the Sense.

3. When it is said, v. 3. That all things were made by him; Grotius
understands it of the old Creation, and of the Son of God. For, he quotes a
passage of Barnabas, where he says, The Sun is the Work of his hands; and
several passages of the Fathers to prove, That the World and all things in it
were created by him; and he adds, That nothing but God himself is excepted.
What say our Wise Interpreters to all this? Nothing at all to the purpose; but
they cite the English Geneva Translation (when they pretend to give Grotius his
Sense) and add, That the Word now begins to be spoken of as a Person by the
same Figure of Speech, that Solomon says, Wisdom has builded her house, etc.
Does Grotius say any thing like this? And yet they say, Let us hear Grotius
interpreting this sublime Proeme of S. John 's Gospel. But they leave out what
he says, and put in what he does not say; is not this interpreting like Wise
men?

4. The Word was made flesh, v. 14. i. e. say the Unitarians as from Grotius;
It did abode on, and inhabit a humane Person, the Person of Jesus Christ; and
so was in appearance made flesh or man. But what says Grotius himself? The
Word that he might bring us to God, showed himself in the Weakness of humane
Nature; and he quotes the words of S. Paul for it, 1 Timothy 3.16. God was
manifest in the flesh: and then produces several Passages of the Fathers to the
same purpose. Is not this a rare Specimen of Wise interpreting, and Fair
dealing with so considerable a Person, and so well known, as Grotius? Who,
after all, in a Letter to his intimate Friend Ger. I. Vossius, declares that he
owned the Doctrine of the Trinity; both in his Poems and his Catechism; after
his reviewing them; which Epistle is Printed before the last Edition of his
Book about Christ's Satisfaction; H. Grot. Opusc p. 294 T. 3.
as an account to the World of his Faith as to the Trinity. And in the last
Edition of his Poems, but little before his Death, he gives a very different
Account of the Son of God from what these Unitarians fasten upon him. Christ
caput rerum vitae melioris Origo,

Immensi mensura Patris, quem mente Suprema

Miratus sese Genitor, de Lumine Lumen

Fundit, and aequali se spectat imagine totum.

H Grot. Syl. p. 8. Ed. 1643*


And now let the World judge, how wisely they have interpreted both S. John,
and his Commentator Grotius?

IV. Is this to interpret Scripture like Wise men, to make our Savior's
meaning to be expressly contrary to his Words? For when he said: Before Abraham
was, Joh. 8.58.
I am; they make the Sense to be that really he was not, but only in Gods
Decree, as any other man may be said to be. This place the late Archbishop (who
was very far from being a Socinian, however his Memory has been very
unworthily reproached in that, as well as other Respects, since his Death)
urged against the Socinians, saying, That the obvious Sense of the Words is,
that he had a real Existence, before Abraham was actually in Being, and that
their Interpretation about the Decree is so very flat, that he can hardly
abstain from saying it is ridiculous And the wise Answer they give is, Answer
to the Archbishop. p. 58.
That the words cannot be true in any other Sense, being spoken of one who was
a Son, and Descendant of Abraham. Which is as ridiculous as the Interpretation;
for it is to take it for granted, he was no more than a Son of Abraham.

V. Is this to interpret Scripture like Wise men, to say, that when our Savior
said in his Conference with the Jews, I am the Son of God, Joh. 10.36.
his chief meaning was, That he was the Son of God in such a Sense, Answer to
Milb. p. 31.
as all the faithful are called Gods Children? Is not this doing great Honor
to our Savior? Especially when they say, That he never said of himself any
higher thing than this, Ib. p. 30.
which is true of every good man, I am the Son of God. And yet the Jews accused
him of Blasphemy, for making himself the Son of God; and the High Priest
adjured him to tell, Whether he were the Christ the Son of God. Joh. 19.7.
Matt. 26.63.


Did they mean no more, but as any Good man is?

But Mr. Seldom says, Seldom de Jure Not. and Gent. l. 2. c. 12.
that by the Son of God the Jews meant, the Word of God (as he is called in the
Chaldee Para^hrast) which was all one, Pocock Not. Miscel. ad Maim. p. 307. etc.
as to profess himself God: And our learned Dr. Pocock says, that according to
the Sense of the ancient Jews, the Son of God spoken of, Psalm. 2. was the
eternal Son of God, of the same Substance with the Father.

And by this we may understand S. Peter's Confession, Thou art the Christ,
Matt. 16.16

S. Joh. 6.69. 1.49.


the Son of the living God; and Nathanael's, Thou art the Son of God. But it is
plain the Jews in the Conference thought he made himself God, by saying, I and
my Father are One. Not one God, say our Wise Interpreters, 10.30.33. Hist. of
Unitar. p. 29.
but as Friends are said to be One. And what must they think of our Savior the
mean time, who knew the Jews understood him quite otherwise, and would not
undeceive them?

But they say, Answer to Milb. p. 29.
The Jews put a malicious Construction upon his Words. How does that appear? Do
they think the Jews had not heard what passed before in some former
Conferences, when they thought he had made himself equal with God; Joh. 5.18.23.
and that he said, That all men should honor the Son, even as they honored
the Father?

These Sayings no doubt stuck with them; and therefore from them, they had
Reason to think that he meant something extraordinary, by his saying, I and my
Father are One. And if they were so Wise in interpreting Scripture, as they
pretend, they would have considered, that if these things did not imply his
being really the Son of God, according to the old Jewish Notion, he would have
severely checked any such Mis-constructions of his meaning, and have plainly
told them, he was but the Son of Man But S. Paul's Character of him does
plainly show, that he was far from any thing like Vanity or Ostentation, Phil.
2.6, 7.
Although he was in the form of God, and thought it no Robbery to be equal with
God; which must imply that he was very far from assuming any thing to himself;
which he must do in a very high measure, if he were not really the Son of God,
so as to be equal with God. The meaning whereof, say our Wise Interpreters, is,
he did not rob God of his Honor by arrogating to himself to be God, Hist. of
Unitar. p. 38.
or equal with God. But what then do they think of these passages in his
Conferences with the Jews? Was he not bound to undeceive them, when he knew
they did so grossly mis-understand him, if he knew himself to be a mere Man at
the same time? This can never go down with me, for they must either Charge him
with affecting Divine Honor, which is the highest Degree of Pride and Vanity,
or they must own him to be, as he was, The eternal Son of God.

VI. Is this interpreting Scripture like Wise men, to deny Divine Worship to be
given to our Savior when the Scripture so plainly requires it? When I had
urged them in my Sermon with the Argument from Divine Worship being given to
Christ; they do utterly deny it, and say, I may as well charge them with the
blackest Crimes. Answer to Sermon. p. 13.
This I was not a little surprised at, knowing how warmly Socinus had disputed
for it. But that I might not misunderstand them, I looked into other places in
their late Books, and from them I gather these things.

1. They make no Question but some Worship is due to the Lord Christ, Answer to
Milb. p. 49.
but the Question is concerning the kind or sort of Worship.

2. They distinguish three sorts of Worship. 1. Civil Worship from Men to one
another. 2. Religious Worship given on the account of a Persons Holiness, or
Relation to God; which is more or less, according to their Sanctity or nearer
Relation to God 3. Divine Worship which belongs only to God; which consists in
a Resignation of our Understandings, Wills and Affections, and some peculiar
Acts of Reverence and Love toward him. The two former may be given to Christ,
they say, but not the last.

From whence it follows, that they cannot according to their own Principles,
resign their Understandings, Wills, and Affections to Christ; because this is
proper Divine Worship. Are not these very good Christians the mean while? How
can they believe sincerely, and heartily what he has revealed, unless they
resign their Understandings to him; How can they Love and Esteem him, and place
their Happiness in him, if they cannot resign their Wills and Affections to
him? I think never any who pretended to be Christians, durst venture to say
such things before and all for fear they should be thought to give Divine
Worship to Christ.

But they confess, That they are divided among themselves about the Invocation
of Christ. Ib. Col. 1.
Those who are for it, say, That he may be the object of Prayer, without making
him God, or a Person of God, and without ascribing to him the Properties of the
Divine Nature, Omnipresence, Omniscience, or Omnipotence. Those who deny it,
they say, do only refuse it, because they suppose he has forbidden it, which
makes it a mere Error. And in the New Testament, they say, The Charge is
frequently renewed, that they are to Worship God only. And as great Writers as
they have been these last seven years, Answer to Archbish. Sermon p. 25. p. 59.
they affirm that, They have wrote no Book in that time in which they have not
been careful to profess to all the World, that a like Honor or Worship (much
less the same) is not to be given to Christ as to God. And now I hope we
understand their opinion right as to this matter. The question is, Whether this
be interpreting those Scriptures which speak of the Honor and Worship due to
Christ, like wise Men? And for that I shall consider,

1. That herein they are gone off from the opinion of Socinus and his
Followers, as to the Sense of Scripture in those places.

2. That they have done it in such a way, as will justify the Pagan and Popish
Idolatry; and therefore have not interpreted Scripture like wise Men.

1. That they are gone off from the opinion of Socinus and his followers, who
did allow divine Worship to Christ. This appears by the disputes he had with
Franciscus Davidis and Christianus Francken about it. The former was about the
Sense of Scripture. Socinus produced all those places which mention the
Invocation of Christ, and all those wherein S. Paul says, The Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ be with you all; and the Lord Jesus Christ direct our way,
etc. and all those wherein a divine Power and Authority is given to Christ as
head of the Church, for the support of the Faith and Hope of all those who
believe in him in order to Salvation. And this Socinus truly judged to be
proper divine Worship. Georg. Blandrata was unsatisfied, that Socinus did not
say enough to prove the necessity of the Invocation of Christ, which he said he
could do from his Priesthood and his Power, from the Examples of the Apostles,
and the very Nature of Adoration. And Blandrata was a Man of great authority
among the Unitarians; and he thought Socinus ought to assert the necessity of
it; or else he would do injury both to Christ and to his Cause.

In the dispute with Francken, Socinus went upon this ground, that divine
Authority was a sufficient ground for divine Worship, although there were not
those essential Attributes of Omnisciency and Omnipotency. But I observe, that
Socinus did not look on this as a matter of Liberty, as our Unitarians now seem
to do; for in the Preface to the former Dispute, he calls the Error of denying
the Invocation of Christ, not, as they now do, a simple Error or a mere
mistake; but a most filthy and pernicious Error, an Error that leads to
Judaism, and is in effect the denying of Christ; and in the latter Dispute he
says, That it tends to Epicurism and Atheism. De divin. Christi, c. ^4.
And Smalcius says, That they are no Christians who refuse giving divine
Worship to Christ.

2. Is it like wise Men, to go upon such grounds as will justify both Pagan
and Popish Idolatry? This they have been charged with, and we shall see what
wise Men they are, by the Defenses they make for themselves.

1. As to Pagan Idolatry, they say,

1. They had no divine command for such a Worship. This was well thought of,
Defense of the Hist. of the Unit. p. 54.
when they confess, that some among themselves deny that there is any command
for invocating Christ, and therefore they must charge all those who do it with
Idolatry. But this is no very wise Notion of Idolatry, which depends upon the
Nature of the Worship, and not the mere positive Will of God.

2. They set up the Creatures more than the Creator, as S. Paul says. S. Paul
does not think them such Fools, that they took the Creatures to be above the
Creator, which was impossible, while they owned one to be the Creator and the
other the Creatures; but that they g^ve such acts of Worship to them, as
belonged only to the Creator, and exceeded in the Worship of them those bounds
which ought to be between them.

3. They set up an infinite Number of Gods who had been mere Men. This is, as
if the question were only, whether one, or a great many were to have such
Worship given them: as if it were a dispute about a Monarchy or a Commonwealth
of Gods. But if it be lawful to give divine Worship to one Creature, it is to
a hundred.

4. Their Worship was terminated on them, and so they made true Gods of Men.
Suppose they asserted one supreme God, and made the rest subordinate to him,
and appointed by him to be the immediate Directors of humane Affairs. I desire
to know, Whether the Adoration of such were Idolatry or not? If it were, they
cannot be excused who give Adoration to Christ, while they esteem him a mere
Creature; if not, all the wiser Pagans must be excused.

2. As to the Papists, the difference they make, is not like wise Interpreters
of Scripture; for they say,

1. They have no Text of Scripture, which commands them to worship S. Peter, S.
Paul and S. Francis. So some among them say, there is none for the Invocation
of Christ, and with them the case is Parallel. But if Socinus his Principle be
true, that communicated Excellency is a sufficient Foundation for Worship,
because it is relative to the Giver, then the Papists must be justified in all
their relative Acts of Worship without any Text to command it.

2. They exceed the Bounds of Honor and Respect due to glorified Saints. But
who is to set these Bounds but themselves in all Acts of relative Worship,
because they depend upon the intention of the Persons? And they hold the very
same things concerning communicated Knowledge and Power from God, which our
Unitarians make use of to justify their Notion of the Invocation of Christ.

VII. Is this interpreting Scripture like wise Men, to turn S. Paul's words,
Romans 9.5. Hist. of the Unit. p 35.
Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is over all, God blessed for
ever, into a Thanksgiving to God for the Exaltation of Christ, i. e. God who is
over all be blessed for ever. Answer to Milb p 35.
But what reason do they give for such a forced and unusual Sense, besides the
avoiding the difficulty of having the Name of God given here to Christ? A very
substantial one. If the words had been intended of Christ, it would have been
in the Greek (...) and not (...), which they have taken up from Erasmus and
Curcellaeus. But Beza, who understood Greek as well as either, (and Curcellaeus
owned him for his Master in that Tongue) says, He could not sufficiently
wonder at this Criticism of Erasmus, and thinks it a violent and far-fetched
Interpretation, and not agreeable to the Greek Idiom, and that (...) is the
same there with (...). And which may signify more to our Unitarians, one of
the learned Men they have had among them, Ante-Nicen. p. 29, 78.
utterly disowns this Interpretation, and says, That the whole Verse belongs
to Christ. But if that will not do, they have another fetch in the case, Answer
to Milb p 34.
viz. That it is very probable that the word God was not originally in the
Text. How does this appear to be very probable? Of that, we have this account:
Grotius observes, that the Greek Copies, used by the Author of the Syriac, had
not the word God, and that Erasmus had noted, Ans. to the Archbishop, p. 29.
that the Copies of S. Cyprian, S. Hilary and S. Chrysostom had only blessed
over all, or above all, without the word God; upon which he charges his
Adversary with no less than Impiety in concealing this; and calls it, cheating
his Reader. But how if all this prove a gross Mistake in him; unless it be
only, that Grotius and Erasmus come in for their shares. It Is true, that
Grotius says, That the word God was left out in the Syriac Version. Answer to
Milb p. 3.
But F. Simon, whose authority they sometimes magnify as to critical Learning,
says plainly, That Grotius was mistaken, Histoir Critique du Nov. Test. To.
III. c. 54. p. 813.
and that the word God is in all the old Copies, and in all the old Versions.
And upon his bringing Erasmus to prove that it was not in S. Cyprian, S.
Hilary, and S. Chrysostom, he cries out, Where is Sincerity? Erasmus had met
with one faulty Edition which had it not, but he says, all the rest of the
MSS. have it. And the learned Oxford Annotators, Annot. in Cypr. advers.
Judaeos.
both on S. Cyprian, and the Greek Testament compared with MSS. (which
excellent Work we hope will shortly appear more publicly) declare, that they
found it in all the MSS. they could meet with; and even Erasmus himself says,
That the Omission in S. Hilary might be only by the negligence of the
Transcribers; and so it appears by the late Edition out of the best MSS. where
the words are, Hilar. in Psalm. 122.
Ex quibus Christus qui est super omnia Deus. And for S. Chrysostom, all that
is said, is, That it does not appear that he read it, but he thinks it might be
added afterward. But what a sort of proof is this against the general consent
of MSS. for S. Chrysostom does not say he thought so. Erasmus very plainly
says, that it is clearer than the Sun, that Christ is called God in other
places of Scripture; but Grotius can by no means be excused, nor those that
rely upon him as to this place.

VIII. Is this interpreting Scripture like wise Men, to take advantage of all
Omissions in Copies, when those which are entire ought to be preferred? This I
mention for the sake of another noted place, 1 Timothy 3.16. God was manifest in
the Flesh. Here our wise Interpreters triumph unreasonably; Hist. of the Unit.
p. 40.
viz For, they say, it appears by the Syriac, Latin, Aethiopick, Armenian,
Arabic, and most ancient Greek Bibles, that the word God was not originally in
this Text but added to it. But the Arabic in all the Polyglotts has God in;
the Syriac and Aethiopick, if we believe their Versions, read it in the
Masculine Gender, and therefore in the King of Spain's Bible, Guido Fabricius
Boderianus puts in Deus. As to the Armenian, I have nothing to say, but what F.
Simon tells us from Vscan an Armenian Bishop; that there was great variety in
their Copies, Hist. Critique du Nov. To. II. c. 17.
and that their first Translation was out of Syriac and not out of Greek. And
the main point is, as to the old Greek Copies; and we are assured, that there
is but One, viz. the Clermont Copy which leaves out God, but that it is in the
Alexandrian, the Vatican and all others; and Curcellaeus mentions no more than
the Clermont Copy.

It is therefore necessary to Examine in this place, the Authority of this
Clermont Copy, (as it is called) whose reading is set up against all other
ancient Greek Copies. Beza affirms it with great Confidence, Verum repugnant
perpetuo consensu omnes Graeci Codices. Bez.
That all the Greek Copies have God with one Consent. But how comes he to take
no notice of this Difference of the Clermont Copy? For that he had a sight of
that part of it, which has the Epistles of S. Paul, appears by his Notes in
which he refers to it. For he mentions it three times in his Notes on Romans 1.
v. 13.29.32. and in one he calls it a very ancient Manuscript written in large
Letters. What should make Beza pass it over here? It seems by Morinus that in
the Clermont Copy, Motinus Exercit. Bibl. l. 1. Ex. 2. c. 4.
there was a Correction made by another hand; which is put into the various
Lections of the Polyglott in Morinus his Words. But how does it appear, that
Beza's Clermont Copy was the very same which Morinus had? Morinus says, he had
it from the F. F. Puteani; Simon. Dissert. Sur le MS. du Nov, Test p. 14
(and is the same I suppose with that in the King of France's Library; of which
they were then the Keepers) But Morinus intimates that it was an old Copy,
Rigalt. vit. P. Puteani, p. 62.
which fell into their hands; and so might come into the French King's Library,
when they gave their own Manuscripts to it. This seems to have been the same
which P. Pithaeus speaks of; for the Description exactly agrees with it; but
Pithaeus, P. Pithae de Latino Interpret. p. II.
who was a Person of great Integrity and Learning, affirms, That this Volume of
the Epistles in great Letters came out of the Monastery of Corbey; and so it
could not be the Clermont Copy which Beza had. And I shall make it appear from
the very places mentioned by Morinus, that Beza's Copy did differ from that
which Morinus perused, as Romans 4.9. Morinus his Copy had (...); Beza takes
notice of it only in the vulgar Latin; which he would never have done, if it
had been in the Clermont Copy, Rom 5.6. For (...) Morinus reads in that Copy
(...), and says it is the true reading: but Beza condemns it, and never
intimates that his Copy had it, Romans 7.25. Morinus says, the reading of his
Copy is the true, (...): Beza says, It is against all the Greek Copies but
one, and that has (...); whether Beza were mistaken as to other Copies is not
our business to enquire; but if the reading had been in his Copy as Morinus
found it; he could never have said, that but one Copy had that different
reading. Romans 8.13, Morinus his Copy had it (...); Beza takes no notice of any
difference. Romans 10.8, Morinus reads (...). Beza says, It is not in the Greek
Copies; and he had then the Clermont by him: but it is both in that of the
French King's Library, and of S. Germain's; which agree with each other, where
Beza's Copy differs; and Beza upon Romans 7.6. and 11.6 observes, that his
Clermont Copy differs from the rest; by which we see how careful he was to
observe the variuos Readings in it; and so upon Romans 15.24, 33, 16, 27.

Romans 14.6. Beza observes, That the vulgar Latin leaves out part of the Verse,
but that it is found in all the Greek Copies; here Morinus charges Beza with
Negligence, or Dis-ingenuity; because it was left out in the Clermont Copy; but
how does he prove he had the same Copy? He says indeed, That the ancient Copy,
which he had was lent to Beza; but he tells not by whom, nor in whose
Possession it was afterward. But if Beza were a man of any ordinary Care or
Honesty, he would never have concealed those things, which Morinus found in it.
1 Cor. 6.20, Beza says, That those words (...), are in all the Greek Copies;
Morinus says, That they were wanting in that which he made use of. It Is true,
they are wanting in the Alexandrian, and some others; but in none that Beza had
the sight of* if he may be believed. These are sufficient to show, that there
is no good Proof, that the ^opy which Beza had was the same which Morinus
borrowed; and therefore his Authority is not to be slighted in this matter,
when he affirms, that all the Greek Copies agreed in reading God manifest in
the flesh; and I cannot imagine Beza so intolerably careless as he must have
been, if Morinus his Copy and Beza's were the same. But whether it were in
Beza's Copy or not, it is certain, they say, That it is not in that ancient
Manuscript, which is called the Clermont Copy; which is affirmed by Morinus,
and taken for granted by others, therefore we must enquire a little farther
into the Authority of this ancient Copy. It appears by those who have viewed
and considered them, that there are two very ancient Copies of S. Paul's
Epistles, so exactly agreeing, that one is supposed to be the Transcript of the
other; one is in the King's Library, the other in the Monastery of S. Germains.
Which Mabillon says is a Thousand years old. Mabil. de Re Deplomat. l. 5. p.
346.
These two Copies are in effect but one, agreeing so much where they differ
from others; and having the old Latin Version opposite to the Greek. Monsieur
Arnauld had so bad an Opinion of both parts of this Clermont Copy, (as it is
called) that he charges it with manifest Forgery, and Imposture; inserting
things into the Text without ground. F. Simon who defends them cannot deny
several things to be inserted, but he says, it was through Carelessness and
not Design. But he Confesses, Dissert. surless MS. du Nov. Test. p. 17.
That those who transcribed both those ancient Copies of S. Paul 's Epistles
did not understand Greek, and hardly Latin. And now let us consider, of what
just Authority this different reading of the Clermont Copy ought to be against
the Consent of all other ancient Copies. We find some good Rules laid down by
the Roman Critics, when they had a Design under Urban 8th. to compare the
Greek Text of the New Testament, with their ancient Manuscripts in the Vatican,
and elewhere, and to publish an exact Edition of it (which Collation was
preserved in the Barberin Library, and from thence published by Pet. Possinus.)
And the main Rules as to the various Lections of Manuscripts were these, 1.
That the Text was not to be altered but a Concurrence of all, or the greatest
part of the Manuscripts. 2. That if one Manuscript agreed with the vulgar
Latin, the Text was not to be altered, but the Difference to be set down at the
end of the Chapter. But it is observable in that Collation of Twenty two
Manuscripts, there is no one Copy produced, wherein there is any Variety as to
this place. I know they had not Twenty two Manuscripts of S. Paul's Epistles,
(they mention but Eight ancient Manuscripts) but they found no difference in
those they had. And now I leave any reasonable man to judge, whether this
Clermont Copy ought to be relied upon in this matter. But I have something more
to say about the Greek Copies.

1. That God is in the Complutensian Polyglott, which was the first of the
Kind, and carried on by the wonderful Care and Expense of that truly great Man
Cardinal Ximenes, Alavarez Gomez de rebus Gestis Fr. Ximenii, l. 2. and 3.
who spared for no Cost or Pains in procuring the best ancient Copies both
Hebrew and Greek; and the fittest men to judge of both Languages. And in
pursuit of this noble Design, he had the best Vatican Manuscripts sent to him
(as is expressed in the Epistle before his Greek Testament,) and what others he
could get out of other places, among which he had the Codex Britannicus
mentioned by Erasmus. But after all these Copies made use of by the Editors,
there is no Intimation of any variety as to this Place; although the vulgar
Latin be there as it was.

But Erasmus mentions the great Consent of the old Copies as to the vulgar
Latin, and whence should that come, but from a Variety in the old Greek Copies.
To that I Answer,

2. That the Greek Copies, where they were best understood had no Variety in
them; i. e. among the Greeks themselves. As appears by Gregory Nyssen, S.
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophylact. But does not Monsieur
Amelote say, Amelote in Loc.
That the Marquess of Velez had Sixteen old Manuscripts, out of which he
gathered various Readings, and he reads it O! I cannot but observe, how he
commends Fabricius and Walton, for rendering the Syriac Version according to the
vulgar Latin; but that will appear to be false, to any one that looks into
them; the former is mentioned already; and the latter translates it, Quod
manifestatus sit in carne. But as to the Marquess of Velez his Copies, there is
a Secret in it, which ought to be understood, and is discovered by Mariana.
Marian. Edit. vulg. c. 17.
He Confesses, He had so may Manuscripts, eight of them out of the Escurial,
but that he never set down whence he had his Readings.

And in another place, he ingenuously confesses, That his Design was to
justify the vulgar Latin; Praef. ad Schol.
and therefore collected Readings on purpose, and he suspects some, out of such
Greek Copies, as after the Council of Florence were made comfortable to the
Latin. Which Readings were published by la Cerda, whose Authority Amelote
follows. And now what Reason can there be, that any such late Copies should be
preferred before those which were used by the Greek Fathers?

3. That the Latin Fathers did not concern themselves about changing their
Version, because they understood it still to relate to the Person of Christ. So
do S. Ierom, Leo, Hilary, Fulgentius, Hier. in Loc. Leo Epist. 34. ad Fl.

Hilar de Trinit. l. 11.

Fulg. ad Thra. c. 4.


and others. As to the Objections about Liberatus, Macedonius and Hincmarus, I
refer them to the Learned Oxford Annotations.

IX. It is not wisely done of these Interpreters, to charge our Church so much
for retaining a Verse in S. John's first Epistle, 1 John 5.7.
when they had so good authority to do it? The Verse is, There are three that
bear Record in Heaven, the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, Consider on the Explic.
p. 29.
etc. From hence they charge us with corrupted Copies and false Translations;
as an instance of the former, they produce this Text, which they say, was not
originally in the Bible, History of Unit. p. 43. Ans. to the Archbishop, p. 29.
but is added to it, and is not found in the most ancient Copies of the Greek,
nor in the Syriac, Arabic, Ethiopick, or Armenian Bibles, nor in the most
ancient Latin Bibles. Notwithstanding all which, I hope to be able to show,
that our Church had reason to retain it. For which end we are to consider these
things;

1. That Erasmus first began to raise any scruple about it. For, however it
might not be in some MSS. which were not looked into, this Verse was constantly
and solemnly read as a part of Scripture both in the Greek and Latin Churches,
as Mr. Seldom confesses, Seldom de Syned. l. 2. c. 4.
and that it was in Wickliff's Bible. So that here was a general consent of the
Eastern and Western Churches for the receiving it; and although there might be
a variety in the Copies, yet there was none in the public Service, and no
Objections against it that we find. But Erasmus his authority swayed so much
here, that in the Bibles in the time of H. 8. and E. 6. it was retained in a
different Letter. As in Tyndell's Bible printed by the King's Printer, A. D.
1540. and in the Church Bible of King E. 6. in both which they are read, but
not in the same Character. Yet Erasmus his authority was not great enough to
cast it out, if he had a mind to have done it. Which does not appear, for he
says himself, that finding it in the codex Britannicus, as he calls it, he
restored it in his Translation as well as the Greek Testament, out of which he
had expunged it before in two Editions. And the Complutensian Bible coming out
with it, added greater authority to the keeping of it in, and so it was
preserved in the Greek Testaments of Hervagius, Plautin and R. Stephens and
others, after the MSS. had been more diligently searched. Morinus says, Morin
exercit Bibl. l. 1, 2, Ex. 2.
it was in seven of Rob. Stephens his MSS. but F. Simon will not allow that it
was in any but the Complutensian, Simon dissert. de MSS p. 14.
which is a strange piece of boldness in him. For Beza says, Bez Epist. ad
nov. Testam.
He had the use of them all from him; and H. Stephens let him have his Father's
Copy compared with 25 MSS. and he affirms, That he found it in several of R.
Stephens his old MSS. besides the Codex Britannicus and the Complutensian Copy,
and therefore he concludes, that it ought to be retained. (And so it was, after
these Copies were come abroad in the Bishop's Bible, under Queen Elizabeth,
without any distinction of character, as likewise in our last Translation.) And
it is observable, that Amelote affirms, that he found it in the most ancient
Greek Copy in the Vatican Library; but the Roman Critics confess, it was not
in their 8 MSS. yet they thought it fit to be retained from the common Greek
Copies, and the Testimonies of the Fathers agreeing with the Vulgar Latin.

2. This Verse was in the Copies of the African Churches from S. Cyprian's
time, as appears by the Testimonies of S. Cyprian, Fulgentius, Facundus, Victor
Vitensis, and Vigilius Tapsensis, which are produced by others. Critique in
nov. Test. c. 18.
F. Simon has a bold conjecture, of which he is not sparing, that Victor
Vitensis is the first who produced it as S. John 's saying; and that it was S.
Cyprian 's own Assertion and not made use of by him as a Testimony of
Scripture. But they who can say such things as these, are not much to be
trusted. For S. Cyprian's words are, speaking of S. John before, Et iterum de
Patre and Filio scriptum est, and hi tres unum sunt. And it was not Victor
Vitensis, but the African Bishops and Eugenius in the head of them, who made
that address to Huneric, wherein they say, That it is clearer than Light, that
Father, Son and Holy Ghost are one God, and prove it by the Testimony of S.
John. Tres sunt qui Testimonium perhibent in caelo, Pater, Verbum and Spiritus
Sanctus, and hi Tres unum sunt.

3. In the former Testimony, the authority of the Vulgar Latin was made use of:
and why, is it rejected here? When Morinus confesses there is no variety in the
Copies of it. Morin. exercit. Bibl. l 1. Ex. 2. c. 1. n. 9.
Vulgata versio hunc versum constanter habet. And he observes, that those of
the Fathers, who seem to omit it (as S. Augustine against Maximinus) did not
follow the old Latin Version. Lucas Brugensis, says only, That in 35 old
Copies, they found it wanting but in five. As to S. Ierom's Prologue, I am not
concerned to defend it; but Erasmus thought it had too much of S. Jerome in it,
and others think it has too little. F. Simon confesses, Critique To. I. c. 9.
that P. Pithaeus and Mabillon think it was S. Ierom's, and that it was in the
MSS. But I conclude with saying, That whoever was the Author, at the time when
it was written, the Greek Copies had this Verse, or else he was a notorious
Impostor.

X. The next thing I shall ask these wise Interpreters of Scripture, is,
Whether, when the Scripture so often affirms, That the World was made by the
Son, Joh. 1.3. Heb. 1.2, 10. Col. 1.16.
and that all things were created by him in Heaven and in Earth, it be
reasonable to understand them of Creating nothing? For after all their Shifts
and Evasions it comes to nothing at last. But that we may see, how much they
are confounded with these places, we may observe,

1. They sometimes say, that where the Creation of all things is spoken of, it
is not meant of Christ but of God. For in the answer they give to the place of
the Epistle to the Colossians, they have these words: For by him all things
were created, Hist. of the Unit. p. 38.
are not spoken of Christ, but of God: the sense of the whole Context is this,
The Lord Christ is the most perfect Image of the invisible God, the first born
from the dead of every Creature; for, O Colossians, by him, even by the
invisible God were all things created; they were not from all eternity, nor
rose from the concourse of Atoms, but all of them, whether things in Heaven, or
things in Earth; whether Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers,
are Creatures, and were by God created, who is before them all, and by him they
all consist. This is a very fair Concession, that of whomsoever these words are
spoken he must be God.

2. But in the defense of this very Book they go about to prove, Defense of the
History of Unitar. p. 13, 14.
That the Creation of the World is not meant by these words. Is not this
interpreting like wise Men indeed? And they tell us, They cannot but wonder,
that Men should attribute the old or first Creation to Christ. Wise Men do not
use to wonder at plain things. For what is the old or first Creation, but the
making the World, and creating all things in Heaven and Earth? And these things
are attribu^ed to the Word, to the Son to Christ. But say they, The Scripture
does never say in express words* that Christ has created the Heaven and the
Earth. What would these wise Interpreters have? Does not by whom all things
were created in Heaven and Earth imply, that Heaven and Earth were created by
him? But they have a notable observation from the Language of the New
Testament, viz That Christ is never said to have created the Heaven, the Earth,
and the Sea, and all that therein is; but we are apt to think, that creating
all things takes in ^he Sea too, and that in the Scripture Language Heaven and
Earth are the same with the World, and I hope the World takes in the Sea; and
the World is said to be made by him, and do not all things take in all? No, say
they, all things are limited to all Thrones, Principalities and Powers, visible
and invisible. Then, however the making of these is attributed to Christ. And
if he made all Powers, Visible and invisible, he must be God. Not so neither.
What then is the meaning of the words, By him were all things created that are
in Heaven and in Earth, visible and invisible; whether they be Thrones, or
Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by him and for
him? Surely then, these Dominions and Powers were created by him. No, say they,
P. 10.
that which we render created, ought to be rendered, modelled, disposed, or
reformed into a new Order. Were ever wise Men driven to such miserable Shifts?
One while these words are very strong and good proof of the Creation of the
World against Atheists and Epicureans, and by and by they prove nothing of all
this, but only a new modelling of some things called Dominions and Powers. Do
they hope ever to convince Men at this rate of wise interpreting? Well, but
what is this creating or disposing things into a new order? And who are these
Dominions and Powers? they answer, Men and Angels. How are the Angels created
by him and for him? Did he die to reform them, as well as Mankind? No, but they
are put under him. And so they were created by him, that is, they were not
created by him, but only made subject to him. But who made them subject to him?
The Man Christ Jesus? No, God appointed him to be the Lord of every Creature.
Then they were not created by Christ, but by God; but the Apostle says, they
were created by Christ. But God made him Head of the Church, and as Head of the
Body he rules over all. This we do not at all question; but how this comes to
be creating Dominions and Powers, visible and invisible. Did God make the Earth
and all the living Creatures in it, when he made Man Lord over them? Or rather
was Man said to create them, because he was made their Head? If this be their
interpreting Scripture like wise Men, I shall be content with a less measure of
Understanding, and thank God for it.

XI. Lastly, Is this to interpret Scripture like Wise men, to leave the form of
Baptism doubtful, whether it were not inserted into S. Matthew's Gospel; or to
understand it in another Sense than the Christian Church has done from the
Apostles times? I say first, Leave it doubtful, because they say, That Answer
to Milb. p. 15.
Learned Critics have given very strong Reasons why they believe these Words.
In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, were not
spoke by our Savior, but have been added to the Gospel of S. Matthew, from the
common Form and Practice of the Church. Why are these strong Reasons of learned
Critics mentioned, but to raise Doubts in Peoples minds about them? But they
declare afterward against them. Not too much of that. For they say, only, P.
16.
That they are not without their weight, but they have observed several things
that make them think, that this Text is a genuine part of Scripture. Very
Wisely and Discreetly spoken! The Reasons are strong and weighty; but they
think otherwise. I wish they had told the World, who these learned Critics
were; lest it should be suspected that they were their own Inventions. But I
find a certain Nameless Socinian was the Author of them; and his Words are
produced by Sandius (a Person highly commended by them for his Industry and
Learning, Sand. Interp. Et Paradox. p. 115.
but as much condemned by others, for want of Skill or Ingenuity.) The reason
of writing these Reasons Sandius freely Confesses was, because this place
clearly proved a Trinity of Persons against the Socinians. But what are these
very strong and weighty Reasons? For it is great Pity, but they should be known.

In the first place he observes, That S. Matthew's Gospel was written in
Hebrew, and the Original he says is lost; and he suspects that either S. Jerome
was himself the Translator into Greek and Latin (who was a Corrupter of
Scripture, and Origin) or some unknow Person: from whence it follows, that our
Gospel of S. Matthew is not of such Authority, that an Article of such moment
should depend upon it. Is not this a very strong and weighty Reason? Must not
this be a very learned Critic who could mention S. Ierom, as Translator of S.
Matthews Gospel into Greek? But then one would think this Interpreter might
have been wise enough to have added this of himself. No; he dares not say that,
but that it was added by Transcribers. But whence or how? To that he says,
That they seem to be taken out of the Gospel according to the Egyptians. This
is great News indeed. But comes it from a good hand? Yes, from Epiphanius. And
what says he to this purpose? He says, That the Sabellians made use of the
counterfeit Egyptian Gospel, and there it was declared that Father, Epiph.
haer. 62. n. 2.
Son and Holy Ghost were the same. And what then? Does he say they borrowed the
Form of Baptism from thence? Nothing like it. But on the contrary, Epiphanius
urges this very Form in that place against the Sabellians: N. 4.
and quotes S. Matthew's Authority for it. But this worthy Author produces
other Reasons, which Sandius himself laughs at, and despises? and therefore I
pass them over. The most material seems to be if it hold, That the most ancient
Writers on S. Matthew take no notice of them, and he mentions Origin, Hilary,
and S. Chrysostom, but these Negative Arguments Sandius thinks of no force.
Origin and S. Chrysostom, he says, reach not that Chapter; the Opus
Imperfectum, which was none of his, does not; but his own Commentaries do, and
there he not only mentions the Form, but takes notice of the Compendious
Doctrine delivered by it, which can be nothing else but that of the Trinity. In
the Greek Catena on S. Matthew there is more mentioned, viz. That Christ had
not then first his Power given him; for he was with God before, and was himself
by Nature God. And there Gregory Nazianzen says, The Form of Baptism was in
the Name of the Holy Trinity; and he there speaks more fully. Remember, says
he, the Faith into which thou were baptized. Into the Father? That is well, but
that is no farther than the Jews go (for they own one God, and one Person.)
Into the Son? That is beyound them, but not yet perfect. Into the Holy Ghost?
Yes, says he, this is perfect Baptism. But what is the common Name of these
three, (...). Plainly, that of God. But this learned Critic observes, that
Hilary in some Copies takes no notice of this Form. That is truly observed, for
the very Conclusion is not Hilary's, but taken out of S. Ierom; but if he had
looked into Hilary's Works, he would have found the Form of Baptism owned, and
asserted by him. For he not only sets it down as the Form of Faith, Hilar. l.
2. de Trinit.
as well as our Baptism appointed by Christ; but argues from it, against the
Sabellians and Ebionites, as well as others. Thus we see how very strong and
weighty the Arguments of this learned Critic were.

CHAP. IX. The General Sense of the Christian Church, proved from the Form of
Baptism, as it was understood in the first Ages.
BUT our Unitarians pretend, that they are satisfied, that the Form of Baptism
is found in all Copies, and all the ancient Translations; and that it was used
before the Council of Nice, P. 17.
as appears by several places of Tertullian. But how then? There are two things
stick with them.

(1.) That the Ante-Nicene Fathers do not allege it to prove the Divinity of
the Son, or Holy Ghost.

(2.) That the Form of Words here used, does not prove the Doctrine of the
Trinity. Both which must be strictly Examined.

1. As to the former. It cannot but seem strange to any one conversant in the
Writings of those Fathers; when S. Cyprian says expressly, Cypri^n. ad Jul.
Ep. 73.
That the Form of Baptism is prescribed by Christ, that it should be in plena
and aduna^a Trinitate: i. e. in the full Confession of the Holy Trinity; and
therefore, he denied the Baptism of the Marcionites, because the Faith of the
Trinity was not sincere among them, as appears at large in that Epistle. And
this, as far as I can find, was the general Sense of the Ante-Nicene Fathers,
Erasm. ad Cens. Paris. Tit. II. Vossi. de Symb. diss. I. n. 38.
as well as others. And it is no improbable Opinion of Erasmus, and Vossius,
two learned Critics indeed, That the most ancient Creed went no further than
the Form of Baptism, viz. to Believe in the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; and the
other Articles were added as Heresies gave occasion. S. Ierom says, Hierom.
Ep. 61.
That in the Traditional Creed, which they received from the Apostles, the main
Article was, the Confession of the Trinity; to which he joins the Unity of the
Church, and Resurrection of the Flesh; and then adds, that herein is contained,
Omne Christiani Dogmatis Sacramentum, the whole Faith into which Christians
were baptized. And he says, It was the Custom among them to instruct those who
were to be Baptized for forty days in the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity. So that
there was then no Question but the Form of Baptism had a particular Respect to
^t; and therefore, so much weight is laid upon the use of it, as well by the
Ante-Nicene Fathers, as others. For, Tertullian says, Tertul. de Bap^ism. ^ 13.
That the Form of Baptism was prescribed by our Savior himself as a Law to his
Church. De Praescript. haeret. c. 20.
S. Cyprian to the same purpose, Cyprian. Ep. 27.73. Ed. Ox.
That he commanded it to be used S. Augustine calls them, the Words of the
Gospel, without which there is no Baptism. Aug. de Baptism. c. Donat. l. 6. c.
25.
The Reason given by S. Ambrose is, Ambros. de Sp. Sanct. l. 1. c 3.
because the Faith of the Trinity is in this Form. But how if any one Person
were left out? He thinks, that if the rest be not denied, the Baptism is good;
but otherwise, vacuum est omne Mysterium, the whole Baptism is void.

So that the Faith of the Trinity was that which was required in order to true
Baptism, more than the bare Form of Words. If there were no reason to question
the former, S. Ambrose seems of Opinion that the Baptism was good, although
every Person were not named, and therein he was followed by Beda, Hugo de
Sancto Victore, Bed. in Act. 19. Hugo de S Vict. de Sacr. l. 1. c. 13.
Peter Lombard and others. Lomb. 4. Sent. Did. ^. c. sed quoth. Basil c Eunom. l.
5. c. 3. c. 10.
And S Basil in the Greek Church, asserted that Baptism in the name of the Holy
Ghost was sufficient, because he is hereby owned to be of equal Dignity with
the Father and Son; but it is still supposing that the whole and undivided
Trinity be not denied. And he elsewhere says, That Baptizing in the Name of
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost is a most solemn Profession of the Trinity in
Unity, because they are all joined together in this public Act of Devotion.
But others thought that the Baptism was not good, unless every Person were
named; which Opinion generally obtained both in the Greek and Latin Church. And
the late Editors of S. Ambrose observe, that in other places he makes the whole
Form of Words necessary as well as the Faith in the Holy Trinity. The Baptism
of the Eunomians was rejected, because they altered the Form and the Faith too,
Epiph. Haer. 76. ad fin.
saying, That the Father was uncreate, the Son created by the Father, and the
Holy Ghost created by the Son.

The Baptism of the Samosatenians was rejected by the Council of Nice. Council.
Nicaen. c. 19.
S. Augustine thinks it was because they had not the right Form, but the true
Reason was, they rejected the Doctrine of the Trinity. And so the Council of
Arles I. does in express Words refuse their Baptism who refused to own that
Doctrine. Aug. de Haeres c. 44. Council. Arel. I. c. 8.
That Council was held A. D. 314. and therefore Bellarmin, Bellarm. de Bap. l.
1. c. 3.
and others after him, are very much mistaken, when they interpret this Canon
of the Arians, concerning whose Baptism there could be no Dispute till many
years after. But this Canon is de Afris; among whom the Custom of Baptizing
prevailed; but this Council propounds an expedient as most agreeable to the
general Sense of the Christian Church, viz. That if any relinquished their
Heresy and came back to the Church, they should ask them the Creed, and if
they found that they were baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, they should have only imposition of hands, but if they did not confess
the Trinity, their Baptism was declared void. Now this I look on as an
impregnable Testimony of the Sense of the Ante-Nicene Fathers, viz. That they
did not allow that Baptism which was not in the Name of the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost; or (which they understood to be the same) in the confession of the
Faith of the Trinity. How then can our Unitarians pretend, That the Ante-Nicene
Fathers did not allege the Form of Baptism to prove the Trinity? For the words
are, If they do not answer to this Trinity let them be baptized, says this
plenary Cou^cil, as S. Augustine often calls it. What Trinity do they mean? Of
mere Names or Ciphers, or of one God and two Creatures joined in the same Form
of words, as our Unitarians understand it? But they affirm, That the Ancients
of 400 years do not insist on this Text of S. Matthew to prove the Divinity
Answer to Mi^b p. 18.
or Personality of the Son or Spirit.

Therefore to give a clear account of this matter, I shall prove, that the
Ante-Nicene Fathers did understand these words, so as not to be taken, either
for mere Names, or for Creatures joined with God; but that they did maintain
the Divinity of the Son and Holy Ghost, from the general Sense, in which these
words were taken among them.

And this I shall do from these Arguments;

1. That those who took them in another Sense, were opposed and condemned by
the Christian Church.

2. That the Christian Church did own this Sense in public Acts of divine
Worship as well as private.

3. That it was owned and defended by those who appeared for the Christian
Faith against Infidels. And I do not know any better means than these, to prove
such a matter of Fact as this.

1. The Sense of the Christian Church may be known by its behavior toward
those, who took these words only for different Names or Appearances of One
Person.

And of this we have full Evidence, as to Praxeas, Noetus and Sabellius, all
long before the Council of Nice.

Praxeas was the first, at least in the Western Church, who made Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, to be only several Names of the same Person, and he was with
great Warmth and Vigor opposed by Tertullian, who charges him with introducing
a new opinion into the Church, as will presently appear. And his testimony is
the more considerable, because our Unitarians confess, P. 17.
That he lived 120 years before the Nicene Council, and that he particularly
insists upon the Form of Baptism against Praxeas. Advers. Prax. c. 26.
But to what purpose? Was not his whole design in that Book to prove three
distinct Persons of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and yet but One God? Does he
not say expressly, That Christ commanded that his Disciples should baptize into
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, not into One of them; ad singula nomina in
Personas singulas tingimur. In Baptism we are dipped once at every Name, to
show that we are baptized into three Persons. It is certain then, that
Tertullian could not mistake the Sense of the Church so grossly, as to take
three Persons to be only three several Names.

He grants to Praxeas, that Father, C 2.
Son and Holy Ghost are one, but how? Per unitatem substantiae, because there
is but one divine Essence: but yet he says, there are three, not with respect
to essential Attributes, for so they are unius Substantiae, and unius Status,
and unius Potestatis, quia unus Deus. And therefore the difference can be only
as to personal Properties and distinct Capacities, which he calls Gradus,
Forma, Species, not merely as to internal Relations, but as to external
Dispensations, which he calls their Economy. For his great business is to
prove against Praxeas, that the Son and Holy Ghost had those things attributed
to them in Scripture, which could not be attributed to the Father. For Praxeas
asserted, Tertul. de praescr. haeret. c. ult.
That the Father suffered; and thence his followers were called Patripassians
and Monarchici, i. e. Unitarians. The main ground which Praxeas went upon, Con.
Prax. ^. 3.
was the Unity of the Godhead, so often mentioned in Scripture, from hence
Tertullian says, That he took advantage of the weakness of the common sort of
Christians, and represented to them, that whereas the Doctrine of Christ made
but one God, those who held the Trinity according to the Form of Baptism, must
make more Gods than one. Tertullian answers, that they held a Monarchy, i. e.
unicum imperium, one supreme Godhead, and a supreme power may be lodged in
distinct Persons and administered in several manners; that nothing overthrew the
divine Monarchy, but a different Power and Authority, which they did by no
means assert. They held a Son, C. 4.
but of the Substance of the Father, and a Holy Ghost from the Father by the
Son: he still keeps to the distinction of Persons, Alium autem quomodo accipere
debes jam professus sum, Personae non Substantiae nomine, ad Distinctionem, non
ad Divisionem, caeterum ubique teneo unam substantiam in tribus cohaerentibus.
Advers. Prax. c. 12.

Et sermo erat apud Deum and nunquam separatus a Patre aut alius a Patre, quia
ego and Pater unum sumus. Haec erat probola veritatis, custos unitatis qua
prolatum dicimus Filium a Patre, sed non separatum. C. 8.


and the Unity of Substance. And he utterly denies any Division of Essences or
separate Substances; for therein, he says, lay the Heresy of Valentinus, in
making a Prolation of a separate Being. But although he says, the Gospel has
declared to us, that the Father is God, the Son God, and the Holy Ghost God,
yet we are taught that there is still but one God: redactum est jam nomen Dei
and Domini in unione, c. 13. whereby the Christians are distinguished from the
Heathens who had many Gods This is the force of what Tertullian says upon this
matter.

And what say our Unitarians to it? They cannot deny that he was an Ante-Nicene
Father; and it is plain that he did understand the Form of Baptism so as to
imply a Trinity of Persons in an Unity of Essence: To which they give no Answer.

But I find three things objected against Tertullian by their Friends:

1. That Tertullian brought this Doctrine into the Church from Montanus, whose
Disciple he then was. So Schlichtingius in his Preface against Meisner,
Schlicht. ad M^isn. de Trinit. p. 13, 14.17.
grants, That he was very near the Apostolical Times, and by his Wit and
Learning promoted this new Doctrine about the Trinity, especially in his Book
against Praxeas. Advers. Prax. 2.
But how does it appear, that he brought in any new Doctrine? Yes, says
Schlichtingius, he confesses, That he was more instructed by the Paraclete. But
if he had dealt ingenuously, he would have owned that in that very place, Nos
vero ut semper nunc magi^ ut instructiores per Paracletum, etc.
he confesses, He was always of that opinion, although more fully instructed by
the Paraclete? This only shows that Montanus himself innovated nothing in this
matter, but endeavored to improve it. And it is possible, that Tertullian
might borrow his Similitudes and Illustrations from him, Hanc regulam ab initio
Evangelii decueurrisse etiam ante priores haereticos, n^dum Praxean hesternum.
which have added no ^^rength to it. But as to the main of the Doctrine he
says, It came from the rule of Faith delivered by the Apostles, before
Praxeas, or any Heretics his Predecessors. Which shows, that those who
rejected this Doctrine were always esteemed Heretics in the Christian Church.
And this is a very early Testimony of the Antiquity and general Reception of
it, because as one was received the other was rejected, so that the Assertors
of it were accounted Heretics. And the Sense of the Church is much better
known by such public Acts, than by mere particular Testimonies of the learned
Men of those times. For when they deliver the Sense of the Church in such
public Acts, all persons are Judges of the truth and falsehood of them at the
time when they are deliver^d; and the nearer they came to the Apostolical
Times, the greater is the strength of their evidence; this I ground on
Tertullian's appealing to the ancient rule of Faith, which was universally
known and received in the Christian Church, and that such Persons were looked
on as Heretics who differed from it. Which being so very near the Apostles
Times, it is hardly possible to suppose, that the whole Christian Church should
be mistaken as to what they received as the rule of Faith, which was delivered
and explained at Baptism, and therefore the general Sense of the Form of
Baptism must be understood by all who were admitted to it. So that the Members
of the Christian Church cannot be supposed better acquainted with any thing
than the Doctrine they were baptized into. Here then we have a concurrence of
several public Acts of the Church. 1. The Form of Baptism. 2. The Rule of
Faith relating to that Form, and explained at Baptism. 3. The Churches
rejecting those as Heretics who differed from it: which Tertullian applies to
those who rejected the Trinity. And Praxeas his Doctrine was then condemned,
not by a particular Sentence, but by the general Sense of the Church at that
time. For Optatus Milevitanus reckons him among the condemned Heretics, Optat.
Mil. l. 1.
and joins him with Marcian and Valentinus, as well as Sabellius, who followed
him in the same Heresy. How was this possible, if Praxeas delivered the true
Doctrine, and Tertullian brought in a new Opinion as Schlichtingius fancies.
Tertullian was at that time a declared Montanist; and if he had introduced a
new Doctrine about the Trinity, can we imagine those would have been silent
about it, who were sharp enough upon Tertullian for the sake of his Paraclete?
Some of the followers of Montanus afterward fell into the same opinions with
Praxeas, as Theodoret tells us, Theodor. haer l. 3 c. 2.
and Tertullian says as much of those Cataphrygians who followed Aeschines:
Tertul. de praefer. c. 5.
But these Montanists are distinguished from the rest. And Rigaltius observes,
that Tertullian followed Montanus chiefly in what related to Discipline,
Rigalt. in Tertul. ad Praxean.
and that himself was not so corrupted in point of Doctrine as some of his
Followers were.

2. It Is objected, Ante-Nicen. p. 27.
That Tertullian's Doctrine is inconsistent with the Doctrine of the Trinity;
for he denies the eternal Generation of the Son; and only asserts an Emission
of him before the Creation.

But my business is not to justify all Tertullian's Expressions or
Similitudes; for Men of Wit and Fancy love to go out of the Road, and sometimes
involve things more by Attempts to explain them; but I keep only to that which
he says, was the Faith of the Church from the beginning; and I see no reason
to call in Question his Fidelity in reporting, however he might be unhappy in
his Explications.

3. Tertullian himself says, Schlichtingius, in other Places, where he speaks
of the rule of Faith, does not mention the Holy Ghost; P. 12.
and therefore this seems added by him for the sake of the Paraclete. But this
can be of no force to any one that considers, that Tertullian grounds his
Doctrine not on any New Revelation by the Paraclete, but on the Rule of Faith
received in the Church long before; and upon the Form of Baptism prescribed by
our Savior. Will they say, the Holy Ghost was there added for the sake of
Montanus his Paraclete? And in another of his Books, he owns the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost to make up the Trinity in Unity. In quo est Trinitas unius
Divinitatis, Pater, Filius and Spiritus Sanctus. De Pudicit. c. 21. Petav. T.
2. l. 1. c. 5. Sect. 4.
Wherein Petavius himself confesses, That he asserted the Doctrine of the
Church in a Catholic manner; although he otherwise speaks hardly enough of him.

The next I shall mention, is Novatian, whom Schlichtingius allows,
Schlichting. Praef p. 30.
to have been before the Nicene-Council; Ante-Nicen. p. 27.
and our modern Unitarians call him a great Man, whoever he was, and very
ancient. And there are two things I observe in him. 1. That he opposes
Sabellianism; for, before his time Praxeas and Noetus were little talked of,
especially in the Western Church; but Sabellius his Name and Doctrine were very
well known by the opposition to him, by the Bishops of Alexandria and Rome.
Novatian. de Trinit. c. 12.21, 31.
He sticks not, at the calling it Heresy several times; and Disputes against
it, and answers the Objection about the Unity of the Godhead. 2. That he owns,
that the Rule of Faith requires our believing in Father, Son and Holy Ghost; C.
29.
and asserts the Divine Eternity of it, and therefore must hold the Doctrine of
the Trinity to be the Faith of the Church contained in the Form of Baptism. For
he says, Et cum Spiritus Sancti divina aeternitate sociari.
The Authority of Faith, and the Holy Scriptures admonish us to believe not
only in the Father and Son, but in the Holy Ghost. Therefore the Holy Ghost
must be considered, as an object of Faith joined in the Scripture with the
other two, which is no where more express, than in the Form of Baptism, which
as S. Cyprian says, was to be administered in the full Confession of the
Trinity, in the place already mention^d. And it is observable that S. Cyprian
rejects the Baptism of those who denied the Trinity at that time, Cypr. Ep. 37.
among whom he instances in the Patripassians, who it seems were then spread
into Africa.

The Dispute about the Marcionites Baptism was upon another ground, for they
held a real Trinity, as appears by Dionysius Romanus in Athanasius, and
Epiphanius, etc. but the Question was, whether they held the same Trinity or
not. S. Cyprian says, That our Savior appointed his Apostles to baptize in
the Name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and in the Sacrament of this Trinity
they were to baptize. Does Marcion hold this Trinity? So that S. Cyprian
supposed the validity of Baptism to depend on the Faith of the Trinity. And if
he had gone no farther, I do not see how he had transgressed the Rules of the
Church; but his Error was, that he made void Baptism upon difference of
Communion, and therein he was justly opposed. But the Marcionites Baptism was
rejected in the Eastern Church, Basil Epist. Canon, 47.
because of their Doctrine about the Trinity.

In the Parts of Asia about Ephesus, Noetus had broached the same Doctrine,
which Praxeas had done elsewhere. For which he was called to an account, and
himself with his Followers we cast out of the Churches Communion, as Epiphanius
reports, which is another considerable Testimony of the Sense of the Church at
that time. Epiphanius says, Epiph haeres. 57. n. 1.
he was the first who broached that Blasphemy; but Theodoret mentions Epigonus
and Cleomenes before him; it seems, that he was the first who was publicly
taken notice of for it; and therefore underwent the Censure of the Church with
his Disciples. When he was first summoned to answer, he denied that he asserted
any such Doctrine; because no man before him says Epiphanius, had vented such
Poison. And in the beginning he says, that Noetus out of a Spirit of
Contradiction had uttered such things, as neither the Prophets, nor the
Apostles, nor the Church of God ever thought or declared. Now what was this
unheard of Doctrine of Noetus? That appears best by Noetus his answer upon his
second appearance which was, That he worshipped One God, and knew of no other,
who was born and suffered, and died for us; and for this he produced the
several places which assert the Unity of the Godhead, N. 2.
and among the rest one very observable, Romans 9.5. Of whom as concerning the
flesh Christ came, who is over all God blessed for ever. From whence he
inferred that the Son and the Father were the same, and the same he affirmed of
the Holy Ghost. But from hence we have an evident Proof that the most ancient
Greek Copies in Noetus his time, which was long before the Council of Nice, had
God in the Text. Epiphanius brings many places of Scripture to prove the
Distinction of Persons in the Unity of the Godhead; but that is not my present
business, but to show the general Sense of the Church at that time. I do not
say that Noetus was condemned by a general Council; but it is sufficient, to
show that he was cast out of the Church, where he broached his Doctrine, and no
other Church received him, or condemned that Church which cast him out, which
shows an after Consent to it. Now what was this Doctrine of Noetus? The very
same with that of Praxeas at Rome. Theodoret says, Theod. haer. l. 3. c. 3.
this his Opinon was, That there was but One God the Father, who was himself
impassible, but as he took our Nature, so he was passible and called the Son.
Epiphanius more fully, Epiph. 57. n. 2.
that the same Person was Father, Son and Holy Ghost; wherein he says, he
plainly contradicts the Scriptures, which attribute distinct Personalities to
them; and yet assert but one Godhead. The Father has an Hypostasis of his own,
and so have the Son and Holy Ghost; but yet there is but one Divinity, one
Power, and one Dominion; for these distinct Persons are, (...); of the same
individual Essence and Power. But Epiphanius was no Ante-Nicene Father: however
in matters of Antiquity, where there is no incongruity in the thing, we may
make use of his Authority; and I think no one will question, that Noetus was
condemned; which was the thing I produced him to prove.

But although Noetus was condemned, Comment. in Matthew. p. 470.
yet this Doctrine did spread in the Eastern parts; for Origin mentions those
who confounded the Notion of Father and Son, and made them but one Hypostasis,
and distinguished only by thought, and Denomination. This Doctrine was opposed
not only by Origin, but he had the Sense of the Church concurring with him, as
appears in the Case of Beryllus Bishop of Bostra, who fell into this Opinion,
and was reclaimed by Origin; and Eusebius gives this account of it, Eusebius. l.
6. c. 33.
That there was a Concurrence of others with him in it, and that this Doctrine
was looked on as an Innovation in the Faith. For his Opinion was that our
Savior had no proper Subsistence of his own before the Incarnation; and that
the Deity of the Father alone was in him. He did not mean that the Son had no
separate Divinity from the Father, but that the Deity of the Father only
appeared in the Son; so that he was not really God, but only one in whom the
Deity of the Father was made manifest. Which was one of the oldest Heresies in
the Church, and the most early condemned and opposed by it.

But those Heresies, which before had differenced Persons from the Church, were
now spread by some at first within the Communion of it; as it was not only in
the Case of Noetus and Beryllus, but of Sabellius himself, who made the
greatest noise about this Doctrine; and his Disciples, Epiphanius tells us,
Epiph. haer. 62.
spread very much both in the Eastern and Western parts; in Mesopotamia and at
Rome. Their Doctrine, he says, was, that Father, Son and Holy Ghost were but
one Hypostasis, with three different Denominations. They compared God to the
Sun, the Father to the Substance, the Son to the Light, and the Holy Ghost to
the Heat which comes from it; and these two latter were only distinct
Operations of the same Substance.

Epiphanius thinks that Sabellius therein differed from Noetus, because he
denied that the Father suffered; but S. Augustine can find no difference between
them. Aug. in Joh. tract. 36.
All that can be conceived is, that a different Denomination did arise from the
different appearance and Operation; which our Unitarians call three Relative
Persons, and one Subsisting Person. Discourse of Nominal. and real Unit. p. 1^


Sabellius did spread his Heresy most in his own Country; which was in
Pentapolis of the Cyrenaick Province, being born in Ptolemais one of the five
Cities there. Of this Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria gives an account in his
Epistle to Xystus then Bishop of Rome, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 6.26.
wherein he takes notice of the wicked and blasphemous Heresy, lately broached
there against the Persons of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Letters on both
sides were brought to him, on which occasion he wrote several Epistles, among
which there was one to Ammonius Bishop of Bernice, another of the Cities of
Pentapolis. In this, he disputed with great warmth against this Doctrine of
Sabellius, insomuch, that he was afterward accused to Dionysius of Rome, that
he had gone too far the other way; and lessened the Divinity of the Son by his
Similitudes; of which he cleared himself, as appears by what remains of his
Defense in Athanasius. But as to his Zeal against Sabellianism it was never
questioned. Dionysius of Rome declares his Sense at large in this matter
against both Extremes, viz. of those who asserted three separate and
independent Principles, and of those who confounded the Divine Persons; Athan.
de Decret. Synodi Nicaenae, p. 275.
and he charges the Doctrine of Sabellius too with Blasphemy, as well as those
who set up three different Principles, and so made three Gods. But he declares
the Christian Doctrine to be, that there were Father, Son and Holy Ghost; but
that there is an indivisible Union in One and the same Godhead. It seems
Dionysius of Alexandria was accused for dividing and separating the Persons, to
which he answers, that it was impossible he should do it, because they are
indivisible from each other; Athanas. de Sentent. Dionysii, p. 561.
and the name of each Person did imply the inseparable Relation to the other,
as the Father to the Son, and the Son to the Father, and the Holy Ghost to
both. And this Judgment of these two great Men in the Church concerning
Sabellianism, was universally received in the Christian Church. And this
happened long before the Nicene Council.

2. Another argument of the general Sense of the Christian Church is from the
Hymns and Doxologies publicly received; which were in the most solemn Acts of
religious Worship made to Father, Son and Holy Ghost. The force of this
argument appears hereby, that divine Worship cannot be given to mere Names, and
an Equality of Worship does imply an Equality of Dignity in the object of
Worship, and therefore, if the same Acts of Adoration be performed to Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, it is plain, that the Christian Church did esteem them to
have the same divine Nature, although they were distinct Persons. And if they
were not so, there could not be distinct Acts of divine Worship performed to
them. S. Basil mentions this Doxology of Africanus, Basil de Sp. Sancto c. 29.
(that ancient Writer of the Christian Church) in the fifth Book of his
Chronicon, We render thanks to him who gave our Lord Jesus Christ to be a
Savior, to whom with the Holy Ghost be Glory and Majesty for ever. And another
of Dionysius Alexandrinus in his 2d. Epistle to Dionysius of Rome. To God the
Father and his Son our Lord Jesus Christ with the Holy Ghost, be Glory and
Power for ever and ever, Amen. And this is the more considerable, because he
says he did herein follow the ancient Custom and Rule of the Church; and he
joined with it, (...), Praising God in the same voice with those who have gone
before us, which shows how early these Doxologies to Father, Son and Holy
Ghost, had been used in the Christian Church. But to let us the better
understand the true Sense of them, S. Basil has preserved some passages of
Dionysius Alexandrinus which do explain it, viz. That either the Sabellians
must allow three distinct Hypostases, or they must wholly take away the
Trinity. By which it is evident, that by Father, Son and Holy Ghost he did
understand three distinct Hypostases, but not divided; for that appears to have
been the Sabellians Argument, That if there were three, they must be divided:
No says Dionysius, they are three whether the Sabellians will or not; or else
there is no Trinity: which he looked on as a great absurdity to take away,
(...) the Divine Trinity. Of what? Of mere Names or Energies? That is no
Trinity; for there is but one subsisting Person of separate and divided
Substances: That the Sabellians thought must follow but both the Dionysius's
denied it. And in another Passage there mentioned, Dionysius of Alexandria
asserts the Trinity in Unity. (...).

(...).


But before Dionysius, he quotes a passage of Clemens Romanus concerning
Father, Son and Holy Ghost, which attributes Life distinctly to them. Now Life
cannot belong to a Name or Energy, and therefore must imply a Person.

But that which is most material to our purpose, is the Public Doxology in the
Church of Neo-Caesarea, brought in by Gregory Thaumaturgus. S. Basil gives a
very high Character of him, as of a Person of extraordinary Piety and Exactness
of Life, and a great promoter of Christianity in those Parts, and by him the
Form of Doxology was introduced into that Church, being chiefly formed by him
(there being but Seventeen Christians when he was first made Bishop there)
which was, Glory to God the Father, and Son with the Holy Ghost, which ought to
be understood according to the sense of the Maker of it. And Gregory has
delivered his sense plainly enough in this matter: for in that Confession of
Faith, which was preserved in the Church of Neo-Caesarea, he owns a perfect
Trinity in Glory, Greg. Thaumat. p. 1.
Eternity and Power, without Separation or Diversity of Nature, On which
Doctrine his Form of Doxology was grounded. Which S. Basil following,
Exceptions were taken against it, by some as varying from the Form used in some
other places. For the Followers of Aetius took advantage from the Expression
used in those Doxologies, Glory be to the Father, by the Son, and in the Holy
Ghost, to infer a Dissimilitude in the Son and Holy Ghost to the Father, and to
make the Son the Instrument of the Father, and the Holy Ghost only to relate to
time and place. But S. Basil takes a great deal of Pains to show the
impertinency of these Exceptions. They would fain have charged this Doxology as
an Innovation on S. Basil, because it attributed equal Honor to Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, which the Aetians would not endure; but they said, That the Son
was to be honored only in Subordination to the Father, and the Holy Ghost as
inferior to both. But S. Basil proves from Scripture an Equality of Honor to
be due to them: and particularly from the Form of Baptism, c. 10. wherein the
Son and Holy Ghost are joined with the Father, without any note of Distinction.
And what more proper token of a Conjunction in the same Dignity, than being put
together in such a manner.

Especially considering these two things. 1. The extreme Jealousy of the
Jewish Nation, as to joining the Creatures with God in any thing that related
to Divine Honor. But as S. Basil argues, If the Son were a Creature, then we
must believe in the Creator, and the Creature together; and by the same reason
that one Creature is joined, the whole Creation may be joined with him; but
says he, we are not to imagine the least Disunion or Separation between
Father, Son and Holy Ghost; nor that they are three distinct parts of one
inseparable Being, but that there is an indivisible Conjunction of three in the
same Essence; so that where one is, there is the other also. For where the Holy
Ghost is, there is the Son, and where the Son is, there is the Father. And so
Athanasius urges the Argument from these Words, Athanas. c. Serap. p. 10.
That a Creature could not be joined with the Creator in such a manner, as in
the Form of Baptism; and it might have been as well said, Baptize in the Name
of the Father, and any other Creature. And for all that I see, our Unitarians
would have liked such a Form very well; for they parallel it with those in
Scripture; and they worshipped the Lord, and the King; and they feared the Lord
and Samuel. Answer to Milb. p. 18.
But the Jews understood the different occasion of such Expressions too well,
to have born such a Conjunction of Creatures with the Creator in the most
solemn Act of Initiation into a Profession of Religion.

2. The Jews had a Notion among them of three distinct Subsistences in the
Deity suitable to these of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. This has been showed by
many as to the Son, or the Divine Word; and Rittangel makes out the same as to
the Holy Ghost. Among the three Subsistences in the Mercavah (which Rittangel
had proved from their most ancient Writings) those which are added to the first
are Wisdom and Intelligence, Rittang. p. 81.
and this last is by the old Chaldee Paraphrast rendered (...), P. 113.
and he proves it to be applied to God in many places of the Pentateuch, where
such things are attributed to him, as belong to the Holy Ghost. And he
particularly shows by many places, P. 117.
that the Schecinah is not taken for the Divine Glory, but that is rendered by
other Words (however the Interpreters of the Chaldee Paraphrast have rendered it
so) but he produces ten places where the Chaldee Paraphrast uses it in another
Sense; and he leaves, he says, many more to the Readers observation. If the
Jews did of old own three Subsistences in the same Divine Essence, there was
then great Reason to join Father, Son and Holy Ghost in the solemn Act of
Initiation: But if it be denied, that they did own any such thing; they must
deny their most ancient Books, and the Chaldee Paraphrast, which they esteem
next to the Text, and Rittangel says, They believe it written by Inspiration.
That which I chiefly urge, is this, that if these things be not very ancient,
they must be put in by the later Jews, to gratify the Christians in the
Doctrine of the Trinity; which I do not believe any Jew will assent to. And no
one else can imagine this, when our Unitarians say, Answer to Dr. Bull, p. 59.
That the Doctrine of the Trinity is the chief Offense which the Jews take at
the Christian Religion. How then can we suppose the Jews should forge these
Books on purpose to put in such Notions, as were most grateful to their
Enemies, and hateful to themselves? Morinus has endeavored to run down the
Credit of the most ancient Books of the Jews; Morin. Exercit. l. 2. l. 10. c. 8.
and among the rest the Book Iezirah, the most ancient Cabbalistical Book among
the Jews, which he learnedly proves was not written by Abraham, (as the Jews
think.) I will not stand with Morinus about this; however the Book Cosri says,
Cosri Part. 4. p. 316.
it was made by Abraham before God spoke to him, and magnifies it to the King
of Cosar, as containing an admirable Account of the first Principles above the
Philosophers. Buxtorf says, that the Book Cosri has been extant Nine hundred
years, and in the beginning of it, it is said, that the Conference was Four
hundred years before, and therein the Book Iezirah is alleged as a Book of
Antiquity: and there the three Subsistences of the Deity are represented by
Mind, Word, and Hand. P. 302.
So that this can be no late Invention of Cabbalistical Jews. But our
Unitarians utterly deny that the Jews had any Cabbala concerning the Trinity.
And they prove it, because the Jews in Origin, and Justin Martyr deny the
Messiah to be God. They might as well have brought their Testimony to prove
Jesus not to be the Messiah; for the Jews of those times, being hard pressed by
the Christians, found they could not otherwise avoid several places of the Old
Testament. But this does not hinder, but that they might have Notions of three
Subsistences in their ancient Books: which contained neither late Invention,
nor Divine Revelations; but a Traditional notion about the Divine Being, and
the Subsistences in it: and I can find no Arguments against it, that deserve
mentioning. For when they say the Jewish Cabbala was a Pharisaical Figment,
etc. it needs no answer. But what do they say to the Old Paraphrases, whereon
the main Weight as to this matter lies? All that I can find is, P. 61.
That they do not speak of distinct Persons; but they confess that Philo speaks
home, and therefore they make him a Christian. But Philo had the same Notion
with the Paraphrasts; and their best way will be to declare, that they look
upon them all as Christians; and they might as well affirm it of Onkelos, as
they do of Philo; but I doubt the World will not take their Word for either.

But to proceed with the Christian Doxologies. N^^hing, says S. Basil, De Sp.
Sancto, c. 10.
shall make me forsake the Doctrine I received in my Baptism, when I was first
entered into the Christian Church; and I advise all others to keep firm to that
Profession of the Holy Trinity, which they made in their Baptism; that is, of
the indivisible Union of Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And, as he says
afterward, C. 17.
by the Order of the Words in Baptism, it appears that as the Son is to the
Father, so the Holy Ghost is to the Son. For they are all put without any
Distinction or Number, C. 18.
which he observes agrees only to a multitude. For by their Properties they are
one and one; yet by the Community of Essence the two are but one: and he makes
it his business to prove the Holy Ghost to be a proper Object of Adoration, as
well as the Father and Son, and therefore there was no reason to find fault
with the Doxology used in that Church: and that, Firmilian, C. 29.
Meletius and the Eastern Christians agreed with them in the use of it, and so
did all the Western Churches from Illyricum to the Worlds end: and this, he
says, was by an immemorial Custom of all Churches, and of the greatest men in
them. Nay, more he says, It had been continued in the Churches, from the time
the Gospel had been receive'd among them. And nothing can be fuller than the
Authority of his Testimony, if S. Basil may be believed.

To these I shall add the Doxology of Polycarp at this Martyrdom, mentioned by
Eusebius, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 15.
which is very full to our Purpose; I Glorify thee by our Eternal High Priest
Jesus Christ thy beloved Son, by whom be Glory to thee, with him in the Holy
Ghost. What can we imagine Polycarp meant by this, but to render the same Glory
to Father, Son and Holy Ghost; but with such a difference as to the Particles,
which S. Basil at large proves come to the same thing? And to the same purpose,
not only the Church of Smyrna, but Pionius the Martyr, who transcribed the
Acts, speaking of Jesus Christ, with whom be Glory to God the Father, and the
Holy Ghost. Vales. ad Eusebius. p. 73.
These suffered Martyrdom for Christianity, and owned the same Divine Honor to
the Father, Son and Holy Ghost.

Coteler VII. p. 1^27.
What could they mean, if they did not believe them to have the same Divine
Nature? Can we suppose them Guilty of such stupidity to lose their Lives, for
not giving Divine Honor to Creatures, and at the same time to do it
themselves? So that, if the Father, Son and Holy Ghost were not then believed
to be three Persons and one God, the Christian Church was mightily deceived;
and the Martyrs acted inconsistently with their own Principles. Which no good
Christian will dare to affirm. But some have adventured to say, that Polycarp
did not mean the same Divine Honor to Father, Son and Holy Ghost. But if he
had so meant it, how could he have expressed it otherwise? It was certainly a
Worship distinct from what he gave to Creatures; as appears by the Church of
Smyrna's disowning any Worship but of Love and Repect to their fellow
Creatures; and own the giving Adoration to the Son of God; with whom they join
both Father and Holy Ghost. Which it is impossible to conceive, that in their
Circumstances, they should have done, unless they had believed the same Divine
Honor to belong to them.

S. Basil's Testimony makes it out of Dispute, that the Doxology to Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, was universally received in the public Offices of the Church,
and that from the time of greatest Antiquity: So that we have no need of the
Te^timonies from the Apostolical Constitutions (as they are called) to prove
it. But I avoid all disputable Authorities. And I shall only add that it
appears from S. Basil, C. 29.
that this Doxology had been long used not only in public Offices, but in
Occasional Ejaculations, as at the bringing in of Light in the Evening, the
People, he says, were wont to say, Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Ghost, etc. This, he says, had been an ancient Custom among the
People, and none can tell who brought it in. But Prudentius shows, Prudent.
Cath.
that it was continued to his Time; as appea^s by his Hymn on that occasion,
Hymn. 5.
which concludes with this Doxology, and S. Hilary ends his Hymn written to his
Daughter, Hilar. Op. N. E. p. 1214.
in the same manner.

3. I come therefore to the last Proof, which I shall produce of the Sense of
the Christian Church, which is, from the Testimony of those who wrote in
Defense of our Religion against Infidels. In which I shall be the shorter,
since the particular Testimonies of the Fathers, have been so fully produced,
and defended by others, especially by Dr. Bull.

Justin Martyr in his Apology for the Christians, Apol. 2. p. 94.
gives an Account of the Form of Baptism, as it was administered among
Christians, which he says, was in the Name of God the Father of all, and of
our Savior Jesus Christ, and of the Holy Ghost. And that he spoke of them as
of distinct Persons, as appears by his words afterward. P. 26.
They who take the Son to be the Father, neither know the Father nor the Son,
who being the Word and first begotten is God. And when he speaks of the
Eucharist, he says, P. 97.
That it is offered to the Father of all, by the Name of the Son, and the Holy
Ghost: and of other solemn Acts of Devotion, he says, That in all of them they
praise God the Father of all, P. 98.
by his Son Jesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost. And in other places, he mentions
the Worship they give to Father, P. 56.
Son and Holy Ghost. Indeed he mentions a difference of Order between them; P.
60.
but makes no Difference as to the Worship given to them. And all this in no
long Apology for the Christian Faith. What can be the meaning of this if he did
not take it for granted, that the Christian Church embraced the Doctrine of the
Trinity in Baptism? Justin Martyr was no such weak Man to go about to expose
the Christian Religion instead of defending it; and he must have done so, if he
did not believe this not only to be a true, but a necessary part of the
Christian Faith For, why did he at all mention such a Mysterious and dark
Point? Why did he not conceal it, (as some would have done) and only represent
to the Emperors, the fair and plausible part of Christianity? No, he was a Man
of great Sincerity, and a through Christian himself; and therefore thought he
could not honestly conceal so fundamental a Point of the Christian Faith, and
which related to their being entered into the Christian Church. For if the
Profession of this Faith had not been looked on as a necessary condition of
being a Member of the Church of Christ; it is hard to imagine, that Justin
Martyr should so much insist upon it, not only here, but in his other
Treatises: Of which an Account has been given by others.

Athenagoras had been a Philosopher, as well as Justin Martyr, before he
professed himself a Christian; and therefore, must be supposed to understand
his Religion before he embraced it. And in his Defense he asserts, Athenag. p.
11.
That the Christians do believe in Father, Son and Holy Ghost; in God the
Father, God the Son, and the Holy Ghost. And he mentions both the Unity and
Order which is among them. Which can signify nothing unless they be owned to
be distinct Persons in the same Divine Nature. And in the next Page, he looks
on it, as thing which all Christians aspire after in another Life, That they
shall then know the Union of the Father, and the Communication of the Father to
the Son, what the Holy Ghost is, and what the Union and Distinction there is
between the Holy Ghost, the Son and the Father. No man who had ever had the
name of a Philosopher would have said such things, unless he had believed the
Doctrine of the Trinity a^ we do, i. e. that there are three distinct Persons
in the same Divine Nature, but that the manner of the Union, and Distinction
between them, is above our reach and comprehension.

But our Unitarians have an Answer ready for these men, Defense of the Hist. of
the Unit. p. 5.
viz. That they came out of Plato 's School, with the Tincture of his three
Principles; and they sadly complain, that Platonism had very early corrupted
the Christian Faith as to these matters.

In answer to which Exception, Resp. ad Judic. Eccles p. 174.178.
I have only one Postulatum to make; which is, that these were honest Men, and
knew their own Minds bent, and I shall make it appear, that none can more
positively declare, than they do, that they did not take up these Notions from
Plato, but from the Holy Scriptures; Justin Martyr says he took the Foundation
of his Faith from thence, Just. Apol. 2. Paraei. ad Graec. p. 18, 22, 24.
and that he could find no certainty as to God and Religion any where else:
that he thinks, Plato took his three Principles from Moses; and in his Dialogue
with Trypho, Dial. cum Trypho, p. 274, etc.
he at large proves the Eternity of the Son of God from the Scriptures; and
said, He would use no other Arguments, for he pretended to no Skill but in the
Scriptures, which God had enabled him to understand.

Athenagoras declares, Athenag. p. 8, 9.
That where the Philosophers agreed with them, their Faith did not depend on
them, but on the Testimony of the Prophets, who were inspired by the Holy Ghost.

To the same purpose speaks Theophilus Bishop of Antioch, Theophil. ad Autolyc.
p. 100.
who asserts the Coeternity of the Son with the Father, from the beginning of
S. John's Gospel; and says, their Faith is built on the Scriptures.

Clemens Alexandrinus owns not only, Clemens Paed. l. 3. c. 7.
the Essential Attributes of God to belong to the Son; but that there is one
Father of all, and one Word over all, and one Holy Ghost who is every where.

Str. l. 4. p. 517. Prof. p. 68.
And he thinks, Plato borrowed his three Principles from Moses; that his second
was the Son, and his third the Holy Spirit.

Even Origin hims^l^ highly commends Moses above Plato, Paed l. 1. c 6. Str. l
5 p. 598. Orig. c.

Celf l 1. p. 16. l 4. p. 198 l. 6. p. 275, 2^9, etc. 308. l 7. p. 351, 371.


in his most undoubted Writings, and says, That Numen^us went beyond Plato,
and that he borrowed out of the Scriptures; and so he says, Plato did in other
places; but he adds, That the Doctrines were better delivered in Scripture,
than in his Artificial Dialogues. Can any one that has the least reverence for
Writers of such Authority and Z^al for the Christian Doctrine, imagine that
they wilfully corrupted it in one of the chief Articles of it; and brought in
new Speculations against the Sense of those Books, which at the same time, they
professed to be the only Rule of their Faith? Even where they speak most
favorably of the Platonic Trinity, they suppose it to be borrowed from Moses.

And therefore Numenius said, Clem Alex. Str. 1. Eusebius.

Praep. l. 8. Theod. Sermon. 1.


That Moses and Plato did not differ about the first Principles; and Theodoret
mentions Numenius as one of those, who said, Plato understood the Hebrew
Doctrine in Egypt; and during his Thirteen years ^ay there, it is hardly
possible to suppose, he should be ignorant of the Hebrew Doctrine, about the
first Principles, which he was so inquisitive after, especially among Nations,
who pretended to Antiquity.

And the Platonic Notion of the Divine Essence enlarging it self to three
Hypostases, is considerable on these Accounts:

1. That it is delivered with so much assurance by the Opposers of
Christianity; such as Plotinus, Porphyrius, Proclus and others were known to
be, and they speak with no manner of doubt concerning it; as may be seen in the
passage of Porphyrie preserved by S. Cyril and others. Cyril. c. Jul. l. 1. and
l. 8.


2. That they took it up from no Revelation; but as a Notion in it self
agreeable enough; as appears by the passages in Plato and others concerning it.
They never suspected it to be liable to the Charge of Nonsense, and
Contradictions, as our modern Unitarians charge the Trinity with; although
their Notion as represented by Porphyrie be as liable to it. How came these Men
of Wit and Sense, to hit upon, and be so fond of such absurd Principles which
lead to the Belief of Mysterious Nonsense, and Impossibilities; if these Men
may be trusted?

3. That the Nations most renowned for Antiquity and deep Speculations, did
light upon the same Doctrine, about a Trinity of Hypostases in the Divine
Essence. To prove this I shall not refer to the Trismegistick Books, or the
Chaldee Oracles, or any doubtful Authorities; Plutarch de Isid. and Osirld. p.
369. ed. Fr.

Eusebius Praep. E. l. 3. c. 11. Jamb. de Mist. Sect. 8. c. 2.

Macrob. in Some. Scipion. l. 1. c. 14.


but Plutarch asserts the three Hypostases to have been receiv^d among the
Persians, and Porphyry, and Iamblicus, say the same of the Egyptians.

4. That this Hypostasis did maintain its Reputation so long in the World. For
we find it continued to the time of Macrobius; who ment^ons it as a reasonable
Notion, viz. of one supreme Being, Father of all, and a Mind proceeding from
it, and soul from Mind. Some have thought that the Platonists made two created
Beings, to be two of the Divine Hypostases; but this is contrary to what
Plotinus and Porphyry affirm concerning it, and it is hard to give an Account,
how they should then be Essentially different from Creatures, and be Hypostases
in the Divine Essence. But this is no part of my business, being concerned no
farther, than to clear the Sense of the Christian Church, as to the Form of
Baptism in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; which according to the
Sense of the Ante-Nicene Fathers, I have proved, does manifest the Doctrine of
the Trinity, to have been generally received in the Christian Church.

2. Let us now see what our Unitarians object against the Proof of the Trinity
from these words.

1. They say, That there is a Note of distinction and Superiority. Answer to
Milb p. 17.
For Christ owns* that his Power was given to him by the Father.

There is no question, but that the Person who suffered on the Cross, had Power
given to him, after his Resurrection; but the true Question is, whether his
Sonship were then given to him. He was then declared to be the Son of God with
Power, and had a Name or Authority given him above every Name; being exalted to
be a Prince and a Savior, to give Repentance, and Remission of Sins: in order
to which he now appointed his Apostles to teach all Nations; baptizing them in
the Name of the Father, the Son and the Holy Ghost. He does not say in the name
of Jesus, who suffered on the Cross; nor in the name of Jesus the Christ now
exalted; but in the name of Father, Son and Holy Ghost: and although there were
a double Gift with respect to the Son and Holy Ghost; the one, as to his Royal
Authority over the Church; the other, as to his extraordinary Effusion on the
Apostles, yet neither of these are so much as intimated; but the Office of
Baptism is required to be performed in the Name of these three as distinct and
yet equal; without any Relation to any Gift, either as to the Son or Holy
Ghost. But if the ancient Jews were in the Right, as we think they were, then
we have a plain account, how these came to be thus mentioned in the Form of
Baptism, viz. that these three distinct Subsistences in the Divine Essence,
were not now to be kept up as a secret Mystery from the World; but that the
Christian Church was to be formed upon the Belief of it.

2. They bring several places of Scripture, where God and his Creatures are
joined, without any Note of distinction or Superiority; as, The people feared
the Lord, and Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.18. They worshipped the Lord, and the King, 1 Chronicles. 29.20. I charge thee before God the Lord Jesus Christ, and his elect
Angels, 1 Timothy 5.21. The Spirit and the Bride say come, Revel. 22.17.

But can any Man of Sense imagine, these places contain a Parallel with a Form
of Words, wherein men are entered into the Profession of a new Religion, and by
which they were to be distinguished from all other Religions? in the former
places, the Circumstances were so notorious as to God, and the Civil
Magistrate, that it shows no more than that the same external Acts may be used
to both, but with such a different Intention as all men understood it. What if
S. Paul name the elect Angels in a solemn Obtestation to Timothy, together with
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ? What can this prove, but that we may call God
and his Creatures to be Witnesses together of the same thing? And so Heaven and
Earth are called to bear Witness against obstinate Sinners: May men therefore
be baptized in the name of God and his Creatures? The Spirit and Bride may say
come without any Incongruity; but it would have been strange indeed, if they
had said, Come be baptized in the Name of the Spirit and the Bride. So that
these Instances are very remote from the purpose.

But they say farther, That the ancients of the first Four hundred years do not
insist on this place, to prove the Divinity or Personality of the Son or
Spirit. As to the first Three hundred years, I have given an account already;
and as to the Fourth Century, I could not have thought, that they would have
mentioned it: since there is scarce a Father of the Church in that time, who
had occasion to do it, but makes use of the Argument from this place to prove
the Divinity and Personality of the Son and Spirit.

Athanasius says, That Christ founded his Church on the Doctrine of the
Trinity contained in these Words; Athan. Ep. ad Serapion, p. 14.

Tom. 2. Ad Serap. Tom. 1. p. 186, 179.


and if the Holy Ghost had been of a different Nature, from the Father and Son,
he would never have been joined with them in a Form of Baptism, no more than an
Angel, or any other Creature. For the Trinity must be Eternal and Indivisible,
which it could not be, if any created Being were in it, and therefore he
disputes against the Arian Baptism, Or. 3. c. Arian p. 413.
although performed with the same Words, because they joined God and a Creature
together in Baptism. To the same purpose argue Didymus, Gregory Nazianzen, S.
Basil and others, within the Compass of four hundred years, Petavius T. II. l.
2. c. 12. sect. 8.
whose Testimonies are produced by Petavius; to whom I refer the Reader, if he
has a mind to be satisfied in so clear a Point, that I cannot but think our
Unitarians never intended to take in the Fathers after the Council of Nice, who
are so expressly against them; and therefore I pass it over as a slip.

4. They object, That the Form of Baptism implies no more, Hist. of the Unitar.
p. 25.
than being admitted into that Religion which proceeds from God the Father, and
delivered by his Son, and confirmed by the Testimony of the Holy Ghost. So much
we grant is implied, but the Question still remains, whether the Son and Holy
Ghost are here to be considered only in order to their Operations, or whether
the Persons of the Son and Holy Ghost, from whom those Effects came, are not
here chiefly intended? For if no more had been meant, but these Effects, then
the right Form of Admission had not been, into the Name of Father, Son and Holy
Ghost; but in the Name of the Father alone, as Revealing himself by his Son,
and Confirming it by the miraculous Works of the Holy Ghost. For these are only
subservient Acts to the design of God the Father, as the only subsisting Person.

5. They tell us, That it is in vain, not to say ridiculously pretended, that a
Person or Thing is God, because we are baptized into it; for some were baptized
into Moses, and others into John's Baptism, and so Moses and John Baptist would
be Gods; and to be baptized into a Person or Persons, and in the name of such a
Person is the same thing. Grant this; yet there is a great difference between
being baptized in the name of a Minister of Baptism, and of the Author of a
Religion, into which they are baptized. The Israelites were baptized unto
Moses; but how? The Syriac and Arabic Versions render it per Mosen; and so S.
Augustine reads it. Aug. in Psalm. 77.
And this seems to be the most natural sense of the Word, (...), being put for
(...) as it is, Act. 7.53. compared with Gal. 3.19. And the force of the
Apostle's Argument, does not lie in the Parallel between being baptized into
Moses, and into Christ; but in the Privileges they had under the Ministry of
Moses with those which Christians enjoyed. The other place implies no more,
than being entered into that Profession, which John baptized his Disciples
into. But does any one imagine, that because John Baptist did enter his
Disciples by Baptism, therefore they must believe him to be God? I know none
that lay the force of the Argument upon any thing parallel to those Places. But
it depends upon laying the Circumstances together. Here was a new Religion to
be taught mankind, and they were to be entered into it, not by a bare verbal
Profession, but by a solemn Rite of Baptism; and this Baptism is declared to be
in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost: which cannot be understood of
their Ministry, and therefore must relate to that Faith, which they were
baptized into, which was concerning the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. And so the
Christian Church understood it, from the beginning, as I have proved in the
foregoing Discourse.

And from hence came the Instruction of Catechumens, who were to be baptized
about the Trinity; and the first Creeds which related only to them, as I have
already observed. And so much our Unitarians grant in one of their latest
Pamphlets, Answ. to Dr. Bull, p. 17.
that a Creed was an Institution, or Instruction what we are to believe in the
main, and fundamental Articles, especially concerning the Persons of Father,
Son and Holy Ghost. But they contend, That the Creed which bears the Name of
the Apostles, was the Original Creed framed by the Apostles themselves, because
they suppose this Creed does not assert the Son and Holy Ghost, to be Eternal
and Divine Persons, and therefore they conclude, that the Makers of this Creed,
either did not know, that any other Person but the Father is God, or Almighty,
or Maker of Heaven and Earth, or they have negligently, or wickedly concealed
it.

This is a matter so necessary to be cleared, that I shall examine these two
things before I put an end to this Discourse.

1. What Proofs they bring that this Creed was framed by the Apostles.

2. What Evidence they produce, that this Creed excludes the Divinity of the
Son and Holy Ghost.

1. As to the Proofs they bring, that this Creed was framed by the Apostles. We
believe the Creed to be Apostolical in the true Sense of it; but that it was so
in that Frame of Words, and Enumeration of Articles, as it is now received,
has been called in question by some Critics of great Judgment and Learning,
whom I have already mentioned. Erasmus says, Eras. ad Cens. Paris. Tit. II.
He does not question the Articles being Apostolical; but whether the Apostles
put it thus into Writing. And his chief Argument is from the Variety of the
Ancient Creeds; of which no Account can be given so probable, as that they were
added Occasionally in opposition to a growing Heresy. As for Instance, the
Word Impassible was inserted with Respect to the Father in the ancient Eastern
Creed, against the Doctrine of Sabellius; but it was not in the old Western
Creed. And he argues, That the Apostolical Creed ended with the Holy Ghost;
because the Nicene Creed did so. Voss de tribus Symb. Dissert. 1. Sect. 47.
And Vossius thinks the other Articles which are in Cyril, were added after the
Nicene Council; which would not have omitted them, if they had been in the
former Creed. And when there were so many Creeds made afterward, it is
observable, that they do all end with the Article of the Holy Ghost; which they
would never have done, in so jealous a time about Creeds, if they had left out
any Articles of what was then received for the Apostolical Creed.

The first Creed after the Nicene, which made great noise in the World, was
that framed at Antioch; Hilar. de Synod. p. 1169.
and that Creed not only ends with the Article of the Holy Ghost; but mentions
the Form of Baptism; and our Saviors commanding his Apostles to baptize in the
Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost; as the Foundation of the Creed. For it
hereby appears, that the Father is true Father, and the Son true Son, and the
Holy Ghost true Holy Ghost; not bare Names, but such as import three distinct
Subsistences.

For Hilary observes, That this Council chiefly intended to overthrow
Sabellianism, and therefore asserted tres Subsistentium Personas, Epiphaninius
haer. 73. n. 17.
as Hilary interprets their meaning, and so does Epiphanius; which was to
remove the Suspicion, that they asserted only triplicis vocabuli Vnionem; as
Hilary speaks. The next Creed is of the Eastern Bishops at Sardica, and that
ends wi^h the Holy Ghost, and so do both the Creeds at Sirmium* and the latter
calls the Article of the Trinity, the close of our Faith; which is always to be
kept according to our Savior's command, Clausula Fidei in Edit. nupera Paris.
ex MSS.
Go teach all Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy
Ghost. So that in all these Creeds, about which there was so much heat in the
Christian Church, there was not the least Objection, that any Articles of the
Apostolical Creed were omitted. It is no Argument, That there was then no
contest about these Articles; for they were bound to give in an entire Creed;
and so the Council of Antioch declares, that they would publish the Confession
of the Faith of the Church: and how could this be, if they left out such
Articles which had been always receiv^d from the Apostles times? But certainly
our Unitarians would not attack such Men, as Erasmus, and Vossius in a matter
relating to Antiquity, if they had not some good Arguments on their side. Their
first business, is to show, that some of Vossius his Arguments are not
conclusive; such as they are, I leave them to any one that will compare them
with the Answers. But there are two things they lay weight upon.

1. That the whole Christian Church East and West, P. 27.
could not have agreed in the same Creed, as to Number and Order of Articles,
and manner of Expression, if this Creed had not come from the same Persons,
from whom they received the Gospel and the Scriptures; Namely, from the
Apostles and Preachers of Christianity.

2. That it was received by a constant Tradition to have been the Apostles; P.
28.
not a bare Oral Tradition, but the Tradition of the ancient Commentators upon
it.

Now these I confess to be as good Arguments, as the Matters will bear; and I
will no longer contest this Point with them, provided, that we be allowed to
make use of the same Arguments; as to the second Point; wherein they undertake
to prove, That the Apostles Creed does exclude the Divinity of the Son and Holy
Ghost. What is now become of the general Consent of the Christian Church, East
and West? and of the Commentators upon this Creed? If the Argument hold good in
one Case, I hope it will be allowed to do so in the other also. And what
greater Testimony can be given of such a Consent of the Christian Church; than
that those who opposed it, have been condemned by it, and that the Church has
expressed her Sense of it in Public, and Private Acts of Devotion, and Divine
Worship, and have defended it as a necessary part of the Christian Faith,
against the Assaults of Infidels and Heretics? So that although the Apostles
Creed do not in express words declare, The Divinity of the three Persons in the
Unity of the Divine Essence; yet taking the Sense of those Articles, as the
Christian Church understood them from the Apostles times, then we have as full,
and clear Evidence of this Doctrine, as we have that we received the Scriptures
from them.

CHAP. X. The Objections against the Trinity in Point of Reason answered.
HAving in the foregoing Chapters endeavored to clear the Doctrine of the
Trinity from the Charge of Contradictions, and to prove it agreeable to the
Sense of Scripture, and the Primitive Church;

I now come in the last place to Examine the remaining Objections, in Point of
Reason; and those are,

1. That this Doctrine is said to be a Mystery, and therefore above Reason, and
we cannot in reason be obliged to believe any such thing.

2. That if we allow any such Mysteries of Faith as are above Reason, there can
be no stop put to any absurd Doctrines, but they may be received on the same
Grounds

1. As to this Doctrine being said to be above Reason, and therefore not to be
believed; we must consider two things;

1. What we understand by Reason;

2. What ground in Reason there is, to reject any Doctrine above it, when it is
proposed as a Matter of Faith.

1. What we understand by Reason. I do not find that our Unitarians have
explained the Nature and Bounds of Reason in such manner, as those ought to
have done, who make it the Rule and Standard of what they are to believe. But
sometimes they speak of clear and distinct Perceptions, sometimes of natural
Ideas, Answer to my Sermon p. 4.

Letter of Resolution, p. 3.


sometimes of congenit Notions, etc. But a late Author has endeavored to make
amends for this, and takes upon him to make this matter clear; and to be sure
to do so, he begins with telling us, Christianity not Mysterious, p. 8, 9.
That Reason is not the Soul abstractedly considered; (no doubt of it) but the
Soul acting in a peculiar manner is Reason. (And this is a ver^ peculiar way of
explaining it) But farther we are told, It is not the Order or Report (respect
I suppose) which is naturally between all things. (But that implies a Reason in
things.) But the thoughts which the Soul forms of things according to it, may
properly claim that Title, i. e. such thoughts which are agreeable to the
Reason of things are reasonable thoughts. This is clear and distinct. And I
perfectly agree with him, That our own Inclinations, or the bare Authority of
others is not Reason. But what is it? Every one experiences in himself a Power,
or Faculty of form^ng various Ideas, or Perceptions of things; of affirming, or
denying according as he sees them to agree or disagree, and this is Reason in
General It is not the bare receiving Ideas into the Mind, that is strictly
Reason, (who ever thought it was?) but the Perception of the Agreement, or
Disagreement of our Ideas in a greater of lesser Number; wherein soever this
Agreement or Disagreement may consist. If the Perception be immediate without
the Assistance of any other Idea, this is not called Reason, but Self-Evidence:
but when the mind makes use of intermediate Ideas to discover that Agreement or
Disagreement, this method of Knowledge is properly called Reason or
Demonstration. And so Reason is defined to be that Faculty of the Soul, which
discovers the certainty of any thing dubious, or obscure by comparing it with
something evidently known.

This is offered to the World, as an Account of Reason; but to show how very
loose, and unsatisfactory it is, I desire it may be considered, that this
Doctrine supposes, that we must have clear and distinct Ideas of whatever we
pretend to any certainty of in our Minds, and that the only Way to attain this
certainty, is by comparing these Ideas together. Which excludes all certainty
of Faith or Reason, where we cannot have such clear and distinct Ideas. But if
there are many things of which we may be certain, and yet can have no clear and
distinct Ideas of them; if those Ideas we have, are too imperfect and obscure
to form our Judgments by; if we cannot find out sufficient intermediate Ideas;
then this cannot be the Means of Certainty, or the Foundation of Reason.

But I shall keep to our present Subject; and our certainty of it in Point of
Reason, depends upon our Knowledge of the the Nature of Substance, and Person
and the Distinction between them: but if we can have no such clear Ideas in our
Minds concerning these things, as are required from Sensation, or Reflection;
then, either we have no use of Reason about them, or it is in sufficient to
pass any Judgment concerning them.

1. I begin with the Notion of Substance. And I have great Reason to begin with
it; for, according to this Man's Principles there can be no certainty of Reason
at all about it. And so our new Way of Reason is advanced to very good Purpose.
For we may talk and dispute about Substance, as long as we please, but, if his
Principles of Reason be true, we can come to no certainty; since we can have no
clear Idea in our Minds concerning it, as will appear from his own Words; and
the method he proceeds in.

Chap. I.
(1.) He says, That the Mind receives in Ideas two ways. 1. By Intermission of
the Senses, as Colors, Figures, Sounds, Smells, etc. 2. By the Souls
considering its own Operations about what it thus gets from without, as
knowing, doubting, affirming, denying, etc.

(2.) That these simple and distinct Ideas, thus laid up in the great
Repository of the Understanding, are the sole matter and Foundation of all our
Reasoning.

Then it follows, That we can have no Foundation of Reasoning, where there can
can be no such Ideas from Sensation, or Reflection.

Now this is the Case of Substance; it is not intromitted by the Senses, nor
depends upon the Operations of the Mind; and so it cannot be within the compass
of our Reason. And therefore I do not wonder, that the Gentlemen of this new
way of reasoning, have almost discarded Substance out of the reasonable part of
the World. Human understanding, l. 1. chap. 4. sect. 18.
For they not only tell us. That we can have no Idea of it by Sensation or
Reflection; but that nothing is signified by it, only an uncertain Supposition
of we know not what. And therefore it is paralleled, more than once, L. 2. c.
13. sect. 19.
with the Indian Philosophers, He knew not what; which supported the Torto^se,
Chap. 23. sect. 2.
that supported the Elephant, that supported the Earth; so Substance was found
out only to support Accidents. And, that when we talk of Substances we talk
like Children, who being asked a Question, about somewhat which they know not,
readily give this satisfactory Answer, that it is Something.

If this be the truth of the Case, we must still talk like Children, and I know
not how it can be remedied. For, if we cannot come at a rational Idea of
Substance, we can have no Principle of certainty to go upon in this Debate.

I do not say, that we can have a clear Idea of Substance, either by Sensation
or Reflection; but from hence I argue, that this is a very insufficient
Distribution of the Ideas necessary to Reason. For besides these, there must be
some general Ideas, which the mind does form, not by mere comparing those Ideas
it has got from Sense or Reflection; but by forming distinct general Notions,
of things from particular Ideas. And among these general Notions, or rational
Ideas, Substance is one of the first; because we find that we can have no true
Conceptions of any Modes or Accidents (no matter which) but we must conceive a
Substratum, or Subject wherein they are. Since it is a Repugnancy to our first
Conceptions of things, that Modes or Accidents should subsist by themselves,
and therefore the Rational Idea of Substance is one of the first, and most
natural Ideas in our minds.

But we are still told, That our Understanding can have no other Ideas, but
either from Sensation or Reflection. L. 2. chapter 1. sect. 5.
And that, herein chiefly lies the Excellency of mankind, above Brutes, that
these cannot abstract, and enlarge their Ideas as men do.

But how comes the general Idea of Substance, to be framed in our Minds? Is
this by Abstracting and enlarging simple Ideas? No, but it is by a Complication
of many simple Ideas together: because not imagining how these simple Ideas can
subsist by themselves, L 2. chapter 23. sect. 1.
we accustom our selves to suppose some Substratum wherein they do subsist, and
from which they do result, which therefore we call Substance. And is this all
indeed, that is to be said for the being of Substance, that we accustom our
selves to suppose a Substratum? Is that Custom grounded upon true Reason or
not? If not, then Accidents or Modes, must subsist of themselves, and these
simple Ideas need no Tortoise to support them: For Figures and Colors, etc.
would do well enough of themselves, but for some Fancies men have accustomed
themselves to. If it be grounded on plain and evident Reason, then we must
allow an Idea of Substance, which comes not in by Sensation or Reflection; and
so we may be certain of some things which we have not by those Ideas.

The Idea of Substance, we are told again, is nothing but the supposed, but
unknown support of those Qualities we find existing, which we imagine cannot
subsist, sine re substante, which according to the true import of the word, is
in plain English, standing under, or upholding. But very little weight is to be
laid upon a bare Grammatical Etymology, when the word is used in another sense
by the best Authors, such as Cicero and Quintilian, who take Substance for the
same with Essence; as Valla has proved; Valla Disput. Dial. l. 1. c. 6.
and so the Greek word imports; but Boethius in translating Aristotle's
Predicaments, rather chose the word Substance as more proper, to ^xpress a
Compound Being, and reserved Essence, for what was more simple and immaterial.
And in this Sense, Substance was not applied to God but only Essence, as S.
Augustine observes, but afterward, the names of Substance, and Essence were
promiscuously used, with respect to God and his Creatures. And do imply, that
which makes the Real Being, as distinguished from Modes and Properties. And so
the Substance, and Essence of a Man are the same; not being taken for the
individual Substance, which cannot be understood without particular Modes and
Properties; but the general Substance, or Nature of Man abstractly from all the
Circum^^ances of Persons.

And I desire to know, whether according to true Reason, that be not a clear
Idea of a Man; not of Peter, James or John, but of a Man as such. This is not a
mere universal Name, or Mark, or Sign; but there is as clear and distinct a
Conception of this in our Minds, as we can have from any such simple Ideas, as
are conveyed by our Senses. I do not deny that the Distinction of particular
Substances, is by the several Modes and Properties of them, (which they may
call a Complication of simple Ideas if they please) but I do assert, that the
general Idea, which relates to the Essence without these is so just, and true
an Idea, that without it the Complication of simple Ideas, will never give us a
right Notion of it.

I must do that Right to the ingenious Author of the Essay of humane
Understanding (from whence these Notions are borrowed to serve other Purposes
than he intended them) that he makes the Case of Spiritual, and Corporeal
Substances to be alike, as to their Idea's, and that we have as clear a Notion
of a Spirit, as we have of a Body, the one being supposed to be the Substratum
to those simple Ideas we have from without, Chap. 23. sect. 5.
and the other of those Operations we find within our selves. And that it is as
rational to affirm, there is no Body, because we cannot know its Essence, as
it is called, or have no Idea of the Substance of Matter; as to say, there is no
Spirit, because we know not its Essence, or have no Idea of a Spiritual
Substance.

From hence it follows, That we may be certain, that there are both Spiritual
and Bodily Substances, although we can have no clear and distinct Ideas of
them. But, if our Reason depend upon our clear and distinct Idea's; how is this
possible? We cannot reason without clear Ideas, and yet we may be certain
without them: Can we be certain without Reason? Or does our Reason give us true
Notions of things, without these Idea's? If it be so, this new Hypothesis about
Reason must appear to be very unreasonable.

Let us suppose this Principle to be true, That the simple Ideas by Sensation
or Reflection, are the sole Matter and Foundation of all our Reasoning: I ask
then, how we come to be certain, that there are Spiritual Substances in the
World, since we can have no clear and distinct Ideas concerning them? Can we be
certain without any Foundation of Reason? This is a new sort of Certainty, for
which we do not envy these Pretenders to Reason. But methinks, they should not
at the same time assert the absolute necessity of these Ideas to our knowledge,
and declare that we may have certain Knowledge without them. If there be any
other method, they overthrow their own Principle; if there be none, how come
they to any Certainty, that there are both Bodily and Spiritual Substances?

As to these latter (which is my business) I must enquire farther, how they
come to know that there are such. The Answer is by Self-Reflection, on those
Powers we find in our selves, which cannot come from a mere Bodily Substance. I
allow he Reason to be very good, but the Question I ask is, whether this
Argument be from the clear and distinct Idea or not? We have Ideas in our
selves of the several Operations of our Minds of Knowing, Willing, Considering,
etc. which cannot come from a Bodily Substance. Very true; but is all this
contained in the simple Idea of these Operations? How can that be, when the
same Persons say, that notwithstanding their Ideas it is possible for Matter to
Think. For it is said, Humane Underst. I. 4. chapter 3.
That we have the Ideas of Matter and Thinking, but possibly shall never be
able to know, whether any mere material Being thinks or not; Sect. 6. 2d. Ed.
p. 310
it being impossible for us by the Contemplation of our own Ideas, without
Revelation to discover whether Omnipotency has not given to some Systems of
Matter, fitly disposed, a Power to perceive or think. If this be true, then for
all that we can know by our Ideas of Matter and Thinking; Matter may have a
Power of Thinking: and if this hold, then it is impossible to prove a Spiritual
Substance in us, from the Idea of Thinking: For how can we be assured by our
Ideas, that God has not given such a Power of Thinking, to Matter so disposed
as our Bodies are? Especially since it is said, That in respect of our Notions,
it is not much more remote from our Comprehension to conceive that God can, if
he pleases, super-add to our Idea of Matter a Faculty of Thinking, than that he
should super-add to it another Substance, with a Faculty of Thinking. Whoever
asserts this, can never prove a Spiritual Substance in us, from a Faculty of
Thinking; because he cannot know from the Idea of Matter and Thinking, that
Matter so disposed cannot Think. And he cannot be certain that God has not
framed the matter of our Bodies, so as to be capable of it.

It is said indeed elsewhere, That it is repugnant to the Idea of Senseless
Matter, Book. IV. Chap. 10. sect. 5.
that it should put into it self Sense, Perception and Knowledge: But this does
not reach the present Case; which is not what Matter can do of it self, but
what Matter prepared by an Omnipotent hand can do. And what certainty can we
have that he has not done it? We can have none from the Ideas; for those are
given up in this Case; and consequently, we can have no certainty upon these
Principles, whether we have any Spiritual Substance within us or not.

But we are told, That from the Operations of our Minds, Book. II. Chap. 23.
sect. 15.
we are able to frame the Complex Idea of a Spirit. How can that be, when we
cannot from those Ideas be assured, but that those Operations may come from a
material Substance. If we frame an Idea on such Grounds, it is at most but a
possible Idea; for it may be otherwise; and we can have no Assurance from our
Ideas, that it is not: So that the most men may come to in this way of Idea's
is, That it is possible it may be so, and it is possible it may not; but that
it is impossible for us from our Ideas, to determine either way. And is not
this an admirable Way to bring us to a certainty of Reason?

I am very glad to find the Idea of a Spiritual Substance made as consistent,
and intelligible, as that of a Corporeal; for as the one consists of a Cohesion
of solid Parts, and the Power of communicating Motion by impulse, so the other
consists in a Power of Thinking, and Willing, and moving the Body; and that the
Cohesion of solid Parts, is as hard to be conceived as Thinking; and we are as
much in the dark about the Power of communicating Motion by impulse, Sect. 27.
as in the Power of exciting Motion by thought. We have by daily experience
clear Evidence of Motion produced, both by Impulse and by Thought; but the
manner how, Sect. 28.
hardly comes within our Comprehension; we are equally at a loss in both.

From whence if follows, That we may be certain of the Being of a Spiritual
Substance, although we have no clear and distinct Idea of it, nor are able to
comprehend the manner of its Operations: And therefore it is a vain thing in
any to pretend, that all our Reason and Certainty is founded on clear and
distinct Ideas; and that they have Reason to reject any Doctrine which relates
to Spiritual Substances, because they cannot comprehend the manner of it. For
the same thing is confessed by the most inquisitive Men, about the manner of
Operation, both in material, and immaterial Substances. It is affirmed, That
the very Notion of Body, Sect. 31.
implies, something very hard, if not impossible to be explained, or understood
by us; and that the natural Consequence of it, viz. Divisibility; involves us
in Difficulties impossible to be explicated, or made consistent. That we have
but some few Superficial Ideas of things; Sect. 32.
that we are destitute of Faculties, to attain to the true Nature of them; and
that when we do that, we fall presently into Darkness and Obscurity; and can
discover nothing farther, but our own Blindness and Ignorance.

These are very fair and ingenuous Confessions of the shortness of humane
Understanding, with respect to the Nature and Manner of such things, which we
are most certain of the Being of, by constant and undoubted Experience. I
appeal now to the Reason of mankind, whether it can be any reasonable
Foundation for rejecting a Doctrine proposed to us, as of Divine Revelation,
because we cannot comprehend the manner of it; especially, when it relates to
the Divine Essence. For as the same Author observes, Sect. 33, 34, 35.
Our Idea of God is framed from the Complex Ideas of those Perfections we find
in our selves, but enlarging them so, as to make them suitable to an infinite
Being, as Knowledge, Power, Duration, etc. And the Degrees or Extent of these
which we ascribe to the Sovereign Being, are all boundless and infinite. Sect.
36.
For it is infinity, which joined to our Ideas of Existence, Power, Knowledge,
etc. makes that Complex Idea, whereby we represent to our selves the best we
can, the Supreme Being.

Now, when our Knowledge of gross material Substances is so dark; when the
Notion of Spiritual Substances is above all Ideas of Sensation; when the higher
any Substance is, the more remote from our Knowledge; but especially when the
very Idea of a Supreme Being implies its being Infinite, and Incomprehensible,
I know not whether it argues more Stupidity, or Arrogance to expose a Doctrine
relating to the Divine Essence, because they cannot comprehend the manner of
it. But of this more afterward. I am yet upon the Certainty of our Reason,
from clear and distinct Ideas: and if we can attain to Certainty without them,
and where it is confessed we cannot have them; as about Substances: then these
cannot be the sole Matter and Foundation of our Reasoning, which is so
peremptorily asserted by this late Author.

But I go yet farther: and as I have already showed, we can have no certainty
of an Immaterial Substance within us, from these simple Ideas; so I shall now
show, that there can be no sufficient Evidence, brought from them by their own
Confession, concerning the Existence of the most Spiritual and infinite
Substance, even God himself.

We are told, That the Evidence of it is equal to Mathematical Certainty; Book
IV. chap. 10. sect. 1.
and very good Arguments are brought to prove it, in a Chapter on purpose: but
that which I take notice of is, that the Argument from the clear and distinct
Idea of God is passed over. How can this be consistent with deducing our
Certainty of Knowledge from clear and simple Ideas? I do not go about to
justify those, who lay the whole stress upon that Foundation; which I grant to
be too weak to support so important a Truth; and that those are very much to
blame, who go about to invalidate other Arguments for the sake of that; but I
doubt all this Talk about clear and distinct Ideas, being made the Foundation
of Certainty, came Originally from those Discourses, or Meditations, which are
aimed at. The Author of them was an ingenious, Thinking man, and he endeavored
to lay the Foundations of Certainty, as well as he could. The first thing he
found any certainty in, was his own Existence; which he founded upon the
Perception of the Acts of his Mind, which some call an Internal, infallible
Perception that we are. From hence he proceeded, to enquire, how he came by
this Certainty, and he resolved it into this, that he had a clear and distinct
Perception of it; and from hence he formed his general Rule, That what he had a
clear and distinct Perception of was true. Which in Reason ought to go no
farther, than where there is the like Degree of Evidence: for the Certainty
here, was not grounded on the clearness of the Perception, but on the Plainness
of the Evidence Which is of that Nature, that the very Doubting of it proves
it; since it is impossible, that any thing should doubt or question its own
Being, that had it not. So that here it is not the Clearness of the Idea, but
an immediate Act of Perception, which is the true ground of Certainty. And this
cannot extend to things without our selves; of which we can have no other
Perception, than what is caused by the Impressions of outward Objects. But
whether we are to judge according to those Impressions, does not depend on the
Ideas themselves, but upon the Exercise of our Judgment and Reason about them,
which put the Difference between true and false, and adequate, and inadequate
Ideas. So that our Certainty is not from the Ideas themselves, but from the
Evidence of Reason, that those Ideas are true, and just, and consequently that
we may build our Certainty upon them.

But the Idea of an infinite Being has this peculiar to it, that necessary
Existence is implied in it. This is a clear and distinct Idea, and yet it is
denied, that this does prove the Existence of God. How then can the Grounds of
our Certainty arise from clear and distinct Ideas; when in one of the clearest
Ideas of our Minds we can come to no Certainty by it? I do not say, That it is
denied to prove it; but this is said, That it is a doubtful thing from the
different make of men's Tempers and Application of their thoughts. Sect. 7.
What can this mean, unless it be to let us know, that even clear and distinct
Ideas, may lose their Effect by the difference of men's Tempers and Studies; so
that besides Ideas, in order to a right Judgment, a due Temper and Application
of the mind is required.

And wherein is this different, from what all men of Understanding have said?
Why then should these clear and simple Ideas be made the sole Foundation of
Reason? One would think by this, that these Ideas would presently satisfy men's
Minds, if they attended to them. But even this will not do, as to the Idea of
an infinite Being. It is not enough to say, They will not examine how far it
will hold: for they ought either to say, that it does hold, or give up this
Ground of Certainty from clear and distinct Ideas.

But instead of the proper Argument from Ideas, we are told, Sect. 6.
That from the Consideration of our selves, and what we find in our own
Constitutions, our Reason leads us to the Knowledge of this certain and evident
Truth; that there is an eternal, most powerful, and most knowing Being. All
which I readily yield; but we see plainly, the Certainty is not placed in the
Idea, but in good and sound Reason from the Consideration of our selves and our
Constitutions. What! in the Idea of our Selves? No certainly; for let our Idea
be taken which way we please, by Sensation or Reflection, yet it is not the
Idea that makes us certain, but the Argument from that which we perceive in,
and about our Selves.

Sect. 5.
But we find in our selves Perception and Knowledge. It Is very true; but how
does this prove that there is a God? It is from the clear and distinct Idea of
it. No, but from this Argument: That either there must have been a knowing
Being from Eternity, or an unknowing; for something must have been from
Eternity: but if an unknowing, then it was impossible there ever should have
been any knowledge; it being as impossible, that a thing without knowledge
should produce it, as that a Triangle should make it self three Angles bigger
than two right ones. Allowing the Argument to be good, yet it is not taken from
the Idea, but from Principles of true Reason; as That no man can doubt his own
Perception; that every thing must have a Cause; that this Cause must either
have Knowledge or not: if it have, the Point is gained; if it has not, nothing
can produce nothing; and consequently, a not knowing Being cannot produce a
knowing.

Again, If we suppose nothing to be first, Sect. 10.
Matter can never begin to be; if bare Matter without Motion eternal, Motion
can never begin to be; if Matter and Motion be supposed Eternal, Thought can
never begin to be. For, if Matter could produce thought, then Thought must be
in the power of Matter; and if it be in Matter as such, it must be the
inseparable Property of all matter; which is contrary to the Sense and
Experience of mankind. If only some parts of Matter have a power of Thinking,
how comes so great a difference in the Properties of the same Matter? What
disposition of Matter is required to thinking? And from whence comes it? Of
which no account can be given in Reason.

This is the Substance of the Argument used, to prove an infinite spiritual
Being, which I am far from weakening the force of; but that which I design, is
to show* That the Certainty of it is not placed upon any clear and distinct
Ideas, but upon the force of Reason distinct from it, which was the thing I
intended to prove.

2. The next thing necessary to be cleared in this Dispute is, the Distinction
between Nature and Person, and of this we can have no clear and distinct Idea
from Sensation or Reflection. And yet all our Notions of the Doctrine of the
Trinity, depend upon the right understanding of it. For we must talk
unintelligibly about this Point, unless we have clear and distinct
Apprehensions concerning Nature and Person, and the grounds of Identity and
Distinction. But that these come not into our Minds by these simple Ideas of
Sensation and Reflection, I shall now make it appear;

1. As to Nature, That is sometimes taken for the Essential Property of a
thing, as when we say, that such a thing is of a different Nature from another,
we mean no more than that it is differenced by such Properties as come to our
Knowledge. Sometimes Nature is taken for the Thing it self in which those
Properties are; and so Aristotle took Nature for a Corporeal Substance, which
had the Principles of Motion in it self: but Nature and Substance are of an
equal extent; and so that which is the Subject of Powers, and Properties is the
Nature, whether it be meant of Bodily or Spiritual Substances. I grant, that by
Sensation and Reflection we come to know the Powers and Properties of Things;
but our Reason is satisfied, that there must be something beyond these; because
it is impossible that they should subsist by themselves. So that the Nature of
things propery belongs to our Reason, and not to mere Ideas.

But we must yet proceed farther. For, Nature may be considered two ways.

1. As it is in distinct Individuals, as the Nature of a Man is equally in
Peter, James, and John; and this is the common Nature with a particular
Subsistence proper to each of them. For the Nature of man, as in Peter, is
distinct from that same Nature, as it is in James and John; otherwise, they
would be but one Person, as well as have the same Nature. And this Distinction
of Persons in them is discerned both by our Senses, as to their different
Accidents; and by our Reason, because they have a separate Existence; not
coming into it at once and in the same manner.

2. Nature may be considered Abstractly, without respect to individual Persons,
and then it makes an entire Notion of it self. For however, the same Nature may
be in different Individuals, yet the Nature in it self remains one and the
same: which appears from this evident Reason; that otherwise every Individual
must make a different kind.

Let us now see, how far these things can come from our simple Ideas, by
Reflection and Sensation. And I shall lay down the Hypothesis of those, who
resolve our Certainty into Ideas, as plainly, and intelligibly, as I can.

1. We are told, That all simple Ideas are true and adequate. Humane Underst.
l. 2. chapter 30, 31.
Not, that they are the true Representation of things without us; by that they
are the true Effects of such Powers in them, as produce such Sensations within
us. So that really we can understand nothing certainly by them, but the Effects
they have upon us.

2. All our Ideas of Substances are imperfect and inadequate; because they
refer to the real Essences of things, of which we are Ignorant, and no man
knows what Substance is in it self: And they are all false, Chap. 32. sect. 18.
when looked on as the Representations of the unknown Essences of things.

Book 3. Chap. 3. sect. 6.
3. Abstract Ideas are only general Names, made by separating Circumstances of
time and place, etc. from them, which are only the Inventions, and Creatures of
the Understanding.

4. Essence may be taken two ways. 1. For the real, internal, Ib. sect. 15.
unknown Constitutions of things, and in this Sense it is understood as to
particular things. 2. For the abstract Idea, and one is said to be the Nominal,
the other the Real Essence. And the Nominal Essences only are immutable; Sect.
19, 20.
and are helps to enable Men to consider things, and to discourse of them.

But two things are granted, which tend to clear this Matter.

1. That there is a Real Essence, which is the Foundation of Powers and
Properties.

2. That we may know these Powers and Properties, although we are ignorant of
of the Real Essence.

From whence I infer.

1. That from those true and adequate Ideas, which we have of the Modes and
Properties of Things, we have sufficient certainty of the Real Essence of them:
For these Ideas are allowed to be true; and either by them we may judge of the
truth of things; or we can make no Judgment at all of any thing without our
selves.

If our Ideas be only the Effects we feel of the Powers of things without us;
yet our Reason must be satisfied, that there could be no such Powers, unless
there were some real Beings which had them. So that either we may be certain by
those Effects of the real Being of Things; or it is not possible, as we are
framed, to have any certainty at all of any thing without our selves.

2. That from the Powers and Properties of things which are knowable by us, we
may know as much of the internal Essence of Things, as those Powers and
Properties discover. I do not say, That we can know all Essences of things
alike; nor that we can attain to a perfect understanding of all that belong to
them: but if we can know so much, as that there are certain Beings in the
World, endued with such distinct Powers and Properties, what is it we complain
of the want of, in order to our Certainty of Things? But we do not see the bare
Essence of things. What is that bare Essence without the Powers and Properties
belonging to it? It is that internal Constitution of things from whence those
Powers and Properties flow. Suppose we be ignorant of this (as we are like to
be, for any Discoveries that have been yet made, that is a good Argument to
prove the uncertainty of Philosophical Speculations about the Real Essences of
things; but it is no prejudice to us, who enquire after the Certainty of such
Essences. For although we cannot comprehend the internal Frame, or Constitution
of things, nor in what manner they do flow from the Substance; yet by them we
certainly know that there are such Essences, and that they are distinguished
from each other by their Powers and Properties.

3. The Essences of things as they are knowable by us, have a Reality in them:
For they are founded on the natural Constitution of things. And however the
abstract Ideas are the work of the Mind; yet they are not mere Creatures of the
Mind; as appears by an instance produced of the Essence of the Sun, being in
one single Individual; in which Case it is granted, Book Chap. Sect. 1.
That the Idea may be so abstracted, that more Suns might agree in it, and it
is as much a Sort as if there were as many Suns as there are Stars. So that
here we have a Real Essence subsisting in one Individual, but capable of being
multiplied into more, and the same Essence remaining. But in this one Sun there
is a Real Essence, and not a mere Nominal or abstracted Essence: but suppose
there were more Suns; would not each of them have the Real Essence of the Sun?
For what is it makes the second Sun to be a true Sun, but having the same Real
Essence with the first? If it were but a Nominal Essence, then the second would
have nothing but the Name.

Therefore there must be a Real Essence in every individual of the same kind;
for that alone is it, which makes it to be what it is. Peter, and James, and
John, are all true and real Men; but what is it which makes them so? Is it the
attributing a general Name to them? No certainly, but that the true and Real
Essence of a Man is in every one of them. And we must be as certain of this, as
we are that they are Men; they take their Denomination of being Men from that
common Nature, or Essence which is in them.

4. That the general Idea is not made from the simple Ideas by the mere Act of
the Mind abstracting from Circumstances, but from Reason and Consideration of
the true Nature of Things. For, when we see so many Individuals, that have the
same Powers and Properties, we thence infer, that there must be something
common to all, which makes them of one kind: and if the difference of Kinds be
real, that which makes them of one kind and not of another, must not be a
Nominal, but Real Essence. And this difference does not depend upon the complex
Ideas of Substance, whereby Men arbitrarily join Modes together in their Minds;
for let them mistake in the Complication of their Ideas, either in leaving out,
or putting in what does not belong to them, and let their Ideas be what they
please; the Real Essence of a Man, and a Horse, and a Tree, are just what they
were: and let their Nominal Essences differ never so much, the Real common
Essence, or Nature of the several Kinds are not at all altered by them.

And these Real Essences are unchangeable: For, however there may happen some
variety in Individuals, by particular Accidents, yet the Essences of Men, and
Horses, and Trees remain always the same; because they do not depend on the
Ideas of Men, but on the Will of the Creator, who has made several sorts of
Beings.

2. Let us now come to the Idea of a Person. For, although the common Nature in
mankind be the same, yet we see a difference in the several Individuals from
one another: So that Peter and James, and John are all of the same kind; yet
Peter is not James, and James is not John. But what is this Distinction founded
upon? They may be distinguished from each other by our Senses, as to difference
of Features, distance of Place, etc. but that is not all; for supposing there
were no such external difference; yet there is a difference between them, as
several Individuals in the same common Nature. And here lies the true Idea of a
Person, which arises from that manner of Subsistence which is in one
Individual, and is not Communicable to another. An Individual, intelligent
Substance, is rather supposed to the making of a Person, than the proper
Definition of it; for a Person relates to something which does distinguish it
from another Intelligent Substance in the same Nature; and therefore the
Foundation of it lies in the peculiar manner of Subsistence, which agrees to
one, and to none else of the Kind; and this is it which is called Personality.

But how do our simple Ideas help us out in this Matter? Can we learn from
them, the difference of Nature and Person? We may understand the difference
between abstracted Ideas, and particular Beings, by the Impressions of outward
Objects; and we may find an Intelligent Substance in our selves by inward
Perception; ^ut whether that make a Person or not, must be understood some
other Way; for, if the mere Intelligent Substance makes a Person, then there
cannot be the Union of two Natures, but there must be two Persons.

Therefore a Person is a complete Intelligent Substance, with a peculiar manner
of Subsistence; so that if it be a part of another Substance, it is no Person;
and on this account the Soul is no Person, because it makes up an entire Being
by its Union with the Body.

But when we speak of Finite Substances and Persons, we are certain that
distinct Persons do imply distinct Substances, because they have a distinct and
separate Existence; but this will not hold in an infinite Substance, where
necessary Existence does belong to the Idea of it. And although the Argument
from the Idea of God, may not be sufficient of it self to prove his Being; yet
it will hold as to the excluding any thing from him, which is inconsistent with
necessary Existence; therefore, if we suppose a Distinction of Persons in the
same Divine Nature, it must be in a way agreeable to the infinite Perfections
of it. And no objection can be taken from the Idea of God, to overthrow a
Trinity of Co-existing Persons in the same Divine Essence. For necessary
Existence does imply a Co-existence of the Divine Persons; and the Unity of the
Divine Essence, that there cannot be such a difference of individual
Substances, as there is among mankind. But these things are said to be above
our Reason, if not contrary to it, and even such are said to be repugnant to
our Religion.

2. That therefore is the next thing to be carefully Examined, whether
Mysteries of Faith, or Matters of Revelation above our Reason, are to be
rejected by us. And a Thing is said to be above our Reason, when we can have no
clear and distinct Idea of it in our Minds: And, that if we have no Ideas of a
thing, it is certainly but lost labor for us to trouble our selves about it;
Christianity not Mist. p. 28.
and that, if such Doctrines be proposed which we cannot understand, we must
have new Powers, and Organs for the Perception of them.

We are far from defending Contradictions to our natural Notions (of which I
have spoken already) but that which we are now upon is, whether any Doctrine
may be rejected, when it is offered as a Matter of Faith upon this account,
that it is above our Comprehension, or that we can have no clear Idea of it in
our Minds. And this late Author has undertaken to prove, That there is nothing
so Mysterious, or above Reason in the Gospel.

To be above Reason, he says, may be understood two ways. P. 67.
1. For a thing Intelligible in it self, but covered with figurative and
mystical Words. 2. For a thing in its own Nature unconceivable, and not to be
judged of by our Faculties, though it be never so clearly revealed. This in
either Sense is the same with Mystery. And from thence he takes occasion to
show his Learning about the Gentile Mysteries, and Ecclesiastical Mysteries,
which might have been spared in this Debate, but only for the Parallel aimed at
between them, as to Priestcraft and Mysteries; without which a Work of this
nature would want its due relish with his good Christian Readers. Others we see
have their Mysteries too; but the Comfort is, that they are so easily
understood, and seen through; as when the Heathen Mysteries, are said, to have
been instituted at first in Commemoration of some remarkable Accidents, P. 71.
or to the Honor of some great Persons that obliged the World by their Virtues
and useful Inventions to pay them such Acknowledgments. He must be very dull
that does not understand the meaning of this; and yet this Man pretends to
vindicate Christianity from being Mysterious.

P. 73.
But there are some, he says, that being strongly inclined out of Ignorance,
or Passion to maintain what was first introduced by the Craft or Superstition
of their Forefathers, will have some Christian Doctrines to be still Mysteries
in the second Sense of the Word; that is, unconceiveable in themselves, however
clearly revealed. I hope there are still some, who are so thoroughly persuaded
of the Christian Doctrine, that they dare own and defend it, notwithstanding
all the Flouts and Taunts of a sort of Men, whose Learning and Reason lies most
in exposing Priestcraft, and Mysteries. Suppose there are such still in the
world, who own their Assent to some Doctrines of Faith, which they confess to
be above their Comprehension, what mighty Reason, and invincible Demonstration
is brought against them? He pretends to Demonstrate; but what I pray? The Point
in hand? No. But he will Demonstrate something instead of it? What is that? Why
truly, That in the New Testament Mystery is always used in the first Sense of
the Word. And what then? Does it therefore follow, that there are no Doctrines
in the Gospel above the reach and comprehension of our Reason? But how does it
appear, that the Word Mystery is always used in that Sense? When S. Paul says
in his first Epistle to Timothy, Chap. 3. v. 9. That the Deacons must hold the
Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience; does he not mean thereby the same with
the Form of sound Words, which Timothy had heard of him, 2 Timothy 1.13. And are
not all the main Articles of the Christian Faith comprehended under it?
Especially that whereinto they were Baptized, in the Name of the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost: and if the Doctrine of the Trinity were understood by this
Form, as I have already proved, then this must be a part of the Mystery of
Faith. And in the same Chapter, v. 16. He makes God manifest in the Flesh; the
first part of the Mystery of Godliness. If it extends to all the other things,
does it exclude this, which is the first mentioned? (And that our Copies are
true, is already made to appear.) There is no Reason therefore to quarrel with
our Use of the Word Mystery in this Sense; but the Debate does not depend upon
the Word, but upon the Sense of it.

And therefore I pass over all that relates to the bare use of the Word, as not
coming up to the main Point; which is, Whether any Point of Doctrine, which
contains in it something above our Comprehension can be made a Matter of Faith?

For our Author concludes from his Observations, P. 145.
That Faith is so far from being an implicit Assent to any thing above Reason,
that this Notion directly contradicts the end of Religion, the Nature of Man,
and the Goodness and Wisdom of God.

But we must not be frighted with this bold Conclusion, till we have Examined
his Premises; and then we shall find, that some who are not great Readers, are
no deep Reasoners. The first thing he premises is, That nothing can be said to
be a Mystery, because we have not an adequate Idea of it, P. 75.
or a distinct View of all its Properties at once, for then every thing would
be a Mystery. What is the meaning of this, but that we cannot have an adequate
Idea of any thing? And yet all our Reason depends upon our Ideas according to
him, and our clear and distinct Ideas are by him made the sole Foundation of
Reason. All our simple Ideas are said to be adequate, because they are said to
be only the Effects of Powers in things which produce Sensations in us. But
this does not prove them adequate as to the things, but only as to our
Perceptions. But as to Substances we are told, That all our Ideas of them are
inadequate. So that the short of this is, that we have no true Knowledge or
Comprehension of any thing; but we may understand Matters of Faith, as well as
we understand any thing else, for in Truth we understand nothing. Is not this a
method of true Reasoning to make us reject Doctrines of Faith, because we do
not comprehend them, and at the same time to say we comprehend nothing? For I
appeal to the common Sense of mankind, whether we can be said to Comprehend
that, which we can have no adequate Idea of? But he appeals to the Learned; for
he says, That to comprehend in all correct Authors is nothing else but to
know. But what is to know? Is it not to have adequate Ideas of the things we
know? How then can we know, that of which we can have no adequate Idea? For if
our Knowledge be limited to our Ideas, our Knowledge must be imperfect and
inadequate where our Ideas are so.

But let us lay these things together. Whatever we can have no adequate Idea of
is above our Knowledge, and consequently above our Reason; and so all
Substances are above our Reason; and yet he says, with great Confidence, That
to Assent to any thing, above Reason, destroys Religion, and the Nature of man,
and the Wisdom and Goodness of God. How is it possible for the same man to say
this, and to say w^thal, that it is very consistent with that Nature of man,
and the Goodness and Wisdom of God, to leave us without adequate Ideas of any
Substance? How come the Mysteries of Faith to require more Knowledge than the
Nature of Man is capable of? In natural things we can have no adequate Ideas;
but the things are confessed to be above our Reason; but in Divine and
Spiritual things, to Assent to things above our Reason is against the Nature of
man.

How can these things consist?

But these are not Mysteries. Yes, whatever is of that Nature that we can have
no Idea of it, is certainly a Mystery to us. For what is more unknown than it
is known is a Mystery. The true Notion of a Mystery being something that is
hidden from our Knowledge. Of which there may be several Kinds. For a Mystery
may be taken for,

1. Something kept secret, but fully understood as soon as it is discovered;
thus Tully in his Epistles speaks of Mysteries which he had to tell his Friend,
Ad. Attic. 4.87. ed. R S.
but he would not let his Amanuensis know; no doubt such things might be very
well understood as soon as discovered.

2. Something kept from common Knowledge, although there might be great
Difficulties about them when discovered. Thus Tully speaks of Mysteries among
the Philosophers, Acad. 4.18.
particularly among the Academicks, who kept up their Doctrine of the Criterion
as a Secret, which, when it was known, had many Difficulties about it.

3. Something that Persons were not admitted to know, but with great
Preparation for it. Such were the Athenian Mysteries which Tully mentions with
Respect, although they deserved it not: De Leg. l. 2. c. 14.
but because they were not Communicated to any but with Difficulty, they were
called Mysteries. And this is so obvious a piece of Learning, that no great
Reading, or deep Reasoning is required about it. Only it may be observed, that
the Word (...) is opposed to (...), and so the Mysteries related to those who
were initiated and not made Epoptoe; i. e. to those who did not thoroughly
understand them, although they had more knowledge of them than such as were not
initiated. Olympiodorus, in reckoning up the Degrees of Admissions, mentions
the (...) before (...). So that they were properly Mysteries to such, who knew
something; though there were other things farther to be discovered, but they
did not yet know what they were, as the Epoptoe did.

From hence the ancient Christian Writers did not only call the Sacraments, but
more abstruse Points of Faith by the name of Mysteries; so S. Chrysostom calls
the Resurrection, a great and ineffable Mystery. Chrysostom. Hom. de Resurrect.
And Isidore Pelusiota in his Epistle to Lampetius says, Isidor. Pelus. l. 2.
Ep. 192.
That S. Paul, when he speaks of the great Mystery of Godliness, does not mean
that it is wholly unknown to us, but that it is impossible to Comprehend it.
Theophylact says, it is therefore called the great Mystery of Godliness;
because although it be now revealed to all, yet the manner of it is hidden from
us, (...), for this Reason it is called a Mystery.

But this is in the way of Reading; let us now come to deep Reasoning; and see
how strongly he argues against this Sense of the Word Mysteries: his Words are
these; They trifle then exceedingly, and discover a mighty Scarcity of better
Arguments, who defend their Mysteries, Christianity not Mist. p. 80, 81.
by this pitiful shift of drawing Inferences from what is unknown to what is
known, or of insisting upon adequate Ideas; except they will agree as some do,
to call every Spire of Grass, sitting and standing, fish and flesh to be
Mysteries. And if out of a pertinacious or worse humor, they will be still
fooling, and call these things Mysteries, I Am willing to admit as many as they
please in Religion, if they will allow me likewise to make mine as intelligible
to others, as these are to me.

It is easy to guess whom these kind Words were intended for: And are not
these very modest and civil Expressions? Trifling, Fooling; out of a
pertinacious, or worse Humor; but why, Fooling about Mysteries, to call such
things by that Name, which are in some measure known, but in a greater measure
unknown to us? and if these are real Mysteries in Nature, why may not the same
term be used for Matters of Faith?

And I think in so plain a Case, no great store of Arguments need to be used.
But in these natural things, he says, P. 84.
we have distinct Ideas of the Properties which make the Nominal Essence, but
we are absolutely ignorant of the Real Essence, or intrinsic Constitution of a
thing, which is the ground or support of all its Properties. Are not then
(without Trifling and Fooling) these Real Essences Mysteries to them? They know
there are such by the Ideas of their Properties, but know nothing of their Real
Essence; and yet they will not allow them to be Mysteries? If they do
understand them, why do they say, They do not, nor cannot? And if this be true,
let them call them what they please, they must be inexplicable Mysteries to
them. So that all this is mere quarrelling about a Word, which they would fain
be rid of, if they knew how; but they involve and perplex themselves more by
their own deep Reasonings against the Trifling and Fooling of others.

But he says, That some would have the most palpable Absurdities and gross
Contradictions to go down, or words that signify nothing, because men cannot
comprehend the Essence of their own Souls, nor the Essence of God, and other
Spiritual Substances. We utterly deny, that any Article of our Faith contains
in it any palpable Absurdities, or gross Contradictions (as I hope has been
proved already as to the Doctrine of the Trinity which is chiefly struck at)
but surely your deep Reasoners may find a difference between gross
Contradictions to our Reason, and barely being above it, or not having any
distinct Conception of the Nature of it. And that is all that we assert, and
which they grant as to all Substances.

If this be their Way of arguing, they may even return to Transubstantiation
again, without any great lessening of their Understandings. But none are so
bold in attacking the Mysteries of the Christian Faith; as the Smatterers in
Ideas, and new Terms of Philosophy, without any true Understanding of them. For
these Ideas are become but another sort of Canting with such men; and they
would reason as well upon Genus and Species, or upon Occult Qualities, and
Substantial Forms, but only that they are Terms out of Fashion.

But we find that the change of Terms does neither improve nor alter men's
Understandings; but only their Ways of speaking; and ill Gamesters will not
manage their Game one jot the better, for having new Cards in their hands.
However, we must see what Work they make of it.

P. 86.
Although we do not know the Nature of the Soul, yet we know as much of it, as
we do of any thing else, if not more, i. e. we really know nothing by any
adequate Idea of it, but we must believe nothing, but what we have a clear
distinct Idea of. Is not this a rare way of fixing the Boundaries of Faith and
Reason? As to God and his Attributes, P. 81.
it is said, That they are not Mysteries to us for want of an adequate Idea; no
not Eternity. And in another place, As to God, P. 88.
we comprehend nothing better than his Attributes.

Let us try this, by the Attribute pitched on by himself; viz. Eternity. We see
he pretends to comprehend nothing better than the Divine Attributes; and
Eternity as well as any; (which I am very apt to believe) but how does he
Comprehend Eternity? Even by finding, That it cannot be Comprehended. P. 82.
Is not this Subtle and deep Reasoning? But Reason he says, performs its part
in finding out the true Nature of Things; and if such be the Nature of the
thing, that it cannot be Comprehended, then Reason can do no more, and so it is
not above Reason. Was there ever such Trifling that pretended to Reason; and
that about the highest Matters, and twith Scorn and Contempt of others whom he
calls Mysterious Wits? The Question is, whether any thing ought to be rejected
as an Article of Faith, because we cannot comprehend it, or have a clear and
distinct Perception of it? He concludes it must be so, or else we overthrow
Religion, and the Nature of Man, and the Wisdom and Goodness of God. Here is an
Essential Attribute of God, viz. his Eternity. Am I bound to believe it or not?
Yes, doubtless. But how can I comprehend this Attribute of Eternity? Very
easily. How so? Do not you comprehend that it is incomprehensible? What then?
Does this reach the Nature of the thing, or only the manner of our Conception?
If the Nature of the thing be, that it cannot be comprehended, then you rightly
understand the Nature of the thing, and so it is not above your Reason. Let the
Case be now put as to the Trinity; do you believe the Doctrine of it, as of
Divine Revelation? No, God has given me the Nature, and Faculties of a Man;
and I can believe nothing, which I cannot have a distinct and clear Idea of;
otherwise I must have new Faculties. Will you hold to this Principle? Then you
must believe nothing, which you cannot have a clear and distinct Idea of. Very
true: But can you have a clear and distinct Idea of what you cannot comprehend?
A clear Idea, is that whereof the mind has a full and evident Perception. A
distinct Idea, is that whereby the mind perceives the difference of it from all
others. Is this right? Yes. But can you have a full and evident Perception of a
thing, so as to difference it from all others, when you grant it to be
Incomprehensible? If you have a full Perception of it, you comprehend its
Nature, and especially if you can difference it from all other things; but when
you say, its Nature is Incomprehensible, and yet believe it, you must deny it
to be necessary to Faith, to have a clear and distinct Idea of the thing
proposed. And if it be repugnant to your Faculties to reject the Trinity,
because you cannot have a clear and distinct Idea of it, for the same Reason,
you must unavoidably reject his Eternity, and all other Attributes which have
Infinity joined with them.

But we must stop here, because this admirable Undertaker has said, That he
despairs not of rendering Eternity, and Infinity as little Mysterious, P. 8^.
as that three and two make five. And till then I take my leave of him.

And so I return to our professed Unitarians, who in answer to my Sermon fell
upon the same Subject, and it is necessary that I consider so much, as tends to
the clearing of it. In my Sermon I had urged this Argument to prove, that we
may be bound to believe some things that are Incomprehensible to us, because
the Divine Nature, and Attributes are acknowledged to be so; and I had said,

(1.) That there is no greater Difficulty in the Conception of the Trinity, and
Incarnation, than there is of Eternity. Not but that there is great Reason to
believe it, but from hence it appears, that our Reason may oblige us to believe
some things, which it is not possible for us to comprehend.

And what say our Unitarians to this?

They Charge my Notion of Eternity (as they call it) with a Contradiction.

The best way of proceeding will be to set down my own Words which are these.
We know that either God must have been for ever, Answer 1^ Sermon. p. 5.
or it is impossible he ever should be, for if he should come into being when
he was not, he must have some Cause of his Being, and that which was the first
Cause would be God. But if he was for ever, he must be from himself, and what
Notion, or Conception can we have in our Minds concerning it?

To this say they, To say a Person, or Thing is from it self is a
Contradiction; it implies this Contradiction, it was before it was. And they
are sorry an Eternal God must be a Contradiction. What a false and spiteful
Inference is this?

But it had looked like very deep Reasoning, if I had said, That God was the
cause of himself. For, that would have implied the Contradiction he had charged
it with: but I had expressly excluded his being from any Cause; and the thing I
urged was only the Impossibility, of our having a clear and distinct Conception
of Eternity. For, if he could have no Cause, what could we think of his being
Eternal? If to be from himself as a Cause, be unconceivable, (as I grant it is)
then it proves what I designed, that we cannot have any distinct Idea of
Eternity. But to be from himself in the Sense generally understood, is a mere
Negative Expression; for no Men were such Fools to imagine any thing could be
before it self, and in this Sense only, Learned Men have told us, that it is to
be understood by those ancient and modern Writers, who have used that
Expression. Possevin. Appar. in Genebrard.
As when S. Ierom says, That God is self Originated; and S. Augustine, that God
is the Cause of his own Wisdom; and Lactantius, that God made himself; all
these and such like Expressions are only to be Negatively understood.

But I confess I aimed at showing, that it was impossible for us to have any
clear and distinct Idea of Eternity, and therefore I took in all possible ways
of conceiing it, either by Gods being from himself, or his Co-existing with all
differences of Time, without any Succession in his own Being; or his having a
successive Duration. From all which I argued the Impossibility of a clear
Notion of Eternity. And now what do these Men do? They dispute against one of
these Notions, and very triumphantly expose, as they think, the Absurdities of
it. And what then? Why then this Notion will not do. But I say none will do.

I prove there can be no successive Duration in a Being of necessary Existence;
and that it is not to be conceived, how without Succession God should be
present with the Being, and not Being, the Promise and Performance of the same
thing; and yet one of these ways we must make use of. From whence I concluded,
That all we can attain to is, a full Satisfaction of our Reason concerning
God's Eternity, although we can form no distinct Conception of it in our Minds.
But when these Men instead of answering the Argument from all the Notions of
Eternity, only dispute against one Notion of it, they apparently show the
weakness of their Cause, if it will bear no other Defenses, but such as this.
For I take it, that the main Debate in point of Reason depends upon this,
whether we can be certain of the Being of a Thing, of which we can have no
clear and distinct Idea? If we may, then it can be no Objection in point of
Revelation, that we can have no clear and distinct Idea of the Matter revealed;
since there can be no Reason to tie us up stricter in Point of Revelation, than
we are without it. If we can be certain in Reason of many things, we can have
no such Ideas of, what imaginable Reason can there be, that a Point of Faith
should be rejected on that account.

2. I urged another Attribute of God, viz. his Spirituality for the same
Reason; viz. that we are satisfied in point of Reason that God must be a
Spirit; and yet we cannot have a clear distinct positive Notion of a Spirit.

And what answer do they give to this? As wise as the former. Why truly, I had
no cause to object this against them, P. 6.
because they own the Spirituality of God's Nature, and none since Biddle have
denied it.

Very well! but does my argument proceed upon that, or upon the not having a
distinct and clear Idea of a Spirit? It was hardly possible for men so to
mistake my meaning, unless they did it, because they had no other answer to
give.

3. I argued from God's Prescience, which I do expressly assert, and prove that
they cannot have a distinct Notion of it, nay that Socinus denied it, because
he could not understand it.

(...) they tell me, P. 7.
I cannot defend our (...) against theirs without finding Contra^^^tions in
God^s Eternity and Foreknowledge. If this be the Ingenuity and Justice and
Charity of the Unitarians; commend me to the honest-hearted Deists, if there be
any such, as they assure us there are. One had better be charged with Trifling
and Fooling with Mysteries, than with undermining the main foundations of
Religion, by charging them with Contradictions.

But nothing could be farther from my Thoughts, than any thing tending that
way. And such a base Calumny is too much honored with a Confutation. But do
they offer to clear the difficulty and give us a clear and distinct Idea of
God^s fore-knowing future Events without a certain Cause to make them future.
Nothing like it. For the question is not, Whether a thing be necessary because
God foresees it as certain, (as they suppose.) But how of a thing merely
possible it comes to be certain without a certain Cause; and how a thing which
has no certain Cause can be certainly foreknown, and what clear and distinct
Notion we can have of this in our Minds. If they had answered this, they had
said something to the purpose. To resolve all into God's infinite Wisdom is a
good answer from us, but not from them. For we think it our Duty to satisfy
our selves with what God has revealed, without prying into the manner of
things above our Comprehension; but these Men who will receive nothing but what
they have clear and distinct Ideas of, ought to show the manner of this, or
else we must be excused on the same reason, if we allow the manner of the
divine Subsistences in the same Essence to be above our Comprehension.

4. I showed how unreasonable their demands were, when the Nature of God is
owned to be incomprehensible, and his Perfections infinite.

And now of a sudden they are quite turned about; for before they were only for
fencing and warding off Blows, but at last they come to the point, and own the
being of God to be comprehensible by them; and that they have clear and
distinct Ideas of God's infinite Attributes. This is indeed to the purpose, if
they can make these things out. But Fencers have many tricks, and I wish we
find none here. I had said, That in consequence to the Assertion, that nothing
is to be believed, but what may be comprehended, the very Being of God must be
rejected too, because his Being is incomprehensible, and so they must reject
one God as well three Persons.

To this they reply, P. 7.
That to comprehend the Being or Existence of God, is only this, to comprehend
that God is, and if we cannot comprehend that, all Religion ceases. Is not this
a fine turn? What I said of God as to the Perfections of his Nature, they will
have it understood of his bare Existence, which I do not mention. When God is
said to be an incomprehensible Being; who before them did understand the
meaning to be, That we cannot comprehend that there is a God? This is not mere
trifling, for it looks like something worse; and yet they presently after say,
That to comprehend a thing is to have a clear adequate Conception of it. And
will they pretend to have such a one of the divine Essence, when they confess
but a little before, That we converse every day with very many things, P. 5.
none of which we comprehend, and that I might have spared my pains in proving
it? But what can be the meaning of these sayings, They cannot comprehend the
common Natures of things, nor have a clear and distinct Idea of them, but they
can comprehend an infinite Being, whom all Mankind own to be incomprehensible.
But as to divine Attributes, they say, They have clear distinct and adequate
Conceptions of them; and instance in Eternity, Power, Wisdom and Justice. We do
not deny that in such Attributes which we apply to God, because we find them to
be Perfections in us, we have a distinct and clear Perception of them, as they
are considered in themselves, for that is the reason why we attribute them to
God. But for such as peculiarly belong to God as Eternity does; and for the
degrees of other Attributes as they belong to him, as they are infinite, so
they are above our Comprehension. (1.) As to Eternity, say they, it is a clear
and distinct Notion of Eternity, to say, it is a duration without beginning and
without end.

But we can have no clear and distinct Notion of Duration, when applied to a
Being that has necessary Existence. For Duration, they say, consists in a
Succession. And what Succession can there be in a Being which always is the
same, if there were no difference of times, i. e. God was the same Being before
time was, and is the very same Being under all the differences of times; he
has not any other Duration now than he had before, and what Succession could
there be where there was no time? But we make use of Duration with respect to
things done in time, and for the help of our und^^standings apply the measure
of time to divine Acts. But in a necessary Existence, there can be no past,
present, or to come; and in a successive Duration, there must be conceived a
longer continuance from time to time; which is repugnant to the Notion of a
Being, which always is. So that, if we cannot conceive Eternity without
Duration, nor Duration without Succession; nor can apply Succession to a Being
which has necessary Existence, then we can have no clear and distinct Notion
of God's Eternity. (2.) As to the Infiniteness of God's Perfections, they say,
That although the Mind be in it self finite, P. 8.
yet it has an infinite Comprehension, for what is finite with respect to its
Extension of parts may be infinite in other respects, and with respect to some
of its Powers. But how does it appear that we have any Power to comprehend what
is infinite? All the Power we have extends only to adding and enlarging our
Ideas without bounds, i. e. we can put no stop to our apprehensions, but still
they may go farther than we can possibly think, but is this an infinite
Comprehension? So far from it, that this shows our Capacities to be finite,
because our Ideas cannot go so far as our Reason. For our Reason tells us, we
can never go so far, but we may still go farther: but it is impossible for our
understanding to have distinct Ideas of the infinite moments in an eternal
Succession of the utmost Bounds of Immensity, or of the extent of infinite
Power and Knowledge, since the very Notion of Infinite implies, that we can set
no bounds to our Thoughts; and therefore although the Infinity of the divine
Attributes be evident to our Reason, yet it is likewise evident to our Reason,
that what is infinite must be above our Comprehension.

II. I come now to the last enquiry which is that if we allow things above our
Reason, what stop can be put to any absurd Doctrine, which we may be required
to believe?

And this is that which our Unitarians object in all their late Pamphlets. In
answer to my Sermon they say, That on our principles, our Reason would be in
vain, Answer to the Archbishop, etc. p. 4.
and all Science and Certainty would be destroyed, which they repeat several
times. And from hence they do so frequently insist on the Parallel between the
Doctrine of the Trinity and Transubstantiation: They say, P. 17. P. 67.
That all the defense we have made for one will serve for the other, Letter of
Resolut p. 3.
or any other absurd and impossible Doctrine. That what we say, will equally
serve all the Nonsense, Considerat. on the Explication, etc. by Dr. W. p. 30.
and impossible Doctrines that are to be found among Men; and they particularly
instance in Transubstantiation. I need mention no more. But I did not expect to
have found this Parallel so often insisted upon, without an answer to two
Dialogues purposely written on that Subject, at a time when the Doctrine of the
Trinity was used as an argument to bring in Transubstantiation, as that is now
alleged for casting off the other.

But I must do them that right to tell the World, that at that time a Socinian
Answer was written to those Dialogues, which I saw, and wished might be
Printed, that the World might be satisfied about it and them. But they thought
fit to forbear; and in all their late Pamphlets where this Parallel is so often
repeated, there is but once, that I can find, any notice taken of those
Dialogues, and that in a very superficial manner. For the main Design and Scope
of them is past over, and only one particular mentioned, which shall be
answered in its due order.

But in answer to the general Enquiry, I shall endeavor to state the due
Bounds between Faith and Reason, and thereby to show, that by those grounds on
which we receive the Doctrine of the Trinity, we do not give way to the
Entertainment of any absurd Opinion, nor overthrow the Certainty of Reason.

1. We have no difference with them about the Use of our Reason as to the
Certainty of a Revelation. For in this case, we are as much as they, for
searching into the grounds of our Faith; for we look on it as a reasonable Act
of our Minds, and if we did not allow this, we must declare our selves to
believe without grounds. And if we have grounds for our Faith, we can express
them in Words that are intelligible; and if we can give an account of our Faith
in an intelligible manner, and with a design to give others satisfaction about
it, I think this is making use of our Reason in matters of Faith.

2. We have no difference with them about the use of our Reason, as to the true
Sense of Revelation. We never say, that Men are bound to believe upon the bare
sound of Words without examining the Sense of them. We allow all the best and
most reasonable ways of attaining to it, by Copies, Languages, Versions,
comparing of Places, and especially the Sense of the Christian Church in the
best and purest Ages, nearest the Apostolical Times and expressed in solemn and
public Acts.

By these Rules of Reason we are willing to proceed, and not by any late and
uncertain methods of interpreting Scripture.

3. We differ not with them about the right use of the Faculties which God has
given us, of right Understanding such matters as are offered to our Assent. For
it is to no purpose to require them to believe, who cannot use the Faculties
which are necessary in order to it. Which would be like giving the Benefit of
the Clergy to a Man with a Cataract in both his Eyes. And it would be very
unreasonable to put his Life upon that Issue, whether he could read or not,
because he had the same Organs of Seeing that other Men had; for in this case
the whole matter depended not on the Organ but the Use of it: This needs no
Application.

4. We differ not with them about rejecting some Matters proposed to our Belief
which are contradictory to the Principles of Sense and Reason. It is no great
argument of some Men's Reason, whatever they pretend to talk against admitting
seeming Contradictions in Religion; for who can hinder seeming Contradictions?
Which arise from the shallowness of Men's Capacities, and not from the
repugnancy of Things: and who can help Men's Understandings? But where there is
evident proof of a Contradiction to the Principles of Sense and Reason; we are
very far from owning any such thing to be an Article of Faith, as in the case
of Transubstantiation. Which we reject, not only, as having no foundation in
Scripture, but as repugnant to the common Principles of Sense and Reason; as is
made to appear in the two Dialogues beforementioned.

But our Unitarians find fault with the Author of them, for laying the force of
his argument upon this, Considerat. on the Explication by Dr. W. p. 30.
That there are a great many more Texts for the Trinity than are pretended for
Transubstantiation; whereas many other arguments are insisted on, and
particularly the great Absurdity of it in point of Reason, Dial. 2. from p. 33.
to the end. And it is not the bare number of Texts, which he relies upon, but
upon the greater Evidence and Clearness of the Tex^s on one side than on the
other, which depends upon figurative Words, not capable of a literal Sense
without overthrowing the Doctrine designed to be proved by it. See with what
Ingenuity these Men treat the Defenders of the Trinity, and the Enemies to
Transubstantiation, which they call only a Philosophical Error or Folly; Answer
to the Archbishop, p. 21.
but the Doctrine of the Trinity is charged with Nonsense, Contradiction, and
Impossibilities.

But wherein then lies the difference in point of Reason? For thus far I have
showed, that we are far from overthrowing Reason, or giving way to any absurd
Doctrines. It comes at last to the point already treated of in this Chapter,
how far we may be obliged to believe a Doctrine which carries in it something
above our Reason; or of which we cannot have any clear and distinct Ideas. And
of this I hope I have given a sufficient Account in the foregoing Discourse.

FINIS.

