THE BISHOP OF WORCESTER'S CHARGE To the CLERGY OF HIS DIOCESE, IN HIS Primary
Visitation, BEGUN At WORCESTER, Sept. 11. 1690.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the Phoenix in S. Paul's Churchyard. M
DC XC I.

To the Reverend CLERGY Of the DIOCESE Of WORCESTER.
My BRETHREN,
WHat I lately delivered among you in the several Places of my Visitation, and
what I have since thought fit in some particulars to add, I have here put
together, and sent it to you, that it might remain with you, not only as an
Instance of my Duty, but as a Monitor of your own. And I may reasonably hope,
as well as desire, that the frequent Reading and Considering the Things I here
recommend to you, will make a deeper Impression on your Minds, than a mere
transient Discourse; for I know nothing will more effectually preserve the
Honor and Interest of the Church of England, than a diligent and conscientious
Discharge of the Duties of our several Places. In this time of general Liberty,
our Adversaries, of all kinds, think themselves let loose upon us; and
therefore we have the more reason to look to our selves, and to the Flock
committed to our Charge.

Yet, I do not question, but through the Goodness of God, and the serious and
vigorous Application of our Minds to the great Business of our High and Holy
Calling, that Church which we so justly value, will escape sinking in the
Quicksands, as it has hitherto, being dashed against the Rocks. If we behave
our selves with that Prudence and Zeal and Circumspection which becomes us, I
hope the Inclinations of the People will never be made use of as an Argument
against us. For, although in a Corrupt Age, that be one of the weakest
Arguments in the World (if it be true) and only shows the Prevalency of Folly
and Faction; Yet there is no such Way to prevent the spreading of both, as our
constant Care to instruct our People in the main Duties of Religion, and going
before them in the Ways of Holiness and Peace.

In the following Discourse, I have first endeavored to Assert and Vindicate
the Authority of Bishops in the Christian Church; and in as few Words, and with
as much Clearness as I could, I have proved their Apostolical Institution. And
the Judgment and Practice of the Universal Church from the Apostles Times, will
prevail with all unbyas'd Persons above any modern violent Inclinations to the
contrary.

In the next place I have recommended to you such things, which I am sure are
much for the Churches Service and Honor, as well as our own, and therefore, I
hope you will the more regard them.

In the last place, I have made it my Design to clear several Parts of the
Ecclesiastical Law, which concerns Churchmen, and have showed the Nature,
Force, and Extent of it; and how agreeable it is to the Common Law of England.
In these things, my aim was to do something toward the Good of this Church,
and particularly of this Diocese. And that the Glory of God, the Salvation of
Souls, and Holiness and Peace may be Promoted therein, is the hearty Prayer of

Westminst. Jan. 33. 1690/1. Your Affectionate Brother, and Fellow Servants to
Our Common Lord, ED. Wigorn.

My BRETHREN,
THIS being my Primary Visitation, I thought it fitting to acquaint my self
with the Ancient as well as Modern Practice of Episcopal Visitations, and as
near as I could, to observe the Rules prescribed therein, with respect to the
Clergy, who are now Summoned to appear. And I find there were Two principal
Parts in them, a Charge and an Enquiry.

The Charge was given by the Bishop himself, and was called Admonitio Episcopi,
or Allocutio; wherein Regino l. 2. p. 205.

Hispan. Council. p. 29.


he informed them of their Duty, and exhorted them to perform it.

The Enquiry was made according to certain Articles drawn out of the Canons,
which were generally the same; according to which the Juratores Synodi (as
Regino Collect. Canon. lib. 2. p. 204.

Burchrd. l. 1. c. 91, 92.

Gratian. 35. q. 5. c. 7.


the Ancient Canonists call them; or Testes Synodales) were to give in their
Answers upon Oath; which was therefore called Juramentum Synodale; for the
Bishop's Visitation was accounted an Episcopal Synod.

The former of these is my present business; and I shall take leave to speak my
mind freely to you, this first time, concerning several things which I think
most Useful, and fit to be considered and practiced by the Clergy of this
Diocese.

For, since it has pleased God, by his wise and overruling Providence,
(without my seeking) to bring me into this station in his Church, I shall
esteem in the best Circumstance of my present Condition, if he please to make
me an Instrument of doing good among you. To this End, I thought it necessary
in the first place, most humbly to implore his Divine Assistance, that I might
both rightly understand, and conscientiously perform that great Duty which is
incumbent upon me; for without his help, all our Thoughts are vain, and our
best Purposes will be ineffectual. But God is not wanting to those who
sincerely endeavor to know, and to do their Duty; and therefore in the next
place, I set my self (as far as my Health and other Occasions would permit) to
consider the Nature and Extent of my Duty; with a Resolution not to be
discouraged, although I met with Difficulties in the performance of it. For such
is the State and Condition of the World, That no man can design to do good in
it; but when that crosses the particular Interests and Inclinations of others,
he must expect to meet with as much Trouble as their unquiet Passions can give
him.

If we therefore consulted nothing but our own Ease, the only way were to let
People follow their Humors and Inclinations, and to be as little concerned as
might be, at what they either say or do. For if we go about to rowze and awaken
them, and much more to reprove and reform them, we shall soon find them uneasy
and impatient; for few love to hear of their Faults, and fewer to amend them.

But it is the peculiar Honor of the Christan Religion, to have an Order of
Men, set apart, not merely as Priests, to offer Sacrifices (for that all
Religions have had) but as Preachers of Righteousness, to set Good and Evil
before the People committed to their Charge; to inform them of their Duties, to
reprove them for their Miscarriages; and that, not in order to their Shame, but
their Reformation: Which requires not only Zeal, but Discretion, and a great
mixture of Courage and Prudence, that we may neither fail in doing our Duty,
nor in the best means of attaining the end of it.

If we could reasonably suppose, that all those who are bound to tell others
their Duties, would certainly do their own, there would be less need of any
such Office in the Church as that of Bishops; who are to inspect, and govern,
and visit, and reform those who are to watch over others. But since there may
be too great failings even in these; too great neglect in some, and disorder in
others; too great proneness to Faction and Schism, and impatience of
Contradiction from mere Equals; therefore S. Jerome himself grants, That to
avoid these mischiefs, there was a necessity of a Superior Order to Presbyters
in the Church of God; ad quem Hieron Comment. ad Titam.

Epist. ad Evagr.


omnis Ecclesiae Cura pertineret, and Schismatum seminatollerentur; as he
speaks, even where he seems most to lessen the Authority of Bishops. But
whatever some expressions of his may be, (when the Bishop of Jerusalem and the
Roman Deacons came into his head) his Reasons are very much for the Advantage
of Episcopal Government. For can any Man say more in point of Reason for it,
than that nothing but Faction and Disorder followed the Government of
Presbyters, and therefore the whole Christian Church agreed in the necessity of
a higher Order, and that the Peace and Safety of the Church depends upon it;
that Advers Luciferian.
if it be taken away, nothing but Schisms and Confusions will follow. I wish
those who magnify S. Jerome's Authority in this matter, would submit to his
Reason and Authority both, as to the Necessity and Usefulness of the Order of
Bishops in the Church.

But beyond this, in several Places, he makes the Bishops to be Successors of
the Apostles, as well as the Hier. in Psalm. Ad Evagr. Ad Marcell. Cyprian. Ep.
3. 66.

Aug. in Ps. 44. 44.

Ambros. ad Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 12. 28. Theod. ad 1 Timothy 1. 3,


rest of the most Eminent Fathers of the Church have done. If the Apostolical
Office, as far as it concerns the Care and Government of Churches, were not to
continue after their Decease, how came the best, the most learned, the nearest
to the Apostolical Times, to be so wonderfully deceived? For if the Bishops did
not succeed by the Apostles own Appointment, they must be Intruders and
Usurpers of the Apostolical Function; and can we imagine the Church of God
would have so uniuersally consented to it? Besides, the Apostles did not die
all at once; but there were Successors in several of the Apostolical Churches,
while some of the Apostles were living; can we again imagine, those would not
have vindicated the Right of their own Order, and declared to the Church, That
this Office was peculiar to themselves? The Change of the Name from Apostles to
Bishops, would not have been sufficient Excuse for them; for the Presumption
had been as great in the Exercise of the Power without the Name. So that I can
see no Medium, but that either the Primitive Bishops did succeed the Apostles
by Iren. l. 3. c. 3.
their own Appointment and Approbation, (which Irenaeus expressly affirms, Qui
ab Apostolis ipsis instituti sunt Episcopi in Ecclesiis) or else those who
governed the Apostolical Churches after them, outwent Diotrephes himself; for
he only rejected those whom the Apostle sent; but these assumed to themselves
the Exercise of an Apostolical Authority 3 John 9, 10.
over the Churches planted and settled by them.

But to let us see how far the Apostles were from thinking that this part of
their Office was peculiar to themselves, we find them in their own time, as
they saw occasion, to appoin r others to take care of the Government of the
Churches, within such bounds as they thought fit. Thus Timothy was appointed by
1 Timothy 3. 2, 3, etc.
St. Paul at Ephesus, to examine the Qualifications of such as were to be
Ordained; and not to lay hands suddenly on any; to receive Accusations, if
there were Cause, 5. 22.
even against Elders, to proceed judicially before two or three Witnesses; and
if there were Reason, to give them 19.
a public Rebuke. And that this ought not to be thought 20.
a slight matter, he presently adds, I charge thee before 21.
God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, and the Elect Angels, that thou observe these
things, without prefetring one before another, doing nothing by partiality.
Here is a very strict and severe Charge for the Impartial Exercise of
Discipline in the Church upon Offenders. And although in the Epistle to Titus,
he be only in general required Titus 1. 5.
to set in order the things that are wanting, and to ordain Elders in every
City, as he had appointed him; yet we are not to suppose, that this Power
extended not to a Jurisdiction over them when he had ordained them. For if any
of those whom he Ordained (as believing them qualified according to the
Apostles Rules) should afterward demeam themselves otherwise; and be self
willed, froward, given to Wine, Brawlens, Covetous, or any way scandalous to
the Church, can we believe that Titus was not as well bound to correct them
afterward, as to examine them before? And what was this Power of Ordination
and Jurisdiction, but the very same which the Bishops have exercised ever since
the Apostles Times? But they who go about to Unbishop Timothy and Titus; may as
well Unscripture the Epistles that were written to them; and make them only
some particular and occasional Writings, as they make Timothy and Titus to have
been only some particular and occasional Officers. But the Christian Church
preserving these Epistles, as of constant and perpetual Use, did thereby
suppose the same kind of Office to continue, for the sake whereof those
excellent Epistles were written: And we have no greater Assurance that these
Epistles were written by St. Paul, than we have that there were Bishops to
succeed the Apostles in the Care and Government of Churches.

Having said thus much to clear the Authority we act by, I now proceed to
consider the Rules by which we are to govern our selves.

Every Bishop of this Church, in the Time of his Consecration, makes a solemn
Profession, among other things, That he will not only maintain and set forward,
as much as lies in him, quietness, love and peace among all Men; but that he
will correct and punish such as be unquiet, disobedient and criminous within
his Diocese, according to such Authority as he has by God's Word, and to him
shall be committed by the Ordinance of this Realm.

So that we have Two Rules to proceed by, viz. the Word of God, and the
Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm.

(1.) By the Word of God; and that requires from us, Diligence, and Care, and
Faithfulness, and Impartiality, remembering the Account we must give, that we
may do it with Joy, and not with Grief. And we are not merely required to
correct and punish, but to warn and instruct, and exhort the Persons under our
Care, to do those things which tend most to the Honor of our Holy Religion,
and the Church whereof we are Members. And for these Ends there are some things
I shall more particularly recommend to You.

(1.) That you would often consider the Solemn Charge that was given you, and
the Profession you madeof yourResolution to do yourDuty at your Ordination.

I find by the Provincial Constitution of this Church, De voto and voti Redempt.

Lyndw. f. 103.


that the Bishops were to have their solemn Profession read over to them twice
in the year, to put them in mind of their Duty. And in the Legatine
Constitutions of Otho, Council. Anglic. vol. 2. f. 182.
(22 H. 3.) the same Constitution is renewed, not merely by a Legatine Power,
but by Consent of the Archbishops, and Bishops of both Provinces; wherein it
Constit. Othor. f. 292.

Council. Angl. vol. 2. f. 227.


is declared, that Bishops ought to visit their Diocesses at fit times,
Correcting and Reforming what was amiss, and sowing the Word of Life in the
Lord's Field; and to put them the more in mind of it, they were twice in the
year to have their solemn Profession read to them; It seems then, that
Profession contained these things in it; or else the reading that could not
stir them up to do these things. What the Profession was which Presbyters then
made at their Ordination, we have not so clear an Account, but in the same
Council at Oxford, 8 H. 3. it is strictly enjoined, that all Rectors and Vicars
should instruct the Constit. Provinc. De Officio Archi-Presbyteri, f. 33.
Council. Anglic. vol. 1. p. 183.
People committed to their Charge, and Feed them, Pabulo Verbi Dei, with the
Food of Gods Word; and it is introduced with that Expression, that they might
excite the Parochial Clergy to be more diligent in what was most proper for
those times. And if they do it not, they are there called Canes muti: and
Lyndwood bestows many other hard Lyndw. v. latratu f. 33. V. Pabulo V. Dei.
Terms upon them, which I shall not mention; but he says afterward, those who
do it not, are but like Idols, which bear the similitude of a Man, but do not
the Offices proper to Men. Nay, he goes so far as to say, That the Spiritual
Food of God's Word is as necessary to the Health of the Soul, as Corporal Food
is to the Health of the Body. Which words are taken out of a Preface to a Canon
in the Decretals De Officio Jud. Ordinarii, inter Caetera. But they serve very
well to show how much even in the dark times of Popery, they were then
convinced of the necessity and usefulness of Preaching. These Constitutions
were slighted so much, that in 9 Edw. I the Offices of Preaching was sunk so
low, that in a Prove. Constit. De Offic. Arch-Presbyt f. 282. Council. Anglic.
vol. 2. p. 332.
Provincial Constitution at that time, great complaint is made of the Ignorance
and Stupidity of the Parochial Clergy, that they rather made the people worse
than better. But at that time the Preaching Friars had got that Work into their
hands by particular Privileges, where it is well observed, that they did not go
to places which most needed their help; but to Cities and Corporations, where
they found most Encouragement. But what Remedy was found by this Provincial
Council? Truly, every Parochial Priest four times a year was bound to read an
Explication of the Creed, Ten Commandments, the Two Precepts of Charity, the
Seven Works of Mercy, the Seven deadly Sins, the Seven principal Virtues, and
the Seven Sacraments. This was renewed in Council. Anglic. 2 Vol. p. 700. 707.
the Province of York, (which has distinct Provincial Constitutions) in the
Time of Edw. 4. And here was all they were bound to by these Constitutions.

But when Wicliff and his Followers had awakened the People so far, that there
was no satisfying them without Preaching, then a new Provinciat Constitution
was Council. Anglic. 2 Vol. p. 649. Constit. de Haeret. f. 156.
made under Arundel, Archbishop of Canterbury; and the former Constitution was
restrained to Parochial Priests who officiated as Curates; but several others
were Authorized to Preach; as (1.) The Mendicant Friars were said to be
authorized Jure Communi; or rather Privilegio Speciali, (but therefore Lyndwood
says, it is said to Lyndw. f. 156.
be Jure Communi, because that Privilege is recorded in the Text of the Canon
Law) These were not only allowed to Preach in their own Churches, but in
Plateis publicis, says Lyndwood, out of the Canon Law (wherein C. Dudam. Clem.
de Sepulturis.
those words were expressed), and at any Hour, unless it were the Time of
Preaching in other Churches; but other Orders, as Augustinians and Carmelites,
had no such general License. Those Preaching Friars were a sort of Licensed
Preachers at that time, who had no Cures of Souls; but they were then accounted
a kind of Pastors. For Jo. de Athon distinguishes Two sorts of Jo. de Athon.
in Constitut. Othobon. f. 46.
Pastors; Those who had Ecclesiastical Offices, and those who had none; but
were such only Verbo and Exemplo; but they gave very great Disturbance to the
Clergy, as the Pope himself confesses in the Canon C. Dudam. de Sepulturis.
Law. (2.) Legal Incumbents authorized to Preach in their own Parishes Jure
Scripto. All Persons who had Cures of Souls, and legal Titles were said to be
missi a jure ad locum and Populum Curae suae, and therefore might preach to
their own People without a special License; but if any one Preached in other
Parts of the Diocese, or were a Stranger in it, then he was to be examined by
the Diocesan, and if he were found tam Moribus quam Scientia idoneus, he might
send him to Preach to one or more Parishes, as he thought meet; and he was to
show his License to the Incumbent of the Place before he was to be permitted to
Preach, under the Episcopal Seal. And thus, as far as I can find, the Matter
stood as to Preaching, before the Reformation.

After it, when the Office of Ordination was reviewed and brought nearer to the
Primitive Form; and instead of delivering the Chalice and Patten, with these
words, Accipe potestatem offerre Deo Sacrificium, etc. the Bishop delivered the
Bible with these words, Take thou Authority to Preach the Word of God, and to
minister the Holy Sacraments in the Congregation, etc. The Priests Exhortation
was made agreeable thereto, wherein he exhorts the Persons in the Name of our
Lord Jesus Christ, to consider the weight and importance of the Office and
Charge they are called to; not barely to instruct those who are already of
Christ's Flock; but to endeavor the Salvation of those who are in the midst of
this naughty World. And therefore he persuades and charges them from a due
regard to Christ, who suffered for his Sheep, and to the Church of Christ,
which is so dear to him, to omit no Labor, Care, or Diligence in instructing
and reforming those who are committed to their Charge. And the better to enable
them to perform these things, there are some Duties especially recommended to
them, viz. Prayer and Study of the Holy Scriptures, according to which that
they are to instruct others, and to order their own Lives, and of those who
belong to them. And that they might the better attend so great a Work, they are
required to forsake and set aside (as much as they may) all worldly Cares and
Studies, and apply themselves wholly to this one thing, that they may save
themselves and them that hear them. After which follows the solemn Profession,
wherein they undertake to do these things.

This is that, my Brethren, which I earnestly desire of you that you would
often consider. You are not at liberty now, whether you will do these things or
not; for you are under a most solemn Engagement to it. You have put your hands
to the Plow, and it is too late to think of looking back; and you all know the
Husbandman's Work is laborious and painful, and continually Returning. It is
possible after all his pains, the Harvest may not answer his expectation; but
yet if he neither plows nor sows, he can expect no Return; if he be idle and
careless, and puts off the main of his Work to others, can he reasonably look
for the same Success? Believe it, all our Pains are little enough to awake the
sleepy and secure Sinners, to instruct the ignorant, to reclaim the vicious, to
rebuke the profane, to convince the erroneous, to satisfy the doubtful, to
confirm the wavering, to recover the lapsed, and to be useful to all, according
to their feveral Circumstances and Conditions. It is not to Preach a Sermon or
two in a Weeks time to your Parishoners, that is the main of your Duty; that is
no such difficult Task, if Men apply their Minds as they ought to do to Divine
Matters, and do not spend their Retirements in useless Studies; but the great
Difficulty lies in Watching over Non potest esse Pastoris excusatio, si lupus
oves comedit, and Pastor nescit. Extr. de Reg. Juris c. 10.
your Flock, i. e. knowing their Condition, and applying your selves suitably
to them. He that is a Stranger to his Flock, and only visits them now and then,
can never be said to watch over it; he may watch over the Fleeces; but he
understands little of the State of his Flock, viz. of the Distempers they are
under, and the Remedies proper for them.

The Casuists say, That the reason why there is no Command Reginald. Pra^is, l.
30. tr. 3. c. 5. p. 52.
for Personal Residence in Scripture, is, because the Nature of the Duty it
self requires it; for if a Person be required to do such things which cannot be
done without it, Residence is employed. As a Pilot to a Ship needs no Command to
be in his Ship; for how can he do the Office of a Pilot out of it? Let none
think to excuse themselves by saying that our Church only takes them for
Curates, and that the Bishops have the Pastoral Charge; for, by our old
Provincial Constitutions (which are still Constit. Provinc. de Clericis non
Resid. c. quum hostis.
in force so far as they are not repugnant to the Law of the Land) even those
who have the smallest Cures are called Pastors; and Lyndwood there notes, that
Parochialis Sacerdos dicitur Pastor; and that not merely by way of Allusion,
but in respect of the Care of Souls. But we need not go so far back. For what
is it they are admitted to? Is it not ad Curam Animarum? Did not they promise
in their Ordination, To teach the People committed to their Care and Charge?

The Casuists distinguish a threefold Cure of Souls. 1. In foro interiori
tantum, and this they say is the Parochial Cure. 2. In foro exteriori tantum,
where there is Authority to perform Ministerial Acts, as to suspend,
excommunicate, absolve, (sine Pastorali Cura:) and this Archdeacons have by
virtue of their Office. 3. In utroque simul? where there is a special Care,
together with Jurisdiction: this is the Bishops. And every one of these, say
they, secundum commune Jus Canonicum, is obliged to Residence; i. e. by the
common Law Ecclesiastical; of which more afterward. The Obligation is to
perpetual Residence, but as it is in other positive Duties, there may other
Duties intervene, which may take away the present force of it; as Care of
Health, necessary Business, public Service Joh. Athon. ad Constit. Othon. f.
14.
of the King, or Church, etc. But then we are to observe, that no Dispensation
can justify a Man in point of Conscience, unless there be a sufficient Cause;
and no Custom can be sufficient again the natural Equity of the Case, whereby
every one is bound from Reginald. ib. n. 53.
the Nature of the Office he has undertaken.

I confess the Case in Reason is different, where there is a sufficient
Provision by another fit Person, and approved by those who are to take Care
that Places be well supplied, and where there is not; but yet, this does not
take off the force of the Personal Obligation, arising from undertaking the
Cure themselves, which the Ecclesiastical Law understands to be, not Can.
Relatum. Ex. De Clericis non Resid.
merely by Promise, but cum effectu, as the Canonists speak; which implies
personal-Residence. Not that they are never to be away; Non sic amare intelligi
debet ut nunquam inde recedat, says Lyndwood; but these Lyndw. in c. quum host
is. Resideant cum effectu.
Words are to be understood civili modo, as he expresses it, i. e. not without
great Reason. There must not be, says he, Callida Interpretatio sed talis ut
cessent frauds and negligentiae; i. e. There must be no Art used to Joh. de
Athon. in Constit. Othon. f. 14. Continui.
evade the Law, nor any gross Neglect of it. It Is true, the Canonists have
distinguished between Rectorie^s and Vicarages, as to Personal Residence; but
we are to consider these things. 1. The Canon Law strictly Can. Echipandae. De
Praebend. and Dign.
obliges every one that has a Parochial Cure to perpetual Residence; and
excepts only two Cases, when the Living is annexed to a Prebend or Dignity; and
then he who has it, is to have a perpetual Vicar instituted, with a sufficient
Maintenance. 2. After this Liberty obtained for dignified Persons to have
Vicars endowed in their Places, the Point of Residence was strictly enjoined to
them: and we find in the Provincial Constitutions a Difference made between
Personatus and Vicaria; but this was still meant of a Vicarage endowed. De
Praesumpt. f. 55. 2.
This was in the time of Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury; and in
another Constitution he required an Oath of Personal Residence from all such De
Clericis non Resident. cum hostis, etc.
Vicars, although the Place were not above the value of five Marks; which, as
appears by Lyndwood else where, was then sufficient for Maintenance and
Hospitality. Lynd. f. 34. Joh. de Athon. in consist. Othon. f. 12.
And to cover the shameful Dispensations that were commonly granted to the
higher Clergy, under Pretense of the Papal Power, the poor Vicars by a
Constitution of Otho, were bound to take a strict Oath of continual Otho de
Instit. Vic. f. 14. Othobon f. 46.
Residence; and without it their Institution was declared to be Null. But even
in that Case the Gloss there says, That they may be some time absent for the
Benefit of the Church or State; but not for their own particular Advantage. 3.
The Obligation in point of Conscience remains the same, but Dispensing with
Laws may take away the Penalty of Non-Residence in some Cases. Joh. de Athon,
Canon of Lincoln, who wrote the Joh. de Athon. in Constit. Othon.
Glosses on the Legatine Constitutions, does not deny, but that Rectors are as
well bound to Residence as Vicars; but these are more strictly tied by their
Oath, and because a Vicar cannot appoint a Vicar, but a Parson may. And although
that Name among some be used as a Term of Reproach, yet in former Ages
Personatus and Dignitas were the same thing; and so used here in England in the
Time of Henry II. but afterward it came to be applied Can. Quia nonnulla de
Clericis non Resid.

Quadrilog. 1. 1. c. 5.


to him that had the Possession of a Parochial Benefice in his own immediate
Right; and was therefore bound to take Care of it. For the Obligation must in
Reason be supposed to go along with the Advantage; however Local Statutes may
have taken off the Penalty.

II. When you have thus considered the Obligation which lies upon you, to take
Care of your Elock, let me in the next place recommend to you a plain, useful,
and practical Way of Preaching among them. I mean, such as is most likely to do
good upon them (which certainly ought to be the just Measure of Preaching.) I
do not mean therefore a loose and careless way of Talking in the Pulpit, which
will neither profit you, nor those that hear you. He that once gets an ill
Habit of speaking extempore, will be tempted to continue it by the Easiness of
it to himself, and the Plausibleness of it to less judicious People. There is
on the other side a Closeness and Strength of Reasoning, which is too elaborate
for common Understandings; and there is an affected Fineness of Expression,
which by no means becomes the Pulpit: but it seems to be like stroaking the
Consciences of People by Feathers dipped in Oil. And there is a way of putting
Scripture Phrases together without the Sense of them, which those are the most
apt to admire, who understand them least: But for those who have not improved
their Minds by Education, the plainest way is certainly ^he best and hardest,
provided, it be not flat, and dry, and incoherent, or desultory, going from one
thing to another, without pursuing any particular Point home to Practice, and
applying it to the Consciences of the Hearers. And give me leave to tell you,
That mere general Discourses have commonly little Effect on the Peoples Minds;
if any thing moves them, it is particular Application as to such things which
their Consciences are concerned in.

And here I must recommend to you the pursuing the Design of His Majesty's
Letter, which has been some time since communicated to you; by it you are
required to Preach at some Times on those particular Vices which you observe to
be most prevalent in the Places you relate to, such as Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Swearing, Profaning the Lord's Day, etc. If ever we hope to reform them, you
must thoroughly convince them, that what they do is displeasing to God.

And there are two sorts of men you are to deal with,

1. Profane Scoffers at Religion. These seldom trouble you; but if any Good be
to be done upon them, it is by plain and evident Proofs of the Good and Evil of
Moral Actions. For, as long as they think them indifferent, they will never
regard what you say, as to the Rewards or Punishments of them.

2. Stupid and senseless People, whose Minds are wholly sunk into the Affairs of
the World, buying and selling, and getting gain. It is a very hard thing to get
a thought into them above these Matters. And whatever you talk of mere
Religion, and another Life, is like Metaphysics to them; they understand you
not, and take no Care to do it: but if you can convince them, that they live in
the Practice of great Sins, which they shall certainly suffer for, if they do
not Repent, they may possibly be awakened this way; if not, nothing but
immediate Grace can work upon them; which must work on the Will, whatever
becomes of the Understanding.

III. After preaching, let me entreat you to look after Catechizing and
instructing the Youth of your Parishes. He that would Reform the World to
purpose, must begin with the Youth; and train them up betimes, in the Ways of
Religion and Virtue. There is far less probability of prevailing on those who
have accustomed themselves to vicious Habits, and are hardened in their
Wickedness. It seems strange to some, that considering the shortness of Human
Life, Mankind should be so long before they come to Maturity; the best Account
I know of it is, that there is so much longer time for the Care of their
Education, to instill the Principles of Virtue and Religion into them, thereby
to soften the Fierceness, to direct the Weakness, to govern the Inclinations of
Mankind. It is truly a sad Consideration that Christian Parents are so little
sensible of their Duties, as to the Education of their Children; when those who
have had only Natural Reason to direct them, have laid so much Weight upon it.
Without it, Plato says, that Mankind grew Plato de Leg. l. 6.

Arist. Polit. l. 1. c 2.


the most unruly of all Creatures. Aristotle, that as by Nature they are
capable of being the best, so being neglected, they become the worst of
Animals, i. e. when they are brought up without Virtue. Education and Virtue,
says he, is a great thing, yea, it is all in all, and without it they will be
much Nicom. l. 2. c. 1 7. c 7.
worse than Beasts. The main Care of the Education of Children must lie upon
Parents; but yet Ministers ought not only to put them in mind. of their Duty,
but to assist them all they can, and by public Catechizing, frequently to
instruct both those who have not learned, and those who are ashamed to learn
any other way. And you must use the best means you can to bring them into an
Esteem of it; which is by letting them see, that you do it, not merely because
you are required to do it, but because it is a thing so useful and beneficial
to them, and to their Children. There is a great deal of difference between
Peoples being able to talk over a Set of Phrases, about Religious Matters, and
understanding the true Grounds of Religion; which are easiest learned, and
understood, and remembered in the short Catechetical Way. But I am truly sorry
to hear, that where the Clergy are willing to take pains this way, the People
are unwilling to send their Children. They would not be unwilling to hear them
instructed, as early as might be, in the way to get an Estate, but would be
very thankful to those who would do them such a kindness; and therefore it is
really a Contempt of God and Religion, and another World, which makes them so
backward to have their Children taught the way to it. And methinks those who
have any Zeal for the Reformation should love and pursue that which came into
request with it. Indeed the Church of Rome it self has been made so sensible
of the Necessity of it; that even the Council of Trent Sess. 24. de Reform. c.
4.
does not only require Catechizing Children, but the Bishops to proceed with
Ecclesiastical Censures against those who neglect it. But in the old Provincial
Constitutions I can find but one Injunction about Catechizing; and that is when
the Priest doubts whether the Children were Baptized or not; and if they be
born eight days before Easter Lyndw. Prove. Cost. f. 134, 135.

Council. Anglic. 2. Vol. 324. 330.


and Whitsuntide, they are not to be baptized till those days, and in the mean
time they are to receive Catechism. What is this receiving Catechism by
Children, before they are eight days old? It is well Exorcism is joined with
it; and so we are to understand by it the Interrogatories in Baptism: and
Lyndwood says, the Catechism is De Consecr. Did. 4. c. 54 57
not only required for Instruction in Faith, but propter sponsionem, when the
Godfather answers, De Fidei Observantia.

It is true the Canon Law requires in adult Persons Chatechising before
Baptism; but I find nothing of the Catechizing Children after it; and no
wonder, since Lynd. Lynd. f. 1. 11. Sciat.

Si enim habeant expensas and Magistros, peccarent ni^^ plus sciant quam Laici.


wood faith, the Laity are bound to no more than to believe as the Church
believes; nor the Clergy neither, unless they can bear the Charges of Studying,
and have Masters to instruct them. This was good Doctrine, when the Design was
to keep People in Ignorance. For Learning is an irreconcilable Enemy to the
Fundamental Policy of the Roman Church; and it was that which brought in the
Reformation, since which a just Care has still been required for the
Instruction of Youth; and the fifty ninth Canon of our Church is very strict in
it, which I desire you often to consider with the first Rubric after the
Catechism, and to act accordingly.

IV. After Catechizing, I recommend to you the due Care of bringing the
Children of your Parishes to Confirmation. Which would be of excellent use in
the Church, if the several Ministers would take that Pains about it, which they
ought to do. Remember that you are required to bring or send in Writing, with
your Names subscribed, the Names of all such Persons in your Parish, as you
shall think fit to be Presented to the Bishop to be Confirmed. If you take no
Care about it, and suffer them to come unprepared for so great, so solemn a
thing, as renewing the Promise and Vow made in Baptism, can you think your
selves free from any Guilt in it? In the Church of Rome indeed great Care was
taken to hasten Confirmation of Children all they could: Post Baptismum quam
citius poterint, as it is in our Constitution Provincial; in another Synodical,
the Parochial Priests Provinc. Constit. De Sacro Unct. f. 18. Council. Anlg. 2.
Vol. p. 353.
are charged to tell their Parishioners, that they ought to get their Children
Confirmed as soon as they can. In a Synod at Worcester, under Walter de
Cantilupo, in the time of Henry III. the Sacrament of Confirmation is declared
necessary for Strength against the Power of Darkness; and therefore it was
called Sacramentum pugnantium: and no Council. Angl. 2. Vol. p. 140. 165.
wonder then that the Parochial Priests should be called upon so earnestly to
bring the Children to Confirmation; and the Parents were to be forbidden to
enter into the Church, if they neglected it for a Year after the Birth of the
Child, if they had opportunity. The Synod of Exeter allowed two Years, and then
if they were not Confirmed, the Parents were to Fast p. 353.
every Friday, with Bread and Water, till it were done. And to the same
purpose, the Synod of Winchester in the time of Edw. I. in the Constitutions of
Richard Bishop p. 440.
of Sarum, two Years were allowed, but that Time was afterward thought too
long; and then the Priest as well as the Parents was to be suspended from p.
143.
entrance into the Church. But what Preparation was required? None that I can
find: But great Care is taken about the Fillets to bind their Heads to receive
the Unction, and the taking them off at the Font, and burning them, lest they
should be used for Witchcraft, as Lyndwood informs us. But we have no such
Customs nor any Lyndw. f. 19.
of the Reformed Churches; We depend not upon the Opus operatum, but suppose a
due and serious Preparation of Mind necessary, and a solemn Performance of it.
I hope, by God's Assistance, to be able, in time, to bring the Performance of
this Office into a better Method; in the mean time, I shall not fail doing my
Duty, have you a care you do not fail in yours.

V. As to the Public Offices of the Church, I do not only recommend to you a
due Care of the Diligent but of the Devout Performance of them. I have often
wondered how a fixed and stated Liturgy for general Use, should become a matter
of Scruple and Dispute among any in a Christian Church; unless there be
something in Christianity which makes it unlawful to pray together for things
which we all understand beforehand to be the Subject of our Prayers. If our
common Necessities and Duties are the same; if we have the same Blessings to
pray and to Thank God for in our solemn Devotions, why should any think it
unlawful or unfitting to use the same Expressions? Is God pleased with the
Change of our Words and Phrases? Can we imagine the Holy Spirit is gi ven to
dictate new Expressions in Prayers? Then they must pray by immediate
Inspiration (which I think they will not pretend to, lest all the Mistakes and
Incongruities of such Prayers be imputed to the Holy Ghost), but if not, then
they are left to their own Conceptions, and the Spirits Assistance is only in
the Exciting the Affections and Motions of the Soul toward the things prayed
for; and if this be allowed, it is impossible to give a Reason why the Spirit
of God may not as well excite those inward Desires, when the Words are the same
as when they are different. And we are certain, that from the Apostles times
downwards, no one Church or Society of Christians can be produced, who held it
unlawful to pray by a set Form. On the other side, we have very early Proofs of
some common Forms of Prayer, which were generally used in the Christian
Churches, and were the Foundations of those Ancient Liturgies, which, by
degrees, were much enlarged. And the Interpolations of latter times, do no more
overthrow the Antiquity of the Groundwork of them, than the large Additions to
a Building, do prove there was no House before. It is an easy matter to say
that such Liturgies could not be S. James's or S. Mark's, because of such
Errors and Mistakes, and Interpolations of things and Phrases of latter times;
but what then? Is this an Argument; there were no ancient Liturgies in the
Churches of Jerusalem or Alexandria; when so long since, as in Origen's time we
find an entire Collect produced by him Orig. in Jer. Hom. 14. p. 141. ed. Haet.
out of the Alexandrian Liturgy? And the like may be showed as to other
Churches, which by degrees came to have their Liturgies much enlarged by the
Devout Prayers of some extraordinary Men, such as S. Basil and S. Chrysostom in
the Eastern Churches.

But my design is not to vindicate our use of an excellent Liturgy, but to put
you upon the using it in such manner, as may most recommend it to the People. I
mean with that Gravity, Seriousness, Attention, and Devotion, which becomes so
solemn a Duty as Prayer to God is. It will give too just a Cause of Prejudice
to our Prayers, if the People observe you to be careless and negligent about
them; or to run them over with so great haste, as if you minded nothing so much
as to get to the end of them. If you mind them so little your selves, they will
think themselves excused, if they mind them less. I could heartily wish, that
in greater places, especially in such Towns where there are People more at
liberty, the constant Morning and Evening Prayers were duly and devoutly read;
as it is already done with good Success in London, and some other Cities. By
this means Religion will gain ground, when the public Offices are daily
performed; and the People will be more acquainted with Scripture, in hearing
the Lessons, and have a better esteem of the Prayers, when they become their
daily Service, which they offer up to God as their Morning and Evening
Sacrifice; and the design of our Church will be best answered, which appoints
the Order for Morning and Evening Prayer daily to be said, and used throughout
the Year.

VI. As to the Dissenters from the Church; the present Circumstances of our
Affairs require a more than ordinary Prudence in your Behavior toward them.
It is to no purpose to provoke or exasperate them, since they will be but so
much more your Emies for it; and if you seem to court them too much, they will
interpret your Kindness to be a liking their Way better than your own; so that
were it not for some worldly Interest, you would be just what they are; which
is in effect to say, you would be Men of Conscience, if ye had a little more
Honesty. For they can never think those honest Men, who comply with things
against their Consciences, only for their temporal Advantage; but they may like
them as Men of a Party, who under some specious Colors promote their Interest.
For my own part, as I do sincerely value and esteem the Church of England (and
I hope ever shall), so I am not against such a due temper toward them, as is
consistent with the preserving the Constitution of our Church. But if any
think, under a Pretense of Liberty, to undermine and destroy it, we have reason
to take the best care we can, in order to its Preservation. I do not mean by
opposing Laws, or affronting Authority, but by countermining them in the best
way; i. e. by outdoing them in those things which make them most Popular, if
they are consistent with Integrity and a good Conscience. If they gain upon the
People by an appearance of more than ordinary Zeal for the good of Souls; I
would have you to go beyond them in a true and hearty Concernment for them; not
in irregular Heats and Passions, but in the Meekness of Wisdom; in a calm and
sedate Temper; in doing good even to them who most despightfully reproach you,
and withdraw themselves and the People from you. If they get an Interest among
them by Industry, and going from Place to Place, and Family to Family; I hope
you will think it your Duty to converse more freely and familiarly with your
own People. Be not Strangers, and you will make them Friends. Let them see by
your particular Application to them, that you do not despise them. For Men love
to value those who seem to value them; and if you once slight them, you run the
hazard of making them your Enemies. It is some Trial of a Christians Patience
as well as Humility, to condescend to the Weaknesses of others; but where it is
our Duty, we must do it, and that cheerfully, in order to the best End, viz.
Doing the more good upon them. And all Condescension and Kindness for such an
End, is true Wisdom, as well as Humility. I am afraid Distance and too great
Stiffness of Behavior toward them, have made some more our Enemies than they
would have been. I hope they are now convinced, that the Persecution which they
complained lately so much of, was carried on by other Men, and for other
Designs than they would then seem to believe. But that Persecution was then a
Popular Argument for them; for, the complaining side has always the most Pity.
But now that is taken off, you may deal with them on more equal Terms. Now
there is nothing to affright them, and we think we have Reason enough on our
side to persuade them. The Case of Separation stands just as it did in Point of
Conscience, which is not now one jot more reasonable or just than it was
before. Some think Severity makes Men consider; but I am afraid it heats them
too much, and makes them too violent and refractory. You have more reason to
fear now, what the Interest of a Party will do, than any Strength of Argument.
How very few among them understand any reason at all for their Separation! But
Education, Prejudice, Authority of their Teachers sway them; remove these and
you convince them. And in order thereto, acquaint your selves with them,
endeavor to oblige them, let them see you have no other Design upon them, but
to do them good; if any thing will gain upon them, this will.

But if after all, they grow more headstrong and insolent by the Indulgence
which the Law gives them; then observe, whether they observe those Conditions
on which the Law gives it to them. For these are known Rules in Law, that he
forfeits his Privilege who goes beyond the Bounds of it; that no Privileges 11.
Q 3. c. 63. Lyndw ad l. de ^oenis f. 161. Extr. de Priv. c. Porro in G^^^^.
are to be extended beyond the Bounds which the Laws give them; for they ought
to be observed as they are given. I leave it to be considered, whether all such
who do not observe the Conditions of the Indulgence, be not as liable to the
Law as if they had none.

But there is a very profane abuse of this Liberty among some, as though it
were an Indulgence not to serve God at all. Such as these, as they were never
intended by the Law, so they ought to enjoy no Benefit by it. For this were to
Countenance Profaneness and Irreligion; which I am afraid will grow too much
upon us, unless some effectual Care be taken to suppress it.

VII. There is another Duty incumbent upon you, which I must particularly
recommend to your Care, and that is, of Visiting the Sick. I do not mean barely
to perform the Office prescribed, which is of very good use, and ought not to
be neglected; but a particular Application of your selves to the State and
Condition of the Persons you visit. It is no hard matter to run over some
Prayers, and so take leave; but this does not come up to the Design of our
Church in that Office: For, after the general Exhortation and Profession of the
Christian Faith, our Church requires, that the sick Person be moved to make
special Confession of his Sins, if he feel his Conscience troubled with any
weighty matter; and then if the sick Person humbly and heartily desires it, he
is to be absolved after this manner, Our Lord Jesus Christ, who has left Power
in his Church to absolve all Sinners who truly repent and believe in him, etc.
Where the Power of Absolution is grounded upon the Supposition of true Faith
and Repentance; and therefore, when it is said afterward, And by his Authority
committed to me, I absolve thee from the same, etc. it must proceed on the same
supposition. For the Church cannot absolve when God does not. So that all the
real Comfort of the Absolution depends upon the Satisfaction of the Person's
Mind, as to the Sincerity of his Repentance and Faith in Christ. Now here lies
the great Difficulty of this Office; how to give your selves and the wounded
Conscience Satisfaction, as to the Sincerity of those Acts; I do not mean as to
the Sincerity of his present Thoughts, but as to the Acceptableness of his
Faith and Repentance with God in order to Remission of Sins. But what if you
find the Persons so ignorant, as not to understand what Faith and Repentance
mean? What if they have led such careless and secure Lives in this World, as
hardly ever to have had one serious Thought of another? Is nothing to be done
but to come and pray by them, and so dismiss them into their Eternal State? Is
this all the good you can, or are bound to do them? I confess, it is a very
uncomfortable thing to tell Men how they are to begin to live, when they are
liker to dye than to live (and the People generally have a strange
superstitious Fear of sending for the Minister, while there is any hope of
Recovery). But at last you are sent for; and what a melancholy Work are you
then to go about? You are, it may be, to make a Man sensible of his Sins, who
never before considered what they were, or against whom they were committed, or
what eternal Misery he deserves by committing them. But I will suppose the best
I can in this Case, viz. That by your warm and serious Discourse, you thoroughly
awaken the Conscience of a long and habitual Sinner; what are you then to do?
Will you presently apply all the Promises of Grace and Salvation to one whose
Conscience is awakened only with the Fears of Death, and the Terrors of a Day
of Judgment? This, I confess, is a hard Case; on the one side, we must not
discourage good Beginnings in any; we must not cast an awakened Sinner into
Despair; we must not limit the infinite Mercy of God: But on the other side, we
must have a great care of encouraging presumptuous Sinners to put off their
Repentance to the last, because then upon Confession of their Sins, they can so
easily obtain the Churches Absolution, which goes no farther, than truly
Repenting and Believing. But here is the Difficulty, how we can satisfy our
selves that these do truly Repent and Believe; who are out of a Capacity of
giving Proof of their Sincerity by Amendment of Life? I do not question the
Sincerity of their present purposes; but how often do we find those to come to
nothing, when they recover and fall into the former Temptations? How then shall
they know their own Sincerity till it be tried? How can it be tried, when they
are going out of the State of Trial? The most we can do, is to encourage them
to do the best they can in their present Condition, and to show as many of the
Fruits of true Repentance as their Circumstances will allow; and with the
greatest humility of Mind, and most earnest Supplications to implore the
infinite Mercy of God to their Souls. But besides these, there are many Cases
of sick Persons, which require very particular Advice and Spiritual Direction,
which you ought to be able to give them, and it cannot be done without some
good Measure of Skill and Experience in Casuistical Divinity. As, How to
satisfy a doubting Conscience, as to its own Sincerity, when so many
Infirmities are mixed with our best Actions? How a Sinner who has relapsed
after Repentance can be satisfied of the Truth of his Repentance, when he does
not know, but he may farther relapse upon fresh Temptations? How, he shall know
what Failings are consistent with the State of Grace, and the Hopes of Heaven,
and what not? What Measure of Conviction and Power of Resistance is necessary
to make Sins to be Wilful and Presumptuous? What the just Measures of
Restitution are in order to true Repentance, in all such Injuries which are
capable of it? I might name many others, but these I only mention to show how
necessary it is for you to apply your selves to Moral and Casuistical Divinity,
and not to content your selves barely with the knowledge of what is called
Positive and Controversial. I am afraid there are too many who think they need
to look after no more than what qualifies them for the Pulpit; (and I wish all
did take sufficient Care of that) but if we would do our Duty as we ought, we
must inquire into, and be able to Resolve Cases of Conscience. For the Priests
Lips should keep this kind of Knowledge; and the People should seek the Law at
his mouth; for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2. 7. If this
held in the Levitical Priesthood, much more certainly under the Gospel, where
the Rates and Measures of our Duties are not to be determined by Levitical
Precepts, but by the general Reason and Nature of Moral Actions.

VIII. Among the Duties of Public Worship, I must put you in mind of a
Frequent Celebration of the Lords Supper. There is generally too great a
Neglect of this, which is the most proper part of Evangelical Worship. The
Duties of Prayers and Praises, are excellent and becoming Duties, as we are
Creatures with respect to our Maker and Preserver. The Duty of hearing the Word
of God read and explained, is consequent upon our owning it to be the Rule of
our Faith and Manners; and all who desire to understand and practice their
Duty, can never despise or neglect it. But that solemn Act of Worship wherein
we do most show our selves Christians, is the celebrating the Holy Eucharist.
For, therein we own and declare the infinite Love of God in sending his Son
into the world to die for Sinners, in order to their Salvation; and that this
is not only a true Saying, but worthy of all men to be credited. Therein, we
lift up our Hearts, and give Thanks to our Lord God; we join with Angels and
Archangels in lauding and magnifying his Glorious Name. Therein, we not only
commemorate the Death and Sufferings of our Lord, but are made Partakers of his
Body and Blood, after a Real, but Sacramental Manner. Therein we offer up our
selves to God, to be a Reasonable, Holy and Lively Sacrifice unto him. Therein
we Adore and Glorify the ever Blessed Trinity; and humbly implore the Grace
and Assistance of our ever Blessed Mediator. And what now is there in all this,
which is not very agreeable to the Faith, Hope, and Charity of Christians? Nay,
what Duty is there, which so much expresses all these together, as this does?
Nor, whereby we may more reasonably expect greater Supplies of Divine Grace to
be bestowed upon us? What then makes so many to be so backward in this Duty,
which profess a Zeal and Forwardness in many others? If we had that Warmth and
Fervor of Devotion, that Love to Christ, and to each other, which the Primitive
Christians had, we should make it as constant a part of our Public Worship, as
they did; but this is not to be expected. Neither did it always continue in the
Primitive Church, when Liberty, and Ease, and Worldly Temptations made Persons
grow more remiss and careless in the solemn Duties of their Religion.

S. Chrysostom takes notice in his time of the different Behavior of Persons,
with respect to the holy Eucharist. In Hebr. Him. 17. in Ephesians. Hom. 3.
There were some who pretended to greater Holiness and Austerity of Life than
others, who withdrew from the common Conversation of Mankind, and so by degrees
from joining in the Acts of Public Worship with them. Which did unspeakable
Mischief to Christianity; for then the Perfection of the Christian Life, was
not supposed to consist in the active part of it, but in Retirement and
Contemplation. As tho our highest imitation of Christ lay in following him into
the Wilderness to be tempted of the Devil; and not in walking as he walked, who
frequented the Synagogues, and went about doing good.

But this way of Retirement happening to be admired by some great Men, the
Public Worship came to be in less esteem; and others upon Reasons of a
different Nature withdrew themselves from such Acts of Devotion as required a
stricter Attendance, and a more prepared Temper of Mind. And there were some
who did abstain, because they were not so well satisfied with themselves as to
their own Preparations; and such as these S. Chrysostom seems to favor, rather
than such who came often without due care, as to the whole Course of their
Lives; only out of custom, or out of regard to the Orders of the Church. From
hence many thought it better to forbear, as long as they did it not out of
Contempt. And so by degrees the People were content to look on it as a
Sacrifice for them to be performed by others, rather than as an Office, wherein
they were to bear a part themselves; at least, they thought once or thrice a
year sufficient for them. And to this, as appears by our old Provincial
Constitutions, Council. Anglic. Tom. 2. p. 144, 166, 299.
they were forced by severe Canons.

When the Reformation began, this Disuse of this holy Sacrament, was looked on,
by the chief Reformers, as a great Abuse and Corruption crept into the Church,
which ought by all means to be Reformed; and the frequent Celebration of it set
up in the Reformed Calvin. Inst. l. 4. c. 17. n. 44.

Pet. Martyr. L. C. l. 4. c. 10. n. 48.

In. 1. Cor. 11. p. 55.

Bucer in Matthew. 16. p. 186.


Churches. But unreasonable Scruples in some, and Misapprehensions in others,
and a general Coldness and Indifference, as to matters of Religion, have
hitherto hindered the Reviving this Primitive Part of Devotion among us.

I do not go about to determine the Frequency in your Parishes, which the
Scripture does not as to the Christian Church, but supposes it to be often
done; but I may require you to take Care, that Christ's Institution be observed
among you; and that with your utmost Care, both as to the Decency and Purity of
it.

The last thing I recommend to you all, is, To have a great Care of your
Conversations. I do not speak it out of a distrust of you; I hope you do it
already: and your Case will be so much worse, if you do it not, because you
very well know how much you ought to do it. For the Honor of God and Religion,
and the Success of your Ministry, as well as your own Salvation, depend very
much upon it. Lead your Flock by your Example, as well as by your Doctrine, and
then you may much better hope that they will follow you; for the People are
naturally Spies upon their Ministers, and if they observe them to mind nothing
but the World all the Week, they will not believe them in earnest, when on the
Lord's Days they persuade them against it. And it takes off the Weight of all
Reproof of other Men's Faults, if those they reprove have reason to believe them
guilty of the same. I do not think it enough for a Preacher of Righteousness
merely to avoid open and scandalous Sins, but he ought to be a great Example to
others in the most excellent Virtues which adorn our Profession, not only in
Temperance and Chastity, in Justice and ordinary Charity, but in a readiness to
do good to all, in forgiving Injuries, in loving Enemies, in evenness of
Temper, in Humility and Meekness, and Patience, and Submission to God's Will,
and in frequent Retirements from the World, not merely for Study, but for
Devotion. If by these and such things you shine as Lights among your People,
they will be more ready to follow your Conduct; and in probability you will not
only stop their Mouths, but gain their Hearts. For among all the Ways of
advancing the Credit and Interest of the Church of England, one of the most
successful will be the diligent Labors, and the exemplary Lives of the Clergy
in it.

But if Men will not regard their own, or the Churches Interest in this matter;
if they will break their Rules in such a manner, as to dishonor God, and the
Church, and themselves by it; - then you are to consider the next thing I was
to speak to, which is,

II. What Authority is given to us for the punishing Offenders in our Diocesses
by the Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm. For this we are to consider, that our
Authority herein is not derived from any modern Canons or Constitutions of this
Church (although due Regard ought to be showed to them) but from the ancient
Common Law Ecclesiastical in this Realm, which still continues in force. For as
there is a Common Law with respect to Civil Rights, which depends not on the
Feudal Constitutions, although in many things it be the same with them; but upon
ancient Practice, and general Consent of the People from Age to Age. So, I say,
there is a Common Law Ecclesiastical, which although in many things it may be the
same with the Canon Law, which is read in the Books; yet it has not its force
from any Papal or Legatine Constitutions, but from the Acceptance and Practice
of it in our Church. I could easily show Council. Anglic. 2 Vol. p. 328.
(if the time would permit) that Papal and Legatine Constitutions were not
received here, although directed hither; that some Provincial Constitutions never
obtained 2. Inst. 632.
the Force of Ecclesiastical Laws; but my business is to show what did obtain
and continue still to have the force of such Ecclesiastical Laws among us.

By the Statute of 25. H. 8. c. 19. it is declared, That such Canons,
Constitutions, Ordinances and Synodals Provincial being already made, which be
not contrariant nor repugnant to the Laws, Statutes and Customs of this Realm,
nor to the Damage or Hurt of the King's Prerogative Royal, shall now still be
used and executed as they were before the making of this Act, etc. It Is true, a
Review was appointed, but such Difficulties were found in it, as to the shaking
the Foundations of the Ecclesiastical Law here, that nothing was ever legally
established in it; and therefore this Law is still in force.

In the Statute 25. H. 8. c. 21. it is said, That this Realm Recognizing no
Superior under God but the King, has been, and is free from Subjection to any
Man's Laws, but only to such as have been Devised, Made, and Observed within
this Realm, for the Wealth of the same: or to such other, as by the sufferance
of the King and his Progenitors, the People of this Realm have taken at their
free Liberty, by their own consent, to be used amongst them, and have bound
themselves by long use and custom to observance of the same, not as to the
observance of the Laws of any Foreign Prince, Potentate, or Prelate, but as to
the Customs and ancient Laws of this Realm, originally estabished, as Laws of
the same, by the said Sufferance, Consent, Custom, and none otherwise.

All that I have now to do, is to show what Authority the Bishops had over the
Clergy by the Ancient Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm; and what Censures they
were liable to for some particular Offenses.

I. By the Ecclesiastical Law the Bishop is Judge of the Fitness of any Clerk
presented to a Benefice. This is confessed by the ord Coke in these Words. And
the 2 Inst. 632.
Examination of the Ability, and Sufficiency of the Person presented, belongs
to the Bishop, who is the Ecclesiastical Judge, and in the Examination he is a
Judge, and not a Minister, and may and ought to refuse the Person presented, if
he be not Persona idonea. But this is plain to have been the Ancient
Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm by the Articul. Cleri. in Edw. 2. time, De
Idoneitate Personae praesentatae ad Beneficium Ecclesiasticum pertinet
Examinatio ad Judicem Ecclesiasticum, and ita est hactenus usitatum and fiat in
futurum.

By the Provincial Constitutions at Oxford in the time Provinc. Constable. quum
secund. f. 71.
of Hen. 3. the Bishop is required to admit the Clerk who is presented, without
Opposition, within two Months, dum tamen idoneus sit; if he thinks him fit. So
much time is allowed, propter Examinationem, says Lyndwood; even when there is
no dispute about Right of Patronage. The main thing he is to be examined upon
is his Ability to discharge his Pastoral Duty, as Coke calls it; or as Lyndwood
says, whether he be commendandus Scientia and Moribus. As to the former, the
Bishop may judge himself; but as to the latter, he must take the Testimonials of
others; and I heartily wish the Clergy would be more careful in giving them, by
looking on it as a Matter of Conscience, and not merely of Civility; for
otherwise it will be impossible to avoid the pestering the Church with
scandalous and ignorant Wretches. If the Bishop refuses to admit within the
time (which by the modern Canons is limited to twenty eight days after the
Presentation delivered) he is liable to a Duplex Querela Can. 95:
in the Ecclesiastical Courts, and a Quare impedit at Common Law; and then he
must certify the Reasons of his Refusal. In Specot's Case it is said, that in
15 Hen. 7. 7, 8. All the Judges agreed, that the Bishop is Judge in the
Examination, and therefore the Law 5. Rep. 57.
gives Faith and Credit to his Judgment. But because great Inconveniences
might otherwise happen, the general Allegation is not sufficient, but he must
certify specially and directly; and the general Rule is, and it was so
resolved by the Judges, That all such as are sufficient Causes of Deprivation
of an Incumbent, are sufficient Causes to refuse a Presentee. But by the Canon
Law Multa impe. diunt promovendum quae non de^iciunt. Gloss. in c 15. de Vit.
and Honest. Cleric. C. Christiano, f. 63.
more are allowed. In the Constitutions of Othobon, the Bishop is required
particularly to enquire into the Life and Conversation of him that is
presented; and afterward, that if a Bishop admits another who is guilty of the
same Fault for which he rejected the former, his Institution is declared null
and void. By the Canon Law, if a Bishop maliciously De Jure Pa^tron. c.
Pastoralis Officii.
refuses to admit a fit Person, he is bound to provide another Benefice for
him; but our Ecclesiastical Law, much better puts him upon the Proof of the
Cause of his Refusal. But if the Bishop does not examine him, the Canonists say
it is a Proof sufficient that he did it malitiose. If a Bishop once rejects
Gloss. in Can. and malitiose.
a Man for Insufficiency, he cannot afterward accept or admit of him; as was
adjudged in the Bishop of Hereford's Case. If a Man brings a Presentation Moor
26. El. 3^ 3 Cr. 27.
to a Benefice, the Bishop is not barely to examine him as to Life and
Abilities, but he must be satisfied that he is in Orders. How can he be
satisfied, unless the other produce them? How can he produce them, when it may
be they are lost? What is to be done in this Case? The Canon is express, That
Can. 39^
no Bishop shall Institute any to a Benefice, who has been Ordained by any
other Bishop (for if he Ordained him himself, he cannot after reject him,
because the Law supposes him to have examined and approved him) except he first
show unto him his Letters of Orders, and bring him a sufficient Testimony of
his former good Life and Behavior, if the Bishop shall require it, and lastly
shall appear upon due Examination to be worthy of the Ministry. But yet in
Palms and the Bishop of Peterborough's Case, it was adjudged that no Lapse did
accrue by the Clerk's not showing his Orders, for the Bishop upon his not
coming to him again, Collated after six Months. But the Court agreed, that the
3 Cr. 341. 1 Leon. 230.
Clerk ought to make Proof of his Orders; but they differed about the manner of
their Proof. Anderson said, the Bishop might give him his Oath. But if a Proof
were necessary, and the Clerk did not come to make Proof, it seems to me to be
a very hard Judgment.

II. The Bishop by the Ecclesiastical Law, is to visit his Diocese, and to take
an account of the Clergy Reginol 1. c. 5. 6, 7, 8, 10, Baluz. ad Reginon. p.
531.
how they behaye themselves in the Duties of their Places. By the eldest Canons
I can find, the Bishops Visitation is supposed as a thing employed in his
Office; whereby he is obliged to look after the good Estate of his whole
Diocese, and especially of the Clergy in it. In the time of Hubert Archbishop
of Canterbury, in the beginning of King John's time care Council. Angl. 2 Vol.
124.
is taken in the Canons then made, That Bishops should not be burdensome to the
Clergy in the Number of the Attendants in their Visitations; which then were
Parochial, and the Number allowed of 20 or 30 Horse, was too heavy for the
Clergy to bear. And therefore by degrees it was thought fit to turn that Charge
into a Certainty, which was the Original of Procurations. By the Fourth Council
of Toledo, the Bishop was to Visit his whole Diocese, Parochially, every Year.
The Gloss says, if there were occasion for it; and that c. 10. q. 1. Episcopum
Regino. l. 1. c. 7.
the Bishop may visit as often as he sees Cause; but if he be hindered, the
Canon says, he may send others (which is the original of the Archdeacons
Visitation) to see not only the Condition of the Churches, but the Lives of the
Ministers. The Council of Braca in the latter end of the Sixth Century, makes
this the first Canon, That all Council. Braca. 2. c. 1. 10 q. 1. Placait.
Bishops should Visit their Diocesses by Parishes, and there should first
examine the Clergy, and then the People; and in another Canon he was required to
receive only his Cathedraticum, i. e. a certain Sum in lieu of Entertainment;
which came to be settled by Prescription. The Council of Cavailon in France, A.
D. 831. fixed no Sum, but desired the Bishops Council. Cabil. 2. c. 14.
to be no Burdens to the Clergy in their Parochial Visitations. Lyndwood says
the Ancient Procuration here was a Day and Nights Entertainment; which after
came to De Censibus, f. 121. De Officio Vicarii c. quoniam V. Procurari.
be a customary Payment: But however it was paid, it is an evident Proof of the
Right of the Bishops Visitations by the ancient Ecclesiastical Law; and by such
a Custom as is allowable by the Rules of our Common Law.

III. There are some Faults, which make the Clergy liable to Deprivation by
Virtue of the Ecclesiastical Law, which was here received. I shall name only
some of them and conclude; these being sufficient for my present purpose.

I. Excessive Drinking. All drinking (ad Potus aequales) was absolutely
forbidden to Clergymen, on pain Council. Anglic. vol. 2. 140. 200.
of Suspension after Admonition; not only by a Synodical, but by a Provincial
Constitution under Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury. The Canon Law says in
that Case, ab Officio vel Beneficio suspendatur: But our Extr. de Vita and
Honestat. Cleric. c. 14.
Constitution is more severe, a Beneficio and Officio. The Council of Oxford
not only strictly forbids all Clergymen whatever tends to Gluttony and
Drunkenness; Prove. Constable. f. 61.
but it requires the Bishops to proceed strictly against those who are guilty,
according to the Form of the General Council, i. e. the Lateran 4. viz. by
Admonition first, and then Suspension. Lyndwood complains, that this was not so
much looked after as it should be, because it brought no Profit; I hope that
Reason will not hold among those who pretend to Reformation; which will be very
defective if it extend not to our Lives as well as our Doctrines: For there can
be no greater Reproach, than to see those loose and dissolute in their
Conversations, who think it their Honor to be Ministers of a Reformed Church.
It was a stinging Reflection upon our Church by the Archbishop of Spalato,
(who was no very strict Man himself) that he saw nothing Reformed among us but
our Doctrines. I hope there was more of Satyr than of Truth in it; for Epist.
ad Jos. Hall.
I do not question, but there were many then (as there are now) of Exemplary
Lives and unblameable Conversations; but if there be any others, it will be the
more shame not to proceed against them; since even before the Reformation, the
Canons were so strict and severe in this matter. In the Council at Westminster
in Henr. II. time, under Richard Archbishop of Canterbury, all Clergymen are
forbidden going into Taverns to eat or drink, unless upon Traveling; and the
Sanction of this Canon is, aut cesset, aut deponatur. The Council. Anglic. 2.
vol. 104.
same was forbidden in the Council at York, in the time of Richard I. in the
Council at London under Hubert, in the time of King John. And since the
Reformation, f. 122.
the same Canon is renewed, That no Ecclesiastical 126.
Persons shall at any time other than for their honest Necessities, resort to
any Taverns or Alehouses. And there have been Instances of the Severity of our
Ecclesiastical Can. 78.
Censures against Drunkenness in Clergymen.

In 8 Jac. Parker was deprived of his Benefice for Drunkenness, and moved for a
Prohibition, but it was denied him. Brownlow's Rep. f. 37.


In 9 Jac. another was deprived for the same Fault and the Judges at Common Law
allowed the Sentence to be good.

No doubt there are other Instances, but we had not known of these, if they had
not been preserved Id. f. 70.
in Books of Reports.

II. Incontinency. Lyndwood says, those who are proved to be guilty of it, are
ipso Jure privati; but Lyndw. f. 9.
he thinks a Declaratory Sentence of the Ecclesiastical Judges necessary for
the Execution of it. Since the Reformation, we have Instances of Deprivation
for 6. C. 14. Hob. 293. Owen 87. 1. Cr. 41. 789.
Adultery in our Law Books. One 12 Eliz. another 16 Eliz. a third 27 Eliz.
These are enough to show that the Ecclesiastical Law is allowed by the Judges
of Common Law, to continue in sufficient force for Deprivation in this Case.

III. Simony. Which is the Name given by the Ecclesiastical Law, to all
Contracts for Gain in the disposing or obtaining any Ecclesiastical Promotion
or Ministry. It is true, these do not come up to the Officium Curae animarum
est praecipuum ac spiritualissimum Dei Donum. Cajetan in Act. 8.
very Sin of Simon Magus, which related to the immediate Gifts of the Holy
Ghost; but because the whole Ministerial Office in all the Parts of it
(especially the Cure of Souls) is of a Spiritual Nature; and all Bargains are
so repugnant to the Design of it, therefore the Ecclesiastical Law has fixed
that detestable Name upon it: For, all contractus non gratuiti in these things
savor of turpe lucrum, and tend to bring in turpe Commercium into the Church;
which would really overturn the whole Design of that Ministry, which was
designed for the Salvation of Souls. And therefore it was necessary, that when
Persons had received (by the Favor of Temporal Princes and other Benefactors,
who were Founders of Churches) such Endowments as might encourage them in their
Function, that severe Laws should be made against any such sordid and
mischievous Contracts. And such there were here in England long before the
excellent Stat. of 31 Eliz. c. 6. although it seems the force of them was so
much worn out, as to make that Statute necessary for avoiding of Simony; which
is there explained to be Corruption in bestowing or getting Possession of
Promotions Ecclesiastical.

In a Council at London under Lanfranc in the Conqueror's time, Simony was
forbidden, under the Name Council. Anglic. 2 vol. p. 8. 10.
of Buying and Selling of Orders. And it could be nothing else before the
Churches Revenue was settled: But in the time of Henr. I. Ecclesiastical
Benefices were p. 35.
forbidden to be bought or sold, and it was Deprivation then to any Clergyman
to be convicted of it; and a Layman was to be out-lawed and excommunicated,
and deprived of his Right of Patronage. And this was done by a Provincial Synod
of that time.

In the Reign of Henr. II. it was decreed, that if p. 105. Constit. Prove. 152.
any Person received any Money for a Presentation, he was to be for ever
deprived of the Patronage of that Church; and this was not merely a Provincial
Constitution, but two Kings were present (Hen. 2. and his Son), and added their
Authority to it. This was not depriving a Man of his Freehold by a Canon, as a
learned Gentleman Parsons Counselor, Sect. 5.
calls it; for here was the greatest Authority, Temporal as well as
Ecclesiastical added to it.

But we are told, these Canons were of as little effect, as that of Othobon,
which made all Simoniacal Contracts void; but some of the most judicious
Lawyers have held, that Simony being contractus ex turpi causa, is Hob. 167.
void between Parties.

All that I aim at is to show, that by our old Ecclesiastical Law, Simoniaeus
incurred a Deprivation and Disability before the Stat. 31. Eliz. and therein I
have the Opinion of a very Learned Judge concurring 1 Rolls. 237
with me.

IV. Dilapidations. By which the Ecclesiastical Law understands any
considerable Impairing the Edifices, Joh. de Athon. in Constit. Othob. f. 55.
2. 35. E. 1.
Woods and Revenues belonging to Ecclesiastical Persons, by Virtue of their
Places. For it is the greatest Interest and Concernment of the Church to have
things preserved for the Good of Successors; and it is a part of common Justice
and Honesty so to do. And the Lord Coke positively affirms, that Dilapidation
is a good Cause of Deprivation. And it was so Resolved by the 11 R. 72. 3.
Inst. 204. Moor 917. Godbolt 279. Rolls 813. 29. E. 3. 16. 2 H. 4. 3. 11 H. 6.
20. 9 E. 4. 34.
Judges in the King's Bench, 12. Jac. Not by Virtue of any new Law or Statute,
but by the old Ecclesiastical Law. For which Coke refers to the Year-Books,
which not only show what the Ecclesiastical Law then was, but that it was
allowed by the Common Constit. Othob. f. 55. 2.
Law of England; and we are told, that is never given to change; but it may be
forced to it by a New Law, which cannot be pretended in this Case. And by the
old Constitutions here received, the Bishops are required to put the Clergy in
mind of keeping their Houses in sufficient Reparations, and if they do it not
within two Othob. f. 55. 2.
months, the Bishop is to take care, it be done out of the Profits of the
Benefice. By the Injunctions of Ed. VI. and Queen Elizabeth, all Persons having
Ecclesiastical Benefices are required to set apart the Fifth of their Revenue
to Repair their Houses; and afterward to maintain them in good condition.

V. Pluralities. By the Ecclesiastical Law, which Provinc. Constit. f. 59.
was here received, the actual receiving Institution into a second Benefice
made the first void ipso jure; and if he sought to keep both above a Month, the
second was void too. Lyndwood observes, that the Ecclesiastical Law had varied
in this matter. And it proceeded by these steps, (which are more than Lyndw.
mentions.) Lyndw. ib. V. sit content.


I. It was absolutely forbidden to have two Parishes, if there were more than
ten Inhabitants in them, because 10. q. 3. c. Unio.
no Man could do his Duty in both Places. And if any Bishop neglected the
Execution of it, he was to be excommunicated for two Months, and to be restored
Council. Tolet. 16. c. 5.
only upon Promise to see this Canon executed.

II. The Rule was allowed to hold, as to Cities, but an Exception was made as
to small and remote Places, where there was a greater Scarcity of Persons 21.
q. 1. c. 1. Clericus.
to supply them.

III. If a Man had two Benefices, it was left to his Ex. de Praebc. referente.
Choice, which he would have: but he could not hold both. This kind of Option
was allowed by the Ecclesiastical Law then in force.

IV. That if he takes a second Benefice; that Institution Ex. de Cleric.
Non-Resident. c. quia nonnulli.
is void, by the third Council of Lateran, under Alexander III.

V. That by taking a second the first is void; which Ex. de Praebc, de. Multa.
is the famous Canon of the fourth Lateran Council.

VI. That if he were not contented with the last, but endeavor to keep both,
he should be deprived of both. And this was the Ecclesiastical Law as it was
declared in our Provincial Constitutions. But the general Practice was to avoid
the former, according to the Lateran Council. These were very severe Canons,
but that one Clause of the Pope's dispensing Power made them to signify
little, unless it were to advance his Power and Revenue. For when the
Dispensing Power came to be owned, the Law had very little force; especially as
to the Consciences of Men. For if it were a Law of God, how could any man
dispense with it? unless it were as apparent that he had given a Power in some
Cases to Dispense, as that he had made the Law. Those Casuists are very hard
put to it, who make Residence Jure Divino, and yet say the Pope may dispense
with it; which at last comes only to this, that the Pope can authoritatively
declare the sufficiency of the Cause: so that the whole matter depends upon the
Cause; whether there can be any sufficient to excuse from Personal Residence.

It is agreed on all hands, that the habitual Neglect of a Charge we have taken
upon our selves, is an evil thing, and that it is so to heap up Preferments
merely for Riches, or Luxury, or Ambition; but the main Question in point of
Conscience is, what is a sufficient Cause to justify any Man's breaking so
reasonable and just a Rule as that of Residence is.

It cannot be denied, that the eldest Canons of the Church were so strict and
severe, that they made it unlawful for any man to go from that Church in which
he first received Orders; as well as to take another Benefice in it: and so for
any Bishop to be translated from that Place he was first Consecrated to; as
well as to hold another with it. But the Good of the Church being the main
Foundation of all the Rules of it; when that might be better promoted by a
Translation; it was by a tacit Consent looked on, as no unjust violation of its
Rules. The Question then is, whether the Churches Benefit may not in some Cases
make the Canons against Non-Residence as Dispensable, as those against
Translations? And the Resolution of it does not depend upon the voiding the
particular Obligation of the Incumbent to his Cure; but upon some more general
Reason with respect to the State of the Church. As being employed in the
Service of it, which requires a Persons having, (not a bare Competency for
Subsistence, but) a sufficiency to provide Necessaries for such Service. For
those seem to have very little Regard to the flourishing Condition of a Church,
who would confine the Sufficiency of a Subsistence, merely to the Necessaries
of Life. But it seems to be Reasonable, that Clergymen should have
Encouragement sufficient, not only to keep them above Contempt, but in some
respect agreeable to the more ample Provision of other Orders of Men. And by
God's own Appointment the Tribe of Levi did not fall short of any of the rest,
if it did not very much exceed the Proportion of others. We do not pretend to
the Privileges they had, only we observe from thence, that God himself did
appoint a plentiful Subsistence for those who attended upon his Service. And I
do not know, what there is Levitical, or Ceremonial, in that. I am sure, the
Duties of the Clergy now require a greater Freedom of Mind from the anxious
Cases of the World, than the Employments of the Priests and Levites under the
Law. But we need not go so far back; if the Church enjoyed all her Revenues as
entirely, as when the severe Canons against Pluralities were made, there would
not be such a Plea for them, as there is too much Cause for in some Places,
from the want of a competent Subsistence. But since that time, the Abundance of
Appropriations (since turned into Lay-Fees) has extremely lessened the
Churches Revenues, and have left us a great number of poor Vicarages, and
Arbitrary Cures, which would hardly have afforded a Maintenance for the
Nethinims under the Law, who were only to be Hewers of Wood, and Drawers of
Water. But this does not yet clear the Difficulty: for the Question is whether
the Subsistence of the Clergy can lawfully be improved by a Plurality of
Livings? Truly, I think this (if it be allowed in some Cases lawful) to be the
least desirable way of any; but in some Circumstances it is much more
excusable than in others. As when the Benefices are mean, when they lie near
each other, when great Care is taken to put in sufficient Curates with good
Allowance; when Persons take all Opportunities to do their Duties themselves,
and do not live at a distance from their Benefices in an idle and careless
manner. But for Men to put in Curates merely to satisfy the Law, and to mind
nothing of the Duties of their Places, is a horrible Scandal to Religion and
our Church, and that, which if not amended, may justly bring down the Wrath of
God upon us. For the loosest of all the Popish-Casuists, look upon this as a
very great Sin, even those who attributed to the Pope the highest Dispensing
Power in this Case.

But when the great Liberty of Dispensing had made the Ecclesiastical Laws in
great measure useless, then it was thought fit by our Lawmakers to Restrain
and Limit it by a Statute made 21. H. 8. wherein it is Enacted, That if any
Person or Persons having one Benefice with Cure of Souls, being of the yearly
value of eight pounds, or above, accept or take any other with Cure of Soul,
and be instituted, and inducted in possession of the same, that then, and
immediately after such Possession had thereof, the first Benefice shall be
adjudged to be void. And all Licenses and Dispensations to the contrary, are
declared to be void and of none effect.

This, one would have thought had been an effectual Remedy against all such
Pluralities and Dispensations to obtain them; and this, no doubt, was the
Primary Design of the Law; but then follow so many Proviso's of Qualified Men
to get Dispensations, as take off a great deal of the Force and Effect of this
Law. But then it ought well to be considered, whether such a License being
against the chief Design of a Law, can satisfy any Man in point of Conscience,
where there is not a just and sufficient Cause? For, if the Popes Dispensation,
with the supposed Plenitude of his Power, could not satisfy a Man's Conscience
without an antecedent Cause, as the Casuists resolve, much less can such
Proviso's do it.

It is the general Opinion of Divines, and Lawyers, says Less. l. 2. c. 34.
Dub. 27.
Lessius, that no Man is safe in Conscience by the Popes Dispensation for
Pluralities, unless there be a just Cause for it.

No Man can with a safe Conscience, take a Dispensation from the Pope for more
Benefices than one, merely for his Pan. c. dudum. 2. de Elect. Sylv. Benef. 4.
Sum. Angel. Ben. 35.
own Advantage, says Panormitan; and from him Sylvester and Sum. Angelica.

A Dispensation, says Card. Tolet, secures a Man as to the Law,; but as to
Conscience there must be a good Cause Tolet. Summa ^asim. 5. c. 82.
for it. And that is, when the Church has more benefit by it, than it would
have without it.

But the Pope's Dispensing Power went much farther in Point of Conscience in
their Opinion, than that which is settled among us by Act of Parliament. For it
is expressed in the Stat. 21 Hen. 8. that the Dispensation is intended to keep
Men from incurring the Danger, Penalty, and Forfeiture in this Statute
comprised. So that the most qualified Person can only say, that the Law does
not deprive him; but he can never plead that it can satisfy him in Point of
Conscience, unless there be some Cause for it, which is of more moment to the
Church, than a Man's sole and constant Attendance on a particular Cure is. But
this Stat. is more favorable to the Clergy, than the Canon Law was before, in
two Particulars.

1. In declaring that no simple Benefices, or mere Dignities, as the Canonists
call them, are comprehended under the Name of Benefices, having Cure of Souls,
viz. No Deanery, Arch-deaconry, Chancellorship, Treasurership, Chantership, or
Prebend in any Cathedral or Collegiate Church, nor Parsonage that has a Vicar
endowed, nor any Benefice perpetually appropriate. But all these before were
within the reach of the Canon Law, and a Dispensation was necessary for them:
Which shows, that this Law had a particular respect to the necessary Attendance
on Parochial Cures, and looked on other Dignities and Preferments in the
Church, as a sufficient Encouragement to extraordinary Merit.

2. That no notice is taken of Livings under the value of 8l. which I suppose
is that of 20 E. 1. for that of H. 8. was not till five Years after. But after
that Valuation, it was to be judged according to it, and not according to the
real Value, as the Judges declared 12 Car. I. in Cr. Car. f. 456.
the Case of Drake and Hill. Now here was a regard had to the Poorness of
Benefices, so far, that the Statute does not deprive the Incumbent upon taking
a second Living, if it be under 8 l. The Question that arises from hence is,
Whether such Persons are allowed to enjoy such Pluralities by Law; or only left
to the Ecclesiastical Law, as it was before? It is certain, that such are not
liable to the Penalty of this Law; but before C. 4. 75. Holland's Case.
any Person might be deprived by the Ecclesiastical Law for taking a second
Benefice without Dispensation, of what value soever; now here comes a Statute
which enacts, that all who take a second Benefice of 8l. without Qualification,
shall lose his legal Title to the first; but what if it be under? Shall he lose
it or not? Not, by this Law. But suppose the Ecclesiastical Law before makes
him liable to Deprivation; does the Statute alter the Law without any Words to
that purpose? The Bishop had a Power before to deprive, where is it taken away?
The Patron had a Right to present upon such Deprivation; how comes he to lose
it? And I take it for granted, that no antecedent Rights are taken away by
Implications; but there must be express Clauses to that purpose. So that I
conclude the ancient Ecclesiastical Law to be still in force, where it is not
taken away by Statute.

And thus my Brethren, I have laid before you the Authority and the Rules we
are to act by; I have endeavored to recommend to you, the most useful Parts of
your Duty; and I hope you will not give me occasion to show what Power we have
by the Ecclesiastical Law of this Realm to proceed against Offenders. Nothing
will be more uneasy to me, than to be forced to make use of any Severity
against you. And my Hearts desire is, that we may all sincerely and faithfully
discharge the Duties of our several Places, that the Blessing of God may be
upon us all; so that we may save our selves and those committed to our Charge.


