A DISCOURSE Concerning the POWER OF EXCOMMUNICATION IN A Christian Church* By
way of Appendix to the IRENICUM.

BY EDWARD STILLINGFLEET, Rector of Sutton in Bedfordshire.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Mortlock, at the sign of the Phoenix in St. Paul's
Churchyard, near the Little North-door. 1662.

A DISCOURSE Concerning The Power of Excommunication IN A Christian Church.
IT is a matter of daily observation and experience in the world,. 1.
how hard it is to keep the eyes of the understanding clear in its judgment of
things, when it is too far engaged in the dust of controversy. It being so
very difficult to well manage an impetuous pursuit after any opinion, nothing
being more common then to see men outrun their mark, and through the force of
their speed to be carried as far beyond it, as others in their opinion fall
short of it. There is, certainly, a kind of ebriety of the mind, as well as of
the body, which makes it so unstable and pendulous, that it often times reeles
from one extreme unto the quite contrary. This, as it is obvious in most eager
controvertists of all ages, so especially in such, who have discovered the
falsity of an opinion they were once confident of, which they think they can
never after run far enough from: So that while they start at an apparition
they so much dread, they run into those untroden paths, wherein they lose both
themselves and the truth they sought for.

. 2.
Thus we find it to be in the present controversy, for many out of their just
zeal against the extravagancies of those who scrued up Church power to so high
a peg, that it was thought to make perpetual dis^ord with the Commonwealth,
could never think themselves free from so great an inconvenience, till they had
melted down all Spiritual power into the Civil State, and dissolved the Church
into the Commonwealth. But that the world may see I have not been more forward
to assert the just power of the Magistrate in Ecclesiasticalls, as well as
Civills, then to defend the fundamental Rights of the Church, I have taken this
opportunity, more fully to explain and vindicate that part of the Churches
power, which lies in reference to offenders? It being the main thing struck at
by those who are the followers of that noted Physician, who handled the Church
so ill, as to deprive her of her expulsive faculty of Noxious humors, and so
left her under a miserere mei.

I shall therefore endeavor to give the Church her due, as well as Caesar
his,. 3.
by making good this following principle or hypothesis, upon which the whole
hinge of this controversy turns, viz. that the power of inflicting censures
upon offenders in a Christian Church, is a fundamental right, resulting from
the constitution of the Church, as a society by Jesus Christ, and that the seat
of this power is in those Officers of the Church, who have derived their power
originally from the Founder of this society, and act by virtue of the Laws of
it.

. 4.
For the clear stating of this controversy, it will be necessary to explain,
what that Power is, which I attribute to the Church, and in what notion the
Church is to be considered as it Exercises this Power. First, concerning the
proper notion of Power, by it I cannot see any thing else to be understood,
then a right of Governing, or ordering things which belong to a Society. And so
Power implies only a moral faculty in the person enjoying it, to take care ne
quid civitas detrimenti capiat, whereby it is evident that every well
constituted Society must suppose a Power within its self of ordering things
belonging to its welfare, or else it were impossible, either the being or the
rights and privileges of a Society could be long preserved. Power then in its
general and abstracted notion, does not necessarily import either mere
authority, or proper coaction, for these to any impartial judgment, will
appear to be rather the several modes whereby power is exercised, then any
proper ingredients of the specific nature of it; which in general, imports no
more then a right to Govern a constituted Society, but how that right shall be
exercised, must be resolved not from the notion of Power, but from the nature
and constitution of that particular Society in which it is lodged and inherent.

It appears then from hence to be a great mistake and abuse of well natured
readers,. 5.
when all Power is necessarily restrained, either to that which is properly
coercive, or to that which is merely arbitrary and only from consent. The
original of which mistake is, the stating the notion of Power from the use of
the Word, either in ancient Roman authors, or else in the Civil Laws, both
which are freely acknowledged to be strangers to the exercise of any other
Power, then that which is merely authoritative and persuasive, or that which is
Coactive and Penal. The ground of which is, because they were ignorant of any
other way of conveyance of Power, besides external force and arbitrary consent,
the one in those called Legal Societies or Civitates, the other Collegia and
hetaeriae. But to us that do acknowledge that God has a right of commanding
men to what duty he please himself, and appointing a Society upon what terms
best please him, and giving a Power to particular persons to govern that
Society, in what way shall tend most to advance the honor of such a Society,
may easily be made appear, that there is a kind of power neither properly
coactive nor merely arbitrary, viz. such a one as immediately results from
Divine institution, and does suppose consent to submit to it as a necessary
Duty in all the members of this Society.

This Power, it is evident,. 6.
is not merely arbitrary either in the Governors or members, for the
Governors derive their Power, or right of Governing from the institution of
Christ and are to be regulated by his Laws in the execution of it, and the
members, though their Consent be necessarily supposed, yet that consent is a
Duty in them, and that duty does imply their submission to the Rulers of this
Society: neither can this power be called coactive, in the sense it is
commonly taken, for coactive power, and external force are necessary correlates
to each other, but we suppose no such thing as a power of outward force to be
given to the Church as such, for that properly belongs to a Commonwealth. But
the power which I suppose to be lodged in the Church, is such a power as
depends upon a Law of a superior, giving right to Govern, to particular
persons over such a Society, and making it the Duty of all members of it to
submit unto it, upon no other penalties, then the exclusion of them from the
privileges, which that Society enjoys. So that supposing such a Society, as
the Church is, to be of Divine institution, and that Christ has appointed
Officers to rule it, it necessarily follows, that those Officers must derive
their Power, i. e. their right of Governing this Society, not merely from
consent and confederation of parties, but from that Divine institution, on
which the Society depends. The want of understanding the right notion of power
in the sense here set down, is certainiy the (...) of Erastianisme, and that
which has given occasion to so many to question any such thing as Power in the
Church, especially, when the more zealous then judicious defenders of it have
rather chosen to hang it upon some doubtful places of Scripture, then on the
very nature and constitution of the Christian Church, as a Society instituted
by Jesus Christ.

This being then the nature of power in general, it is, I suppose clear,. 7.
that an outward coactive force is not necessary in order to it; for if some
may have a right to govern, and others may be obliged to obedience to those
persons antecedently, to any civil constitution; then such persons have a just
power, to inflict censures upon such as transgress the rules of the society,
without any outward force. It is here very impertinent to dispute, what effects
such censures can have upon wilful persons without a coactive power; if I can
prove, that there is a right to inflict them in Church officers, and an
obligation to submit to them in all offenders, I am not to trouble my self with
the event of such things as depend upon divine institutions. I know it is the
great objection of the followers of Erastus, that Church censures are inflicted
upon persons unwilling to receive them, and therefore must imply external and
coactive force, which is repugnant to the nature of a Church. But this admits
(according to the principles here established) of a very easy solution; for I
deny not, that Churchpower goes upon consent, but then its very plain here was
an antecedent consent to submit to censures in the very entrance into this
Society, which is sufficient to denominate it a voluntary act of the persons
undergoing it; and my reason is this, every person entering into a Society,
parts with his own freedom and liberty, as to matters concerning the governing
of it, and professes submission to the rules and orders of it: now a man
having parted with his freedom already, cannot reassume it when he please,
for then he is under an obligation to stand to the Covenants made at his
entrance; and consequently his undergoing what shall be laid upon him by the
Laws of this society, must be supposed to be voluntary as depending upon his
consent at first entrance, which in all societies must be supposed to hold
still, else there would follow nothing but confusion in all Societies in the
world, if every man were at liberty to break his Covenants when any thing comes
to lie upon him according to the rules of the Society, which he out of some
private design would be unwilling to undergo. Thus much may serve to settle
aright the notion of power; the want of understanding which, has caused all
the confusion of this controversy.

The next thing is,. 8.
in what notion we are to consider the Church, which is made the subject of
this power? As to which we are to consider; This power either as to it is right
or in actu primo, or as to it is exercise, or in actu secundo: Now if we take
this power as to the fundamental right of it, then it belongs to that universal
Church of Christ, which subsists as a visible Society, by virtue of that Law of
Christ, which makes an owning the profession of Christianity the duty of all
Church members. If we consider this power in the exercise of it then (it being
impossible that the universal Church should perform the executive part of this
power relating to offenses) I suppose it lodged in that particular Society of
Christians, which are united together in one body in the community of the same
Government; but yet, so as, that the administration of this power, does not
belong to the body of the society considered complexly, but to those officers
in it, whose care and charge it is, to have a peculiar oversight and inspection
over the Church, and to redress all disorders in it. Thus the visive faculty is
fundamentally lodged in the soul, yet all exterior acts of sight are performed
by the eyes, which are the (...) Overseers of the body, as the other are of the
Church, so that the exercise and administration of this power, belongs to the
special Officers and Governors of the Church, none else being capable of
exercising this power of the Church as such, but they on whom it is settled by
the founder of the Church it is self.

. 9.
This Society of the Church may be again considered, either as subsisting
without any influence from the civil power, or as it is owned by, and
incorporated into a Christian state. I therefore demand, whether it be
absolutely necessary for the subsistence of this Christian society, to be
upheld by the civil power or no? And certainly none who consider the first and
purest ages of the Christian Church, can give any entertainment to the
Affirmative, because then the Church flourished in it is greatest purity, not
only when not upheld, but when most violently opposed by the civil power; if
so, then it is being united with the civil state is only accidental, as to the
constitution of a Church; and if this be only accidental, then it must be
supposed furnished with every thing requisite to it is well ordering,
antecedenty to any such union, and abstractly from it. For can we imagine our
Blessed Savior should institute a society, and leave it destitute of means to
uphold it is self, unless it fell into the hands of the civil power? or that he
left every thing tending thereto, merely to prudence, and the arbritrary
constitutions of the persons joining together in this society? Did our Savior
take care there should be a society, and not provide for means to uphold it?
Nay, it is evident, he not only appointed a society, but officers to rule it;
had those officers then a Right to Govern it or no, by virtue of Christ's
institution of them? if not, they were rather Bibuli than Caesares, Ciphers
than Consuls in the Church of God. If they had a power to govern, does not that
necessarily imply a Right to inflict censures on offenders? unless (...) will
suppose that either there can be no offenders in a Christian Church, or that
those offenders do not violate the Laws of the society, or there be some
prohibition for them to exercise their power over them (which is to give power
with one hand, and take it away with the other) or that this power cannot
extend so far as to exclude any from the privileges of the Church, which is
the thing to be discussed.

Having thus cleared our way,. 10.
I now come to the resolution of the question its self, in order to which I
shall endeavor to demonstrate with what evidence the subject is capable of
these following things. First that the Church is a peculiar Society in its own
Nature, distinct from the Commonwealth. Secondly, that the power of the Church
over its members does not arise from mere confederation or consent of parties.
Thirdly, That this power of the Church does extend to the exclusion of
offenders from the privileges of it. Fourthly, That the fundamental rights of
the Church do not escheat to the Commonwealth upon their being united in a
Christian State. If these principles be established, the Churches power will
stand upon them, as on a firm and unmovable basis.

I begin with the first.. 11.
That the Church is a peculiar Society in its own nature, distinct from the
Commonwealth, which I prove by these arguments.

1 Those Societies, which are capable of subsisting apart from each other, are
really, and in their own nature, distinct from one another, but so it is with
the Church and Commonwealth. For there can be no greater evidence of a real
distinction than mutual separation; and I think the proving the possibility of
the souls existing, separate from the body, is one of the strongest arguments
to prove it to be a substance really distinct from the body, to which it is
united; although we are often fain to go the other way to work, and to prove
possibility of separation from other arguments evincing the soul to be a
distinct substance; but the reason of that is for want of evidence as to the
state of separate souls, and their visible existence which is repugnant to the
immateriality of their natures. But now, as to the matter in hand, we have all
evidence desirable, for we are not put to prove possibil^^y of separation,
merely from the different constitution of the things united, but we have
evidence to sense of it, that the Churh has subsisted when it has been not
only separated from but persecuted by all civil power. It is with many men as
to the union of Church and State, as it is with others, as to the union of the
Soul and Body, when they observe how close the union is, and how much the Soul
makes use of the Animal Spirits in most of its operations, and how great a
sympathy there is between them, that, like Hyppocrates his Twins, they laugh
and weep 'together, they are shrewdly put to it, how to fancy the Soul to be
any thing else then a more vigorous mode of matter; so these observing how
close an Union and Dependence there is between the Church and State in a
Christian Commonwealth, and how much the Church is beholding to the civil
power in the Administration of its functions, are apt to think that the Church
is nothing but a higher mode of a Commonwealth, considered as Christian. But
when it is so evident that the Church has, and may subsist supposing it
abstracted from all Civil Power, it may be a sufficient demonstration that
however near they may be when united, yet they are really and in their own
nature, distinct from each other. Which was the thing to be proved.

. 12.
2 Those are distinct societies, which have every thing distinct in their nature
from each other, which belong to the constitution or government of them; but
this is evident, as to the Church and Commonwealth, which will appear, because
their Charter is distinct, or that which gives them their being as a society:
Civil societies are founded upon the necessity of particular men's parting with
their peculiar Rights, for the preservation of themselves, which was the
impulsive cause of their entering into societies, but that which actually speaks
them to be a society, is the mutual consent of the several parties joining
together, whereby they make themselves to be one Body; and to have one common
interest. Apud. Agust. de Civit. de l. 2. c. 21.
So Cicero de Repub. defines populus, to be caetus multitudinis, juris
consensu et utilitatis communione sociatus. There is no doubt, but Gods general
providence, is as evidently seen in bringing the World into societies and
making them live under Government, as in disposing all particular events which
happen in those societies; but yet the way, which providence uses in the
constitution of these societies, is by inclining men to consent to associate
for their mutual benefit and advantage: So that natural reason consulting for
the good of mankind, as to those Rights which men enjoy in common with each
other, was the main foundation upon which all civil societies were erected. We
find no positive Law enacting the being of civil societies, because nature
it is self would prompt men for their own conveniences to enter into them. But
the ground and foundation of that society, which we call a Church, is a matter
which natural reason and common notions can never reach to; and therefore an
associating for the preserving of such, may be a Philosophical Society, but a
Christian it cannot be: And that would make a Christian Church to be nothing
else but a society of Essens or an (...) of Pythagorians, who do either not
understand or not consider whereon this Christian society is founded; for it is
evident they look on it as a merely voluntary thing, that is not at all settled
by any Divine positive Law.

The truth is,. 13.
there is no principle more consistent with the opinion of those who deny any
Church power in a Christian state, then this is, and it is that, which every
one, who will make good his ground must be driven to; for it is evident, that
in matters merely voluntary, and depending only on consideration, such things
being liable to a Magistrates power, there can be no plea from mutual consent
to justify any opposition to supreme authority in a Commonwealth. But then,
how such persons can be Christians, when the Magistrates would have them to
be otherwise, I cannot understand; nor how the primitive Martyrs were any
other then a company of Fools or Madmen, who would hazard their lives, for that
which was a mere arbritrary thing, and which they had no necessary obligation
upon them to profess. Mistake me not, I speak not here of mere acts of
discipline, but of the duty of outward professing Christianity; if this be a
duty, then a Christian society is settled by a positive Law, if it be not a
duty, then they are fools who suffer for it: So that this question resolved
into it is principles, leads us higher than we think for, and the main thing in
debate must be, whether there be an obligation upon conscience for men to
associate in the profession of Christianity or no? If there be, then the
Church, which is nothing else but such an association, is established upon a
positive Law of Christ; if there be not, then those inconveniences follow,
which are already mentioned.

. 14.
We are told indeed by the Leviathan with confidence enough, that no precepts
of the Gospel are Law, till enacted by civil authority; but it is little
wonder, that he, who thinks an immaterial substance implies a contradiction,
should think as much of calling any thing a Law, but what has a civil
sanction. But I suppose all those, who dare freely own a supreme and infinite
essence to have been the Creator, and to be the ruler of the World, will
acknowledge his Power to oblige conscience, without being beholding to his own
creature to enact his Laws, that men might be bound to obey them. Was the
great God fain to be beholding to the civil authority he had over the Jewish
Commonwealth (their government being a (...)) to make his Laws obligatory to
the consciences of the Jews? What, had not they their beings from God? and can
there be any greater ground of obligation to obedience, than from thence?
Whence comes civil power to have any Right to oblige men more, than God,
considered as Governor of the World, can have? Can there be indeed no other
Laws according to the Leviathans Hypothesis, but only the Law of nature and
civil Laws? But I pray whence comes the obligation to either of these, that
these are not as arbitrary, as all other agreements are? And is it not as
strong a dictate of nature as any can be (supposing that there is a God) that
a creature which receives it is being from another, should be bound to obey
him, not only in the resultancies of his own nature, but with the arbitrary
constitutions of his will: Was Adam bound to obey God or no, as to that
positive precept of eating the forbiden fruit, if no civil Sanction had been
added to that Law? The truth is, such Hypotheses as these are, when they are
followed close home, will be found to Kennel in that black Den, from whence
they are loath to be thought to have proceeded.

. 15.
And now, supposing, that every full Declaration of the Will of Christ, as to
any positive institution, has the force and power of a Law upon the
consciences of all, to whom it is sufficiently proposed: I proceed to make
appear, that such a divine positive Law there is, for the existence of a
Church, as a visible body and society in the World; by which I am far from
meaning such a conspicuous society, that must continue in a perpetual
visibility in the same place; I find not the least intimation of any such
thing in Scripture; but that there shall always be some where or other, in
the world, a society owning and professing Christianity, may be easily deduced
from thence; and especially on this account, that our Savior has required
this, as one of the conditions in order to eternal felicity, that all those who
believe in their hearts, that Jesus is the Christ, must likewise confess him
with their mouths to the world: and therefore, as long as there are men to
believe in Christ, there must be men that will not be ashamed to associate,
on the account of the Doctrine he has promulged to the world. That one Phrase
in the New Testament, so frequently used by our blessed Savior, of the
Kingdom of Heaven (importing a Gospel state) does evidently declare a society,
which was constituted by him, on the principles of the Gospel Covenant.
Wherefore should our Savior call Disciples, and make Apostles, and send them
abroad with full commission to gather and initiate Disciples by Baptism; did
he not intend a visible society for his Church? Had it not been enough for men
to have cordially believed the truth of the Gospel, but they must be entered
in a solemn visible way, and join in participation of visible Symbols of bread
and wine, but that our Savior required external profession and society in the
Gospel as a necessary duty, in order to obtaining the privileges conveyed by
his Magna Charta in the Gospel. I would fain know, by what argument we can
prove, that any humane Legislator, did ever intend a Commonwealth to be
governed according to his mode, by which we cannot prove that Christ by a
positive Law, did command such a society, as should be governed in a visible
manner, as other societies are? Did he not appoint officers himself in the
Church, and that of many ranks and degrees? Did he not invest those officers
with authority to rule his Church? Is it not laid as a charge on them, to take
heed to that flock over which God had made them Overseers? Are there not Rules
laid down for the peculiar exercise of their Government over the Church in all
the parts of it? Were not these officers admitted into their function by a most
solemn visible rite of imposition of hands? And are all these solemn
transactions a mere piece of sacred Pageantry? and they will appear to be
little more, if the Society of the Church be a mere arbitrary thing, depending
only upon consent and confederation, and not subsisting by virtue of any
Charter from Christ, or some positive Law, requiring all Christians to join in
Church Society together.

But if now from hence it appears (as certainly it cannot but appear) that this
Society of the Church does subsist by virtue of a Divine positive Law,. 16.
then it must of necessity be distinct from any civil Society, and that on
these accounts, First because there is an antecedent obligation on conscience
to associate on the account of Christianity, whether Humane Laws prohibit or
command it. From whence, of necessity it follows, that the constitution of the
Church is really different from that of the Commonwealth; because whether the
Commonwealth be for, or against this Society, all that own ir are bound to
profess it openly, and declare themselves members of it. Whereas were the
Church and Commonwealth really and formally the same, all obligation to Church
Society would arise merely from the Legislative Power of the Commonwealth. But
now there being a Divine Law, binding in conscience, whose obligation cannot
be superseded by any Humane Law, it is plain and evident, where are such
vastly different obligations, there are different Powers; and in this sense I
know no incongruity in admitting imperium in imperio, if by it we understand
no external coactive power, but an internal power laying obligation on
conscience, distinct from the power lodged in a Commonwealth considered as
such. An outward coactive power was always disowned by Christ, but certainly
not an internal Power over Conscience to oblige all his Disciples to what
Duties he thought fit.

Secondly I argue from those Officers, whose rights to govern this Society are
founded on that Charter, whereby the Society its self subsists. Now I would
willingly know why, when our Savior disowned all outward power in the world,
yet he should constitute a Society and appoint Officers in it, did he not
intend a peculiar distinct Society from the other Societies of the world. And
therefore the argument frequently used against Church Power, because it has no
outward force with it by the constitution of Christ, is a strong argument to
me of the peculiarity of a Christian Society from a Commonwealth, because
Christ so instituted it, as not to have it Ruled at first by any outward force
or power. When Christ says his Kingdom was not of this world; he implies,
that he had a Society that was governed by his Laws in the world, yet distinct
from all mundane Societies: had not our Savior intended his Church to have
been a peculiar Society, distinct from a Commonwealth, why our Savior should
interdict the Apostles the use of a civil coactive power: Or why instead of
sending abroad Apostles to preach the Gospel, he did not employ the Governors
of Commonwealths to have enforced Christianity by Laws and temporal edicts,
and the several Magistrates to have empowered several persons under them to
preach the Gospel in their several Territories? And can any thing be more
plain, by our Saviors taking a contrary course, then that he intended a
Church Society to be distinct from civil, and the power belonging to it, (as
well as the Officers) to be of a different nature from that which is settled
in a Commonwealth. I here suppose, that Christ has by a positive Law
established the Government of his Church upon Officers of his own appointment;
which I have largely proved elsewhere, Iren. p. 2. c. 3.
and therefore suppose it now. Thirdly, I argue from the peculiar rights
belonging to these Societies. For if every one born in the Commonwealth, have
not thereby a right to the privileges of the Church; nor every one by being of
the Church, any right to the benefits of the Commonwealth; it must necessarily
follow, that these are distinct from one another. If any one by being of the
Commonwealth, has right to Church privileges, then every one born in a
Commonwealth may challenge a right to the Lords Supper without Baptism or open
professing Christianity, which I cannot think any will be very ready to grant.
Now there being by Divine appointment the several rights of Baptism and the
Lords Supper, as peculiar badges of the Church as a visible Society, it is
evident, Christ did intend it a Society distinct from the Commonwealth.

Fourthly, I argue from the different ends of these societies, a Commonwealth
is constituted for civil ends, and the Church for spiritual: for ends are to be
judged by the primary constitution, but now it is plain, the end of civil
society is for preservation of men's rights as men (therefore Magistracy is
called by St. Peter (...)) but this Christian society does not respect men
under the connotation of men but as Christians. The answer given to this is
very short, and insufficient when it is said, that every man in a
Commonwealth, is to act upon spiritual accounts and ends: For there is a great
deal of difference between Christianities having an influence upon men's actings
in a Commonwealth, and making a society the same with a Commonwealth. To
argue therefore from one to another, is a shortness of discourse I cannot but
wonder at: unless it could be proved, that Christianity aimed at nothing else
but regulating men in the affairs of a Commonwealth, which is a task I
suppose will not be undertaken.

Lastly, I argue from the peculiar offenses against this society, which are, or
may be distinct from those against a Commonwealth, I deny not, but most times
they are the same; but frequently they differ, and when they are the same, yet
the consideration of them is different in the Church and Commonwealth, for
which I shall suppose the six arguments produced in the last Chapter of the
first part to stand good, Iren. p. 1. c. 8.. 4.
which will strongly hold to excommunication in the Christian Church, though
there produced only for the Jewish. I would fain know what is to be done in
many offenses, known to be against the Laws of Christ, and which tend to the
dishonor of the Christian society, which the civil and Municipal Laws, either
do not, or may not take cognizance of? Thus much may serve, as I think to make
evident, that the Church in it is own nature is a peculiar society distinct from
a Commonwealth, which was the first proposition to be proved.

The second is, That the power of the Church over it is members in case of
offenses,. 17.
does not arise merely from confederation and consent, though it does suppose
it. This Church power may be considered two ways. Either, first, as it
implies the right in some of inflicting censures. Or secondly, as it implies in
others, the duty of submitting to censures inflicted; now as to both these, I
shall prove that their original is higher than mere confederation.

1. As to the right of inflicting censures, on these accounts. First, what ever
society does subsist by virtue of a divine constitution, does by virtue thereof
derive all power for it is preservation, in peace, unity, and purity; but it is
plain, that a power of censuring offenders, is necessary for the Churches
preservation in peace and purity; and it is already proved, that the Church
has it is Charter from Christ, and therefore from him it has a power to
inflict punishments on offenders, suitable to the nature of the society they
are of. I am very prone to think that the ground of all the mistakes on this
subject have risen from hence, that some, imprudently enough, have fixed the
original of this power on some ambiguous places of Scripture, which may, and it
may be, ought to be taken in a different sense; and their adversaries,
finding those places weak and insufficient proofs of such a power, have from
thence rejected any such kind of power at all; But certainly if we should
reject every truth that is weakly proved by some who have undertaken it, I know
no opinion would bid so fair for acceptance as Scepticisme, and that in
reference to many weighty and important truths; for how weakly have some proved
the existence of a Deity, the immortality of the soul, and the truth of the
Scriptures, by such arguments, that if it were enough to overthrow an opinion
to be able to answer some arguments brought for it, Atheism it is self would
become plausible. It can be then no evidence, that a thing is not true,
because some arguments will not prove it; and truly, as to the matter in hand,
I am fully of the opinion of the excellent H. Grotius, in Luke 6.22
speaking of excommunication in the Christian Church: Neque ad eam rem
peculiare praeceptum desideratur, cum ecclesiae caetu, a Christo semel
constituto, omnia illa imperata censeri debent, sine quibus ejus caetus puritas
retineri non potest. And therefore men spend needless pains to prove an
institution of this power by some positive precept, when Christ's founding his
Church, as a particular society, is sufficient proof he has endowed it with
this fundamental Right, without which the society, were arena sine calce, a
company of persons without any common tie of union among them; for if there be
any such union, it must depend on some conditions, to be performed by the
members of that society, which how could they require from them, if they have
not power to exclude them upon nonperformance?

2. I prove the divine original of this power from the special appointment and
designation of particular officers by Jesus Christ, for the ruling this
society. Now I say, that Law which provides there shall be officers to govern,
does give them power to govern, suitable to the nature of their society: Either
then you must deny, that Christ has by an unalterable institution appointed a
Gospel Ministry, or that this Ministry has no Power in the Church, or that
their Power extends not to excommunication. The first I have already proved,
the second follows from their appointment, for by all the titles given to
Church Officers in Scripture; it appears they had a Power over the Church, (as
(...).) all which as you well know, do import a right to govern the Society
over which they are set. And that this power should not extend to a Power to
exclude, convict offenders, seems very strange, when no other punishment can
be more suitable to the nature of the Society than this is; which is a
debarring him from the privileges of that Society, which the offender has so
much dishonored. Can there be any punishment less imagined toward
contumacious offenders then this is, or that carries in it less of outward and
coactive force, it implying nothing but what the offender himself freely
yielded to at his entrance into this Society?

All that I can find replied by any of the Adversaryes of the opinion I here
assert,. 18.
to the argument drawn from the institution and titles of the Officers of the
Church, is, that all those titles which are given to the Ministers of the
Gospel in the New Testament, that do import rule and government, are all to be
taken in a spiritual sense, as they are Christ's Ministers and Ambassadors to
preach his Word and declare his will to his Church. So that all power such
persons conceive to lie in those titles, is only Doctrinal and declarative;
but how true that is, let any one judge, that considers these things.

1. That there was certainly a power of discipline then in the Churches
constituted by the Apostles, which is most evident not only from the passages
relating to offenders in Saint Paul's Epistles, especially to the Corinthians
and Thessalonians, but from the continued practice of succeeding ages,
manifested by Tertullian, Cyprian, and many others. There being then a power of
discipline in Apostolical Churches, there was a necessity it should be
administered by some persons who had the care of those Churches; and who were
they but the several Pastors of them? It being then evident that there was such
a power, does it not stand to common sense it should be employed in such titles
which in their natural importance do signify a right to govern, as the names
of Pastors and Rulers do?

2. There is a diversity in Scripture made between Pastors and Teachers, Ephesians.
4.11. Though this may not (as it does not) imply a necessity of two distinct
offices in the Church, yet it does a different respect and connotation in the
same person* and so imports that ruling carries in it somewhat more then mere
teaching, and so the power employed in Pastors to be more then merely doctrinal,
which is all I contend for, viz. A right to govern the flock committed to their
charge.

3. What possible difference can be assigned between the Elders that rule well,
and those which labor in Word and Doctrine, (1 Timothy 5.17.) if all their ruling
were merely laboring in the Word and Doctrine? and all their governing nothing
but teaching? I intend not to prove an office of rulers distinct from teachers
from hence (which I know neither this place, nor any other will do) but that
the formal conception of ruling, is different from that of teaching.

4. I argue from the Analogy between the primitive Churches and the Synagogues,
that as many of the names were taken from thence where they carried a power of
Discipline with them, so they must do in some proportion in the Church; or it
were not easy understanding them. It is most certain the Presbyters of the
Synagogue had a power of ruling; and can you conceive the Bishops and
Presbyters of the Church had none, when the Societies were much of the same
constitution, and the Government of the one was transcribed from the other, as
has been already largely proved?

5. The acts attributed to Pastors in Scripture, imply a power of Governing,
distinct from mere Teaching; such are (...), used for a right to govern, Matthew.
2.6. Revel. 12.5. -- 19.15. which word is attributed to Pastors of Churches in
reference to their flocks. Acts 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. and (...), is applied to
Ministers, when they are so frequently called (...), which notes praesidentiam
eum potestate; for Hesychius renders is by (...); and the (...) at Athens had
certainly a power of Government in them.

6. The very word (...), is attributed to those who have oversight of
Churches, 1 Cor. 12.8. by which it is certainly evident, that a power more then
doctrinal is understood, as that it could not then be understood of a power
merely civil. And this I suppose may suffice to vindicate this argument from
the titles of Church Officers in the New Testament, that they are not
insignificant things, but the persons who enjoyed them had a right to govern
the Society over which the Holy Ghost has made them Overseers.

. 19.
3. I argue that Church power arises not merely from consent, because the
Church may exercise her power on such who have not actually confederated with
her; which is in admitting members into the Church: For if the Church Officers
have power to judge whether persons are fit to be admitted, they have power to
exclude from admission such whom they judge unfit, and so their power is
exercised on those who are not confederated. To this it may be answered, That
the consent to be judged, gives the Church power over the person suing for
admission. I grant it does, as to that particular person, but the right in
general of judging concerning admission, does argue an antecedent power to an
actual confederation. For I will suppose that Christ should now appoint some
Officers to found a Church, and gather a Society of Christians together, where
there has been none before: I now ask, Whether these Officers have power to
admit any into the Church or no? This I suppose cannot be denied, for to what
end else were they appointed? If it be granted they have power to admit
persons, and thereby make a Church, then they had power antecedently to any
confederation; for the confederation was subsequent to their admission; and
therefore they who had power to admit, could not derive their power from
confederation. This argument, to me, puts the case out of dispute, that all
Church Power cannot arise from mere confederation.

And that which further evidenceth that the power of the Church does not arise
from mere consent, is that Deed of Gift whereby our Blessed Savior did confer
the Power of the Keys on the Apostle Peter, as the representative in that
action of the whole College of the Apostles and Governors of the Church, of
which power all the Apostles were actually infeoffed, John 20.23. By which
Power of the Keys is certainly meant some administration in the Church, which
does respect it as a visible society, in which sense the Church is so
frequently called, as in that place, the Kingdom of Heaven; Matthew. 16.19.
and in all probability the administration intended here by the Power of the
Keys, is that we are now discoursing of, viz. the Power of Admission into the
Church of Christ in order to the pardon of the sins of all penitent believers,
and the shutting out of such who were manifestly unworthy of so holy a
communion. So that the Power of the Keys does not primarily respect exclusion
out of the Church, and receiving into it again upon absolution, but it chiefly
respects the Power of Admission into the Church, though by way of connotation
and Analogy of reason it will carry the other along with it. For if the
Apostles as Governors of the Church were invested with a power of judging of
men's fitness for admission into the Church as members of it, it stands to the
highest reason that they should have thereby likewise a power conveyed to them,
of excluding such as are unworthy after their admission, to maintain communion
with the Church. So that this interpretation of the power of the Keys, is far
from invalidating the power of the Church, as to its censuring offenders; all
that it pretends to, is only giving a more natural and genuine sense of the
power of the Keys, which will appear so to be, if we consider these things. 1.
That this power was given to Saint Peter before any Christian Church was
actually formed, which (as I have elsewhere made manifest) was not done till
after Christ's resurrection; Iren. p. 2. ch 5.. 5. p. 212.
when Christ had given the Apostles their commission to go preach and baptize,
etc. Matthew. 28.19. Is it not therefore far more rational that the power of the
Keys here given, should respect the founding of a Church and admission into
it, then ejection out of it (before it was in being) and receiving into it
again? And this we find likewise remarkably fulfilled in the person of the
Apostle Peter, who opened the door of admission into the Christian Church, both
to Jews and Gentiles. So the Jews by his Sermon at Pentecost, Acts 2.41.
when about 3000. souls were brought into the Church of Christ. So the
Gentiles, as is most evident in the story of Cornelius, Acts 10.28. who was the
first fruits of the Gentiles. So that if we should yield so far to the great
inhancers of Saint Peter's power, that something was intended peculiar to his
person in the Keys given him by our Savior, we hereby see how rationally it
may be understood without the least advantage to the extravagant pretensions of
Saint Peter's pretended successors. 2. The pardon of sin in Scripture is most
annexed to Baptism and Admission into the Church, and thence it seems evident
that the loosing of sin should be by admitting into the Church by Baptism, 1
Pet. 3.21. Tit. 3.5.
in the same sense by which Baptism is said to save us, and it is called the
washing of regeneration, respecting the spiritual advantages which come by
admission into the Church of Christ; and so they are said to have their sins
bound upon them, who continue refractory in their sins, Acts 8.33.
as Simon Magus is said to be in the bonds of iniquity. 3. The Metaphor of the
Keys referrs most to admission into the house, and excluding out of it, rather
then ejecting any out of it, and re-admitting them. Thus when Eliakim is said
to have the Keys of the house of David, it was in regard of his power to open
and shut upon whom he pleased. Isa. 22.20. Cypr. Ep. 73. sect. 6.
And thus Cyprian, as our learned Mr. Thorndike observes, understands the power
of binding and loosing in this sense, in his Epistle to John, where speaking of
the remission of sins in Baptism, he brings these very words of our Savior to
Peter as the evidence of it; That what he should loose on earth should be
loosed in heaven; and concludes with this sentence. Vnde intelligimus non nisi
in Ecclesia praepositis and in Evangelica lege ac Dominica ordinati^ne fundatis
licere baptizare, and remissam peccatorum dare; foris autem nec ligari aliquid
posse nec solvi, ubi non sit qui ligare possit aut solvere. That which I now
infer from this discourse is, that the power of the Church does not arise from
mere consent and confederation, both because this power does respect those who
have not actually consented to it, and because it is settled upon the
Governors of the Church by divine institution. Thus it appears that the right
of inflicting censures does not result merely ex confederata disciplina, which
was the thing to be proved.

The like evidence may be given,. 20.
for the duty of submitting to penalties or Church Censures in the members of
the Church:

1. Every person who enters this Society, is bound to consent, before he does
it, because of the obligation lying upon conscience to an open profession of
Christianity, presently upon conviction of the understanding of the truth and
certainty of Christian Religion. For when once the mind of any rational man is
so far wrought upon by the influence of the Divine Spirit, as to discover the
most rational and undoubted evidences which there are of the truth of
Christianity, he is presently obliged to profess Christ openly, to worship him
solemnly, to assemble with others for instruction and participation of
Gospel Ordinances; and thence it follows that there is an antecedent obligation
upon conscience to associate with others, and consequently to consent to be
governed by the rulers of the Society which he enters into. So that this
submission to the power of Church Officers in the exercise of Discipline upon
offenders, is employed in the very conditions of Christianity, and the solemn
professing and undertaking of it. 2. It were impossible any Society should be
upheld, if it be not laid by the founder of the Society as the necessary duty
of all members to undergo the penalties which shall be inflicted by those who
have the care of governing that Society, so they be not contrary to the Laws,
nature, and constitution of it. Else there would be no provision made for
preventing divisions and confusions which will happen upon any breach made upon
the Laws of the Society. Now this obligation to submission to censures, does
speak something antecedently to the confederation, although the expression of
it lies in the confederation its self. By this I hope we have made it evident
that it is nothing else but a mistake in those otherwise learned persons, who
make the power of censures in the Christian-Church to be nothing else but a lex
cenfederatae disciplinae, whereas this power has been made appear to be
derived from a higher original then the mere arbitrary consent of the several
members of the Church associating together: And how far the examples of the
Synagogues under the Law, are from reaching that of Christian Churches in
reference to this, because in these the power is conveyed by the founder of the
Society, and not left to any arbitrary Constitutions, as it was among the Jews
in their Synagogues. It cannot be denied but consent is supposed, and
confederation necessary, in order to Church power, but that is rather in regard
of the exercise, then the original of it; for although I affirm the original of
this power to be of Divine institution, yet in order to the exercise of it in
reference to particular persons (who are not mentioned in the charter of the
power its self) it is necessary that the persons on whom it is exerted, should
declare their consent and submission either by words or actions, to the rules
and orders of this Society.

. 21.
Having now proved that the power of the Church does not arise from mere consent
of parties, the next grand inquiry is concerning the extent of this power,
Whether it does reach so far as to excommunication? For some men who will not
seem wholly to deny all power in the Church over offenders, nor that the Church
does subsist by divine institution, yet do wholly deny any such power as that
of excommunication, and seem rather to say that Church officers may far more
congruously to their office inflict any other mulct upon offenders, then
exclude them from participation of Communion with others in the Ordinances and
Sacraments of the Gospel: In order therefore to the clearing of this, I come to
the third Proposition.

That the power which Christ has given to the officers of his Church, does
extend to the exclusion of contumacious offenders from the privileges which
this Society enjoyes. In these terms I rather choose to fix it, then in those
crude expressions, wherein Erastus and some of his followers would state the
question, and some of their imprudent adversaries have accepted it, viz.
Whether Church Officers have power to exclude any from the Eucharist, Ob
moralem impuritatem? And the reasons why I wave those terms, are,

1. I must confess my self yet unsatisfied as to any convincing argument,
whereby it can be proved that any were denied admission to the Lords Supper,
who were admitted to all other parts of Church-society, and owned as members in
them. I cannot yet see any particular reason drawn from the nature of the Lords
Supper above all other parts of divine worship, which should confine the
censures of the Church merely to that ordinance; and so to make the Eucharist
bear the same office in the body of the Church, which our new Anatomists tell
us the parenchyme of the liver does in the natural body, viz. to be colum
sanguinis, to serve as a kind of strainer to separate the more gross and
faeculent parts of the blood from the more pure and spirituous; so the Lords
Supper to strain out the more impure members of the Church from the more Holy
and Spiritual. My judgment then is, that excommunication relates immediately
to the cutting a person off from communion with the Churches visible society,
constituted upon the ends it is; but because communion is not visibly discerned
but in administration and participation of Gospel ordinances, therefore
exclusion does chiefly refer to these, and because the Lords Supper is one of
the highest privileges which the Church enjoyes, therefore it stands to reason
that censures should begin there. And in that sense suspension from the Lords
Supper of persons apparently unworthy, may be embraced as a prudent, lawful and
convenient abatement of the greater penalty of excommunication, and so to stand
on the same general grounds that the other does; for qui potest majus, potest
etiam minus, which will hold as well in moral as natural power, if there be no
prohibition to the contrary, nor peculiar reason as to the one more then to the
other.

2. I dislike the terms ob moralem impuritatem, on this Erastus* and from him
by others as the controversy was managed concerning excommunication among the
Jews, viz. whether it were merely because of ceremonial, or else likewise
because of moral impurity. As to which I must ingenuously acknowledge Erastus
has very much the advantage of his adversaries, clearly proving that no
persons under the Law were excluded the Temple-worship because of moral
impurity. But then withal I think he has gained little advantage to his cause
by the great and successful pains he has taken in the proving of that; my
reason is, because the Temple-worship or the sacrifices under the Law were in
some sense propitiatory, as they were the adumbrations of that grand sacrifice
which was to be offered up for the appeasing of Gods wrath, viz. the blood of
Christ; therefore to have excluded any from participation of them, had been to
exclude them from the visible way of obtaining pardon of sin (which was not to
be had without shedding of blood, as the Apostle tells us) and from testifying
their faith toward God, Heb. 9.22.
and repentance from dead works. But now under the Gospel those ordinances,
which suppose admission into the Church by baptism, do thereby suppose an
alsufficient sacrifice offered for the expiation of sin, and consequently the
subsequent privileges do not immediately relate to the obtaining of that, but
a grateful comemmoration of the death of Christ, and a celebration of the
infinite mercy and goodness of God in the way of redemption found out by the
death of his Son. And therefore it stands to great reason that such persons,
who by their profane and unworthy lives dishonor so holy a profession, should
not be owned to be as good and sound members of the society founded on so
sacred a foundation, as the most Christian and religious persons. To this, I
know nothing can be objected, but that first, the passover was commemorative
among the Jews; and secondly, That the privileges of that people were then
very great above other people, and therefore if God had intended any such thing
as excommunication among his people, it would have been in use then. To these I
answer.

1. I grant the passover was commemorative as to the occasion of its
institution; but then it was withal typical and annunciative of that Lamb of
God who was to take away the sins of the world, and therefore no person who
desired expiation of sins, was to be debard from it; but the Lords Supper under
the Gospel has nothing in it propitiatory, but is intended as a Feast upon a
sacrifice and a Federal rite, as has been fully cleared by a very learned
person in his discourse about the true notion of the Lords Supper.

2. I grant the Jews had very many privileges above other Nations: Nay so far,
that the whole body of the people were looked upon as Gods chosen, and peculiar
and holy people; and from thence I justly infer that whatever exclusion was
among the people of the Jews from their society, will far better hold as an
argument for excommunication under the Christian Church, then if it had been a
mere debarring from their Levitical Worship. And that I should far sooner
insist upon, from the reason assigned, as the ground of excommunication, then
the other infirm and profligated argument; and so the exclusion out of the Camp
of Israel and the Cerith among the Jews (whatever we understand by it) may a
pari hold to a ground of exclusion from the Christian Society: In imitation of
which, I rather suppose that exclusion out of the Synagogues was after taken
up, rather then as a mere Out-lawry, when they were deprived of Civil power.

The question then being thus clearly stated, it amounts to this, Whether under
the Gospel,. 22.
there be any power in the Officers of the Church by virtue of divine
institution to exclude any offenders out of the Christian society, for
transgressing the Laws of it? And according to our former propositions, I
suppose it will be sufficient to prove that power to be of divine institution,
if I prove it to be fundamentally and intrinsecally resident in the society its
self. For what ever does immediately result from the society it self, must have
the same original which the subject has, because this has the nature of an
inseparable property resulting from its constitution. For the clearing of
which, I shall lay down my thoughts of it as clearly and methodically as I can;
and that in these following hypotheses.

1. Where there is a power of declaring any person to be no true member of the
society he is in, there is a formal power of excommunication: for this is all
which I intend by it, viz. an authoritative pronouncing virtute officii, any
convict offender to have forfeited his interest in the Church as a Christian
society: and to lose all the privileges of i^: So that if this power be lodged
in any Church officer, then he has power formally to excommunicate.

2. Where the enjoyment of the privileges of a society is not absolute and
necessary, but depends upon conditions to be performed by every member, of
which the society is judge, there is a power in the rulers of that society to
debarr any person from such privileges, upon nonperformance of the
conditions. As supposing the jus civitatis to depend upon defending the rights
of the City; upon a failing in referente to this in any person admitted to
Citizen-ship, the Rulers of the City have the same power to take that right
away, which they had at first to give it; because that right was never
absolutely given, but upon supposition that the person did not overthrow the
ends for which it was bestowed upon him.

3. The Church is such a society in which communion is not absolute and
necessary, but it does depend on the performance of some conditions, of which
the Governors of it are the competent Judges: And that appears,

1. Because the admission into the Church, depends upon conditions to be judged
by Pastors, as in case of adult persons requiring Baptism, and the Children of
Infidels being baptized: in both which cases it is evident that conditions are
prerequisite, of which the Pastors are Judges.

2. Because the privileges of this Society do require a separation from other
Societies in the world, and calls for greater holiness and purity of life; and
those very privileges are pledges of greater benefits which belong only to
persons qualified with suitable conditions; it would therefore be a very great
dishonor to this Society, if it lay as common and open as other Societies in
the world do, and no more qualifications required from the members of it.

3. We have instances in the sacred Records of Apostolical times, of such
scandals which have been the ground of the exclusion of the persons guilty of
them from the privileges of the Christian Society. And here I suppose we may
(notwithstanding all the little evasions which have been found out) fix on the
incestuous person in the Church of Corinth. As to which I lay not the force of
the argument upon the manner of execution of the censure then, viz. by
delegation from an Apostle, or the Apostolical rod, or delivering to Satan; for
I freely grant that these did then import an extraordinary power in the
Apostles over offenders; but I say the ground and reason of the exercise of
that power in such an extraordinary manner at that time, does still continue,
although not in that visible extraordinary effect which it then had. And
whatever practice is founded upon grounds perpetual and common, that practice
must continue as long as the grounds of it do, and the Churches capacity will
admit; (which hypothesis is the only rational foundation on which Episcopal
Government in the Church does stand firm and unshaken, and which in the former
discourse I am far from undermining of, as any intelligent Reader may perceive)
now I say that it is evident that the reasons of the Apostles censure of that
person, are not fetched from the want of Christian Magistrates, but from such
things which will hold as long as any Christian Church: which are the dishonor
of the Society. 1 Corinthians. 5, 1. the spreading of such corruptions further, if
they pass uncensured. 1 Corinthians. 5.6. and amendment of the person, 1 Cor. 5.5.
Upon these pillars the power of censures rests it self in the Church of God,
which are the main grounds of penalties in all Societies whatsoever, viz. the
preservation of the honor of them, and preventing of further mischief, and
doing good to the offending party. And that which seems to add a great deal of
weight to this instance, is, that the Apostle checks the Corinthians that
before the exercise of the Apostolical rod, they were not of themselves
sensible of so great a dishonor to the Church as that was, and had not used
some means for the removing such a person from their Society. And ye are puffed
up, and have not rather mourned that he that has done this deed may be taken
away from among you, 1 Corinthians. 5.2. Therein implying, that whether there had
been such a thing in the Church, or no, as the Apostolical rod, it had been the
duty of a Christian Society to have done their endeavor in order to the
removing such a person from their number. But further, I cannot understand, how
it should be a duty in Christians to withdraw from every brother who walks
disorderly, 1 Cor. 5.11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
and Church Officers not to have power to pronounce such a person to be
withdrawn from, which amounts to excommunication. It is not to me at all
material, whether they did immediately relate to Civil or Sacred converse,
(concerning which there is so much dispute) for in which soever we place it, if
Church Officers have a power to pronounce such a person to be withdrawn from,
they have a power of excommunication; so we consider this penalty as inflicted
on the person in his relation to the Society as a Christian; and withal, how
nearly conjoined their civil and spiritual eating were together, 1 Corinthians,
11.20, 21. and how strongly the argument will hold from Civil to Sacred, viz. a
remotione unius ad remotionem alterius, not from any fancyed pollution in
Sacris from the company of wicked men, but from the dishonor reflecting on the
Society from such unworthy persons partaking of the highest privileges of it.
Thus from these three Hypotheses this Corollary follows, that where any persons
in a Church do by their open and contumacious offenses, declare to the world
that they are far from being the persons they were supposed to be in their
admission into the Church, there is a power resident in the Pastors of the
Church to debar such persons from the privileges of it, and consequently from
Communion in the Lords Supper. 1. Because this expresses the nearest union and
closest confederation, as the (...) among the Grecian Commonwealths did. 2.
Because this has been always looked on with greatest veneration in the Church
of God; and therefore it is least of all fit those persons should be admitted
to the highest privileges of the Church, which are unworthy of the lowest of
them.

. 23.
There remain only some few objections which are levelled against this opinion
concerning the power of excommunication, which from the Question being thus
stated and proved, will be soon removed. The first is that this excommunication
is an outward punishment, and therefore belongs not to Church Officers, but to
the Magistrate. 2. Because it neither is nor ever was in the power of any
Church Officer to debar any offending member from public worship, because any
heathens may come to it. 3. It cannot lie as to exclusion from the Lords
Supper, because Christ is offered as spiritual food, as well in the Word
Preached as in the Sacrament. To these I answer. 1. I do not well understand
what the Objectors mean by an outward punishment; for there can be no
punishment belonging to a visible Society, (such as the Church is here
considered to be) but it must be visible, i. e. outward, or a thing to be taken
notice of in the world; and in this sense I deny that all visible punishment
belongs only to the Magistrate; but if by outward, be meant forcible
punishment, then I grant that all coactive power belongs to the Magistrate; but
I deny that excommunication formally considered, is a forcible punishment. 1.
Because every person at his entrance into this Society, is supposed to declare
his submission to the rules of the Society; and therefore whatever he after
undergoes by way of penalty in this Society, does depend upon that consent. 2.
A person stands excommunicate legally and de jure, who is declared
authoritativly to be no member of the Society, though he may be present at the
acts of it; as a defranchised person may be at those of a Corporation. 3. A
person falling into those offenses which merit excommunication, is supposed in
so doing, voluntarily to renounce his interest in those prviledges, the
enjoyment of which does depend upon abstaining from those offenses which he
wilfully falls into; especially if contumacy be joined with them, as it is
before excommunication; for then nothing is done forcibly toward him; for he
first relinquisheth his right, before the Church-Governour declares him
excluded the Society. So that the offender does meritoriously excommunicate
himself, the Pastor does it formally, by declaring that he has made himself no
member by his offenses and contumacy joined with them. To the second I answer,
That I do not place the formality of excommunication in exclusion from hearing
the Word, but in debarring the person from hearing tanquam pars eoclesiae, as a
member of the Church, and so his hearing may be well joined with that of
Heathens and Infidels, and not of members of the Church. To the third I answer,
That exclusion from the Lords Supper is not on the accounts mentioned in the
objection, but because it is one of the chiefest privileges of the Church, as
it is a visible Society.

Having thus cleared and asserted the power of excommunication in a Christian
Church, there remains only one enquiry more, which is, Whether this power does
remain formally in the Church, after its being incorporated into the
Commonwealth, or else does it then escheate wholly into the Civil power? The
resolution of which question mainly depends on another spoken to already; viz.
Whether this power was only a kind of Widows estate, which belonged to it only
during its separation from the Civil power, or was the Church absolutely
infeoffed of it as its perpetual right, belonging to it in all conditions
whatsoever it should be in? Now that must appear by the Tenure of it, and the
grounds on which it was conveyed, which having been proved already to be
perpetual and universal, it from thence appears that no accession to the Church
can invalidate its former title. But then as in case of marriage, the right of
disposal and well management of the estate coming by the wife, belongs to the
husband; so after the Church is married into the Common wealth, the right of
supreme management of this power in an external way does fall into the
Magistrates hands. Which may consist in these following things. 1. A right of
prescribing Laws for the due management of Church Censures. 2 A right of
bounding the manner of proceeding in censures, that in a settled Christian
State, matters of so great weight be not left to the arbitrary pleasure of any
Church Officers, nor such censures inflicted but upon an evident conviction of
such great offenses which tend to the dishonor of the Christian Church, and
that in order to the amendment of the offenders life. 3. The right of adding
temporal and civil sanctions to Church Censures and so enforcing the spiritual
weapons of the Church, with the more keen and sharp ones of the Civil state.
Thus I assert the force and efficacy of all Church Censures in foro humano to
flow from the Civil power, and that there is no proper effect following any of
them as to Civil rights, but from the Magistrates sanction. 4. To the
Magistrate belongs the right of appeals in case of unjust censures; not that
the Magistrate can repeal a just censure in the Church, as to its spiritual
effects; but he may suspend the temporal effect of it: in which case it is the
duty of Pastors to discharge their office and acquiesce. But this power of the
Magistrate in the supreme ordering of Ecclesiastical as well as Civil Causes, I
have fully asserted and cleared already. Iren. p. 1. c. 2. sect. 7.
From which it follows, That as to any outward effects of the power of
excommunication, the person of the Supreme Magistrate must be exempted, both
because the force of these censures does flow from him in a Christian State,
and that there otherwise would be a progress in infinitum, to know whether the
censure of the Magistrate were just or no. I conclude then, that though the
Magistrate has the main care of ordering things in the Church, yet (the
Magistrates power in the Church being cumulative, and not privative) the Church
and her officers retain the fundamental right of inflicting censures on
offenders: Which was the thing to be proved.

Dedit Deus his quoque Finem.

